Imprimatur.

CAROLUS ALSTON, R.P.D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris Domesticis.
^nii 26. 1686.
THE Christian Life. PART II. Wherein that FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLE OF Christian
Duty, THE Doctrine of our SAVIORS Mediation, is Explained and Proved. VOLUME
II. By JOHN SCOTT D. D. Rector of S. Peter's Poor, London.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-head in S. Paul's
Churchyard, and Thomas Horn, at the South Entrance of the Royal Exchange. 1687.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
THis second Volume of the second Part of the Christian Life, had long since
been made Public, had it not been for an unfortunate Accident which befell me
when it was almost finished, by which I was necessitated almost to begin again,
and cast the whole into a different Method from what I first designed; for
according to my first Draught, this second Volume had not ammounted to much
above half of what it now is, only I intended to have added some Notes at the
end of it, for the fuller proof and explanation of several Points therein
handled, which now I am forced to leave out, the Book being already swelled so
much beyond my first Intention, only three or four of them I am forced to Print
with it, because I had referred to them in two of the Sheets which were Printed
before I new modeled the whole Design. I pray God prosper this Work, according
to its honest Intention, and that will be an abundant compensation for all the
Pains and Labor I have undergone in composing it.

THE CONTENTS.
SECT. I.
OF the Signification and Notion of a Mediator, page 4, etc. Six general
Articles proposed to our belief in Scripture concerning the Person and Offices
of the Mediator. First, That he is designed and authorized to this Office by
God, who is our absolute Lord and Sovereign, 6. Upon what accounts the belief
of this is necessary, 8. Secondly, That this Office to which he is Authorized,
consists in acting for, and in the behalf of God and Men, who are the Parties
between whom he mediates, 10. the belief of which Article carries with it the
most indispensible Obligations to Christian Piety and Virtue, 11. Thirdly, That
his Mediation proceeds upon certain terms and stipulations between God and Man,
which terms he obtained of God for us, and in Gods Name has published to us,
17. what these terms are, ibid. the performance of these Terms, our Savior
solicits both of God and us, 18. Fourthly, That as he acts for and in the
behalf of God and Men, so be partakes of the Natures of both, 23. That he
should partake of the Nature of God, was highly necessary to qualify him for
this sublime Office of mediating for God with Men, 24. and the same necessity
there was, that he should partake of the nature of Man, 27. That he should also
partake of the nature of both, no less requisite to qualify him to Mediate for
Men with God, 30. That he is God as well as Man, proved from Scripture, 34. and
also that he is Man as well as God, 39. Fifthly, That as he partakes of the
Natures of both, so that he might transact Personally with both, he was sent
down from Heaven to us, and is returned from us to Heaven, 42. Of the Birth and
Personal Union of the Divine and Humane Natures in Christ, 44. Of his Death,
Resurrection and Ascension, 46, etc. Sixthly, That upon his return to Heaven,
there to mediate Personally for Men with God, he substituted the Divine and
Omnipresent Spirit, personally to promote and effectuate his mediation for God
with Men, 49, 50. This Divine Spirit is the third Person in the Tri^une
Godhead, 50. That there is a third Person subsisting in the Divine Nature, and
that he is the same with the Spirit of God in the Old Testament, 51. And first,
That this Spirit is a Person, ibid. Secondly, That he is a Divine Person, 53.
Thirdly, That he is the third Divine Person, 56. Of the subordination of these
Divine Persons, and that it arises not from any inequality of Essence, but from
the inequalities of their Personal properties, 57, etc. That there was always a
subordination of the Son to the Father, and of the Holy Ghost to both, 58. That
in the affair of the Mediation this subordination was founded, not only in the
inequalities of their Personal properties, but also in a mutual compact and
agreement, 59. That the Holy Spirit acts, and has always acted under Christ in
the Kingdom of God, 60. That by the Holy Spirit, Christ himself acted while he
was upon Earth, 60, 61. That this Spirit is sent, both from the Father and the
Son, and of the different nature of their Missions, 61, etc. Some things which
the Holy Spirit has done in the pursuance of his Ministry to our Savior, and
has long since ceased to do; as first he inspired the Apostles and Disciples
of our Savior with the gift of Languages, 65, 66. Secondly, He fully
instructed them by his immediate Inspirations in the Doctrine which they were
to teach the World, 67, etc. Thirdly, He gave the most convincing evidence of
the Truth and Divinity of their Doctrine, 70. Fourthly, He conducted them by
his infallible advice through all the emergent difficulties of their Ministry,
72. Of the cessation of these miraculous Assistances, 74, etc. Other things
which the Holy Spirit has always done, and always continues in pursuance of
this his Ministry, as being continually present with the Church, 76. We receive
him in our Baptism, 77. Of the different manner of his ordinary Operations now,
from what it was heretofore, 78, etc. That these his ordinary Operations are
all performed by impression of thoughts, 81, 82. they are all reduced to five
Heads: First, Illumination, 83, etc. Secondly, Sanctification, 85. Thirdly,
Quickening or Excitation, 88. Fourthly, Comforting and supporting, 90. Fifthly,
Intercession, 93.

SECT. II. Concerning the particular Offices of Christ's Mediation.
From the respective states and conditions of the Parties between whom Christ
mediates, is shown the necessity of his being Prophet, Priest and King, 98. The
order in which our Savior proceeds in the discharge of these Offices, 100.

SECT. III. Concerning the Prophetic Office of Christ.
The great need of this Office, 101. That the Messiah was to be a Prophet, 102.
Of the import of the word Prophecy, 103. The admirable accomplishments of our
Savior for this Office, shown in three Particulars: First, That when he came
down to Prophecy to us, he came immediately from the Bosom of the Father, 104.
Secondly, That he came down into our own Natures, 160. Thirdly, That while he
abode among us, he was always full of the Holy Ghost, 109. how effectualy he
discharged this Office, shown in six Particulars* First, He made a full
declaration of his Fathers Will to the World, 113. Secondly, He proved and
confirmed what he declared by Miracles, 116. Thirdly, He gave a perfect example
of Obedience to what he declared and proved to be his Fathers will, 118.
Fourthly, He sealed his Declaration with his own Blood, 120. Fifthly, He
Instituted an Order of Men to Preach what he had declared to the World, 121.
Sixthly, He sent his Holy Spirit when he left the World, to recollect and
explain his Doctrine to those whom he had ordained to Preach it, and to enable
them also to prove it by Miracles, 123, 124.

SECT. IV. Of Christ's Priestly Office.
To what persons the Priesthood anciently belonged, 130. What the Melchisedecan
Priesthood was, and in what respects Christ's Priesthood is of that Order, 132.
what the old Priesthood was, and in what acts it consisted, 136. That it
consisted, first, in Sacrificing; and secondly, in presenting the Sacrifice to
God by way of Intercession for the People, 136, etc. That this ancient
Priesthood was in both these acts of it, intended by God for a Type of the
Priesthood of our Savior, 142, etc.

SECT. V. Concerning the first Act of our Saviors Priesthood; viz. Sacrificing.
That the death of Christ had in it all the requisite Conditions of a Sacrifice
for Sin, and what those Conditions are, showed in five Particulars, 147, etc.
these Conditions applied to our Saviors death; as first, In his death he was
substituted in the room of sinful Men to be punished for them, in order to
their being released from their personal Obligation to punishment, 151.
Secondly, He dyed a pure and spotless Innocent. Thirdly, His death was of
sufficient intrinsic worth and value, to be an equivalent commutation for the
punishment that was due to the whole World of sinners, 155. Fourthly, His death
was on his part voluntary and unforced, 160, 161. Fifthly, His death was
admitted and accepted of God in lieu of the punishment which was due to him
from Mankind, 164. The wisdom of this method of Gods^ admitting Christ's
sacrifice for sinners, in order to the reforming Mankind, shown in five
Particulars. ^ First, That the Sacrifice of Christ's death was a most sensible
and affecting acknowledgement of the infinite guilt and demerit of our sin,
167. Secondly, It was an ample declaration of Gods severity against sin, 169.
Thirdly, It was a most obliging expression of the love of God and our Savior
to us, 171. Fourthly, It is a sure and certain ground of our hope of pardon, if
we repent and amend, 174. Fifthly, It is a seal and confirmation of the New
Covenant, 177.

SECT. VI. Of Christ's Intercession, or presenting his Sacrifice to God in
Heaven, by way of Advocation for us.
The Nature of it defined, 183. The definition explained in the several parts
of it, which are four. First, It is a Solemn Address of our Blessed Savior to
God the Father in our behalf, 184. Secondly, This Address is performed by the
presenting his Sacrificed Body to the Father in Heaven, 186. Thirdly, it is
continued and perpetuated by the perpetual Oblation of this his sacrificed
Body, 190. Fourthly, In virtue of this perpetual Oblation, he does always
successfully move and solicit God, 193. And that which he moves him to, is,
First, to receive and graciously accept our sincere and hearty Prayers, 196.
Secondly, to empower him to bestow on us all those Graces and Favors, which in
consideration of his Sacrifice, God has promised to us, 199. The admirable
tendency of this method of Gods communicating his Favors to us, through
Christ's Intercession, to reform Mankind, shown in five Particulars. First, It
naturally tends to excite in us a mighty awe of the Divine Majesty, 204.
Secondly, It also tends to give us the strongest conviction of Gods hatred of
Sin, 206. Thirdly, It secures us from presuming upon Gods mercy while we
continue in our sins, 208. Fourthly, It encourages us to approach God with
cheerfulness and freedom, 212. Fifthly, It assures our diffident minds of Gods
gracious intentions to perform to us all the good things which he has promised
to us, upon our performing the condition of them, 216.

SECT. VII. Of Christ's Kingly Office.
Christ's universal Royalty success^^e to his Sacrifice and Intercession, page
221, etc. Christ had a particular Kingdom in this World, viz. The ^ewish Church
before his Incarnation, and during his abode upon Earth, 225. and therefore
that which he was exalted to upon his ascension, was the universal Kingdom of
the World, ibid. Six Heads proposed to be treated of concerning our Saviors
Kingdom, 226.

SECT. VIII. Of the Rise and Progress of Christ's Kingdom from the Fall to his
Incarnation.
Of which an account is given at large in eight Propositions, page 227. First,
That the Kingdom of Christ is founded in the new Covenant, 228. Secondly, That
the new Covenant commenced immediately after the Fall, and was afterward in a
particular manner renewed to Abraham and his Posterity, ibid. etc. Thirdly,
That from its first Commencement, Christ was Mediator of it, and so he
continued to be all along under that particular renewal of it to the People of
Israel, 233, etc. Fourthly, Christ's being always Mediator of this Covenant,
necessarily implies his having been always King over all that were admitted
into it, and particularly over the People of Israel, 235, etc. and that he was
the Divine King that reigned over Israel, and who in the Old Testament is
promiscuously called Jehovah, and the Angel of Jehovah, is proved in five
Propositions, 238, 239, etc. Fifthly, That after his coming into the World, he
still retained this his right and title of King of Israel in particular, 255,
etc. Sixthly, That the main Body of the Jews rejected Christ from being their
King, and were thereupon rejected by him, yet was there a remnant of them that
received and acknowledged him, 258. Seventhly, That this remnant still
continued the same individual Church or Kingdom of Christ with what it was
before its main Body revolted, they very much reformed and improved, 259, etc.
Eighthly, That to this individual Church or Kingdom of Christ, thus reformed
and improved, was superadded all those Gentiles that were afterward converted
to Christianity, 272, etc.

SECT. IX. Of the Nature and Constitution of Christ's Kingdom.
The Kingdom and Church of Christ the same, 275. The universal Church or
Kingdom of Christ defined, 277. This definition explained in the several parts
of it, which are eight, 272, 278. First, It is one Universal Society,
consisting of all Christian People, 278, etc. Secondly, It consists of all
Christian People incorporated by the New Covenant, 280, etc. Thirdly, These
Christian People are incorporated by the New Covenant in Baptism, 283, etc.
Fourthly, They are incorporated under Jesus Christ their supreme Head, 291.
Fifthly, This one Universal Society thus incorporated, is distributed into
particular Churches, 292, etc. Sixthly, These particular Churches are
distributed under Lawful Governors and Pastors, 295, etc. Seventhly, These
particular Churches thus distributed, hold Communion with each other, 298, etc.
Eighthly, The Communion which these particular Churches hold, is first, in all
the Essentials of Christian Faith, 303, etc. Secondly, in all the Essentials of
Christian Worship, 307, etc. Thirdly, In all the Essentials of Christian
Regiment and Discipline, 309.

SECT. X. Concerning the Ministers of the Kingdom of Christ.
Which are of a fourfold Rank and Order; First, The supreme Minister of it is
the Holy Ghost, p. 315. Secondly, next to him are the whole world of Angels
both good and bad; and as for the good, they are subjected to Christ by the
Order and appointment of God the Father, ibid. That the good Angels were not
subject to him as Mediator till his ascension into Heaven; but had their
distinct regencies over the several Gentile Nations. 316, etc. But upon Christ's
ascension these their distinct regencies were all dissolved, and they subjected
to Christ's Mediatorial Scepter, 320, etc. And as for the bad Angels, they were
subjected to him by just and lawful Conquest, 322. That this Conquest he
obtained while he was upon Earth, but especially in his last agony, 323, etc.
Seven particular instances of the Ministry of good Angels under Christ; first,
they declare upon occasion his mind and will to his Church and People, 331,
etc. Secondly, they guard and defend his subjects against outward dangers, 333,
etc. Thirdly, they support and comfort them upon difficult undertakings and
under great and pressing calamities, 334, etc. Fourthly, they protect them
against the rage and fury of evil spirits, 336, etc. Fifthly, they further and
assist them in their religious Offices, 340, etc. Sixthly, they conduct their
separated spirits to the Mansions of Glory, 342, etc. Seventhly, they are
hereafter to attend and minister to him at the general Judgment, 345, etc. The
Ministry of evil Angels to Christ in four particulars: First, they try and
exercise the virtues of his subjects, 347, etc. Secondly, they chasten and
correct their faults and miscarriages, 351, etc. Thirdly, they harden and
confirm incorrigible sinners, 354, etc. Fourthly, they execute the vengeance of
Christ on them in another world, 357, etc. The third sort of the Ministers of
Christ's Kingdom are the Kings and Governors of the world, 361, etc. by their
subjection to Christ they are not deprived of any natural Right of their
Sovereignty, 363, etc. But in the first place have the same commanding Power
over all indifferent things, and that in Ecclesiastical Causes as well as Civil
that they had under the Law of Nature, 364, etc. And secondly, are as
unaccountable and irresistible as they were before, 365, etc. What th^se
Ministries are which Kings are obliged to render our Savior, shown in general
from Isa. 49.23.476, etc. Particularly: first, they are to protect and defend
his Church in the profession and exercise of the true Religion, 377.378.
secondly, they are to fence and cultivate its peace and good order, 378, etc.
they are to chasten and correct the irregular, 379, etc. they are to provide
for the decency of its worship, and for the convenient maintenance of its
Officers and Ministers, 381, etc. The fourth sort of Ministers of Christ's
Kingdom are the spiritual or Ecclesiastical Governors, 383. That Christ has
erected a spiritual Government in his Church, 384, etc. That this Government is
Episcopal proved from four Arguments; first, from the institution of our
Savior, 388, etc. secondly, from the practice of the Apostles upon it, 393,
etc. thirdly, from the Universal Conformity of the Primitive Church to this
Apostolic practice, 404. fourthly, from our Saviors declared allowance and
approbation of both, 421, etc. Of the Ministers of this spiritual Government,
which are either such as are common to the Bishops, together with the inferior
Officers of the Church; as first to teach the Gospel, 427, etc. secondly, to
administer the Evangelical Sacraments, 429, etc. thirdly, to offer up the
public Prayers and intercessions of Christian Assemblies, 431, etc. Or such as
are peculiar to the Bishops; as first to make Laws for the peace and good order
of the Church, 433. secondly, to ordain to Ecclesiastical Offices, 436.
thirdly, to exercise that spiritual jurisdiction which Christ has established
in his Church, 439. fourthly, to confirm such us have been Baptized and
instructed in Christianity, 446, etc.

SECT. XI. Of Christ's Regal Acts in his Kingdom.
Which are of three sorts: First, such as he has performed once for all, of
which there are four, first, his giving Laws to his Kingdom, 449, etc. That
what Christ taught as a Prophet had the force of Law, ibid. His Law spiritual,
450. His Laws reduced under two heads, first, his Law of perfection, 452, etc.
secondly, his Law of sincerity, 455, etc. The second of those Regal Acts which
he has performed once for all, is his mission of the Holy Spirit, 457. A third
is, his erecting an external Polity and Government, 458, etc. Another sort of
Christ's Regal acts are such as he has always performed and does always
continue to perform, of which there are four: first, his pardoning penitent
Offenders, the nature of which is explained, 461, etc. the Scripture attributes
it both to Christ and God the Father, 462. that both of them have an
appropriate part in it, 463. The part of God the Father is, first to make a
general Grant of Pardon, 464, etc. secondly, to make it in consideration of
Christ's death and sacrifice, 466, thirdly, to limit it to believing, and
penitent sinners, ibid. etc. The part which Christ performs in it is, to make
an actual and particular application of this general Grant of his Father to
particular sinners upon their faith and repentance, 474, etc. The second of
these Regal Acts of Christ is, his punishing obstinate Offenders, 476. A third
is, his protecting and defending his People and Kingdom in this world, 479,
etc. The fourth is, his rewarding his faithful subjects in the life to come,
483, etc. The third and last sort of Christ's Regal Acts are those which are yet
to be performed by him, of which there are three: first, he is yet farther to
extend and enlarge his Kingdom by a more universal conquest of his Enemies,
485, etc. secondly, he is yet to destroy Death the last Enemy by giving a
general Resurrection, 492, etc. this proved from his own Resurrection, ibid.
The Objections against this argument, and the Doctrine of the Resurrection
answered, 494, etc. The manner of the Resurrection described at large from 1
Cor. 15.42.501. First, this mortal body is to be the seed or material principle
of our resurrection, 502. secondly, this seed must die and be corrupted before
it is to be raised and quickened, 503. thirdly, this dead seed is to be raised
and quickened by the Power of God, 505. fourthly, it is to be raised and
quickened into the proper form and kind of a human body, 508. fifthly, this
human body is to be very much changed and altered, 510. the change that will be
made in the bodies of good men is fourfold: first, from base and humble into
glorious bodies, 511. secondly, from earthly and fleshly into spiritual and
Heavenly, 513. thirdly, from weak and passive into active and powerful, 514.
fourthly, from corruptible and mortal into incorruptible and immortal, 517.
They will differ in degrees of Glory proportionably as they differ in degrees
of perfection, 518. Of the woeful change which the bodies of the wicked will
undergo, 521. The third and last of these regal Acts of Christ, is his judging
the World; where first the thing is proved that he shall judge the world, 523.
Secondly, an account is given of the signs and forerunners of his coming to
judgment, 524. Thirdly, the manner and circumstances of his coming, 526. as
first, the place from whence he is to come, ibid. 527. secondly, the State
wherein he is to come, 528. thirdly, the Carriage on which he is to come, 530.
fourthly, the train and equipage with which he is to come, 533. fifthly, the
place to which he is to come, 536. Fourthly, the process of this judgment, 538.
And first of the judgment of the righteous, wherein is implied first their
citation or summons, 539. secondly, their personal appearance, 540. thirdly,
their trial, 54^. fourthly, their sentence, 543. fifthly, their assumption into
the clouds of heaven, 545. The Judgment of the wicked implies also first their
citation, 547. secondly, their personal appearance, 548. thirdly, their trial,
549. fourthly, their sentence, 551. fifthly, their execution, 552.

SECT. XII. Concerning Christ's surrendering his Kingdom.
Christ has a twofold Kingdom, viz. His Essential Kingdom which is coeternal
with him and can never be surrendered, and his Mediatorial Kingdom which is
founded upon a solemn compact and agreement with the Father, and this is the
Kingdom which shall be surrendered, p. 556, etc. At the conclusion of the day of
Judgment the whole Mediation will cease, the end of it being fully
accomplished, 557. An account of the cessation of the Mediatorial Kingdom from
1 Cor. 15.24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 558. the whole passage resolved into five
propositions, ibid. First, that the Kingdom there spoken of was committed to
him by God the Father, 559. secondly, that he is to possess this Kingdom so
long, and no longer, as till all things are actually subdued unto him, 560.
thirdly, that during his possession of this Kingdom, he is in a state of
subjection to the Father, 561. fourthly, that when he has delivered it up to
the Father, he will be otherwise subject to him than he is now, 562. fifthly,
that he being thus subjected to the Father, all Power and Dominion shall be
thenceforth immediately exercised by the Deity, 565.

SECT. XIII. Of the Reason and Wisdom of this Method of Gods governing sinful
men by his own Eternal Son in our Nature.
Five reasons of this Method assigned: First, that he might govern us in a way
more accommodate to this degenerate state of our nature, 567, etc. secondly,
that he might the more effectually cure and prevent the spreading contagion of
Idolatry, 573, etc. thirdly, that thereby he might give us the more powerful
encouragement to Obedience, 582. fourthly, that he might the more powerfully
excite our Gratitude and Ingenuity, 585. fifthly, that he might thereby give us
the more ample assurance of our future Reward, 588.

SECT. XIV. That Jesus is this Mediator of whom we have been treating.
Three ways by which God has testified that Jesus is the true Mediator; First,
by Prophecy; secondly, by Voice from Heaven; thirdly, by Miracles, 591. The
last of these only insisted on, as being that to which our Savior most
commonly appeals, 592. This, together with the goodness of his Doctrine a most
certain evidence of his being the Mediator, ibid. The Miracle of his
Resurrection was that which both our Savior and his Apostles most insisted on,
594. The reality of this attestation capable of being proved only by credible
Testimony, 596. The Testimony of our Saviors Resurrection accompanied with all
the most credible circumstances, which are six, 597. First, they who testified
it were most certainly informed whether it were true or no, 598. secondly,
there was a concurrence of several Witnesses to the truth of the Fact, 600.
thirdly, there was no visible reason to suspect their honesty and integrity,
603. fourthly, there was no apparent motive to induce them to testify falsely,
609. fifthly, they gave the greatest security for the truth of what they
testified, 612. sixthly, they gave certain signs and tokens that what they
testified was true, 614. What a most convincing argument this of Miracles, and
particularly of Christ's miraculous Resurrection was of the truth of his being
the Mediator, shown in four particulars; First, that it was the most proper and
convenient Evidence, 622. secondly, that it was the most certain and infallible
Evidence, 625. thirdly, that it was the plainest and most popular Evidence,
629. fourthly, that it was the shortest and most compendious Evidence, 631.

OF THE CHRISTIAN LIFE. PART II. VOL. II.
CHAP. VII. Of the necessity of acknowledging Jesus Christ to be the one and
only Mediator between God and Man, in order to our Leading a Truly Christian
Life.
HITHERTO we have treated of the common Principles of Religion in General, but
as for this last, it is the great Principle of Christian Religion, strictly so
called, as it is distinguished from the Religion of Nature, and, as such, is
properly the Religion of the Mediator, as containing only the Doctrines which
concern the Mediator, and the Duties which result from those Doctrines, and owe
their Obligations to them; both which being taken away, all the remaining
Religion is purely Natural and Moral. So that this Principle we are now
treating of, contains in it all that Religion which is strictly Christian,
without believing of which, and practicing upon it, we cannot be truly said to
lead a Christian Life, how well soever we may live. For there is no doubt but
upon the Motives and Principles of natural Religion a man to whom Christianity
was never sufficiently proposed may upon due consideration and a hearty
endeavor reclaim himself to a very pious and virtuous life, as it is apparent
many of the Heathen Philosophers did; but no man can be pious or virtuous in
the Christian sense, who is not so upon the Christian Obligations: for the
Principles from and by which we act are the very life and soul of our Religion;
and therefore as it is the Rational Soul that specifies the Man a Rational
Animal, so it is our Christian Principles that specify our Religion Christian
Religion. Wherefore though the Piety and Virtue of an Heathen may be materially
the same with that of a Christian, yet it is impossible it should be formally
Christian, unless it be animated and acted with the belief of Christianity. So
that if we leave out this, and practice only upon the abovenamed Principles,
we are at best but wise and honest Heathens, and there is nothing in all our
Religion but the simple Dictates of mere natural reason. It Is true, to live
according to mere Natural reason is all that God expects from those to whom
Christianity has never been proposed; for how can he expect that they should
live by Principles which they either never heard of, or have not sufficient
reason to believe? But where Christianity has been made known, and
sufficiently proposed, we cannot be good men unless we believe it, and if we
believe it we cannot be good Christians unless we practice upon it. And since
Christianity has improved the duties of Natural Religion upon new Principles,
and enforced them with new Obligations, to render our Piety and Virtue strictly
and properly Christian, it is necessary we should believe these new Principles,
and act upon these new Obligations; otherwise we are at best but mere Natural
men, in the true sense of the Apostle, i. e. men who are merely conducted by
the light of natural Reason, and have not received the things of the Spirit of
God, that is, the new Principles and Obligations which Christianity superadds
to natural Religion, 1 Cor. 2.14.

In handling therefore of this great and necessary Principle of Christian Life,
viz. the belief and acknowledgment of Christ's being the one and only Mediator,
I shall endeavor these three things:

First, To show what it is that we are to believe in general concerning the
Person and Office of this Mediator.

Secondly, What are the particular Parts and Offices of his Mediation.

Thirdly, What Evidence there is to induce us to believe him to be this one and
only Mediator.

SECT. I. What it is that we are to believe in general concerning the Person
and Office of this Mediator.
THE Greek word (...), which we translate Mediator, signifies one that
interposes between two Parties, either to obtain some favor from the one Party
for the other, or to adjust or make up some difference between them. And this
undertaking of his, is either, first, of his own head and voluntary,
undertaking without any Warrant or Authority from the Parties between whom he
interposes, in which case he acts altogether precariously, and as a mere
Orator, and can only persuade and entreat on both sides; or secondly, it is
Authoritative, and this is two ways; first, when the Person who mediates is
Authorized thereunto by the consent and designation of both Parties, both being
equal, and consequently having an equal right to Authorize him. For when the
Parties are equal, he must be authorized by both before he can pretend to any
right to oblige and determine them; but when once both Parties have agreed to
put their case into his hands, and refer themselves to his determination, he
from thenceforth commences a Mediator by Office, and is the Legal
Representative of both, as being Authorized by them to act in their stead in
all those points that are referred by them to his determination. So that
whatsoever he does in the matter before him is in effect the act of both
Parties, who having both submitted their wills to his, and voluntarily
empowered him to will for them both, are thereupon as effectually concluded and
determined by what he does, as if it were their own personal Will and Action.
And in this sense a Mediator is the same with that which we in English call an
Vmpire, who is one that acts for both Parties by Authority from both, and in
whose judgment and determination both have obliged themselves to consent and
agree. But then secondly, the Mediation is authoritative when he who mediates
is Authorized thereunto by a superior Party, who has a just Authority and
Dominion over the inferior. For when a Mediator acts the part of two unequal
Parties, whereof the one is superior, and has a just dominion over the other,
it is sufficient that he be Authorized by the appointment of the superior, and
the subject or inferior Party will be as much obliged by his determination, as
if he had voluntarily referred himself to him. For a Mediator between a
Superior, as such, and a Subject, is one who is Authorized to act on the part
of the Superior in requiring the Subjects Duty and Obedience, and to act on
the part of the Subject in impetrating the Superiour's favor and protection;
and there can be no doubt but every absolute Superior has right to Authorize
a Mediator between him and his Subjects, to act for him in ruling them, and for
them in soliciting his favor. For he who Mediates between a Sovereign and
Subject, is the Sovereign's Vicegerent and the Subject's Advocate; and he who
without our consent has a right to our duty, and to all the favors he bestows
upon us, may, whether we consent to it or no, demand our duty by what
Vicegerent, and bestow his favors by what Advocate he pleases. And as for the
Subject, he will be obliged, whether it be by his consent or no, to abide by
the Mediator whom the Sovereign appoints, and by the terms which he shall
impose on him; otherwise he will be justly liable to punishment.

Having given this short account of the general Notion of a Mediator, I proceed
to show what it is in the general that the Scripture proposes to our belief
concerning the Person and Office of this great Mediator between God and men;
the whole of which I shall reduce under these six heads:

First, That he is Designed and Authorized to this Office by God who is our
absolute Lord and Sovereign.

Secondly, That this Office to which he is authorized consists in acting for
and in the behalf of God and men, who are the parties between whom he Mediates.

Thirdly, That this his Mediation proceeds upon certain terms and stipulations
between God and men, which he obtained of God for us, and in his name has
published and tendered to us.

Fourthly, That as he acts for and in the behalf of God and men, so he partakes
of the natures of both.

Fifthly, That as he partakes of the natures of both, so, that he might
transact personally with both, he was sent down from Heaven to us, and is
returned again from us to Heaven.

Sixthly, That upon his return from us to Heaven, there to Mediate personally
for Men with God, he substituted the Divine and Omnipresent Spirit personally
to promote and effectuate his Mediation for God with Men.

I. That he is Designed and Authorized to this Office by God, who is our
absolute Lord and Sovereign. For since God for just and excellent reasons was
resolved not to converse with sinful men immediately, they having rendered
themselves, through their woeful degeneracy, utterly unsit for, and unworthy of
any such near and close access to his most holy Majesty; and since his tender
mercy and compassion toward us would not permit him utterly to reject and
abandon us, there was no expedient, at least that we know of, in which the
holiness of his Majesty could so fairly accord with the tenderness of his
Mercy, as this of transacting with us by a Mediator, by whose inter-agency, he,
though a most holy Sovereign, may without debasing himself freely converse with
us, and we, though his guilty subjects, may without terror and anxiety as
freely draw near unto him; But, by virtue of his essential Sovereignty and
absolute Dominion over us, the right of choosing and appointing this Mediator
was wholly in him, because, as I showed just before, he only can have the right
of appointing the person who shall be his Vicegerent and our Advocate, who is
the Sovereign Lord of our beings, and the supreme dispos^r of all our
blessings. And accordingly he has constituted the holy and blessed Jesus to be
the sole Mediator between himself and us, to exercise his authority over us,
and to procure for, and convey his favors to us; and hence he is called the
Christ or Messiah of God, that is, his anointed, Anointing with oil being
anciently the visible sign by which the Regal, Priestly, and Prophetic Offices
were conferred. This Title of the Lord's Anointed therefore being applied to
Jesus, denotes his being designed, appointed, and authorized by God to this
great Office of Mediator, in which all those three Offices are included. For
so, Acts 5.31. we are told, him, i. e. Christ, has God exalted with his right
hand to be a Prince and a Savior to give Repentance unto Israel, and
forgiveness of sins; And Acts 2.36. Therefore let all the house of Israel know
assuredly that God has made that same Jesus whom ye have crucified both Lord
and Christ; and, 10 name no more, Phil. 2.9, 10, 11. Wherefore God also has
highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name, that at the
name of Jesus every Knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth,
and things under the earth, and that every tongue should confess that Jesus
Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. The belief of which is
absolutely necessary to create in our minds the reverence that is due to our
holy Religion. For unless we suppose the founder of it to be Authorized and
Commissioned by God, we must strip and disarm it of all its authority, and look
upon it at best but as a Pious Imposture, contrived on purpose to Chouce men of
their Sins, and to train and delude them into Piety and Virtue. For as it is a
Religion, it can have no Authority but Divine, and a Divine Authority it cannot
have unless the Author of it had a Divine Commission; but supposing him to be
Commissioned from God, we owe the some respect and reverence to his Religion as
if God himself had proclaimed it to us in an audible voice from the Battlements
of Heaven; and it will be no less disrespect to the Divine Majesty for us to
contemn and slight what he, a^ God's mouth, has delivered to us, than it would
have been for a Jew to have laughed at the Ten Commandments while God himself
was proclaiming them from Mount Sinai in a voice of Thunder. For if we believe
that God authorized him to reveal his Will to us, we must believe his voice to
be the voice of God, who spoke to us by him as by a living Oracle; and
consequently, that in refusing to hear and to obey him we stop our ears against
God, and do in effect declare that we regard what he says no more than we do
the whistling of the Wind. And as the belief of Christ's being Commissioned and
appointed by God is highly necessary to Create in us a due reverence for his
Religion, so it is no less requisite to create in us a due trust and confidence
in his Intercession for us. For had he thrust himself upon this Office without
any Call or Commission from God, God would have been no way obliged to hear him
how earnestly soever he had supplicated in our behalf; but since he intercedes
for us by God's own Commission, we may depend upon it that God will be always
ready to hear him, and graciously accept our addresses to him when ever they
are presented by his hand. For since God appointed him to be our Advocate, it
must be either with an intent to hear him in our behalf, and if so, we may be
sure his Ears will be always open to him; or with a design to mock and ridicule
him, and recreate his own inexorable spleen with the spiteful pleasure of
denying and repulsing him, which to imagine of God is no less senseless than
blasphemous. Since therefore he Advocates for us by God's own Commission, we
may be sure his Plea in our behalf will be always acceptable and successful,
since in repulsing him, he must in effect affront his own Authority by which he
intercedes for us.

II. That this Office to which he is authorized consists in acting for, and in
the behalf of God and Men, who are the Parties between whom he Mediates. And
this is implied in the very Notion of an authorized Mediator, who, as such, is
an Agent between two Parties, acting by authority for both, in order to the
adjusting some difference between them, and reducing them to a mutual accord
and agreement; and if he act only for one Party, he is not a Mediator, but an
Attorney; and accordingly the Apostle tells us, that a Mediator is not a
Mediator of one, but God is one, Gal. 3.20. For the better understanding of
which words it is to be considered that in the foregoing Verse the Apostle had
asserted, that the Law was ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator, that
is, in the hand of Moses, who was appointed to Mediate not only for God with
the People of Israel, but also for the People of Israel with God; and this,
says he, is implied in the very Notion of a Mediator, for a Mediator is not of
one, but God is one, that is, God is only one of the two Parties between whom
this Mediation is made, and therefore Moses must be supposed not only to act
for God with the People as his Vicegerent, but also for the People with God as
their Advocate; in short, he must act for both Parties, otherwise he acts not
as a Mediator. And accordingly as Moses who was the Mediator of the Jewish
Covenant acted for and between God and the People, so Jesus Christ, who is
Mediator of the Christian Covenant, is styled the one Mediator between God and
men, 1 Timothy 2.5. that is, that goes between the two opposite Parties, and
transacts for both in order to their accord and reconciliation; that as God's
Vicegerent acts for him with us in order to the reducing us to our duty and
allegiance to him, and as our Advocate acts for us with God in order to the
inducing him to be gracious and favorable to us; that so having prevailed with
us to lay down our enmity against God, and obtained of God to remit his
displeasure against us, he may effect a happy Reconciliation between us. Both
which parts of his Mediation are expressed in those words of the Apostle, Heb.
7.25. Wherefore he is able to save to the utmost those who come unto God by
him, that is, who by submitting to him, as mediating for God, submit to God
himself, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them, or to Mediate with
God in their behalf.

The belief of which carries with it the most indispensable Obligations to
Christian Piety and Virtue; but while we look upon Christ as acting only for
one Party, whether it be for God or our selves, we do in a great measure
enervate the Motives of Christianity. For thus while we look upon him as acting
only for God, that is, as God's Vicegerent, we must necessarily conclude that
he is concerned only for God's Authority, and that when he has secured or
vindicated that by reducing us to our duty, or punishing our disobedience, he
will have no more to do with us or our concerns, but even leave us to shift for
our selves, and to seek our reward where we can find it; that he is substituted
by his Father for no other end but to exact our Homage, or revenge our
Rebellion, but that as for us, he is no way concerned either to procure us any
pardon for our past sin, or reward for our future Obedience; and while we look
upon him by whom alone we have access to God, as one that is utterly
unconcerned for our welfare, we must look upon our selves as desperate and
abandoned Creatures, that are utterly forsaken of all hopes and encouragements.
For what hope can we have, when not only the Deity we are to address to is
highly offended at us, but also the Mediator we are to address by is utterly
regardless of us? And in such a hopeless condition all the arguments in the
World are void and insignificant. And so on the other hand, while we look upon
Christ as acting only for us, that is, as our Propitiation and Advocate* we
must unavoidably conclude that he is concerned only for our preservation and
happiness; that his Office requires no more of him but only to pay off the
scores of our sins with his blood, and by pleading that payment in Heaven to
obtain our actual release from the rigorous demands of divine Justice; in short
that he has nothing else to do but only to purchase and sue out our pardon,
and to justify and set us right in the Court of Heaven; but as for reducing us
under his Father's Authority, and subduing our Wills and Lives to his
obedience, that is no part of his Mediatorship, nor consequently is he at all
concerned about it; and if so, all that his Mediation can oblige us to
(supposing that he has effectually discharged it) is to rest and rely upon it
for our Pardon and Justification with God; and if out of pure gratitude we will
be dutiful and obedient to him for the future, he will kindly accept it, but if
not, he has no remedy against us; and what likelihood is there that any
argument of Religion should ever prevail with us to submit to the divine
Authority, so long as we presume upon Christ's Mediation for Pardon and
Justification without it, and believe it to be left wholly to our own Ingenuity
whether we will submit or no. Thus while we consider Christ's Mediation by
halves, and mistake either part of it for the whole, we pervert and deprave it,
and instead of what it is, viz. a most wise and powerful inducement to Piety
and Virtue, render it an inevitable temptation either to Despair or
Presumption, both which are equally and utterly inconsistent with a holy and
Christian Life.

But if we consider this Doctrine in its full extent, as it takes in both parts
of Christ's Mediation, it inforces our duty upon us with the most necessary and
powerful obligations. For it addresses it self to every passion in us that is
capable of being moved and persuaded, and at once proposes to our hope and
fear, which are the most vigorous principles of action, the most encouraging
and dreadful considerations. For since his Office obliges him to act for God
and men together, we may depend upon it, that through the whole course of his
Mediation he will be most just and impartial to both, and that as on the one
hand he will not so act for his Father's Authority as to neglect our safety and
welfare, so neither on the other will he so concern himself for our safety and
welfare as to expose his Father's Authority; and if he proceed with this exact
equality between the Parties he acts for, we have all the reason in the World
to conclude, that if we submit our selves to God we shall be graciously
received and rewarded, but that if we persist in our Rebellion against him we
shall be most severely punished.

For in the first place his being concerned for us as well as for God, gives us
the most ample security, that if we will submit to his Fathers Authority, which
he stands engaged to secure or vindicate, he will have a most zealous regard to
us and our concerns, and be as mindful of our interest as if it were his own.
For in undertaking to be our Advocate he assumed our Persons, and took our
Affairs into his own hands, so that now he is another our selves, and stands
obliged to act for us with as much care and concern as if our Persons and
Interests were his; and therefore we may depend upon it that he will act as
much for our advantage as we our selves could do if we were in his place, and
had the same power and interest with his Father that he has* and that if we
were sitting in his room at the right hand of God, and there interceding for
our selves, we could not justly wish for, or desire more or greater instances
of Grace and Favor than he will ask and obtain for us. And what greater
encouragement can we have to return to our duty than this very consideration,
that all our concerns with our offended God are deposited in the hands of a
most faithful Mediator, who upon our return will concern himself as zealously
for our Good as for his Father's Authority, and solicit our cause in the Court
of Heaven as Industriously as we our selves could do if we were admitted to be
our own Advocates? But then in the second place his being concerned for his
Father's Authority as well as for our Interest, gives us as full assurance, on
the other hand, that he is no less obliged by his Office to reduce us to our
duty to his Father, or avenge him upon us for our disobedience than he is to
restore us to his grace and favor; and if he should so attempt the later as to
be any way deficient in the former, he would not perform the part of a just
Mediator, which consists in acting impartially for both Parties. For should he
favor our interest beyond his Father's Authority, he would be so far partial
to us against his Father. Now though he loved us so well as to sacrifice his
life for us on Earth, and in the virtue of that Sacrifice to appear our
Advocate in Heaven, yet we can never be so fond sure as to imagine that he
loves us better than his own Father; and if he does not, we may build upon it
that he is as zealously concerned to assert his Authority as to prosecute our
interest, and to provide that he be obeyed or avenged as that we be pardoned
and rewarded; but for us to rely upon Christ as mediating for us, without
submitting to him as mediating for God, is in effect to hope that he will be so
exceeding gracious to us as to betray his Father's trust for our sake, and
sacrifice his authority to our safety. For should he take our part with God,
and solicit him to favor us while we persist in our rebellions against him,
he would in effect abandon the cause and interest of God's Government, and
endeavor all that in him lay to expose his authority to the scorn and cont^mpt
of Mankind. Whilst therefore we obstinately refuse to hearken to him in his
Mediation for God, that is, to submit to his Laws, and return to our duty and
allegiance, he will be so far from interceding for us in the virtue of his
meritorious sacrifice, that he will appear against us as an incensed Judge in
the quarrel of his Father's Authority, and dearly revenge upon our guilty heads
all those shameless affronts and indignities we have offered it, and by making
us everlasting Monuments of his Vengeance, convince us by woeful experience,
that he is no less a just Mediator for God than a merciful Mediator for Men. So
that by resolving to persist in our rebellion against God, we do in effect
renounce the Mediation of our Savior, and proclaim before God and Angels that
we will not be beholden to the one and only Advocate of sinners. And when we
have flung our selves out of this Protection, Lord! whither shall we go for
sanctuary from thy vengeance? When there is but this one Mediator and he has
discarded me, O my wretched Soul, whither will thou betake thy self? Call now
and see if there be any will hear thee, to which of all the Saints or Angels
will thou turn thee? What Favorite of Heaven will plead thy cause when the
only Advocate of Souls has rejected thee? For if he who is my only Mediator,
be incensed against me, who shall Mediate between me and him? When God alone
was angry with me, there was some hope, because my Savior stands as a living
Screen between me and his displeasure, to guard and defend me from it; but when
that is kindled against me too, what is there to interpose between me and the
devouring flame? Be wise therefore, O ye sinners, be instructed, ye obstinate
Rebels against God; Kiss the Son lest he be angry and ye perish from the way;
for if his wrath be kindled but a little, blessed are all they that put their
trust in him, but Woe be to them that provoke him.

Thus the Mediation of Christ addresses to our fear as well as hope, in order
to the subduing us to the Will of God, and presses at once upon both these
great Avenues of our Souls with the most irresistible Motives.

III. That this his Mediation proceeds upon certain terms and stipulations
between God and Men, which he obtained of God for us, and in his name has
published and tendered to us. For when Mankind, by reason of the degeneracy of
humane nature, were cut off from all immediate intercourse with God, and this
most wise and holy Method of conversing with us by a Mediator was resolved on
by the Divine Council, God, in consideration of what our Mediator had engaged
himself to suffer for us in the fullness of time, granted to him in our behalf a
most gracious and merciful Covenant, whereby he engaged himself to bestow his
spirit upon us to enable us to repent and return to him, upon condition that we
should seek it, and cooperate with it; to pardon all our past sins, upon
condition that we should unfeignedly repent of them; and to crown us with
eternal life, upon condition we should persevere to the end in well-doing. This
is the substance of that gracious Covenant which God has granted to us for the
sake of our Mediator; who has accordingly assured us from God, that he will
give his holy Spirit unto them that ask, Luke 11.13. That if we will repent and
be converted, our sins shall be blotted out when the times of refreshing shall
come from the presence of the Lord, Acts 5.19. And that if we will be faithful
to the death we shall receive a Crown of life, Rev. 2.10. And upon this
Covenant it is that our blessed Savior proceeds in his Mediation between God
and Men. For our Baptismal Vow is nothing else but only a solemn engagement of
our selves to perform the condition of this Covenant, upon which there results
to us a conditional right to all that God has promised in it; and when by this
federal solemnity of Baptism God and we have once obliged our selves to each
other, by mutual promises and engagements, Christ's Office, as Mediator between
us, is to solicit on both sides for mutual performance; and accordingly in
Mediating for God with us, he requires nothing of us but what we promised to
God, and in mediating for us with God he claims nothing of God but what God
promised to us. And hence he is called, The Mediator of this better Covenant,
Heb. 8.6. and The Mediator of the new Covenant, Heb. 12.24. because he
transacts between both Parties to solicit the performance of their mutual
engagements. For so the same Author in Heb. 9.14, 15. seems to explain it, How
much more, says he (having spoken before of the virtue of the blood of Bulls
and Goats) shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered
himself without spot to God, purge our Consciences from dead Works to serve the
living God; and for this cause he is the Mediator of the New Covenant, that by
means of death for the Redemption of transgressions, etc. they which are called
might receive the promise of eternal Inheritance; where those words [and for
this cause] seem as well to refer to what went before as to what follows, and
then the sense will be this, For this cause he is the Mediator of the New
Covenant, both that he might take care that our Consciences being purged from
dead works we might serve the living God, and that having redeemed us by his
Death, we might receive the promise of eternal Inheritance. And accordingly he
proceeds in his Mediation; for in acting for God as his King or Vicegerent, he
has enacted the conditions which this Covenant requires of us into the Laws of
his Kingdom, and exacts them of us under the fearful Penalty of eternal
Damnation; whereby he has taken effectual care that we shall either perform
these conditions, or undergo a punishment as great as the guilt of our neglect
and contempt of them; and having thus tied them upon us by the utmost force of
Law, that is, by Law established on the most dreadful Penalty, he has, so far
as his Regal Authority extends, compelled us to the performance of our part of
this Covenant; so that if we do not perform it, it is not to be attributed to
any neglect or omission of the Mediator, who to oblige us to perform it has
most faithfully acted for God, even to the utmost extent of that power
wherewithal he invested him.

And so on the other hand, in acting for us as our Intercessor, he has taken
no less care to insure God's part of this Covenant to us than he did to insure
our part of it to God. For this Covenant being granted to us by God in
consideration of a valuable satisfaction for our sins, Christ has not only
rendered this satisfaction to God by dying for us, and thereby purchased for us
a just right and claim to all the blessings which God has promised on his part
if we perform what he requires on ours, but in the virtue of this satisfaction
he also appears for us at the right hand of God, there to plead our right, and
to prefer our claim, by exhibiting that vocal Blood, and those importunate
Wounds with the price of which he purchased and obtained it. So that now we are
entitled to all the blessings of this Covenant, not only by God's Promise, but
by Christ's Purchase too, and to secure both, we have Christ himself advocating
for us in Heaven with the price of that Purchase in his hands. So effectually
has he transacted for us in his Mediation with God in our behalf, that we have
the highest security imaginable, that if we perform our part of this Covenant,
God will not fail to perform his; since in so doing he would not only violate
his own truth which he has engaged to us by promise, but also injuriously
defraud his own Son of what he has duly purchased for us by his Death, and
claims upon that Purchase by his Intercession. For he intercedes for no other
blessings in our behalf but what he purchased for us upon a consideration that
was not only infinitely valuable in it self, but also freely accepted by his
Father; and he purchased no other blessings for us but what are specified in
this gracious Covenant; so that he asks nothing for us but what he has a right
to obtain, nothing but what he purchased by his blood, and is in strict Justice
due to his meritoriou^ sacrifice, and consequently nothing that his Father can
deny him without doing him the most outrageous wrong and injury; and therefore
this we may be as confident of as we can be of any thing in the World, that
whatsoever he has purchased for us he will not fail to ask, and that
whatsoever he asks he will be sure to obtain.

Thus Christ by his Mediation between God and Men has taken the most effectual
care to insure the mutual performance of this everlasting Covenant to both
Parties. For to insure God of our performing our part, he has bound it upon us
by a Law enforced with an everlasting Penalty; which is the strongest
obligation he could lay upon us; And to insure us of God's performing his part,
he duly purchased it for us by his Death, and in virtue of that just Right he
ever lives to claim it by his Intercession, which is the strongest obligation
he could lay upon God; so that now, as God cannot fail in his part without
violating his Truth and Justice, which would be to destroy his own Being, and
un-god himself, so neither we can in ours without exposing our everlasting
well-being, and plunging our selves body and soul together into everlasting
wretchedness and calamity. And hence I suppose it is that our Savior is called
the surety of a better Covenant, Heb. 7.22. or, as the Greek word may be
rendered, the Trustee between both Parties, to see that they mutually perform
their several parts of this Covenant to each other; which Office our blessed
Lord has faithfully performed, in that he has taken the utmost care to oblige
both God and us mutually to make good our several engagements to each other.
For though he has not undertaken for us that we shall certainly perform our
part, yet he has undertaken to oblige us to it by the highest and most urgent
reason, which was all that he could reasonably undertake for Beings that are
free to good and evil; and if notwithstanding he has thus obliged us, we will
be so desperately obstinate as not to comply, he has undertaken to chastise
our obstinacy with a most dire and exemplary vengeance.

And since he thus proceeds in his Mediation upon the certain and stated terms
of a Covenant, which he himself has published and revealed to us, we may
hereby most certainly inform our selves what he expects from us, and what we
are to expect from him. For now we are sure that all he can expect from us is
that we should faithfully perform our part of this Covenant, that is, that we
should implore the assistance of God's holy Spirit, and diligently to
cooperate with it, so as to repent and return from our evil ways to the
sincere practice of all Christian Piety and Virtue, and that herein we should
persevere to the end; and less than this he cannot admit without being an
unfaithful Trustee for God of that blessed Covenant upon which he Mediates. And
now we are also sure that all we can expect from him is, that if we implore the
assistance of his Spirit we shall have it, that if with his assistance we
repent we shall be pardoned, and that if being pardoned we persevere in
well-doing, we shall be crowned with everlasting life; and less than this he
cannot obtain for us without being an unfaithful Trustee for us. For if he
should exact less for God of us, or procure less for us of God than that
Covenant upon which he Mediates obliges God and us to, he would be wanting in
his care one way or the other to see this Covenant with which he is entrusted
duly and impartially executed, and either defraud God or us of some part of
that right which it devolves upon us; which we have all the assurance in the
world he will never do. So that now we proceed upon certain terms, and do know
infallibly what to trust to; we know that our Mediator exacts of us the whole
and entire condition of the Gospel Covenant; that this he will certainly
accept, but that this he expects without the least defalcation or abatement; so
that if we heartily implore the assistance of his holy Spirit, and cooperate
with it, we have all the assurance in the world that we shall be effectually
enabled to render him that sincere repentance and obedience he requires, and
that if we repent we shall be pardoned, and if we persevere in our obedience,
be advanced to everlasting glory. On the other side, we know infallibly before
hand, that if we refuse to submit to this condition, or do any way fall short
of it, instead of being our kind and merciful Advocate, our Mediator will
become our implacable Judge, and doom us to a place of dismal torment, where we
shall live with everlasting horror and despair; so that now we can no longer
persevere in our impenitence, without trampling at the same time on the highest
encouragements, and charging headlong through the most amazing danger.

IV. That as he acts for, and in the behalf of God and Men, so he partakes of
the natures of both. For that this high and important Office might be the more
effectually executed and performed, the eternal Father thought meet to place it
in the hands of his own eternal Son, the Son of his natural Generation, to whom
he communicated from all eternity his own Divine Essence and Nature, and whom
in due time he appointed to assume the Humane Nature into a personal union with
his Divinity, that so being God-man in one person he might be the better fitted
and accomplished to Mediate between God and Men. For in Mediating
Authoritatively for God with us, he was to perform the Office of a divine King,
to rule and Govern us, as God's Vicegerent, and either reduce us under his
Authority, or chastise us for our Rebellion against him; which is a Sphere so
vast, and so sublime, as needs no less than some divine Intelligence to inform
and actuate it. For to wield the Divine Scepter and Government is a Province
that requires a Divine Knowledge and Power; for the souls and hearts of men are
the principal Seat and Subject of the divine Government, and therefore it is
very requisite that he who is entrusted with the administration of it should
have a through and perfect inspection of all our most secret Thoughts, and
Intentions, and Purposes, and Resolutions, otherwise how is it possible he
should take cognizance of them so as to command, and overruled and reward, and
punish them? But to know the hearts of men is in Scripture always appropriated
to the divine Omniscience; so 1 Kings 8.3^. Thou, even thou only know the
hearts of the Children of men; and if only God's all-searching Eye can
penetrate into the hearts of men, who but a God can Rule and Govern them? And
accordingly our Savior, upon whose shoulders this inward and spiritual
Government rests, challenges to himself this divine Prerogative which is so
necessary a qualification for it; Rev. 2.23. And all the Churches shall know,
says he, that I am he which searches the reins and hearts, and will give to
every one of you according to his works. Nor is it less requisite to qualify
him for this spiritual Empire that he should be Almighty than that he should be
Omniscient; for to enable him to rule the hearts and souls of men it is
necessary that he should have the Command and Disposal of all those outward
Events and Accidents in which they are any way concerned, since it is by these
in a great measure that their hearts are swayed, their affections formed, their
intentions and resolutions squared and regulated, and in a word, their good and
evil actions rewarded and punished in this World; and to wield and manage,
moderate and dispose such infinite numbers of Events as concern such infinite
numbers of Men so vastly distant from one another in place, condition, and
temper, requires a power that can do whatsoever it pleases both in Heaven and
Earth, which the Psalmist appropriates to the divine Power as its peculiar
Prerogative, Psalm. 135.6, 7. and if it be only a divine power that can manage
and dispose all the affairs of all men, what can be more requisite than that he
who rules and governs them should communicate of the divine Omnipotence? And
accordingly our Savior, upon whom this Government is devolved, assures his
Disciples that all power was communicated to him both in Heaven and Earth,
Matt. 28.18. which being the Prerogative of the divine Power seems impossible
to have been communicated to any but a divine Person. And therefore the Prophet
Isaiah, speaking of the Government of Christ, tells us, that his name should be
called Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, Isa. 9.6. where by Counselor
and mighty God he seems to design his infinite Knowledge and Power whereby he
should be qualified for this his divine Government; for so Mighty God does
always in the Scripture Phrase signify Almighty God; so in Deuteronomy. 7.21. Psalm.
50.1. Ier. 32.18. Hab. 1.12. and elsewhere. By all which it is evident, that to
Mediate Authoritatively for God with men is a Province so sublime as that it
requires no less than divine perfections in the Person that undertakes and
manages it, and consequently that it is requisite he should be God.

Nor is it less requisite to render his Government more awful and Majestic.
For though the condition of the Person alters not the nature of the Authority
he is vested with, yet in the estimation of men the same Authority is more or
less venerable according as the quality and condition of ^he Persons clothed
with it is more or less considerable. Since therefore the quality of the Person
does always cast a Cloud or Luster on the Office, it was very requisite that he
who was Authorized to Mediate for God with men, which is the highest Office
under God the Father, should be a Person of the highest Rank and Dignity next
to God the Father himself, and consequently that he should be God the Son; and
hence the Author to the Hebrews, Chap. 1. to render his Authority mo^e awful
takes a great deal of pains to imblazon the dignity of his Person, in which he
gives him such Styles and Characters, as cannot without extreme force be
applied to any but a Person divine; he styles him The brightness of his
Father's Glory, and the express Image of his Person; the Founder of the Earth,
and the Maker of the Heavens, and the Vpholder of all things by the word of his
power, Verse. 3.10. he tells us, that he was set far above the Angels, and that
the Father had ordered all his Angels to worship him, declaring him to be God
in these terms, Thy Throne O God is for ever and ever; and then he concludes
all with this application, Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to
the things which we have heard of him, Chap. 2. v. 1. which shows that in the
Apostle's sense to Mediate for God is a station so sublime that it was very fit
it should be supplied (as it was) with a Person of the highest Dignity, that so
his Person might reflect a Majesty on his Office, and render it more awful and
venerable in the World.

And as to accomplish him for this high Office of Mediating for God with Men,
it was most fit he should be God, so it was no less requisite he should be Man.
For Man being naturally a sensitive, as well as a rational Creature, in this
degenerate state of his nature, wherein his sensitive part is predominant,
there are no sorts of objects do so vigorously impress and affect him, as those
which strike immediately on his senses; and hence it is that he so greedily
prefers carnal before rational, and sensitive before spiritual goods,
notwithstanding the later are in themselves infinitely greater and more
eligible, and that in his conceptions of spiritual objects he is so prone to
blend and intermix them with carnal and Corporeal Phantasms, because his mind
is so estranged from spiritual objects by its continual intimacy and
familiarity with sensual ones, that it can hardly frame any Idea of them
without disguising them into some bodily semblance. God therefore being a
spiritual and invisible Essence, and upon this account far removed out of the
Ken and Prospect of our sense, our sensual and depraved minds must either be
naturally indisposed to think seriously of, and consequently to be duly
affected by him, which renders us prone to Irreligion, or to sophisticate our
conceptions of him with corporeal Images and Phantasms which renders us prone
to Idolatry; to prevent both which God in great condescension to this
deplorable weakness of humane minds has always thought meet to converse with
us under some sensible appearance or visible Symbol of his Divine Presence.
Thus when God conducted his Chosen People through the Red Sea and Wilderness,
he went before them in a Pillar of Cloud by day, and in a Pillar of Fire by
night, and when afterward he gave them his Law, he descended upon Mount Sinai
in a bright and glorious flame, overcast with thick and solemn clouds, in which
illustrious appearance he afterward made his entrance into the Tabernacle,
where he made his constant abode, and from whence he frequently exhibited
himself to the Peoples eyes and senses in a body of visible light and glory,
which visible light is in holy Scripture very often called the Glory of the
Lord. And since God in condescension to the weakness of humane minds thought it
meet to present himself to the senses of men in some visible appearance, there
is the same reason why the Mediator should assume some visible substance to his
invisible Godhead, that therein he might exhibit himself to our sense, and
thereby at once affect our minds with a great love and dread of his divine
Majesty, and by vouchsafing us a visible presence prevent our framing Idols and
false Images, and Representations of him in our own minds. Now of all sensible
substance there was none so proper for this end as Humane Nature, which is that
above all others that we are most intimately acquainted with and most
accustomed to love, and reverence, and obey. It is true, had his design been to
Govern us by terrors and affrightments, as he did the Jews, it would have been
more proper for him to assume that dreadful appearance of a consuming fire, in
which he was wont to converse with them; but his design being to erect his
Empire in men's Souls, and to captivate their Wills into a free and generous
obedience, he could not have appeared to us in any visible substance so proper
for this end, so apt to oblige and aw, to indear and terrify us together, as
Humane Nature. And accordingly as God dwelt of old in the Jewish Tabernacle,
and thence displayed himself before the Eyes of that People in a visible Glory;
so the Word, as St. John tells, was made flesh, and tabernacled among us, (for
so the Greek word (...) signifies,) i. e. as in condescension to the weakness
of the Jews he pitched his Tabernacle among them, and thence frequently
appeared in a visible Glory to their sense, so in condescension to ours he
pitched his Tabernacle in our flesh or nature, from whence, as he proceeds, we
behold his Glory (i. e. at his Baptism and Transfiguration) as the glory of the
only begotten Son, or in which the only begotten Son was wont to display
himself from between the Cherubins, John 1.14. In short therefore since in
Mediating for God with us it was very needful that in compliance with our
weakness he should address to our sense in some visible appearance, and since
there was no visible appearance in which he could so advantagiously address to
us as that of Humane Nature, it hence evidently appears how requisite it was
that he should assume our Nature to his Deity, and be Man as well as God.

And as it was requisite he should be God-man in order to his Mediating for God
with us, so was it also no less requisite in order to his Mediating for us with
God; because, as I shall show hereafter, to Mediate for us with God implies,
first, his making an atonement for our sins with his Blood; Secondly, his
appearing for us as our Advocate in Heaven. Now as for the first, it was highly
requisite that he should be Man, that so he might suffer for us, his Divinity
being wholly impassible; and this reason the Apostle himself assigns, Heb.
2.14. Forasmuch then as the Children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also
himself (speaking of Christ) took part of the same, that through death he might
destroy him who has the power of death; and seeing he was to assume another
Nature to his Divinity, that so he might suffer for us, it was most fit and
proper that he should assume ours rather than any other. For since God in mercy
had consented to accept of another person's suffering for our sins, it was very
requisite that what he suffered for us should come as near to our own personal
suffering as it was possible, that so it might be more exemplary to us, and
more nearly affect us with dread and horror for our sins; and next to our own
personal suffering is the suffering of our Nature: and therefore since the
punishment of our sins was to be transferred from our Persons, it was highly
fit it should be inflicted on our Nature, which it could not have been had not
he been Man who endured it.

And as it was requisite that he should be Man, that so he might suffer, and
that so the Nature at least that had sinned might suffer, so it was no less
requisite that he should be God-man in one and the same person; to render his
sufferings a valuable Consideration for all that Punishment that was due to God
upon the score of the infinite sins of an infinite number of sinners. For how
could the blood of one man, though never so innocent or excellent, have
amounted to a valuable commutation for the forfeited lives and souls of a world
of guilty sinners? Or what less than the blood of God-man could have been any
way equivalent to that Eternal Punishment that was due to God from the whole
Race of Mankind? And yet that it should be in some measure equivalent was
highly requisite, as I shall show hereafter, both to satisfy the divine
Justice for what is past, and to secure the divine Authority for the future;
and accordingly we are said to be purchased with the blood of God, Acts 20.28.
not that the Divine Essence can suffer or bleed, but being united into one
Person with the Humane Nature, the Properties of this Nature, and also the
Actions and Passions thence proceeding, may be truly attributed to it; and
therefore since in the Person of Christ God was united to Man, whatsoever his
Humanity suffered may be truly called the suffering of God; and being so, it
was a suffering every way equivalent to the Eternal damnation of the whole
world of sinners.

Lastly, As he was to appear as our Advocate at the right hand of God, it was
very fit he should be Man, that so, as the Apostle discourses, having an High
Priest that was in all points tempted like as we are, as having been placed in
our Nature and Circumstances, he might be the more affectionately touched with
the feeling of our infirmities, Heb. 4.15. i. e. that so our nature being a
part of himself, and that himself having experienced its weakness and
infirmity, he might be the more nearly concerned for it, and be touched with a
more tender compassion toward it, and consequently solicit its cause and
interest at the right hand of God with greater zeal and importunity. For so the
same Author reasons, Heb. 3.17, 18. Wherefore in all things it behoved him to
be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful High
Priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the
People, for in that himself has suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor
them that are tempted.

And that he should be God as well as Man is no less requisite to create in us
the greater confidence of the success of his Advocation. For what Reason or
Argument could be great enough to satisfy our guilty, and therefore anxious
minds, that ever a mere man, who had nothing beyond our selves to recommend him
to God but only his Innocence and Virtue, should be able to obtain such a
prevailing interest in Heaven, as not only to reconcile the Almighty Father of
all things to a world of sinful men, against whom he was so justly and so
highly incensed, but also to obtain of him to embrace them with infinite Love,
and crown them with eternal Favors; which is such a stupendous success as we
could scarce have modestly hoped for from the most importunate intercession,
not only of the best man that ever was upon earth, but of the highest Angel in
Heaven? For unless we could reasonably suppose God to be more pleased with one
innocent man or Angel than he is displeased with a world of guilty sinners,
which is hardly supposable, we could have no just ground to hope that the cries
of the ones intercessions should be more prevalent with him than the cries of
the others guilts. But when we consider, that he who has undertaken our cause
is the Son of God, the Son of his natural Generation, that from all Eternity
was begotten of his Essence, God of God, Light of Light, very God of very God,
what may we not expect from the Prayers of one so near and dear to the Eternal
Father, that is fit either for him to ask, or for the Eternal Father to bestow?
For this we may be confident of, that he can never be so highly displeased with
us as he is pleased with his own Son, who is the stamp of his very Essence, and
express Character of his Person, and that therefore his pleasure in him will be
far more prevalent than all his displeasure against us; and while it is so, we
have all the security in the world that he will succeed in his Advocation, and
prevail in our behalf. Thus that Christ should be God-man was in it self highly
expedient to qualify him for all the Parts and Offices of his Mediation, and
accordingly the holy Scripture expressly declares him to be so.

For first, That he is God is as plainly asserted as any Proposition in the
Bible. For thus not to instance in the Old Testament, where he is frequently
styled Jehovah, the incommunicable name of God, and the Mighty or Almighty God,
and Immanuel, that is, God with us; In the New Testament he is not only called
God, Acts 20.28. where the Pastors are exhorted to feed the Church of God which
he has purchased with his own blood, which can be applied to none but Christ;
and John 20.28. where Thomas calls him my Lord and my God, which Confession of
his our Savior himself approves, Verse 29. but moreover he is called the true
God, 1 John 5.20. And we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ,
he is the true God and eternal life, and God over all blessed for ever, Romans
9.5. and accordingly the Father himself is brought in thus bespeaking him, Thy
Throne O God is for ever and ever, Heb. 1.8. where his design is to show the
excellency of Christ above the Angels; for says he in Verse 7. Of the Angels
he says, who makes his Angels Spirits, and his Ministers a flame of fire, but
unto the Son he says, Thy Throne O God, etc. which style, O God, here must
necessarily import something greater than was ever attributed to Angels, and
consequently something greater than a Nominal or Titular Deity, which our
Adversaries in this Article allow was frequently given to the Angel of the Lord
in the Old Testament. If therefore that Angel of the Lord were a mere created
Angel, as they affirm, he had as much attributed to him as our Savior, unless
we suppose this style, O God, to import real and essential Deity, and not
merely nominal. So also John 1.1. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God. For the clearing of which noble Text, which
our Adversaries with a world of Art have endeavored to perplex and entangle,
it is to be considered that this Phrase, (...), the Word, was a term of Art by
which in that very Age when this Gospel was written, and long before and after
it, both the Jewish and Heathen Writers were wont to express and signify a
divine Person, Vide Note ad finem.
by whom the Ancient Jews understood the Messiah, Vide Note ad finem.
who is that very Person the Apostle here treats of.

Since therefore by this Phrase the Word, both Jews and Gentiles, when S. John
wrote this Gospel, understood a divine Person; and since by this divine Person
the Jews understood the Messiah, there is no reason to imagine that S. John
here meant it in any other signification, since in so doing he could not but
foresee he should impose upon the World, and take an effectual course to make
us believe he meant what he never intended. For he is so far from explaining
this Phrase into any different sense from that of the Jewish and Gentile
Writers, that he all along explains himself in the very same. Vide Note ad
finem.


Now it is hardly to be imagined by any one whose mind is not deeply tinctured
with Heretical Pravity, but that had the Apostle used this Technological Phrase
in any different sense from its common acceptance, he would have told us of
it, and not have given us such an unavoidable occasion to mistake in so great a
Doctrine, by clothing its sense in such Phrases as in the Language of the Age
he wrote in signified so differently from what he meant and intended by them.

And as in the abovenamed Texts he is expressly styled God, so other Texts, to
convince us that he is not a mere titular Deity, attribute sundry things to him
which are peculiar to God Essential. For so the making of the World is in
sundry places expressly attributed to him, (which as the Apostle tells us, Heb.
3.4. is peculiar to God; For he, says he, that made all things is God;) for so
in the abovenamed Text we are told, That by him were all things made, and that
without him was not any thing made which was made; where by all things we must
necessarily understand the whole World, unless we will suppose the Apostle to
equivocate, because it was then a common and received Doctrine that the Word
was the maker of the World. For so, besides the above cited Authorities, the
Chaldee Paraphrase upon Isa. 45.12. instead of I made the Earth, and created
man upon it, says the Lord, renders it, I by my word made the Earth, and
created man upon it; and on Genesis 1.27. instead of God created man, the
Jerusalem Targum renders it, The Word of the Lord created man, and so in
several other places. This therefore being the Doctrine of the Age, S. John
could not but apprehend that they would certainly understand these words of his
in their own sense, because in all appearance they are so to be understood; if
therefore he meant them in any other sense, he ought immediately to have
explained himself, which since he has not, it is plain either that he meant
according to the common sense, or that he intended to equivocate; but that he
meant according to the common Doctrine of the Age is sufficiently evident from
other Texts of Scripture. For Heb. 11.3. the Apostle expresses this Article to
the Jews in their own Language, through Faith we understand that the Worlds
were made by the Word of God; now that by this Word he meant Christ, is plain
from Heb. 1.1, 2. In these last days God spoke unto us by his own Son, by whom
also he made the Worlds; and that by these Worlds he means the whole Creation
is evident from the 8, 9, and 10. verses of this Chapter, But unto the Son he
said, thy Throne O God is for ever and ever, etc. Thou have loved
righteousness, and hated iniquity, etc. speaking still of the Son, and then it
follows, And thou Lord in the beginning have laid the foundation of the Earth,
and the Heavens are the work of thine hands; for the conjunction ( And) here
plainly connects these words to the foregoing, viz. But unto the Son he said,
etc. so that still it is the same Son of whom it is said, Thy Throne O God,
etc. and thou Lord in the beginning, etc. the same Person whose Throne in verse
8. is said to be for ever and ever, that is said in verse 10. to have laid the
foundations of the earth. So also Col. 1.15, 16, 17. Who is the Image of the
invisible God, the firstborn of every Creature, for by him were all things
created that are in Heaven, and that are on earth, visible and invisible,
whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers, all things
were created by him, and for him, and he is before all things, and by him all
things do consist; where to show that he means a proper and literal creation,
the Apostle describes it in those very words wherein Moses describes the
creation of the World, For by him were all things created that are in Heaven,
and that are on Earth; and to show that he does not mean by creating, renewing
or regenerating, as the Socinians will needs understand him, he tells us, that
not only Men were created by him, who are the only Subjects of this new
Metaphorical creation, but all things in general that are on Earth, and not
only all things that are on Earth, but all things that are in Heaven too, where
there never was any thing new-created or regenerated; for the Thrones and
Dominions, the Principalities and Powers, i. e. Orders of Angels that are here
said to be created by him have never been renewed or regenerated, but those of
them that fell fell for all eternity, and they which stand have always stood,
and shall stand for ever; and therefore by his creating them must be meant his
giving them their being and existence.

And as the creation of the World is in Scripture attributed to Christ, which
speaks him a divine Being, so there are other things ascribed to him which are
peculiar to the Divinity, as particularly his being Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the end, the first and the last, in Rev. 22.13. and several other
places, which is a style that God has appropriated to himself, Isa. 44.6. Thus
says the Lord the King of Israel, and his Redeemer the Lord of Hosts, I am the
first, and I am the last, and besides me there is no God. If then Christ be the
first and last, as he himself declares he is, Rev. 1.17. he must be that Lord
the King and Redeemer of Israel.

Hitherto we have been proving that he is God, but then there are other Texts
that do as plainly prove him to be God-man. For so in 1 Timothy 3.16. Without
controversy great is the mystery of Godliness, God was manifested in the
flesh, which is the same with that of S. John, John 1.18. And the Word (which
in the first verse he says was God) was made flesh; so also Phil. 2.6, 7. For
being in the form of God he thought it not Robbery to be equal with God, but
emptied himself, and took upon him the form of a servant, being made in the
likeness of men; from which words it is plain that Christ was in the form of
God before ever he was in the form of a servant, for it was by taking on him
the form of a Servant that he emptied himself, and his being in the form of a
servant consisted in being made in the likeness of men, so that his being in
the form of God does as much imply that he was God, as his being in the form of
a servant does that he was Man, and since in becoming man he emptied himself,
it necessarily follows, that before he became so he was full, and also that
that fullness of his consisted in being in the form of God; if then he was full
by being in the form of God, before he emptied himself into the form of a
servant by being made in the likeness of men, it is certain that he was in the
form of God before he was in the form of man, and that his being in the form of
God does as much signify his being really God as his being in the form of men
does his being really man: But for further satisfaction concerning these two
last cited Texts I refer the Reader to that most learned and incomparable
Treatise, Pearson's Exposition of the Creed, fol. 121, and 127. where the
Cavils of the Socinians are all shamefully baffled with clear and convincing
reasons.

Thus as it is highly requisite in it self that the Mediator should partake of
the Natures of both the Parties between whom he interposes, so we are
sufficiently assured that he does, by Scripture Testimony. So that now in his
Mediation for God with us we have all the reason in the world to dread and
reverence his Authority, and also to resign up our selves to its conduct with a
free and cheerful mind. For being God, we are sure that he has an all-seeing
Eye that inspects our hearts, and pries into the inmost thoughts and purposes
of our Souls, and an Almighty Arm that can stretch forth it self to the
remotest distance, and reach us even to the bottomless Pit; and being thus
exposed to the inspection of an all-seeing Eye, and the vengeance of an
Almighty Arm, how dare we harbor any thought or purpose, any desire or
affection with which that Eye is offended, or that Arm provoked? But then being
Man as well as God, his Authority comes armed to us with equal Sweetness and
Majesty, and is every whit as apt to affect our love and ingenuity, as our
dread and reverence. For how can we refuse to obey him when he commands us in
our own nature; a nature which is most intimate and familiar to us, and which
we are most inured to love and to obey; and above all, a nature wherein he bled
and died for us, and cheerfully exposed himself to sorrow, and shame, and
torment, that we might live and be happy for ever? And so on the other hand, in
his Mediation for us with God we have all the reason in the World steadfastly to
rely upon his meritorious Sacrifice and powerful Intercession; for as he was
man, he was not only capacitated to suffer for us, but he actually suffered in
our nature, that very nature wherein we had justly deserved to suffer for ever.
So that what he suffered for us came as near to our suffering for our selves,
and consequently did as much satisfy the ends of divine Justice in exacting
punishment of Offenders, as it was possible for any substituted or vicarious
punishment to do. For though our persons escape, our nature has been punished
in him. But then being God as well as Man, what he suffered for us was not only
instead of what we ought to have suffered, but equivalent to it. So that our
ransom from eternal punishment being paid with the blood of one of our own
kind, hypostatically united to God, we did as much suffer in him as we could do
without suffering in our own persons, and what we suffered in him was every way
equivalent to what we had deserved to suffer in our own persons. So that now we
have all possible assurance that the Divine Justice is so far satisfied by what
Christ has suffered for our sins, that if we repent and forsake them, we shall
be freely discharged from all that infinite Debt of punishment which we have
justly contracted by them. And then again being Man, we may be secure that he
has a most tender sympathy with the whole Mass of humane nature by what
distances soever of time or place divided and dispersed, and consequently that
having in himself experienced its weaknesses and temptations, so far as was
consistent with his innocence, he must needs be a very concerned and zealous
Advocate for us with the Almighty Father. And then being God-man, the Son of
the Almighty Father's Essence as well as the Son of man, we may be equally
secure that he cannot fail being successful in his Advocation, especially when
he pleads for us, as he does in the right of his own meritorious Blood by which
he purchased our admission into the divine Grace and Favor. So that
considering all these things, it is evident that there could have been no
Mediator between God and us so every way fit and proper to govern us for God,
and intercede for us with God, none in whom both God and we could have reposed
that Trust and Confidence, as a Theanthropos or God-man.

V. Another thing which the Scripture proposes to our belief concerning this
Mediator, is that as he partakes of the natures of both the Parties between
whom he mediates, so, that he might transact personally with both, he was sent
down from Heaven to us, and is returned again from us to Heaven. For since he
was appointed to Mediate between God and Men, it was highly expedient that he
should personally address to both Parties, that so he might more closely and
effectually solicit a mutual reconciliation between them, and that being
personally known to both, they might both repose their trust in him with
greater confidence and assurance. He was well known to the Father, in whose
bosom he dwelt from all Eternity, to be a Person every way fitted to be
entrusted with his authority and the administration of his Government, as
communicating with him in the same divine Essence, and consequently essential
Dominion; by reason of which no person in the World could be so much concerned
for his Father's Authority as he was, and consequently no Person could be so
proper to be entrusted with it; and therefore when upon the first breach
between God and men there arose an occasion for a Mediator, God could not but
be infinitely satisfied that there was none so fit to act on his part, or
Mediate for him, as his own Son. But then since he was neither known to us by
person, nor allied to us by nature, as he was to his Father, we could have no
such reason as the Father had to place our trust and confidence in him; and
therefore though when he first undertook his Mediatorship between God and us he
was not related to us by nature as he was to the Father, yet it was upon an
agreement between the Father and him that he should hereafter assume this
relation to us, and become the Son of Man as well as the Son of God, that he
was admitted to this Office. So that though from our Fall to his Incarnation he
was not Man but only God, yet all that time he Mediated as God-man between God
and Men; he Mediated for God as actually subsisting in the Divine Nature, he
Mediated for men as he was infallibly to subsist in the humane nature also. He
having therefore vertually and intentionally assumed our nature from his very
first entrance on his Mediatorship, did thereupon become equally related to
both Parties, but till he had actually assumed our natures, and therein
manifested himself unto us, we could not have that knowledge of him, nor of his
relation to us, that the Father had, nor consequently that reason to repose our
trust and confidence in him; and therefore that we might have the same reason
to confide in him in his Mediation for us as God had in his Mediation for him,
God so ordered it, not only that he should assume our nature, which, if he had
so thought meet, he might have done without either being seen of us, or born
among us, but also that he should so assume it as to be visibly born of humane
kind, and manifested in it in the open view and sight of the World. For in the
fullness of that time, which was long before prefixed in the Eternal Council of
God, the Holy Ghost by an immediate, invisible, and miraculous operation on the
pure and Immaculate Womb of a Virgin called Mary of the Lineage of David,
enabled her without any Congress of Man to conceive a Child of humane kind,
consisting of a rational Soul in a mortal body, which the Eternal Word, or
natural Son of God, who was before all Worlds, immediately assumed into a
personal Union with himself, whereby he became God-man who before was only God;
and this without either commixing his two natures into one, or converting
either of them into the other, but under their Personal Union preserving them
still distinct and separate; which God-man the blessed Virgin that conceived
him actually brought forth after the natural time of Women, and Nursed and
Educated till he arrived to the Age of man, at which time he began personally
to treat with men in his Father's behalf, and, in order to the reducing them to
their bounden duty and allegiance to the Throne of Heaven, revealed his Mind
and Will to them with his own mouth, and pressed and enforced it upon them with
the most powerful Motives that ever were urged to mankind, and by his own
miraculous Works and most holy Example abundantly demonstrated to them that
what he revealed to be the Will of his Father was true and practicable. Thus
far in his own person he Mediated for his Father with Men, as I shall show more
fully hereafter.

The consideration of which ought in all reason and conscience to render his
Mediation more prevalent with us. For when God the Father has condescended so
far as to send down his only Son from Heaven on an Embassy to us to propose to
us terms of reconciliation who had so highly incensed and affronted him; when
God the Son has condescended so far as to cloth himself in our nature, that
therein he might indear himself to us, and thereby oblige us to listen more
attentively to his gracious proposals, what a stupendous height of obstinacy
will it be in us to stop our Ears against him, and reject those terms of Mercy
he proposes to us, by persisting in a wilful rebellion? Had God sent but one of
the lowest Angels in Heaven to us to promise pardon and eternal life to us upon
condition we would but sincerely submit to his Will, one would have thought a
proposal so infinitely reasonable in it self, and advantageous to us, should
have been embraced by us with transports and raptures; but to reject it now
when he has sent it to us by his own Eternal Son, whom all his Angels adore,
and by his Son incarnate in our own natures, is such a degree of obstinacy and
ingratitude together, as no Devil was ever guilty of. Suppose that you beheld
this most glorious Person coming down to you from the right hand of God to
tender you a Pardon and a Crown upon condition you would submit to his Father's
Will, and denounce everlasting vengeance against you if you persist in your
rebellion, would you dare by refusing to submit, to reject that Pardon and that
Crown, and defy that vengeance to his face? One would think it were
impossible; but yet in effect you do the same thing, who believe that that
Jesus who preached this Gospel to the World 1600. years ago was the Son of God
in Humane Nature, and yet obstinately refuse to submit to its proposals. Hence
from this very Topic, that God has in these last days spoken unto us by his
own Son, Heb. 1.2. the Apostle himself makes this inference, Therefore we ought
to give the more earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lest at any
time we should let them slip, Heb. 2.1.

And now having finished his Personal Treaty or Mediation with us for God, he
lays the foundation of his everlasting Intercession for us with God before our
own Eyes, viz. in the Sacrifice of himself for the sins of the World. He might,
if he had pleased, have suffered death for us in the invisible state, and
received those tortures from the malice of Devils which were inflicted on him
by the malice of devilish men, but that would not have given so great a
satisfaction to our Faith. For for the Son of God to lay down his life for
Sinners, is such a stupendous instance of love, as would have exceeded the
belief of Mankind, had it not been openly and visibly transacted; and therefore
he rather chose to resign up himself into the hands of the Jews his cruel
Persecutors, and by them to offer up his Life upon the Cross in the Public
view of the World. And now having given this sensible evidence to our Faith
that he died for us, to satisfy us farther that his death was accepted by his
Father as a full atonement for our sins, he rose again from the dead the third
day after his Crucifixion, which was a plain evidence that his Father was fully
satisfied with what he had suffered for us, because he exacted no more, but by
his Resurrection actually discharged him from any farther suffering for ever.
So that the Resurrection of Christ is not only an evidence of the truth of his
Religion, under which notion I shall discourse of it hereafter, but also of the
acceptance of his Sacrifice. For so the Apostle intimates in Romans 8.33, 34.
Who then shall lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect? It is God that
justifies: Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea, rather,
that is risen again, i. e. Who is there now that can presume to denounce
eternal condemnation against any good Christian, since Christ himself has laid
down his life for him, yea rather since he is risen again from the dead, and
has thereby given sufficient evidence that God has accepted his death as our
ransom from eternal condemnation? And now having satisfied our Faith in these
two great points, that he died for our sins, and that God has accepted his
death in lieu of that eternal punishment that was due for them, all the farther
satisfaction we can ask or need is, that as he came down from the Father to
Mediate personally with us for him, so he should return back again to the
Father to Mediate personally for us with him, to exhibit and plead his
meritorious Sacrifice in our behalf, and in virtue thereof to solicit our
pardon and acceptance with God. And therefore to satisfy us in this also,
after he had abode some time upon Earth after his Resurrection, and satisfied
his Disciples by frequent converses with them that he was really risen, and
given them all necessary Orders for their future conduct in the propagation of
his Gospel, he carried them out to Bethany, where after he had lift up his
hands and blessed them, he ascended before their eyes into Heaven, upon which
it is said, Luke 24.52. That they worshipped him, and returned to Jerusalem
with great Joy; surely not because their dear Lord was gone from them, never in
this World to be seen by them more, that was cause of sorrow rather than joy to
them; but because he was gone to the right hand of the Father, there to
intercede in Person for them, and for ever to exhibit that wounded and
bleeding body of his, by which he had made expiation for the sins of the World,
and purchased the promise of the Spirit, and of eternal life; upon this account
indeed they had great cause to rejoice, because now they knew they had a sure
Friend in Heaven where their main hope and interest lay, even that very Friend
who not long before had freely exposed himself to a most shameful and
tormenting death to rescue them from death eternal, and who after such an
instance of love they could not but conclude would employ his utmost interest
with the Father in their behalf, and, in a word, who being the only begotten of
the Father, whose precious Blood he had graciously accepted as a ransom for the
sins of the World, could not but have an interest with him infinitely
sufficient to obtain for them all the graces and favors that were fit either
for them to ask, or for his Father to bestow. So that now if we heartily comply
with him as Mediating for his Father with us, we have all the encouragement in
the world to depend on him as Mediating for us with his Father, since he does
not Mediate with him by a second hand, or at a distance, but in his own Person,
in that very Person which is not only infinitely dear to the Father as being
his only begotten Son, but has also infinitely merited of him by offering him
his own life at his command as a Sacrifice for the sins of the World. And
accordingly upon this consideration the Apostle founds the hope of Christians,
1 John 2.1, 2. My little Children these things write I unto you that ye sin
not, but if any man sin, let him not presently give up himself as hopeless and
irrecoverable, for we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous, and he is the Propitiation for our sins.

VI. And lastly, Another thing which the Scripture proposes to our belief
concerning this Mediator is that upon his return from us to Heaven, there to
Mediate Personally for Men with God, he substituted the divine and Omnipresent
Spirit Personally to promote and effectuate his Mediation for God with Men.
When he went up to Heaven, there to Mediate for us with God, he did not thereby
abandon his Mediation for God with us, but immediately substituted a certain
mighty, spiritual Being to act for him, whom he calls the Advocate, or, as we
render it, the Comforter and the Holy Ghost, and who was to Mediate with Men in
his behalf even as he Mediated with them in the behalf of his Father, and to
Advocate for his Authority as he Advocated for his Father's. For so he tells
his Ministers, whom he left behind him to assert and propagate his Authority in
the World, I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter or
Advocate, i. e. to plead for, and enforce your Ministry in my behalf, whose
Ministers you are, that he may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of
Truth, etc. I will not leave you comfortless, or without an Advocate. I will
come to you, that is, by this Spirit of Truth who is to be my Vicegerent even
as I am my Father's, John 14.16, 17, 18. But for the fuller explication of this
great and necessary Article I shall, first, show what this divine Spirit is
which Christ has substituted to Mediate for God with us in his absence.
Secondly, I shall explain his subordination, and substitution to Christ in this
part of his Mediation. Thirdly, I shall show what it is that he has done, and
still continues to do in order to the effecting this Mediation.

First, What this divine Spirit is which Christ has substituted to Mediate for
God with us in his absence. I answer, it is the third Person in the Tri-une
Godhead. For that besides the Father and the Son there is a third divine Person
subsisting in the Godhead, seems to have been a current Doctrine among the
ancient Writers both Vide Note d ad finem.
Gentile and Jewish Vide Note e ad finem.
, and is most plainly and expressly asserted in holy Scripture; which third
Person is known in Scripture by the name of the Holy Ghost, or the Spirit of
the Lord. For that the Holy Ghost so often named in the New Testament is the
same with that Spirit of the Lord so much celebrated in the Old, S. Peter
expressly asserts, 2 Pet. 1.2. For the Prophecy came not in old time by the will
of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost; from
which words it is evident that this Holy Ghost whom S. Peter here mentions is
the very same with that holy Spirit, or Spirit of the Lord, by whom, as we are
told in the Old Testament, the ancient Prophets were inspired, vid. Isa. 63.11.
2 Samuel 23.2. Mich. 2.7. and abundance of other places; and accordingly S. Peter
applies that Prophecy of Joel 2.28. I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh,
to that miraculous descent of the Holy Ghost on the day of Pentecost, Acts
2.16, 17. but this is that, says he, which was spoken by the Prophet Joel,
etc. which could not be true if S. Peter's Holy Ghost were not the same with
Ioel's spirit of the Lord. But it is most certain that the Holy Ghost whom S.
Peter and the New Testament so often mention, was in the first place, a real
Person, and not a mere Quality, as the Socinians vainly dream. For so we every
where find personal properties and actions attributed to him. Thus he is said
to speak, Acts 28.25. and Heb. 3.7. yea, and his speeches are frequently
recorded; so Acts 10.20. The Spirit said unto Peter, arise therefore, get thee
down, and go with them, for I have sent thee; and Acts 13.2. The Holy Ghost
said, separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them;
and how can we without horrible force to such plain, historical relations,
which ought to be literal and not figurative, attribute these speeches to a
mere Virtue or Quality? And elsewhere he is said to reprove the world, John
16.8. and to search into and know the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10, 11. and
to divide his Gifts severally to every man as he will, 1 Cor. 12.11. And not
only so, but such things and actions are attributed to him as can in no sense
be attributed to the Father, which would be nonsense if he were only the
virtue or power of the Father, and not a real Person, distinct from him. Thus
the Holy Ghost is said to come, as sent from the Father, in the name of Christ,
John 14.26. and in John 16. he is said to come, as sent from Christ, verse 7.
And when he comes, Christ promises them, that he shall guide them into all
truth, for he shall not speak of himself, says he, but whatsoever he shall
hear that shall he speak, ver. 13. Again, he shall glorify me, says Christ,
for he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you, verse 14. And to name
no more, the Holy Ghost is said to make Intercession for the Saints according
to the Will of God, Romans 8.27. none of which things can in any tolerable sense
be said of God the Father. Since therefore not only personal actions, but such
personal actions also as cannot be attributed to the Father, are frequently
attributed to the Holy Ghost; it hence necessarily follows, that he is not
merely the virtue or power of the Father, but a distinct principle of action
from him, that acts from and by himself, and consequently is a real person or
subsistence.

It being evident therefore, from what has been said, that the Spirit of the
Lord in the Old Testament is the same with the Holy Ghost in the New, and that
the Holy Ghost in the New is a real person distinct from the Father, it hence
follows in the second place, that this Holy Ghost is a divine person, because
in the Scripture-forms of Baptism and Benediction he is always ranked with
divine persons, viz. the Father and the Son; thus Baptism is in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Matthew. 28.19. And the Grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost
be with you all, is the usual form of Benediction, 2 Cor. 13.14. Now that the
Father is a divine person all acknowledge, and that the Son is so too has been
proved at large, and therefore since the Holy Ghost is ranked with the Father
and the Son, both in our Baptismal Dedication and form of Benediction, that is
a sufficient evidence that he is a divine person also. For what likelihood is
there that in such solemn acts of Religion a mere Creature should be taken into
copartnership with the divine Father and Son? But besides both in the Old and
New Testament divine actions and perfections are attributed to him. Thus in Job
33.4. Creation is ascribed to him, The Spirit of God has made me, and the
breath of the Almighty has given me life. So also Job 26.13. By his Spirit he
has garnished the Heavens. Since therefore to Create is a divine Act, and
since every Act flows from the Essence of the Agent, it follows that the
Essence of this Spirit from which this divine Act of Creation flows, is divine.
Again, in Psalm. 139.7. Omnipresence is attributed to this divine Spirit;
Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? And if there be no place whither we can go
from him, as the Question plainly implies there is not, then he must
necessarily fill all places, and be Omnipresent. So again, 1 Cor. 2.10.
Omniscience is attributed to him, for the Spirit searches all things, yea, the
deep things of God; and that by searching here is not meant Enquiry, but
Knowledge and Comprehension, the next verse will inform us, For what man knows
the things of a man save the spirit of a man which is in him? Even so the
things of God knows no man, save the Spirit of God. If then the Spirit's
search be knowledge, and his Knowledge comprehends all things, what else is
this but Omniscience? And as the Actions and Attributes which the Scripture
attributes to the Holy Ghost are divine, so are the Honors also. For so 1 Cor.
6.19. our bodies are said to be the Temples of the Holy Ghost which is in us;
now since there is nothing can make a Temple, which as such is the house of
God, but only the Inhabitation of a divine Person, and since no person can have
right to the honor of a Temple, which as such is made for divine Worship, but
he to whom divine Worship is due; it will hence necessarily follow, both that
the Holy Ghost is a divine Person, and that he has right to divine Worship;
and accordingly, 1 Cor. 3.16. the Apostle makes the Inhabitation of God's
Spirit in us to be that which constitutes us Temples of God, but how could his
Spirit's dwelling in us constitute us Temples of God, unless he himself were
God?

Besides all which he is in express words affirmed to be God. So in 2 Cor.
3.15, 16, 17. Even unto this day when Moses is read, the Vail is upon their
h^arts; nevertheless when it shall turn to the Lord, the Vail shall be taken
away; now the Lord is that Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there
is liberty; in which words the Apostle, as all agree, refers to Exodus 34.34.
When Moses went in before the Lord to speak with him, he took the Vail off
until he came out; from whence I argue, that Lord whom Moses went in to speak
with was Jehovah, the true God, this Jehovah, the Apostle tells us, is that
Spirit, this Spirit he also tells us is the Spirit of the Lord, or the Holy
Ghost, therefore the Holy Ghost is Jehovah, the true God. So also Acts 5.3, 4.
Why has Satan filled thy heart to lie unto the Holy Ghost, etc. Thou have not
lied unto men, but unto God, i. e. in Lying to the Holy Ghost, who is God; for
if he were not God, as we are sure he is not man, it might as well have been
said, thou have not lied unto men only, no nor to the Holy Ghost only, but unto
God; and indeed it ought to be so expressed, supposing that by the Holy Ghost
and God he did not mean the same thing, because the design of the words was to
aggravate Ananias his crime, from the consideration of the greatness of the
Person against whom it was committed, and therefore had the Holy Ghost been any
thing less than God, as we are sure the Apostles were, to whom the lie was
immediately told, he ought to have pursued the (...) as well to the Holy Ghost
as to men, and then it must have been, it was not merely to men that thou did
lie, no nor to the Holy Ghost merely, but unto God himself; since therefore he
places the Aggravation of his lying to the Holy Ghost in this only, that he
lied not unto men but unto God, it is plain that by the Holy Ghost and God he
meant the same thing. From all which Testimonies it is very apparent that this
great Spirit or Holy Ghost, whom Christ has substituted to carry on his
Mediation for God with men in his absence, is no other than the third divine
Person subsisting in the eternal Godhead. And indeed considering the mighty
part he was to act, viz. to Mediate under Christ for God with men, the same
reason which rendered it necessary for Christ to be God to qualify him for
this Office, vide Page 24. do render it altogether as necessary for the Holy
Ghost to be so. And indeed how is it possible he should operate upon so many
men together, at such remote distances as he is obliged to do by his Office,
and at once move every member of that vast Body of Christ* the Catholic
Church, dispersed over the Face of the whole Earth, unless like an Omnipres^nt
soul, he be diffused through the whole, and co-exists with every part; and if
he be Omnipres^nt, ^e must be God. And now having given an account of the
Person and Quality of this Divine Spirit, I proceed

Secondly* To explain his subordination and substitution to Christ, in this
part of his Mediatorship for God with men. In order to which it is to be
considered that this subordination of the sacred Persons in the holy Trinity
proceeds not from any inequality of Essence, but from the inequality of their
personal Properties. For as to their Essence they are all of them God, i. e.
infinite in being and perfections; and being infinite, they must all be equal,
there being no such thing as more or less in infinity; and then being equal in
Essence, they must necessarily be equal in essential Power and Dominion, and
consequently, as such, are no way subject or subordinate to one another. But as
to their personal Properties it cannot be denied but they are unequal; for the
Father who begot, must in that respect be superior to the Son, who was
begotten, and the Holy Ghost who proceeded, must in that respect be inferior
to the Father and Son from whom he proceeded; and upon this inequality their
subordination is founded. For as there is a stated Number in the Trinity, by
which the sacred Persons are determined to Three, so there is also a stated
Order, by which they are ranked into a First, a Second, and a Third; which
Order is not made by mutual consent or arbitrary constitution, but founded in
the nature of those personal properties by which they are distinguished from
one another. For as the Father, being the Fountain of Godhead to the Son, must
be first in order of nature; and as the Son together with the Father was the
Fountain of Godhead to the Holy Ghost, and therefore must be second to the
Father, and in order of nature before the Holy Ghost; so the Holy Ghost
proceeding from the Father and the Son, must of the Three be in order of nature
the Third. For so the Scripture expressly asserts that he proceeded from the
Father, John 15.26. and also that he is the Spirit of the Son, Gal. 4.6. and
the Spirit of Christ, Romans 8.9. and the Spirit of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.19. And
being the Spirit both of the Father and the Son, he must be supposed to proceed
from both. And wherever the Holy Ghost is in the Old Testament called the
Spirit of God, it is in the Hebrew Ruach Elohim in the Plural, which seems to
intimate that he proceeded not from one, but from two divine Persons, i. e. not
from the Father alone, but from the Son also. So that though, as to their
Godhead, they are all equal, yet in order of nature, and in respect of their
personal properties, the third is inferior, the second superior, and the
first supreme; and being unequal in those personal Properties by which they
stand related to each other, it is very reasonable that according to these
their personal inequalities they should be subordinate to one another, and
consequently that the Father, who is the Fountain of the Divinity, should be
supreme in the Divine Monarchy, and that the Son, who was begotten of him,
should minister to him, and that the Holy Ghost, who proceeded from the Father
and the Son, should minister to both. And accordingly in all its external
actions and administrations this has ever been the Economy of the Holy
Trinity, for the Father to act by the Ministry of the Son, and the Son by the
Ministry of the Holy Ghost. For so before the Fall of man, and consequently,
before this Mediation of the Son commenced, it is evident that even in creating
the World the Father acted by the Son, and therefore is said to have made the
World by him, Heb. 1.2. and the Son acted by the Spirit, who is said to have
moved upon the face of the Chaos, Genesis 1.2. for that by the Spirit of God there
is meant the third Person in the Holy Trinity, we have reason to believe,
because he is elsewhere said to have made man, and to have garnished the
Heavens, as has been already shown. And in the same Method of subordination
the Godhead has always proceeded in its transactions with the world, and that
more especially and remarkably in this great affair of Mediating with mankind;
wherein the Father has always used the Ministry of the Son, and the Son the
Ministry of the Holy Ghost; but in the matter of the Mediation it is evident
that this subordination of these sacred persons was founded not only in these
their personal inequalities, but also in a mutual agreement between them, in
which the Son agreed with the Father that in case he would be so far reconciled
to Rebellious Mankind as to grant them a Covenant of mercy, and therein among
other blessings to promise them his Holy Spirit, he himself would assume our
natures, and therein not only treat with us personally in order to the reducing
us to our bounden Allegiance, but also die a Sacrifice for our sins; upon which
agreement the Father long before the Son had actually performed his part of it,
even from our first Apostasy, granted his Spirit to mankind, which Spirit was
granted to this end, that under the Son he should Mediate with men in order to
the reducing them to their due subjection to the Father. For all that heavenly
influence which the Holy Ghost sheds forth upon the minds of men is wholly
Mediatorial in God's behalf, and in order to the reconciling men's minds unto
him; and therefore in this his Mediation he must be supposed to act in
subordination to the Son who is supreme Mediator; and accordingly as the Son
has been, and will be always Mediating with men by this blessed Spirit, even
from his Ascension to the end of the World, so I make no doubt but he always
Mediated with them by the same Spirit, even from the Fall of man to his
Incarnation. For so in the time of the Old World, we read of the Spirit's
striving with men, i. e. in order to the subduing their stubborn Wills to a due
subjection to the Will of the Father, Genesis 6.3. in doing of which he even then
Mediated for God with Men under the Great Mediator, and so he has continued to
do through all successive Ages of the World. For there is nothing more apparent
from Scripture than that it is under Christ that the Spirit acts in the Kingdom
of God, upon which account he is called the Spirit of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.11. even
as by the ancient Jews he is called the Spirit of the Messiah, as was observed
before; and this Spirit whom St. Peter calls the Spirit of Christ, was, as he
himself there tells us, the Spirit which was in the ancient Prophets; by which
it is evident that long before Christ came, this Spirit was his, and that he
acted by him. And even when he came down into the World to transact personally
with men, he generally acted by this holy Spirit. For so at his Baptism we are
told that the Holy Ghost descended on him in a bodily shape, Luke 3.22. upon
which it is said, that he went away full of the Holy Ghost, Luke 4.1. after
which it is plain that it was by this Holy Ghost in him that he Prophesied and
wrought his Miracles; for so Isa. 61.1. the Prophet attributes the whole
Prophecy of Christ to the Spirit of the Lord which was upon him; and in Matt.
12.28. our Savior himself affirms, that he cast out Devils by the Spirit of
God, and therefore he calls the Jews attributing his miraculous works to the
Devil, blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, Matt. 12.31. because it was by the
power of the Holy Ghost that he wrought them. Now as the Father's acting by the
Son implies the Son's Subordination to him, so the Son's acting by the Spirit,
implies the Spirit's subordination to him, which subordination of the Spirit in
his Mediatorial Office is immediately founded in that Compact of the Son with
the Father, upon which he undertook the Mediation. For the Spirit was a part of
the purchase of the Son's Blood, and whatsoever he purchased he purchased of
the Father by compact and agreement with him; so that now he has a right to
the Spirit's Ministry, not only by virtue of his proceeding from him, together
with the Father, but also by the purchase of his own Blood, whereby he obtained
the promise of him from the Father. For so the Holy Ghost is said to be shed on
us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior, i. e. through the Intercession
he makes in virtue of his meritorious Sacrifice, Tit. 3.5, 6. For whatsoever
comes to us from God through Christ, is part of what he has purchased for us,
and in Romans 5.5, 6. he makes Christ's dying for the ungodly the reason of the
giving the Holy Ghost to us. The promise of the Holy Ghost therefore being part
of the purchase of Christ's blood, he by his Advocation in Heaven obtained the
performance of it of the Father, even as he does the performance of all his
other promises. For the Father being the supreme person in the Holy Trinity is
the prime and Original Fountain of all our blessings, and every good thing we
receive is derived from him to us through the Son, and by the Holy Ghost; and
even the Holy Ghost himself is derived to us from the Father through the
Advocation of the Son. For so he himself tells us, I will pray the Father, and
he shall give you another Comforter, namely, the Holy Ghost, John 14.16. So
that though Christ has purchased the Holy Ghost of the Father as he has also
all the other blessings of the New Covenant, yet it is plain this Purchase
vests him not with a right to bestow and send him without the Father, but only
to obtain him of the Father upon his Prayer or Advocation; and so of all those
other blessings. So that still the Father is the supreme Source from whence the
Spirit and all those blessings are derived to us, and it is from his hands that
the Son procures them by his powerful Intercession; in short therefore, Christ
by his death purchased a right of the Father to obtain of him by his
Intercession Authority to send the Holy Ghost to Minister for and under him in
his Mediation for God with men; and accordingly he promises his Disciples that
when he departed this World he would send the Comforter to them, John 16.7.
where he uses the very same phrase as he did when he Commissioned his Apostles
to minister under him, As the Father has sent me, so send I you, John 20.21.
and accordingly his sending the Comforter must denote his Commissioning him by
the Authority he had received from the Father to minister under him in his
Mediation for the Father. For so in John 15.26. When the Comforter is come whom
I will send to you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth which proceeds
from the Father, he shall testify of me; where first, the Son is said to
Commission or send him; Secondly, to Commission or send him from the Father, i.
e. by Authority from him; And thirdly, to Commission or send him to testify of
him, and therein to minister to him; and so in Luke 24.49. when he was just
ascending into Heaven he tells his Disciples, Behold I send the promise of my
Father upon you, i. e. the promise of the Holy Ghost; and accordingly, Acts
2.33. St. Peter tells us upon that miraculous descent of the Holy Ghost, that
Christ being exalted to the right hand of God, and having received of the
Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, (i. e. having by his Intercession
received authority of the Father to send the Holy Ghost, according to that
promise which he had before purchased of him with his blood) he has shed forth
this which ye now see and hear, i. e. this Miraculous Gift of the Holy Ghost;
in all which places it is evident that the Holy Ghost was substituted,
commissioned, and sent by the Son, authorized thereunto by the Father, to
minister under him. For as the Son acts by the Father's Authority as he is his
Minister, so all that authority which he communicates to others to act under
him, he must derive Originally from the Father, and consequently that Authority
by which he sent the Spirit to act as his Minister, he must have derived from
the Father whose Minister himself is; and hence the Father is said to send the
Spirit in the name of the Son, i. e. to appoint the Spirit to act under the
Son, and by his authority, John 14.26. as the Son is said to send the Spirit
from the Father, i. e. by the authority which he had received of the Father;
and this I verily believe is the reason why the Apostle in Ephesians. 4.8. quotes the
Psalmist with that variation, he ascended up on high, says he, speaking of
Christ, he led Captivity Captive, he gave gifts unto men, whereas the words of
the Psalmist are, He received gifts for men, Psalm. 68.18. to denote that that
gift of the Holy Ghost which Christ gave to his Church, was nothing but what he
himself had first received from the Father; so that though it was from the
Father that the Son had his authority to send the Holy Ghost, yet it was from
the Son that the Holy Ghost had his Mission immediately. And accordingly you
may observe, that after Christ's departure from this World, the Holy Ghost
acted immediately under Christ as the supreme Vicegerent of his Kingdom. For
next and immediately under Christ he Authorized the Bishops and Governors of
the Church, and constituted them overseers of the flock of Christ, Acts 20.28.
it was he that chose their Persons, and appointed them their Work, Acts 13.2.
and gave them their several Orders and Directions, Acts 15.28. Acts 16.6. in
all which it is evident he acted under Christ, and still continues to act as
his supreme Substitute and Vicegerent; and accordingly he is styled by
Tertullian, the Vicarious virtue or power, as he was the supreme Vicar and
Substitute of Christ in mediating for God with Men; so that now the Holy Ghost
is subordinated to the Son, not only by virtue of his procession from him
together with the Father, but also by virtue of his being purchased and
obtained by him of the Father by his meritorious Death and Intercession. I
proceed,

III. To show what it is that this Holy Spirit has done, and still continues
doing in order to the effectuating this his Mediation. For there are some
things which he has done, and now ceases to do, and some things which he has
always done, and will still continue doing to the end of the World, of both
which I shall give some brief account in order to the fuller explication of the
Ministry of the Holy Ghost under Jesus the great Mediator. First therefore
there are some things which he has done, and now ceases to do, and of this
sort were those extraordinary operations he performed in order to the Planting
and Propagating Christ's Gospel in the World, upon and after that his
Miraculous Descent, of which we read in Acts 2. For when Christ was departing
from his Disciples into Heaven, he ordered them to stay at Jerusalem, and not
to undertake that mighty work of Planting his Gospel through the World till
they were endued with power from on high, Luke 24.49. which power from on high
was no other than that miraculous assistance which upon his Descent the Holy
Ghost did afterward vouchsafe them; upon which Order they return to Jerusalem,
and there continue till the day of Pentecost, fasting and praying together in
an Upper Room, when all of a sudden the Holy Ghost descended upon them in a
visible body of bright shining fire, and endowed them with all those Heavenly
powers which were requisite to qualify them for the propagation of Christ's
Gospel through the World. For as they were to be the first Planters of the
Gospel, it was requisite, First, that they should be able to speak the several
Languages of those Nations to whom they were to preach; Secondly, that they
should be fully and clearly instructed in the Doctrines which they were to
preach; Thirdly, that they should be able to give the most convincing evidence
of the truth and divinity of their Doctrines; Fourthly, that they should be
conducted by Infallible advice through all the emergent difficulties of their
Ministry; against all which necessities the Holy Ghost abundantly supplied
them: For,

First, He inspired them with the gift of Languages, without which they must
have spent a great part of their lives, before they could have been capable of
preaching the Gospel to the World, in learning the several Languages of the
several Nations they were to preach to; which must have very much retarded the
progress of the Gospel. And therefore the Holy Ghost upon this his miraculous
Descent, did in an instant infuse into them the Habit of speaking several
Languages; insomuch that all of a sudden, and without any Rules of Grammar or
previous instructions, they were heard to speak, to the great astonishment of
their Auditors, in the fifteen several Tongues of fifteen several Nations, Acts
2.4, etc. And though they were immediately dispersed abroad in the World, and
some of them into remote Countries, whose names perhaps they had never heard
of, yet still wherever they came they were inspired with the Language of the
Country, which they spoke as freely as their own Mother Tongue. And this was a
vast advantage to them in their Ministry, because they were not only enabled by
it to preach the Gospel to all Nations, but were enabled in such a manner, as
gave a mighty confirmation to their Doctrine. For their very gift of speaking
being a miraculous effect of divine power was an undeniable demonstration that
what they spoke was divine.

Secondly, The Holy Ghost fully and clearly instructed them in the Doctrines
which they were to preach; and this was no more than what was necessary. For
what they preached, who were the first Planters of the Gospel, was to be the
standard of truth and falsehood to all succeeding Generations, and therefore it
was highly necessary that they should be fully and clearly instructed in the
Doctrine of the Gospel, that so their Successors in all Ages might safely rely
on their Authority. But whilst they were under the Personal Discipline of our
Savior, who instructed them by Humane Methods, i. e. by proposing his Doctrine
to their Ears, and through their Mediation to their Understandings, it is plain
they made but very slow and slender improvements. For after all his pains with
them, they continued very ignorant of some of the most material Articles of
Faith, and at best they had but gross Apprehensions of the nature of Christ's
Kingdom, and of the ends and reasons of his Death, and were very diffident even
of his Resurrection; and the reason was, that Christ taught them as a man does
a man, i. e. by words, which are only the audible Images and Representations of
things, which being liable to misapprehension and oblivion, some of them they
utterly fo^got, and some of them they grossly misunderstood. But when the Spirit
came upon them, a wondrous Light broke all of a sudden into their
Understandings, by which they discovered farther into the Gospel Mysteries in
an instant than they had done under all our Savior's teaching. For though the
Spirit taught them no new Doctrines, but did only repeat and explain to them
what our Savior had taught them before, ( for he shall receive of mine, says
Christ, i. e. of my Doctrine, and shall show, or explain it unto you,) yet it
is evident he taught them much more effectually than our Savior. For he spoke
not to their Ears, but to their Minds, and represented things more nakedly and
immediately to their understandings; he conversed with their spirits, even as
Spirits do with Spirits, without invol^ing his sense in articulate sounds, or
material representations, but objected it to them in its own naked light, and
characterized it immediately on their understandings. And as he immediately
proposed the divine light to their minds, so he also illuminated their minds to
discern and comprehend it; he raised and exalted their intellectual faculties,
and, as a vital form to the light of their reason, did actuate, and thereby
enable it to comprehend his Revelations. And hence, Acts 19.6. we are told that
the Disciples who upon St. Paul's laying his hands on them received the Holy
Ghost, spoke with Tongues, and Prophesied, i. e. explained the deep Mysteries
of the Gospel; for so Prophesying in the New Testament does most commonly
signify; hence 1 Cor. 13.2. the Apostle makes Prophecy to consist in
understanding divine Mysteries and Knowledge, and in ver. 9. We know in part,
says he, and we Prophecy in part; so that the effect of their receiving the
Holy Ghost, you see, was Prophecy, that is, a clear understanding of, and
ability to explain the Mysteries of Religion. A plain evidence how effectually
he taught them, in that they no sooner became his Scholars, but they were fit
to be the Teachers of the World. For though it seems probable that he as well
as our Savior instructed them gradually in the knowledge of the Gospel, since
it was some time after this first descent that the Mystery of the calling of
the Gentiles was revealed to them, yet it is very apparent that he instructed
them much faster than our Savior had done, and much fuller, and that those
impressions of divine truth which he made upon their understandings were much
more vigorous and clear, and therefore could not be so easily either forgotten
or mistaken by them. And accordingly our Savior himself tells them, that he
had many things to say unto them, but they could not bear them, such was the
narrowness of their capacity, and the way of his teaching: Howbeit, says he,
when the spirit of truth is come, he shall lead you into all truth, John 16.12,
13. and teach you all things, John 14.20. Thus the Holy Ghost fully instructed
them what Doctrines they were to preach to the World, and by his immediate
inspirations enabled them to deliver down the truth to us, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth.

Thirdly, The Holy Ghost enabled them to give the most convincing evidence of
the Truth and Divinity of their Doctrines; without which it was impossible they
should ever have succeeded in their Ministry. But the only certain evidence
they could give that their Doctrine was divine, was the testimony of Miracles.
For there is nothing which pretends to be divine can any otherwise evidence it
self to be so, but by something that is apparently divine; and there being
nothing apparently divine but what is plainly and evidently a miraculous effect
of divine power, it follows that Miracles only can attest the Divinity of any
Doctrines. Wherefore to enable the first Planters of the Gospel to convince the
World that their Doctrine was divine, it was highly requisite that they should
be endowed with this divine power of working Miracles; and accordingly so they
were upon this miraculous descent of the Holy Ghost upon them. For so, Acts
2.43. upon this coming of the Holy Ghost on them we are told that many wonders
and signs were done by the Apostles; so also, Acts 4.30, 31. that upon their
praying that God would stretch forth his hand to heal, and that signs and
wonders might be done by the name of Jesus; God in answer to their Prayer
filled them with the Holy Ghost, that is, enabled them by his Spirit to effect
these signs, and wonders they had prayed for. It is true indeed, they had in
some measure this gift of the Holy Ghost before this miraculous Descent, even
while our Savior was among them, but that was very sparingly, and only upon
some particular occasions, and for the effecting some particular Miracles; but
our Savior promised them that upon his going to the Father, to send the
Comforter to them, They who believed on him should not only do the Works which
he did, but greater works than those, John 14.12. and accordingly when after
his Ascension the Holy Ghost came upon them, he continued with them* and upon
all occasions empowered them to do all kinds of Miracles for the confirmation
of their Doctrine; so that whereas before the greatest part of these miraculous
signs of the divinity of the Christian Doctrine were performed by Christ
himself in his own Person, and by that means confined to the place of his
Personal habitation, which was too narrow a Theater for many Spectators to
behold them, the Holy Ghost by working Miracles in his name of all sorts, and
upon all occasions in and by his Ministers, who were presently to be dispersed
over the face of the whole Earth, did much more amply display his divine power,
and with greater speed spread the renown of it through the World, and by
constantly impowering so many persons in so many parts of the World to perform
so many miraculous things in Christ's name, did as it were carry him in open
Triumph through the World, and at once display his Majesty and Power, over the
face of the whole Earth. For what Christ did in his own Person while he was on
Earth, that and much more the Holy Ghost did in the persons of all his
Ministers; and the Holy Ghost did that at the same time in a thousand parts of
the World which Christ did only in one; and by these miraculous effects, which
are therefore called the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.4.
the Holy Ghost asserted to the World the truth and divinity of those Doctrines
which the Ministers of Jesus taught. For this gift of Miracles expired not with
those Primitive Ministers, but was continued down to their Successors for
several Generations together, until the Christian Doctrine was propagated
through the World; and then, when it had done its work, and accomplished its
end, it was withdrawn, as being no longer necessary.

Fourthly and lastly, The Holy Ghost conducted them by his own infallible
advice through all the emergent difficulties of their Ministry. For the work
wherein they were engaged was attended with difficulties that were utterly
insuperable to Humane Wisdom and Power. For first their work being such as
required an invincible courage and firm integrity of mind, a watchful prudence
and spotless purity of manners, it was highly needful, especially at first (a
good beginning being of vast importance to all great undertakings) that they
should be infallibly directed what persons were fit to be ordained to it, and
which of those were mos^ fit and proper for the several Countries and Provinces
of the World; and then through the whole course of their Ministry they were
fain to contend with all the united Wit and Malice of the World, and were very
often sent to preach among strange Nations, whose Tempers and Manners they
understood not, and still wherever they came they had Spies upon them to
watch their Designs, and observe their actions, and ever and anon they were
accused and impleaded by subtle and insinuating Orators before the Tribunals of
their Enemies, and there forced to answer for themselves. Besides that they
being to convert both Jews and Gentiles, between whom there was an inveterate
aversion, and to unite them together into one communion, it could not be
otherwise expected but that great dissentions should arise among their own
Converts, as accordingly it happened; which if not managed with infinite
prudence, must needs give a great disturbance to them, and interrupt the
course, and hinder the success of their Ministry. And in such difficult
circumstances it was almost impossible for them not to miscarry without being
conducted by an infallible prudence and circumspection; under all which
exigencies the Holy Ghost served the primitive Church in the same capacity as
the Vrim and Thummim did the ancient Jews, i. e. as an Oracle to advise them in
all cases of difficulty, and direct them in the management of all their great
and weighty affairs. Thus in that difficult case, which of the Apostles should
be sent forth to the Gentiles, the Holy Ghost either by a Bath Col, i. e. Voice
from Heaven, or an immediate inspiration, thus directs them, Separate me Paul
and Barnabas for the work whereunto I have called them, Acts 13.2. and when
they went forth among the Gentiles, the Holy Ghost advises them where they
should preach, and where not, Acts 16.6. and so also in the choice of their
Bishops they had always the Direction of the Holy Ghost; so in Acts 20.28. it
is said that it was the Holy Ghost that set them over the Flock, and S. Paul
tells Timothy, that the (...), or Episcopal Office wherewith he was invested,
was given him by Prophecy, i. e. by the immediate direction of the Holy Ghost;
and S. Clemens, who was a Disciple of the Apostles, tells us, that in those
times they ordained Bishops, (...), discerning by the Spirit who should be
ordained; and again, that they did it, (...), having a perfect foreknowledge
who they should choose. And thus also for composing the differences which arose
between their Jewish and Gentile Converts, they had the immediate advice of the
Holy Ghost, who directed them to that wise expedient, Acts 15.28. by which the
peace of the Church was secured for the present, and afterward maintained in
despite of all the attempts of seditious Incendiaries to break and divide it.
And thus having recourse upon all occasions to this infallible Guide, they were
never at a loss either what to say, or how to behave themselves; the Holy Ghost
making good to them what our Savior had promised them, When they bring you
before Magistrates, take no thought what ye shall answer, for the Holy Ghost
shall teach you at the same hour what ye ought to say, Luke 12.11, 12.

These are the extraordinary things which the Holy Ghost acted for and under
Christ, in order to the planting and propagating his Gospel through the World,
and which he continued to act so long as it was necessary for that end. For as
for the first, the Gift of Tongues, it seems to have been continued no longer
than till the Gospel had been preached to, and some Converts made in the
several Nations, the First Fruits of whom were always ordained to the work of
the Ministry; and when once the several Nations had Natives of their own to
preach the Gospel to them in their own Languages, there was no farther
necessity of this miraculous Gift of Tongues. And then as for the second, the
Gift of Revelation, it seems to have been continued no longer than till the
whole New Testament was revealed, and the several parts of it were collected
into one Volume, and distributed to the several Churches, after which there was
no farther necessity of any new revelation. But as for the third, the Gift of
Miracles, it seems to have been continued much longer than either of the
former, as indeed there was longer occasion for it, especially for that of
ejecting evil Spirits, who for many Ages had been the Gods of the World, and
detecting their frauds and impostures, that so by beholding the manifold
Triumphs of Christ's power over them, the Heathen might be at length convinced
of the falseness of their own Religion, and of the truth of Christ's; and
accordingly this gift, as I shall show hereafter, was continued in the Church
for above two hundred years together, till it had wrought its designed effect,
i. e. had sufficiently detected the fraud and malice of those Idol Gods, to the
conviction of all that were convincible, and then it was withdrawn as being no
farther necessary. And then as for the last, viz. the Gift of Counsel and
Direction, it seems to have been continued no longer than till the Government
of the Church was every where established, and its Affairs reduced into a
stated course and method, by which sufficient provision being made against
those emergent difficulties with which the state of Christianity was perplexed,
this Gift also ceased, together with the reason and necessity of it. Thus by
these extraordinary Gifts and Operations the Holy Ghost continued to solicit
the cause of Christ and his Religion in the World, till by their invincible
evidence he had baffled the malice and prejudice of a deluded World, and
captivated Mankind into the belief and obedience of the Gospel; and this being
effected he discontinued those Extraordinaries, and now proceeds to solicit
the same cause in a more ordinary and standing way and method, viz. by
cooperating with men's minds and wills in a more humane and regular manner, by
joining in with their Reason, and thereby influencing their Wills and
Affections; which brings me to the

2. Second sort of the Holy Ghost's operations, viz. that which he ordinarily
does, and always has done, and will always continue to do. For upon the
cessation of these his miraculous operations the Holy Ghost did not wholly
withdraw himself from mankind, but he still continues Mediating with us under
Christ in order to the reconciling our Wills and Affections to God, and
subduing that inveterate Malice and Enmity against him, which our degenerate
nature has contracted. For it is by this blessed Spirit that Christ has
promised to be with us to the end of the World, Matthew. 28.20. and Christ
himself has assured us that upon his Ascension into Heaven he would pray his
Father, and he should give us another Comforter, meaning this Holy Ghost, that
he might abide with us for ever, John 14.16. and accordingly the Holy Ghost is
vitally united to the Church of Christ, even as Souls are united to their
bodies. For as there is one body, i. e. Church, so there is one Spirit, i. e.
one Holy Ghost which animates that body, Ephesians. 4.4. and hence the Unity of the
Church is in the foregoing verse called the Unity of the Spirit, because as the
soul by diffusing it self through all the parts of the body unites them
together, and keeps them from flying abroad and dispersing into atoms, so the
Holy Spirit by diffusing himself throughout this mystical body joins and unites
all its parts together, and makes it one separate and individual Corporation.
So that when by Baptism we are once incorporated into this body we are entitled
to, and do at least de jure participate of the vital influence of the Holy
Ghost, who is the Soul of it; and accordingly, as Baptism joins us to that body
of which this divine Spirit is the Soul, so it also conveys that divine Spirit
to us. So that as in natural bodies those Ligaments which unite and tie the
parts to one another, do also convey life and spirit to them all; so also in
this mystical body those federal rights of Baptism and the Lord's Supper, which
are as it were its Nerves and Arteries, that join and confederate its members
to one another, are also the conveyances of that spiritual life from the Holy
Ghost which moves and actuates them all. And hence the washing of Regeneration,
and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, the being born of water and of the Holy
Ghost are put together as concurrent things, and in Acts 2.38. Baptism is
affirmed to be necessary to our receiving the Holy Ghost; and if by Baptism we
receive the Holy Ghost, that is, a right and title to his Grace and Influence,
then must the Holy Ghost be still supposed vitally united to the Church,
whereof we are made members by our Baptism, and like an Omnipresent Soul, to be
diffused all through it, and to move and actuate every part of it by his
heavenly Grace and Influence.

It is true, he does not move and actuate us by mere force and irresistible
power, so as to necessitate us, or to determine our natural liberty one way or
the other; nor does he ordinarily work upon men in such a strange and miraculous
way as he did in the first Ministration of the Gospel, when he frequently
transformed men in an instant from Beasts and Devils into Saints, and as it
were at one act turned the whole Tide of their natures into a quite contrary
Current. For so Origin against Celsus very often triumphs in these sudden and
miraculous Conversions wrought by the Christian Religion; so lib. 1. p. 21.
should any man, says he, release men's Souls from all sorts of wickedness,
from Lust, and Unrighteousness, and Contempt of God, and this but in a hundred
instances, surely no man would imagine that he could ever have inspired so many
men with reasons strong enough to conquer so many Vices without a divine
assistance; but if you enquire into the lives of those that have embraced
Christianity, you will find that whereas before they lived in all impurities
and lusts, (...), i. e. from that very time wherein they received the Word, how
much more equal, and temperate, serious and constant are they grown? So again,
li. 2. p. 78. in answer to Celsus, who calls Christianity a pestilent Doctrine,
neither Jew, says he, nor any one else can ever make it out, (...), i. e. that
a pestilent Doctrine should so wonderfully convert the most profligate persons
that embraced it, to a life most suitable to Nature and Reason, and all manner
of Virtue. Such were the miraculous operations of the Holy Ghost in those days
as to transport men in an instant from an inveterate habit of wickedness to a
habit of Piety and Virtue. For so Lactantius de falls. sup. lib. 3. c. 26. what
a mighty influence the divine Precepts have upon men's Souls daily experience
shows, for, says he, Da mihi virum qui sit iracundus, maledicus, effraenatus,
paucissimis Dei Verbis tam placidum quam ovem reddam: da cupidum, avarum,
tenacem; jam tibi eum liberalem dabo and pecuniam suam plenis manibus
largientem: da timidum doloris ac mortis; jam cruces and ignes and Taurum
contemnet: da libidinosum, Adulterum, Ganeonem; jam sobrium, castum,
continentem videbis: da crudelem and sanguinis appetentem; jam in veram
clementiam furor ille mutabitur: da injustum, insipientem, peccatorem; continuo
and aequus and prudens and innocens erit; i. e. Give me a man who is wrathful,
reproachful, ungovernable, and with a few words of God I will render him as
placid as a Lamb; give me a covetous, a niggardly and tenacious man; I will
return him to thee liberal and distributing his money with a bountiful hand;
give me one that is timorous of grief and death, he shall despise all manner of
torment; give me one that is lustful, adulterous, and a Buffoon, you shall
presently see him sober, chaste, and continent; give me one that is cruel and
thirsty of blood, his fury shall be immediately converted into pity and
clemency; give me one that is unjust, foolish, and criminal, and he shall be
presently rendered just, prudent, and innocent; which wondrous Changes were so
very frequent in the Primitive times, that the Heathen, as St. Austin has
observed, were very much amazed at them, and therefore attributed them to the
power of Magic, thinking it impossible they should ever be effected without
the assistance of some very powerful Spirit.

But since Christianity has been spread through the World, and prevailed so
far as to be the Religion of Nations, the divine Spirit does not ordinarily
work upon men in such a strange and miraculous way, nor produce in them such
sudden Changes and instantaneous Conversions, but proceeds more gradually, and
more suitably to the Methods of Humane Nature, by joining in with our
understandings, and leading us on by reason and persuasion from Acts to
Dispositions, and from Dispositions to Habits of Piety. So that whatsoever
Grace he now affords us, it ordinarily works on us in the same way, and after
the same manner as if all were performed by the strength of our own reason; so
that in the Renovation of our natures we cannot certainly distinguish what is
done by the Spirit from what is done by our natural Reason and Conscience
cooperating with him; only this we do most certainly know, that in this
blessed work the Spirit is the main and principal Agent; that without him we
can do nothing; and that he is the Author and Finisher of our faith, who
works in us to will and to do according to his own pleasure; but yet that he
does not work upon us as a Mechanic upon dead materials, but as upon living
and free Agents, that can and must cooperate with him; that he acts not on us
by any necessary causality, but in such a way as is fairly consistent with the
natural liberty of our Wills; and does not renew us whether we will or no, but
takes our free consent and endeavor along with him; and that having done all
on his part, that is necessary to persuade us, he expects that we should
consider what he says, and upon that consent to his gracious Motions, and
express this consent in a constant course of holy and virtuous endeavor; and
that unless we do thus concur with him, we shall for ever remain and perish in
our sin, notwithstanding all that grace which he affords us. But as for the
particular manner of the Holy Ghost's operation on our mind, it is not to be
expected that we who know so little of the nature and intercourse of Spirits
should be able to render a clear and distinct account of it; only thus much may
be said, that our Soul being a thinking Spirit, whose very Essence consists in
a power or principle of cogitation, seems naturally incapable of any other
passion from any external Agent, but only the impression of Thoughts. For how
can a Spirit, whose very Essence is thinking, be any otherwise affected by any
thing without it, but only by being made to think, or by having such thoughts
and considerations impressed on it? And by the same reason that bodies which
are material substances are impressible only by matter, Souls which are
thinking substances must be impressible only by Thought. And hence we find by
experience that there is no Object we converse with can any otherwise affect
our Mind, than by suggesting such thoughts and cogitations to it, and that all
the pleasure and torment of our minds consists in joyful and tormenting
thoughts; which are plain Arguments that our mind is a sort of Being which
nothing but thought can strike or touch, and which has no sense or feeling of
any thing but only of dreadful or hopeful, pleasant or painful Cogitations. And
if this be so, then the way of the Holy Spirits working upon our minds,
supposing that he works sutably to their natures, must be by inspiring or
impressing them with thoughts. For as he is an infinite Spirit, he is always
and every where present with our Spirits, and has an immediate access to them,
by virtue of which he can speak to our minds whenever and whatever he pleases,
and also urge what he speaks with that life and power, as to excite our most
serious consideration and attention; and by this it is that he ordinarily works
upon us in order to the reducing us to God, viz. by inspiring such good
thoughts into our minds as are most apt to move and persuade us to believe and
obey the Gospel, and by a continued repetition of them urging and pressing them
upon us in order to the reducing our vain and roving minds to a fixed and
serious attention to them. For it is very apparent that our Faith and all our
good Resolutions are the immediate effects of deep and serious consideration, I
considered my ways, says David, and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies. So
that in reducing us to God the great work of the Spirit is to reduce us to a
fixed and steady consideration; which being once effected, there naturally
follows a good resolution, unless the Will be invincibly obstinate; and to this
as naturally succeeds the actual return of the Soul to God. Now to reduce us to
this fixed consideration the Holy Ghost, in the first place, suggests good
thoughts to our minds, and then to keep our minds fixed and intent on them,
that so our worldly cares or pleasures may not divert us from them, he most
importunately urges and repeats the same thoughts, or seconds them with a train
and succession of new ones to the same purpose; so that unless we are
incorrigibly obstinate against all good motions, we cannot avoid admitting them
into our most serious consideration, and when they are there, they cannot fail
of raising in us good desires and affections, which if we carefully cherish
will soon determine in holy purposes and resolutions. In all which things, you
see, it is only by impression of thoughts that the Holy Spirit operates on our
minds. But this will more plainly appear by considering those particular
operations on our minds which the Scripture attributes to the Holy Ghost, all
which may be ranked under these five Heads: 1. Illumination. 2. Sanctification.
3. Quickening or excitation. 4. Comforting or supporting. 5. Intercession.


First, Illumination or informing our minds with the light of heavenly truth;
thus Ephesians. 1.17, 18. the Apostle prays that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Father of Glory, would give unto them the Spirit of wisdom and revelation
in the knowledge of him, that the eyes of their understanding being enlightened,
they might know what is the hope of Christ's calling, and what the riches of
the glory of his inheritance in the Saints; and 1 Cor. 2.12. we are told, that
it is by receiving the Spirit of God that we know the things that are freely
given us of God. Now this illumination of the Spirit is twofold; first,
External, by that revelation which he has given us of God's Mind and Will in
the holy Scripture, and that miraculous evidence by which he sealed and
attested it; for all Scripture is given by inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3.16. or
as it is elsewhere expressed, was delivered by holy men, as they were moved by
the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21. And all those miraculous testimonies we have to
the Truth and Divinity of Scripture are, as has been already proved, from the
Holy Ghost, and upon that account are called, the demonstration of the Spirit.
So that all that light we receive from Scripture, and all the evidence we have
that that light is divine, we derive originally from the Holy Spirit. But
besides this external illumination of the Spirit, there is also an internal
one, which consists in impressing that external light and evidence of Scripture
upon our understandings, whereby we are enabled more clearly to apprehend and
more effectually to believe it. For though the divine Spirit does not (at least
in the ordinary course of his operation) illuminate our minds with any new
truths, or new evidences of truth, but only presents to our minds those old and
Primitive truths and evidences which he at first revealed and gave to the
World, yet there is no doubt but he still continues not only to suggest them
both to our minds, but to urge and repeat them with that importunity, and
thereby to imprint them with that clearness and efficacy, as that if we do not
through a wicked prejudice against them wilfully divert our minds from them to
vain or sinful objects, we must unavoidably apprehend them far more distinctly,
and assent to them far more cordially and effectually than otherwise we should
or could have done. For alas! our minds are naturally so vain and stupid, so
giddy, listless, and inadvertent, especially in spiritual things which are
abstract from common sense, as that did not the Holy Spirit frequently present,
importunately urge, and thereby fix them on our minds, our knowledge of them
would be so confused, and our belief so wavering and unstable,as that they
would never have any prevailing influence on our Wills and Affections. So that
our knowledge and belief of divine things, so far forth as they are saving and
effectual to our renovation, are the fruits and products of this internal
illumination of the Spirit.

Secondly, Another of these ordinary operations of the Spirit is
Sanctification; which consists in the purifying our Wills and Affections from
those wicked Inclinations and inordinate Lusts, which countermand God's Will in
us, and set us at enmity against him; and this also the Scripture attributes to
the Holy Spirit. So Tit. 3.5. For according to his mercy he saves us by the
washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost; and in 1 Cor. 6.11. But
ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the name of our
Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. And this is the meaning of our being
sealed by the Spirit, so often mentioned in the New Testament, viz. our
receiving his Image or Impression from him; which consists in holiness and
righteousness, and by this Image or Impression we are discriminated and set
apart from the rest of the World, as a chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood,
an holy Nation, and a peculiar People, 1 Pet. 2.9. and made Kings and Priests
unto God, Rev. 1.6. upon which account we are said to be anointed by the
Spirit, 1 John 2.20. and by the same Image we are also entitled to, and secured
of all the blessings of the New Covenant: upon which account it is called, The
earnest of the Spirit, and the first fruits of the Spirit. And this Image of
himself the Holy Ghost produces in us by suggesting to our minds the powerful
Motives and Arguments of Religion, and by often reiterating, imprints them upon
us with all their native force and efficacy in the most lively and affecting
Characters; and by these his blessed suggestions he by degrees persuades and
bends our stubborn Wills, m^lts and mollifies our hard hearts, reduces and
tempers our wild affections to a willing compliance with the Will of God, and
at length to a hearty complacency in all those instances of Piety and Virtue
wherein our Sanctification, or this Image of himself, consists. Which operation
of the Spirit we frequently experience in our selves. For how often do we find
good thoughts injected into our minds, we know not how nor whence, which are
many times improved into such strong and vehement convictions of the folly and
danger of our sin, as even in the midst of our loose mirth and jollity, and in
despite of all our endeavor to chase them from our minds, and rock our selves
into a deep security, cease not to follow, and haunt, and importune us, till
they have scared us into wise and sober Resolutions; and though we, like
ungrateful Creatures, do oftentimes stifle the good motions of the Spirit, and
turn a deaf Ear to his Calls and gracious Invitations, yet does he not
presently give us over, but still, as we are running away from him, we hear a
voice behind us calling after us to return; and though we still run on, yet
still he follows us with his importunities through the whole course of our
sinful life, till either he has brought us back, or sees us past all hope of
recovery. And indeed such is the degeneracy of our Natures, the vanity of our
Minds, and the prejudice of our Wills and Affections against God and Goodness,
that without this sanctifying influence of the Holy Ghost it is certain no man
ever was, or ever will be reclaimed to a state of Piety and Virtue. For though
our Religion furnishes with such Motives as are infinitely sufficient to
persuade us, and though our Minds and Wills are not so depraved, but that still
we are naturally capable to consider, and naturally free to follow those
Motives; yet so vain and roving are our Minds, so averse to all serious and
spiritual thoughts; so stubborn and inflexible are our Wills to those spiritual
duties which those Motives persuade to; so cankered and prejudiced against
them, that did not the Holy Ghost frequently impress them on our Minds, and
Pathetically urge and apply them to our Wills and Affections, we should never
of our selves so thoroughly consider them, as to be conquered and persuaded by
them; but either our thoughts would presently fly away from them, and rove into
sensual cares or pleasures, or our Wills and Affections, by objecting their
prejudices and the interest of their Lusts against them, would infallibly
b^ssle and defeat them. So that it is to this sanctifying influence of the Holy
Ghost that all the Graces and good Dispositions of our Minds are owing.

Thirdly, Another of th^se ordinary operations of the Spirit is Quickening or
Exciting us in the ways of Piety and Virtue. For as by his sanctifying
influence he first inspires us with spiritual life, so he still proceeds to
cherish and invigorate it, and to quicken it up into Activity and Motion,
whe^ever he perceives it droop or languish. Hence the Apostle, Gal. 5.25. If we
live by the Spirit, let us also walk by the Spirit; i. e. if we have rec^i^ed
spiritu^l life from him, let us move and act by him; and hence also we are said
to be led by the Spirit of God, i. e. to be moved and conducted in our motion
by him, Romans 8.14. And this he also does partly by admonishing and putting us
in mind of our duty, which in the C^^ud and Hurry of our Worldly occasions we
are too prone to forget, and partly suggesting to our minds such considerations
of Religion as are most apt to quicken ou^ sluggish endeavor, to allure our
hope, or alarm our fear, or ^ff^ct our ingenuity, and by th^se to excite our
zeal, and render us more active and v^gorous in the ways of Piety and Virtue;
and of this operation of the Holy Spirit there is no good man but has frequent
experience. For thus when our thoughts are squandered abroad among our worldly
cares and pleasures, we are many times assaulted with unexpected temptations,
which ^inding our minds in a careless, forgetful, and incogitant posture, are
apt to surprise and hurry us into sinful actions before we are aware, in which
nick of time a good thought is suddenly shot into our minds to warn and
admonish us of the precipice of sin and guilt we are falling into, by which, if
we are not wilfully deaf and inadvertent to it, the temptation is discovered,
and baffled, and defeated; and thus also when through the many temptations that
do here surround us, our zeal for God and goodness does at any time languish,
and we begin to grow cold and indifferent in Religion, we find a world of good
thoughts pressing so hard upon our minds, as that without doing violence to our
selves we cannot avoid listening and attending to them, and when they have
almost forced themselves into our attention, there they do so vigorously
struggle with our reluctant Wills, so Pathetically address to our listless
affections, that without equal violence to our selves we cannot avoid being
moved by their persuasions, and at last conquered by their powerful
importunities. Now these good thoughts are many times the immediate
inspirations and whispers of the Holy Spirit to our minds, which he very often
imprints on us with that life and vigor, and repeats and urges with that
efficacious Ardour and restless Importunity, that unless we are strangely
obstinate we cannot find in our hearts to repel or resist them.

Fourthly, Another of these ordinary operations of the Holy Spirit on men's
minds is comforting and supporting them, or inspiring their minds with such
joys and refreshments as are necessary to support them under the difficulties
and temptations they are here exposed to. For this operation of the Spirit is a
standing provision against such Difficulties and Temptations as are too great
for an ordinary patience and courage to con^est with, and is not ordinarily
vouchsafed to us, but only at such times when we are called to do or suffer
something beyond our selves, and above our own strength and ability; in which
cases we are secured of this supporting influence of the Spirit by that
Promise, 1 Cor. 10.13. God is faithful, who will not suffer ye to be tempted
above what ye are able, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape,
that ye may be able to bear it. For thus we read of the Primitive Church, that
they walked in the comfort of the Holy Ghost, Acts 9.31. i. e. had the constant
supporting influence of the Spirit of God to strengthen and bear up their minds
under that mighty work and grievous persecutions they were to undergo; and the
Apostle makes it his earnest Prayer to God for his Christian Romans, that he
would fill them with all joy and peace in believing, that is, in their
profession of the Christian Faith, and that they might abound in hope through
the power of the Holy Ghost, Romans 15.13. And accordingly we find the Ages of
Persecution abounding with remarkable instances of this operation of the Holy
Ghost. For whereas constant Persecutions never failed to exterminate false
Religions from the World, witness the Heathen Religion and the Christian
Heresies, the Priscillians, Arians, and Donatists, which whilst they were
tolerated or connived at, did mightily increase and multiply, but under
vigorous persecutions immediately shrunk, and in a little time dwindled into
nothing; the true Christianity, on the contrary, bore up its head under the
heaviest oppressions, and triumphed in the midst of flames, and was so far from
being vanquished by all the barbarous cruelties of its Persecutors, that the
more they persecuted it, the more it conquered and prevailed, which doubtless
is in a great measure to be attributed to this supporting influence of the Holy
Spirit, which still accompanied its Confessors and Martyrs. For how was it
possible that a company of tender Virgins, delicate Matrons, and aged Bishops
could ever have endured those long and dolorous Martyrdoms, as many times they
did, when their Tormentors took their turns from morning to night, and plied
them with all kinds of cruelties, till they were oftentimes forced to give
over, and confess that they had not heart enough to inflict the Tortures which
those poor Sufferers had courage enough to endure? How could they have sung in
the midst of Flames, smiled upon Racks, triumphed upon Wheels and Catastaes,
and there challenged their Executioners, as they often did, to distend their
Limbs to the utmost stretch, to tear their flesh with Vngulae, to scorch their
tender parts with fires, and rake their bowels with Spikes and Gaunches? How, I
say, could they have endured all these miserable harrasings of their tender
flesh with the most witty and exquisite Tortures, and this sometimes for sundry
days together, when for one base and cowardly word they might have been
released when they pleased, had they not been supported with an invisible hand,
and refreshed with such strong consolations, as not only abated, but sometimes
quite extinguished their pains? And the same comforts, though not perhaps in
the same degree, other good men have frequently experienced; sometimes upon
their undertaking some great and Heroic Office of Piety or Virtue, sometimes
in their conflict with some great Temptation, sometimes when they have been
sorely oppressed with some mighty sorrow or affliction, and sometimes in the
hour and extremities of Death; for it is only upon these or such like
extraordinary occasions that the Holy Spirit usually administers these great
Consolations to our minds. And this he also performs in the same manner as he
does the aforenamed operations, viz. by suggesting to, and vigorously
impressing comfortable thoughts upon our minds; for there is no doubt but that
as he can impress on us what thought soever he pleases, so he can also impress
it with what strength and vigor soever he pleases, and accordingly as he
impresses a comfortable thought on us more or less vigorously, it must of
necessity be a greater or a less consolation to us; if he think fit, and our
state require it, he can imprint a comfortable thought on us with that strength
and vehemence, as that it shall even ravish us from our sense, and so ingross
all our attention to it as that we shall be altogether mindless and insensible
of any pain or pleasure of the body. For thus it is usual for serious
Contemplators in their profound Muses to collect and call together all their
animal spirits to attend that work, so as that many times there are none, or
not enough at least remaining to supply the Offices of their sense, and carry
on the inferior operations of Nature; and if we our selves by intense thinking
can thus alienate our minds from sense, we may easily suppose that the Holy
Ghost, who has the command of our minds, can when he pleases stamp a joyous
thought so vigorously upon them, as that it shall instantly transport them into
an ecstasie, and ravish them from all Corporeal sensation. And that thus he
has done is notoriously evident in the abovenamed Martyrs, whose Senses were
many times so intranced by the rapturous contemplations their minds were seized
with, that they lay smiling and sometimes singing under the bloody hands of
their Tormentors, without any apparent sense of those long and exquisite
cruelties that were practiced upon them. And though the blessed Spirit seldom
applies these strong and powerful Cordials to pious minds but in such great and
urgent extremities, it being much more for their interest to be kept humble and
lowly than to be ravished with continued comforts, yet ordinarily he
administers a standing peace and satisfaction to them, and when ever their
necessities call for it, he inspires them with such degrees of joy and
consolation as their case and condition requires.

Fifthly and lastly, Another of these ordinary operations of the Holy Spirit on
Men's minds is Intercession, by which he enables us to offer up our Prayers to
God with such ardent and devout affections as are in some measure suitable to
the matter we pray for. For Prayer being the immediate converse of our Souls
with God, wherein our minds are obliged to withdraw themselves from sense and
sensible things, and wholly to retire themselves from those Objects to which
they are most endeared and familiarized, into the divine and spiritual world,
there is no one duty whatsoever to the due performance of which our carnal
affections are naturally more listless and averse; and therefore as herein we
have most need of the Holy Spirit's assistance, so herein he more especially
operates on our minds, exciting in us all those graces and affections which are
proper to the several parts of our Prayer, such as shame and sorrow in the
confession of our sins; a sense of our need of mercy, and a hope of obtaining
it in our supplications for pardon and forgiveness; resignation to God's Will
and dependence on his truth and goodness in our address for temporal mercies
and deliverances; hunger and thirst after Righteousness in our Petitions for
his grace and assistance; and in a word, Gratitude, and Love, and Admiration of
God in our praises and thanksgivings for mercy; and in these divine affections
the life and soul of Prayer consists. And accordingly in Gal. 4.6. the Apostle
tells us, Because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into
your hearts, crying, Abba, Father; that is, by kindling devout and pious
affections in your Souls, enabling you to cry to God with all earnestness and
assurance, as to a kind and merciful Father; and hence also we are said to pray
in or by the Holy Ghost, Jude 20. because all the proper graces and affections
of Prayer are excited in us by him. And this his excitation of the graces of
Prayer in us is called his making Intercession for us, Romans 8.26, 27. which
imports no more than his enabling us to offer up the matter of our Prayers to
God in a most devout and affectionate manner, or as he there explains himself,
with sighs and groans that are not to be uttered, that is, with such earnest
and flagrant affections as are too big for words to express. And this is
properly to intercede for us. For as Christ, who is our Advocate in Heaven,
does offer up our Prayers to the Father, and enforce them with his own
Intercessions; so his Spirit, who is our Advocate on Earth, begets in us those
affections which render our Prayers prevalent, and wings them with fervor and
ardency; the one pleads with God for us in our own hearts, by kindling such
desires there as render our Prayers acceptable to him, and the other pleads
with him for us in Heaven, by presenting those desires, and soliciting their
supply and acceptance. Now this Intercession of the Holy Spirit is also
performed, as all the aforegoing operations, by suggesting to, and imprinting
such thoughts upon our minds, as are most apt to raise and excite our
affections; which thoughts he often urges with that vehemence, and presses with
that reiterated importunity, that if we do not wilfully repel them from our
minds, and refuse them admittance to our hearts and affections, they cannot
fail to stir up in us all the graces of Prayer, and inflame our Souls with a
servent devotion; and accordingly whenever we harbor these suggestions of the
Spirit, and by seriously attending to them cherish and encourage them, we find
by experience they so affect and influence our devotions, as that in every
Prayer our Souls take wing, and, like the Angel that appeared to Manoah, ^ly up
to Heaven in the flames of our Sacrifice.

And thus I have given a brief account both of what the Holy Spirit has done,
and of what he still continues to do toward the promoting and effectuating of
Christ's Mediation for God with men. And by what has been said it abundantly
appears that he has done for us, and still continues to do all that our case
and necessity requires; and that there is nothing imaginable wanting on his
part toward the reducing and reconciling our minds to God. So that now he may
justly say to us what God does to his Vineyard, Isa. 5.4. What could I have
done more for my Vineyard that I have not done? Or, as the Hebrew expresses it,
What is to be done more? Not but that by his omnipotent power absolutely
considered, the Holy Spirit can do more for us than he ordinarily does; he can
in an instant infuse a new nature into us in despite of all the resistance of
our Wills, and make such irresistible impressions on our minds as our most
inveterate prejudice and enmity against God shall never be able to withstand;
but then his power always acts by the direction of his wisdom, and can do no
otherwise, that is, it can do no more than it can wisely do; and it is certain
that ordinarily and regularly it cannot wisely so act upon men as to determine
their natural liberty to good and evil; since by so doing he must not only
commit a perpetual violence on the frame of our Beings, and thereby reverse the
established course of our natures, but also destroy the very being of Virtue in
us, which is no longer Virtue than while it is free and unconstrained. But
whatsoever he can wisely do, or, which is all one, consistently with the
liberty of our nature, he has done, and still continues doing. So that now to
the reduction of our Souls to God there is nothing wanting but our own consent
and free cooperation, which if we will refuse we may; for for desperate
obstinacy there is no remedy; if we will not comply with the blessed Spirit, it
is certain he will not save us whether we will or no. So that when inquisition
shall be made for the blood of our Souls, the utmost we can charge him with is,
that he did not drag us to Heaven in spite of our teeth, and bind up our hands
in the Cords of an irresistible Fate to hinder us from murdering our selves;
but if we have so little regard of our selves as to spurn at our own happiness,
it is by no means fit that he should force it upon us, and it would be a very
mean and unreasonable condescension in him to prostitute his grace to such as
scorn and refuse it. If therefore after all these things that the Spirit has
done for us we persist and finally perish in our enmity against God, he may
fairly wash his hands in innocence over us, and charge our blood upon our own
heads; and how deplorable soever our condition proves in the future state, his
Justice will Triumph gloriously in our ruin, and our own Consciences, together
with all the reasonable World, will be forced to be his Compurgators and to
pronounce him infinitely just and righteous in all his ways.

SECT. II. Concerning the particular Offices of Christ's Mediation.
FOR the clearer stating what are the particular Offices of the Mediator, it
will be necessary briefly to enquire into the state and condition of the
Parties between whom he Mediates, as they stand related to one another. For he
being to officiate for, and between God and Man, to be sure his Offices must be
such as their respective states and conditions do require. For how can he
officiate effectually between them, unless he performs all those good Offices
on both sides, which, considering their states as they stand related to one
another, are necessary to create a mutual accord and agreement between them?
Now the state of God as he stands related to us, is that of a supreme and
absolute Sovereign over blind and rebellious Subjects, who were so far depraved
and degenerated, as that we neither understood his Will, nor were at all
disposed to obey it. Wherefore that he might officiate effectually for God with
us, his ignorant and rebellious Subjects, it was necessary, First, that he
should perform the Office of a Prophet, in revealing God's Will and pleasure to
us, of which the whole Race of Mankind was so deplorably ignorant. Secondly,
That he should perform the Office of a King, in exacting our obedience to God,
and subduing our stubborn Wills to his heavenly pleasure; so that in
officiating for God with us, it was necessary that he should both teach us as
God's Prophet, and rule us as God's King. And then the state of man as it
respects God, is that of a most guilty and criminal Subject, who by a continued
course of Rebellion had justly and highly incensed and provoked his Sovereign
Lord against him, in which state of things it was highly necessary that in
officiating for us with God, our Mediator should in the first place, render him
some great and honorable reparation in our behalf, such as he in his infinite
wisdom should think meet to exact for those high and manifold affronts and
Indignities which we had offered to his Sacred Person and Authority. For
without some such reparation he could not well have admitted of any
reconciliation with us, without prostituting his own Authority, and rendering it
cheap and vile in the eyes of bold and insolent Offenders. Now the greatest
reparation he could make for us was to take our punishment on himself, by
offering up his own life to God as a Sacrifice for the sins of the World. And
then, secondly, it was necessary that having made this reparation for us, he
should thereupon become our Advocate, and plead his Sacrifice to God in our
behalf, that for the sake thereof he would be so far propitious to us as to
admit us upon our unfeigned repentance, to his grace and favor. Both which are
comprehended in the Priestly Office, which consists, as I shall show hereafter,
in atoning God with Sacrifice. So that the particular Offices which the
respective states of God and Man require of him that Mediates between them, is
to teach and rule for God, and to expiate and Advocate for men.

But for the better understanding of these particular Offices it is necessary
we should briefly consider the Method and Economy of them, and explain in what
Order and Manner the Mediator has proceeded and advanced in the exercise and
administration of them. Which in short was thus; by Commission from God the
Father he came down into this World, where the first Mediatorial Office he
undertook was that of Prophet, in the discharge whereof he made a full
revelation of God's Mind and Will to the World. And having performed this, at
least so far as was needful in his own Person, he next enters upon the first
part of his Priestly Office, which was to make an expiation for the sins of the
World, by the Sacrifice of himself; and this being finished, he a little after
proceeded to the other part, which was to make an Oblation of his Sacrifice to
God in Heaven, and in virtue thereof to Advocate for us, and solicit our
Pardon and admission into the divine favor; upon the performance of all which,
and as a glorious reward of it, he was admitted to sit down at the right hand
of God in the Throne of Regal Authority next and immediately to the Father. For
so Phil. 2.8, 9, 10. the Apostle tells us, He humbled himself, and became
obedient to the death, even the death of the Cross; wherefore God also has
highly exalted him, and given him a name above every name, that at the name of
Jesus every Knee should bow. And in Heb. 12.2. his sitting down at the right
hand of the Throne of God is the consequence of his enduring the Cross, and
despising the shame of it. So that in short, the Order and Method in which he
proceeded in his Mediatorial Offices was this; First, he Prophesied, then he
made expiation for our sins on the Cross, then presented his Expiation in
Heaven, and therein began to Advocate or intercede for us; and then he received
that Regal Authority by which he is to reign till the Consummation of all
things. And therefore for the more clear and distinct explication of these
particular Offices, it will be most proper to treat of them in the same order
wherein they are placed in the divine Economy, beginning first with the
Prophetic, thence proceeding to the Priestly, and thence to the Kingly Office.

SECT. III. Of the Prophetic Office of Jesus Christ.
COnsidering the manifold Errors, and the deep Ignorance in which Mankind was
almost universally lost and bewildered, it was absolutely necessary that he who
Mediated for God with men, in order to the reconciling them to him, should in
the first place take care to inform them of the Nature, and instruct them in
the Will of God; without which it was impossible for them so much as to know
what it is to be reconciled to him. And accordingly this was the first
Mediatorial Office that our Savior undertook, viz. to Prophecy to the World,
i. e. to reveal and publish the Gospel to Mankind, wherein the Nature and the
Will of God, and the Method of our Salvation, are plainly stated and described,
so far forth at least as it is necessary to our reconciliation to him. Upon
which account he is called the Light of the World, the Sun of Righteousness,
the Way, and the Truth, and the bright Morning Star; all which refer to his
Prophetic Office, which is the fountain of all that spiritual light that
shines through the World. For long before our Savior was born, it was foretold
of him that he should execute the Office of a Prophet; so Deuteronomy. 18.15. The Lord
thy God shall raise up unto thee a Prophet, from the midst of thee, of thy
brethren, like unto me, unto him ye shall hearken; which prophecy S. Peter
applies to our Savior, Acts 3.22. And upon this and other Prophecies of the
Old Testament it is evident, it was a general anticipation among the Jews in
our Savior's time, that the Messiah should be a Prophet. For thus upon
Christ's feeding five thousand men with five Loaves and two Fishes, they cried
out, This is of a truth that Prophet that should come into the world, John
6.14. so upon his restoring the Centurion's Servant, they were amazed, and
glorified God, saying that a great Prophet was risen up among them, Luke 7.16.
And so also his own Disciples style him, A Prophet mighty in deed and word
before God and all the People.

Now this Prophetic Office of Christ consisted not so much in foretelling of
future events (though this he also did so far as it was needful for the Church)
as in expounding, declaring, and making known the Will of God to us by divine
revelation. For so, to Prophecy signifies no more than to speak from, or in
the stead of another; (...) in composition, being all one with (...): thus
Exodus 7.1. God said to Moses, I have made thee a God to Pharaoh, and Aaron thy
brother shall be thy Prophet, that is, he shall be thy mouth to deliver to
Pharaoh what I shall deliver to thee. For so the word is explained, Exodus 4.16.
He shall be thy spokes-man, he shall be to thee instead of a Mouth. And in this
sense the Poets were anciently called the Prophets of the Muses; so Theocritus,
(...). i. e. the sacred Prophets of the Muses; and Saint Paul himself, Tit.
1.12. calls the Heathen Poets their Prophets, quoting a passage out of
Epimenides, who though he is styled by Laertius (...), a great Favorite of the
Gods, and, as he relates the Story, directed the Athenians how to Lustrate
their City in a time of Pestilence, yet if we may credit Aristotle, (...), i.
e. he never prophesied of things to come, Rhet. l. 3. c. 17. but was only a
Divine, as Plutarch calls him, and (...), i. e. a friend of God, and one that
had a deep insight into divine things. By which it is evident that Prophesying
does not necessarily include, in the true acceptance of it, foretelling
futurities, but only denotes declaring the Mind and Will of God in any matter
by divine inspiration. For so Justin Mart. in Cohortat. ad Graec. tells us,
that the Prophets declared those things to the World, (...), i. e. which the
Holy Ghost descending upon them had intended by them to teach those persons who
were truly willing to be instructed in the true Worship of God. And accordingly
S. Chrysostom, (...), a Prophet is only an Interpreter, but an Interpreter of
God. And so also Dionys. the Areop. styles the Prophets (...), i. e. the
Fathers of secret wisdom, Epist. 9. because they discovered those things to the
World which were discoverable only by divine inspiration. And in this large
sense of the word, Christ's Prophetic Office is to be understood, viz. as a
declaring and signifying the Will of God to Mankind, concerning the Way and
Method of our reconciliation to God, and eternal salvation by him. But for the
fuller explication of this his Mediatorial Office, I shall endeavor first, to
show how excellently he was fitted and accomplished for it; and secondly, how
fully and effectually he has discharged it. As for the first, how excellently
he was fitted and accomplished for this Office will evidently appear by these
three considerations:

I. That when he came down to Prophecy to us, he came immediately from the
bosom of the Father. For as he was the Eternal Son of God he was always with
him from all Eternity, and always intimate and infinitely dear and familiar to
him; and therefore as such, must not only be supposed fully to comprehend his
Nature, and perfectly to know his Will, but also to be privy to his most secret
Thoughts and Councils. And it is upon this account perhaps chiefly that he is
called the Logos, or Word of God, because as S. Gregory Nazianzen discoursed,
Orat. 36. he has the same relation to God the Father that a word or inward
thought has to the mind; not only in regard of his generation without any
passion, but because of his intimate conjunction with him, by which he
perfectly understands him, and so has full power to declare him. For the
Father is known, says he, by the Son, and the Son is a brief and easy
demonstration of the Father, as every thing that is begotten is (...), the
silent word of that which begat it. So that as it is the Office of our Speech
to declare our Minds to one another, so it is the Office of this Eternal Word
of the Father to declare his Mind and Will to the World; and who can be so
proper to declare the Father's mind to us as he who from all Eternity has been
so familiar to his inmost thoughts and purposes? Hence S. John, John 1.18. No
man has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of
the Father, he has declared him; and indeed his being in the bosom of the
Father, i. e. being most near and intimate to him, did perfectly qualify him
to declare him; for in that nearness and intimacy he could not but have a most
perfect knowledge of him, and this not by the Instructions of Angels, nor by
Dreams or Visions, as other Prophets had; no nor merely by the Holy Ghost
neither, but by an immediate personal Intuition of his Father's thoughts and
purposes which from all Eternity were exposed to his view and prospect.

II. It is also to be considered, that as he came down immediately from God, to
Prophecy to us, so he came down into our own nature, which gave a vast
advantage to his ministry. For had he preached to us, as he did to the Jews,
from Mount Sinai, in his divine person, the Glory and Majesty thereof would
have so amazed and confounded us, that like them we should not have been able
to attend to him, and our minds would have been so struck with the terrible
manner of his Ministry, that we could never have fixed our thoughts as we ought
upon the matter of it. For so the Jews upon God's preaching personally to them,
in the proper equipage of his divine Majesty, were struck with such a sacred
Horror, as that they were not able to bear it, but made it their request that
they might not hear the voice of the Lord any more, and that for the future he
would speak with them by Moses, whose voice they could more easily bear, and
better attend to; which request of theirs God thought so reasonable, that he
promises to raise up unto them a Prophet of their own Brotherhood, like unto
Moses, meaning the Word incarnate, and bids them hearken to him, Deuteronomy. 18.15,
16. i. e. since you cannot endure to hear me speaking to you in the Majesty of
my Divinity, I will hereafter allay and qualify it, by assuming one of your
own kind and kindred into personal union with it; in and by whom I will
vouchsafe to speak to you in such a familiar and condescending manner, as that
you shall be able freely to attend without any terror or disturbance. And
indeed the most natural way of instructing humane minds is by humane means; as
for voices from Heaven, or from bright and glorious appearances on earth, they
are more apt to confound than to edify our understandings, and therefore for
this reason, among others, Christ thought meet to assume our natures, that so
he might treat with us in such a way as is most accommodate thereunto, and
deliver his divine Doctrines to us in a humane form and voice, that so being
conveyed to us in the most natural and familiar manner, they might not so alarm
our dread as to confound our attention, but might instruct our minds instead of
scaring and amusing them. And therefore he did not only qualify the terror
and dreadfulness of his divine Majesty by putting on our nature, but together
with it he put on all the condescensions and sweetnesses of a most familiar and
endearing conversation, and conversed among men in such a generous, friendly,
and courteous manner, as charmed and enamoured all ingenuous minds, and thereby
attracted their attention to his Doctrine. So that as Christ was the Son of God
he perfectly understood his Father's Will, and as he was the Son of Man he was
perfectly fitted to reveal and declare it to Mankind.

And as by being God-man he was most perfectly accomplished to declare God's
Will to us, so he was also to give us a perfect Example of Obedience to it;
which, as I shall show hereafter, was a necessary part of his Prophetic
Office. For without assuming humane Nature he could never have been an example
of humane Virtue, which consists in acting sutably to the nature of a Man, who
is a Compound of Spirit and Matter, Reason and Sense, Angel and Brute, from
which contrary Principles there arise in him contrary inclinations and
affections, in the good or bad government whereof all humane Virtue and Vice
consists. How then could he have practiced those virtues which consist in the
dominion of spiritual and rational faculties over brutal and sensitive, such as
Temperance, Chastity, Equanimity, and the like, had he not assumed that nature
which is compounded of both? How could he have shown us by his own example how
to govern the Passions, and conduct our selves in the Circumstances of men, had
he not communicated with us in the Passions and Circumstances of humane Nature?
He might have come down from the Heavens to us inrobed with splendour and light,
or have preached his Gospel to the World in the midst of a Choir of Angels from
some bright Throne in the Clouds, and it would have been more convenient for
himself to have done so, because more suitable to the natural Dignity and
Majesty of his Person; but he consulted not so much his own convenience as
ours; he knew well enough that his appearance among us in such an illustrious
equipage would have been more apt to astonish than to instruct us, to have
amused our thoughts into a profound admiration of his glories, than to have
directed our steps in the paths of Piety and Virtue, and that it would be much
more for our interest that he should conduct us by his example than amaze us by
his appearance; and therefore he rather chose to appear to us in our own
nature, that so by going before us as a man, he might show us by his example
what became men to do, and trace out to us the way to our happiness with the
print of his own footsteps. So that his coming among us in our own nature was
of vast moment to his Prophetic Office, both in declaring his Father's Will to
us, and setting us an example of obedience to it.

III. And lastly, It is farther to be considered, that as he came down
immediately from the Father to Prophecy to us in our own natures, so while he
abode among us he was always endued with the Holy Ghost; the Spirit of the
Lord, from whom all Prophetic Inspiration proceeds rested on him, and made its
constant residence and abode in his humane nature. So that whereas it descended
upon other Prophets only at certain times, and upon certain occasions, by
reason of which it was not in their power to Prophecy when they pleased, but
they were fain to attend the arbitrary motions of the Holy Ghost, and, like
dead Organ Pipes, were mute and silent as often as he withdrew, and ceased to
breath into them his divine Enthusiasms; our blessed Savior had the Prophetic
Influx at command, and could Prophecy whenever he pleased. For the Holy
Ghost resided in his mind, and like an assisting Form or Genius was always
present with his Understanding, and being, as was showed before, subordinate to
him, both by personal Property and Agreement with the Father, it operated in
him whenever, howsoever, and whatsoever he pleased; and was as entirely at
his disposal as his own most voluntary motions. So that whenever he had
occasion for a Revelation, he no sooner willed it, but the Holy Ghost
immediately inspired it into him, and whenever he wanted a Miracle to confirm
a Revelation, he no sooner called for it but the Holy Ghost immediately exerted
it by him. For, as I showed before, he did both Prophecy and effect his
Miracles by the Holy Ghost that was in him, and that was so entirely subject to
him through the whole course of his Ministry, that he could Prophecy, and do
Miracles by him whenever he pleased; and hence he is said to be anointed with
the Holy Ghost, and with power, Acts 10.38* that is, to be consecrated to the
Prophetic Office by the descent of the Holy Ghost upon him, by whom he was
empowered to Prophecy, and to confirm his Prophecy by Miracles; for so it
follows, He went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed with the
Devil, for God was with him; and accordingly at his Baptism he was solemnly
consecrated the great Prophet of God by a visible Unction of the Holy Ghost,
who, as St. Luke tells us, descended on him in a bodily form or appearance,
Chap. 3. ver. 22. which St. Matthew thus expresses, the Spirit of God descended
like a Dove, and light upon him, Chap. 3. ver. 16. not as if he descended in
the form of a Dove, but, as it seems most probable, he assumed a body of light
or fire, and therein came down from above, just as a Dove with its Wings spread
forth is observed to do, and gathering about our Savior's head crowned it with
a visible Glory. For so in the Nazaren Gospel, as Grotius observes, it is said
that upon this descent of the Holy Ghost, (...), i. e. there immediately shone
a great light round about the place; and Justin Martyr tells us, that when
Christ was Baptized, (...), that there was a fire lighted in the River Jordan,
that is, by the reflection of that bright and flaming appearance, in which the
Holy Ghost descended, the River seemed to be all on fire. So that as God did
signalize his presence in the Old Tabernacle by a visible Light or Glory, so
the Holy Ghost by descending on our Savior in this shining appearance,
declared him to be the Tabernacle of his divine Presence, wherein he meant from
thenceforth to reside and make his constant abode, and from whence and by whom
he would for the future communicate himself to Mankind. And accordingly the
sign which God gave to John Baptist, by which he might know the Messiah when he
saw him, was this, Upon whom thou shall see the Spirit descending and remaining
on him, the same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost, i. e. who from
himself, or from his own fullness shall communicate the Holy Ghost to the World,
Ioh. 1.33. For so full was Jesus of the Holy Ghost, that he not only prophesied
himself, and did miracles by it whenever he pleased, but he also communicated
it to his own immediate Disciples, and empowered them to communicate it to
others; and hence it is said, that God gave not the Spirit by measure to him,
John 3.34. i. e. with limitations, and restrictions to such particular times,
or ends and purposes, but in that unlimited manner, as that he could not only
act by it himself whenever or howsoever he pleased, but also communicate it
to others in what degree or measure soever he pleased. For so Ioh. 20.22. it is
said, that he breathed upon his Disciples* and bid them receive the Holy Ghost;
and Acts 8.17. we are told, that upon their laying their hands upon others they
also received the Holy Ghost. And by this unlimited fullness of the Holy Ghost,
which our Savior received at his Baptism, he was perfectly accomplished for
his Prophetic Office. For the Holy Ghost abode in him after that visible glory
in which he descended, disappeared, even throughout the whole course of his
Ministry; and hence Luke 4.1. we are told, that being full of the Holy Ghost he
returned from Jordan; and after he had finished his forty days Fast in the
Wilderness, he returned from thence in the power of the Spirit into Galilee,
ver. 14. where in his own City of Nazareth he began to Prophecy, declaring and
manifesting that the Spirit of the Lord was upon him, verse. 18, to 23. and at
Cana in Galilee he began to work Miracles, and thereby to manifest forth his
Glory, Joh. 2.11. Thus by Prophesying, and confirming his Prophecies by
Miracles, he exerted that fullness of the Holy Ghost which was communicated to
him at his Baptism. And now, since before he came down to Prophecy to us he
was from Eternity in the bosom of the Father, and since when he came down he
was clothed in humane nature, and in that nature was inspired with such an
unbounded fullness of the Holy Ghost, as that he could not only Prophecy
himself, and confirm his Prophecy by Miracles, when he pleased, but also
communicate these his Gifts to others in what measures and proportions he
thought fit, to enable them to Prophecy for him wheresoever he thought meet to
send them, what can we imagine farther necessary to complete and accomplish him
for the Prophetic Office?

I proceed therefore in the next place to show how thoroughly and effectually he
discharged this Office; which will plainly appear by considering briefly what
those things were which as a Prophet he performed; all which are reducible to
these six Heads:

First, He made a full Declaration of his Father's Will to the World.

Secondly, He proved and confirmed what he had declared by Miracles.

Thirdly, He gave a perfect Example of Obedience to what he had declared and
proved to be his Father's Will.

Fourthly, He sealed his declaration with his own Blood.

Fifthly, He instituted an Order of men to preach what he had declared to the
World.

Sixthly, He sent his Holy Spirit, when he left the World, to recollect and
explain to those men what he had declared, and to enable them also to prove and
assert it by Miracles.

I. He made a full Declaration of his Father's Will to the World, viz. in those
Sermons, Parables, and Discourses of his which we find recorded in the four
Evangelists, in which the whole Will of God concerning the Way and Method of
our Salvation is fully and perfectly revealed. For thus S. Paul declares to the
Elders of the Church of Ephesus, that he had kept back nothing that was
profitable for them, but had testified both to the Jews and Greeks repentance
toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, Acts 20.20, 21. and ver.
27. he tells them, that he had not shunned to declare unto them all the Counsel
of God. Now it is certain that this whole Counsel of God, which he had
preached, was only that account of our Savior's Discourses and Actions which
S. Luke gives us in his Gospel, who, as Irenaeus tells us, was a follower of S.
Paul, and did compile into one Book that History of our Savior's Life and
Doctrine which S. Paul had taught and delivered; and if so, then the whole
Counsel of God must be contained in this Gospel; and accordingly S. Luke tells
his Theophilus in the beginning of his Gospel, That forasmuch as many had set
forth a declaration of those things that were surely believed among Christians,
it seemed good unto him also, having had a perfect understanding of all things
from the first, to write them down in order, that he might know the certainly
of those things wherein he had been instructed. From whence I infer, that
supposing that S. Luke performed what he promised, his Gospel must contain a
full declaration of the Christian Religion. For, first, by promising to give an
account of those things that were surely believed among Christians, he engaged
himself to give an entire account of Christianity, unless we will suppose that
there were some parts of Christianity which the Christians of that time did not
surely believe. Secondly, In promising to give an account of those things of
which he had perfect understanding from the first, and in which his Theophilus
had been instructed, he also engaged himself to give a complete account of the
whole Religion, unless we will suppose that there were some parts of this
Religion which S. Luke did not perfectly understand, and in which Theophilus
had not been before instructed. And the some may be said of the three other
Evangelists, viz. that their Gospels do severally contain all the necessary
Articles of Christianity, though the last of them seems to have been wrote upon
a more particular design* viz. more fully to explain, than any o^ the former
Evangelists had done, the Article of the Divinity and eternal generation of
Jesus Christ the Son of God. And if the whole of Religion be contained in these
Gospels, which are only Histories of our Savior's Preaching and Actions, then
it cannot be denied but that he made a full revelation of God's Will to the
World. It is true, there are sundry other divine Writings annexed to these
Gospels* which together with them complete the New Testament, viz. the Acts and
Epistles of the Apostles; but these pretend not to declare any new Religion to
the world. For as for the Acts of the Apostles, it is only an Historical
account of the Preparations of Christ's Ministers for the preaching that Gospel
to the World which he had taught them, and of the Way and Method of their
procedure in it, in despite of all those oppositions they met with. And as for
the Epistles, they are partly Comments and Enlargements on our Savior's
Actions and Discourses, and partly Decisions of such Controversies as arose
among them, according to the Analogy of that Faith which our Savior had
before declared and revealed; but in all these Writings there is no one Article
of Faith but what was before declared and defined in the Sermons and Discourses
of our Savior. And then as for the Primitive Writers, who lived in or near the
Apostolical Age, and upon that account had much greater advantages of
understanding the truths of Christianity than we who live at this remote
distance, they are at best but genuine Commentators on that Doctrine which our
Savior first taught, and his Apostles afterward more fully explained to the
World; but as for declaring any new Doctrines, or defining new Articles of
Faith, that is an upstart invasion of Christ's Prophetic Office, which they
never so much as pretended to. So that the Prophecy of our Savior is the
Fountain from whence all Christian truth is derived, as containing in it a
complete and entire Sum of God's Will and Counsel concerning the Salvation of
Mankind.

II. As he taught the whole Will of God, so he proved that what he taught was
the Will of God by sundry miraculous operations, which are the great evidences
by which God always demonstrated the truth of his divine revelations, and which
of all others are the most popular, easy, and convincing proofs that can be
given of them. For as for the Prophets themselves, they might be very well
assured that their Enthusiasms were divine, by the vehement impressions they
made on their minds, which were such as did as fully satisfy them that they
were from God, as the strokes of the Sun beams on our eyes do us that it is day
at Noon; but no other man could be satisfied that what they spoke was by divine
inspiration, without either being divinely inspired himself, or confirmed by
them in the belief of it by some miraculous sign of the Divine Power; which
latter was the way by which the Prophets of Old did ordinarily confirm their
Doctrines, when they delivered any thing new to the World. And accordingly
though our Savior had all along sufficiently confirmed his Doctrines to the
Jews by the Authorities of the Old Testament, yet this confirmation of his
Miracles he more particularly insists on, and appeals to; thus John 10.25. The
works, says he, that I do in my Father's name they testify of me; And again,
verse. 37, 38. If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not, but if I do,
though ye believe not me, believe the works; and herein he places the
inexcusable sin of their unbelief, that they persisted in it notwithstanding he
had done among them the works which none other man did, John 15.24. And indeed
well he might, considering the miraculous powers he exerted among them; for how
often did he even before their eyes subpoena in whatsoever was in Heaven, or
Earth, or Sea, to give their testimony to his Doctrine; he made the Angels
minister to him, and the Devils tremble and fly before him, and the Plants and
Animals, the Winds and Seas obeyed him, and Health and Sickness, and Life and
Death and the Grave did by their obedience to his Word bear witness to the
truth of his Doctrine. By his powerful voice he shook the Heavens, and sent
down the Holy Spirit on his Followers; he tore the Rocks, and opened the
Graves, and at his command the bodies of his Saints arose; and, which was more
miraculous than all, he raised himself the third day after his Crucifixion, and
having finished his Course upon Earth, ascended Triumphantly into Heaven in the
view of a numerous assembly of Spectators. All which were such illustrious
demonstrations of his being inspired by God, as nothing but an incurable
infidelity could ever be able to withstand. But wh^t proper arguments these
Miracles of his we^e to convince men, and what evidence there is o^ the truth
and reality of them, will be shown at l^rge hereafter, and therefore it will be
needl^ss at present to insist any farther on this particular.

III. Therefore as a Prophet he gave us a perfect Example of Obedience to that
which he had declared and proved to be his Father's Will. He did not only
reveal his Father's Will to men's Ear's in his excellent Sermons and Discourses,
but he also set it forth before their Eyes in the glorious Example of his
Actions. For what he taught in Words he exemplified in Deeds, and his
Conversation was a lively Picture of his Doctrine, wherein all that Humility
and Self-denial, that Temperance and Justice, that Charity and
Heavenly-mindedness, that invincible Constancy of Mind, and generous Contempt
of the World, which he taught Mankind, were drawn to the life, and expressed in
their fairest colors and proportions. So that what he taught in Words he
taught over again in Actions, and explained his Rules still by his own Example;
for his Conversation was all along a most genuine Comment and Paraphrase on his
Religion; by casting their eyes on which those who did not fully understand the
sense of his Precepts by his Words, might very easily expound it by his
Actions. For there is no doubt but a good Example does far more effectually
instruct than good Precepts; because it does not only express the same virtues
that the Precepts enjoin, but also expresses them with much more grace and
Emphasis. For whereas Precepts and Discourses of Virtue are only the dead
Pictures and artificial Landskips and Descriptions of it, a virtuous Example is
Virtue it self, informed and animated, alive and in motion, exerting and
exhibiting it self in all its natural Charms and Graces. And therefore as we
know a man much better when we see himself alive and in action, than when we
only see his Picture, so we understand Virtue much better when we see it living
and acting in a good Example, than when we only behold it described and
pictured in virtuous Precepts and Discourse. So that by giving us a complete
and perfect Example of Piety and Virtue, the blessed Jesus has far more
effectually instructed us in our duty than by all those heavenly Sermons which
he preached to the World; because his whole life was nothing else but a
continued series of living and moving Virtue, or rather it was nothing but
Piety and Virtue acting their several parts in their own proper Forms, and
exhibiting themselves to the Eyes of men in all their natural Graces. And as
the Holiness of his life did most effectually instruct men in their duty, so it
could not but very much confirm them in the truth of his Doctrine; for it is
certain if his Doctrine were false, it was not a simple Error, but a downright
Lie, i. e. a known and wilful falsehood; because it depended, as I shall show
by and by, upon matters of fact, which he could not but know whether they were
true or false. So that if these facts were false, he was a wilful Deceiver in
affirming them, and building his Doctrines upon them. But how could he be
reasonably suspected of lying whose whole life was such an illustrious example
of goodness and unspotted integrity of manners? For it is to serve either their
Covetousness or Ambition, their Envy or their Revenge, that men turn wilful
Deceivers* none of which Vices, nor so much as the least appearance of them are
visible in the life of Jesus, but their contraries continually shone through
the whole course of his Actions; and if none of those Vices ever appeared in
him, that could any way tempt him to lie and deceive, it is not only unjust but
unreasonable to suspect him. Thus by the sanctity of his life he not only
instructed men in his Father's Will, but also confirmed them in the belief of
it.

IV. As a Prophet also he sealed his Doctrine with his blood; which is the
highest pledge that any Mortal can give of his truth and integrity. While he
was preaching his Doctrine to the World, he foresaw all along that he must
either recant it, or die for it; and therefore it is not imaginable that he
would have proceeded to divulge it, had he not believed it to be true. For what
man in his wits would ever publish a lie to the world, when he knows beforehand
he must either recant it with shame, or assert and maintain it with his blood?
But such was the nature of his Doctrine, that he could not believe it to be
true, unless it were so; because the truth or falsehood of it depended upon
matters of fact, wherein he could not be deceived; namely, that he was the Son
of God, that he came down from him, and had dwelt with him in unspeakable glory
and happiness from the foundations of the world, John 17.5. upon the truth of
which facts depended the Authority of his whole Doctrine; but whether these
were true or false he could not be ignorant if he were in his wits, which no
body can doubt, that considers the exactness of his Conversation, and the
wisdom and dependence of his Doctrine. Now if he were first in Heaven, and was
sent down from thence to preach to the World, there is no doubt to be made of
the truth of his Doctrine; and whether he were or no he could not be ignorant;
if he were not there, he not only died with a wilful lie in his mouth, which is
not reasonably imaginable of a person of his unspotted Piety and Virtue, but he
also published it to the World in his life, notwithstanding he knew it to be a
lie, and foresaw he must either dye for it, or shamefully recant it, which is
not imaginable of a person of his wisdom and soundness of mind. So that
considering that he could not but certainly know whether his Doctrine were true
or false, his sealing it with his blood is an unanswerable attestation of the
truth of it; and accordingly his blood is made a great Testimony of the truth
of his Gospel, 1 John 5.8. and S. Paul tells us that he witnessed a good
confession before Pontius Pilate, 1 Timothy 6.13. that is, in affirming before
Pilate that he was the Son of God, and King of the Jews; even when he certainly
foresaw that he should forfeit his life by it, he took it upon his death that
he had preached nothing but the truth to the world.

V. As a Prophet he also instituted an Order of men to publish and declare his
Doctrine to the World. Whilst the gift of Prophecy continued in the Jewish
Church, there were certain Schools called the Schools of the Prophets, in which
men were trained up under some great and eminent Prophets, who were the Masters
of those Schools, in the knowledge of divine things, and the practice of Piety
and Virtue, that so being educated in wisdom and goodness, they might be the
better disposed and qualified to receive the Prophetic influx, and deliver
God's Messages to the people. For out of these schools God ordinarily called
those persons whom he employed and sent forth to prophecy to their Kings and
People; and accordingly our Savior, when he began to revive the spirit of
Prophecy in his own Person, (which from Malachi till then, which was for the
space of four hundred years, had been utterly extinct) immediately erected a
School of Prophets* consisting of his twelve Apostles and seventy Disciples, to
whom, as it seems, he afterward added thirty eight more, Vide Acts 1.15. over
whom he himself presided as the great Master Prophet, in order to the
instructing their minds in all divine wisdom, and forming their manners by the
strictest rules of Piety and Virtue; that so, when ever occasion required, they
might be duly qualified to Prophecy to the World. And accordingly as those
ancient Masters of the Prophetic Schools had ordinarily their Scholars
personally attending on them, and, upon emergent occasions, did frequently send
them forth as their Ministers upon Prophetic Messages, Vid. 2 Kings 9.1. and 1
Kings 20*35. so our blessed Savior kept his in ordinary attendance about him,
that so they might hear his Doctrine, and see his Miracles, and observe his
Conversation; and, upon particular occasions, he sent them forth as his
Ministering Disciples to Prophecy in his name; Vid. Luke 10.1. And out of this
Prophetic School of our Savior the Primitive Prophets of our Religion were
called and sent forth to preach the Gospel through the World. For that his
Gospel might be taught through all succeeding Ages to the end of the World, he
first erected this sacred School, and when he was to leave it, he deposited a
standing Commission in the hands of his twelve Apostles, whom he ordained to
preside in it in his room, by which he empowered them not only to ordain and
send forth the present Disciples of it, viz. the Presbyters and Deacons, to
teach his Gospel to all Nations, but also to derive down the same authority to
their Successors through all Generations to come; For as the Father has sent
me, says he, so send I you, John 20.21. and as he sent them, so they still
sent others, and so in an uninterrupted line of Succession has this Commission
been handed and derived from one Generation to another; the Bishops who next
succeeded the Apostles in presiding over the Sacred School, not only still
ordaining other Bishops to succeed them, but also still admitting other
Presbyters and Deacons, who are as the Disciples of that School to Minister
under them in the propagation of the Gospel. Thus Christ as the Great Prophet
of the Church has erected a standing Prophetic School or Order of men
authoritatively to teach and declare his Gospel to all succeeding Ages of the
World.

VI. And lastly, As he was a Prophet also he sent his Holy Spirit, when he left
the World, to recollect and explain to his Disciples the Doctrine he had taught
them, and to enable them also to prove and assert it by Miracles* For as Elias,
the Great Prophet of Israel, when he was snatched up into Heaven, let drop his
Mantle, and, with that, derived that holy Spirit on his Disciple Elisha, by
which he Prophesied and wrought his Miracles, so Jesus, the Great Prophet of
the World, when he ascended into Heaven, derived that divine Spirit upon his
Apostles and Disciples, by which he himself Prophesied and confirmed his
Prophecies by miraculous Evidences while he was upon Earth; Vid. supra p. 66,
67* etc. For in all likelihood the Holy Ghost descended on the day of Pentecost
not only on the Apostles, but also upon all the rest of the hundred and twenty
Disciples, of whom we read in Acts 1.15. For of these consisted the Prophetic
School of our Savior, who in all probability separated them while he was yet
upon Earth from the rest of his Followers to be the Heralds and Preachers of
his Gospel to the World; and if so, we may reasonably conclude that the Holy
Ghost fell on them all as well as on the Apostles, to qualify them for that
work, which together with the Apostles they had been foreordained to. Indeed,
as the Apostles were placed in a higher station than any of the rest, as being
authorized by Christ to superintend and preside over them, so they received a
peculiar Gift of the Holy Ghost, in which none of the rest communicated with
them, and that was conferring by imposition of hands the Holy Ghost upon
others. For so in Acts 8. we find that when Philip had converted the People of
Samaria, he could not confer the Holy Ghost on them, but Peter and John are
sent thither for that purpose, who laid their hands upon them, and they
received the Holy Ghost, verse 17. Now by thus deriving his Holy Spirit on his
Apostles and Disciples, the blessed Jesus still proceeded by them to Prophecy
to the World, till through their Ministry he had fully consummated his
Prophetic Office, and revealed and explained the whole Doctrine of the Gospel.
For till such time as the whole New Testament was completed, his Ministers
generally preached by the immediate inspiration of the Holy Ghost, who, as I
have shown at large, p. 67, etc. not only recollected to their memories those
Doctrines which Christ himself had taught them, but also explained them fully
to their minds, and thereby enabled them to explain them fully to the World;
and when this was once finished, and the whole Doctrine of the Gospel committed
to Writing, and collected into a Volume, the Spirit of Prophecy was withdrawn
from the Ministers of Christianity, who were from thenceforth obliged to supply
the want of it by their own study and industry. For now the Gospel being fully
revealed, there needed no farther Revelation; and for the Holy Spirit to reveal
over again to men's minds what he had plainly enough revealed already, and set
before their eyes, would have been but actum agere, to multiply actions to no
purpose. Whilst the Gospel lay hid in the Eternal Counsel of God, out of the
reach and prospect of humane understandings, it was necessary that the Holy
Ghost should immediately reveal it to the minds of those who were to declare it
to the World; otherwise it is impossible it should ever have been known to
Mankind; but when once he had fully revealed it to them, and declared it by
them, and transmitted their declaration by a standing Scripture to all
succeeding Generations; to what end should he still proceed to make new
Revelations of it, unless it were to gratify men's sloth and idleness, and
excuse them from the trouble of searching and studying that Scripture in which
he had taken care to transmit his Gospel to them? But though that blessed
Spirit has never been wanting to Mankind in any necessary assistance, yet when
once he has put things within our own power, he always expects that we should
do them, and not sit still with our hands in our Pockets, expecting that he
should do them for us. Since therefore by transmitting to us the Scripture, he
has put it within the power of its Ministers to understand and teach the
Gospel, he expects that they should exercise that power in a diligent study of
those things which lead to the true understanding of Religion* and not depend
upon new Revelations for the understanding of that which he has already
sufficiently revealed to them. For thus till the whole Old Testament was
finished, God continued the Spirit of Prophecy in the Jewish Church, after
which he immediately withdrew it, and wholly remitted his People to the conduct
of the Priests and Levites, who in their forty eight Cities, which were so many
Universities for their education in divine Learning, diligently read and
studied the Law, and thereby accomplished themselves to preach and explain it
to the People. And in like manner God continued the same Spirit of Prophecy in
the Christian Church till the whole New Testament was revealed and written, and
Copies of it dispersed through all the Churches, and from thenceforth the
Spirit of Prophecy ceased, and in the room of its first inspired Ministers
there succeeded an ordinary standing Ministry, who by their Learning, and
Industry, and diligent search of Scripture were to supply the defect of
immediate Revelation, and to qualify themselves to teach and instruct the
several Flocks that were committed to their Charge. In short therefore, the
Spirit of Prophecy remained upon the Ministers of Christ till such time as it
had fully revealed and clearly explained the Gospel to them, and when this was
done, and they had transmitted its Revelations to writing, there could be no
farther need of it, unless it be supposed either that he had not sufficiently
revealed the Gospel to them, or that he has some new Gospel to reveal. And
thus you see what it is that our Savior has done in the discharge of his
Prophetic Office. And considering all, I know not what farther he could have
added to complete and perfect it, and to render his Prophecy effectual to teach
and instruct the World. So that if after all these mighty performances we still
remain in darkness and ignorance, the blame of it wholly redounds upon our
selves; for he has in all respects abundantly performed his part toward the
enlightening of the World, and chalked out to us the way to our happiness with
such plain and visible lines, that if we are but willing to walk in it, we
cannot mistake or wander from it; but if we will be so supine and negligent as
to concern our selves no more about it than if it were only a Fanciful
description of the Road to Vtopia, or the Highway to the World in the Moon, it
is impossible we should be thoroughly acquainted with it how plainly soever it
is described. It is true, there are some Doctrines in Christianity which are
not so clearly revealed, but that the most honest minds may be mistaken about
them; but then these are such as are far remote from the necessary and
fundamental Articles, upon which our Salvation depends, all which are so
clearly and distinctly revealed, that there is nothing but a perverse Will,
that is either prejudiced against them by some sinful affection, or through a
profane disregard of God and Religion utterly unconcerned about them, can
hinder men from apprehending them; and if when the divine Light shines so
clearly round about them, men will be so obstinate as to shut their eyes
against it, it is at their own eternal peril, and they are as justly
accountable for their ignorance, as if they had sinned against the clearest
knowledge. For this, says our Savior, is the condemnation of the World, that
light is come into the World, and men love darkness more than light. If
therefore through any wicked prejudice against the truth, or through a profane
neglect to enquire after it, we continue ignorant of it, this will be no excuse
at all for our sinning against it, but we shall be as certainly condemned for
our affecting Ignorance, and loving darkness more than light, as if we had
sinned against the clearest light and conviction. For what a monstrous instance
is it of stupidity and impiety together to shut our eyes against that light
which is of such infinite moment to us, and which the Son of God thought worth
his while to come down from Heaven to reveal to us; what is this, but to tell
him to his face, that if he had pleased he might have spared his pains, and not
have come so far on such an impertinent Errand as is not worth a man's while to
listen to? O prodigious supineness and stupidity! that men who are so
inquisitive about the little affairs of this life, as that when they receive
but a Letter in which they imagine any of their worldly interests are
concerned, they cannot forbear one moment breaking it open and perusing the
Contents of it, should yet receive a Message from the God of Heaven by his own
Son, in which their everlasting happiness or misery is concerned, and take no
notice of it, but let it lie by them day after day without ever enquiring into
the Contents of it, or taking the least care and pains to inform themselves
about it. Good God! what reverence have these wretched Creatures for thee, or
what regard for themselves, that can thus receive thy Messages, and with them
their own Eternal Fate, with the same unconcern and indifferency, as they would
the most impertinent Tales of Bedlam? Wherefore as we regard either God or our
own Souls, let us from henceforth be persuaded seriously to attend to this
great and momentous Revelation of our Savior, and thoroughly to inform our
minds with its Doctrines and Precepts; for which end let us avoid, as much as
in us lies, busying and entertaining our thoughts with nice and curious
Speculations, or remote and disputable Opinions; and betake our selves to the
study of things upon which our Eternal life and happiness depends, viz. of the
Duties which the Gospel exacts and requires of us, and of the Motives by which
it presses and inforces them; which when once we have digested into a clear and
distinct Scheme of practical knowledge, that will be a standing light to our
Wills and Affections, by which we shall always see our way before us, and be
secured from wandering into dangerous errors, and at length safely conducted to
eternal light and happiness.

SECT. III. Of Christ's Priestly Office.
IN treating of which great and momentous Argument, I shall endeavor, first,
to show what the ancient Priesthood was, and in what Acts it consisted.
Secondly, To prove that the ancient Priesthood in its proper Acts was a Type
and Figure of the Priesthood of our Savior. Thirdly, To explain the
Priesthood, and Priestly Acts of our Savior corresponding to that ancient
Priesthood, in which they were prefigured.

First, What the ancient Priesthood was, and in what Acts it consisted. In the
first Ages of the World it is evident, that in matters which concerned himself
alone, every man was his own Priest. For thus in sacrificing to God upon their
own particular accounts, both Cain and Abel officiated for themselves, but in
Family-Sacrifices the Father of the Family was the Priest, as is evident by
Noah and Job, Genesis 8.22. Job. 1.5. And when Families were multiplied into
Tribes and greater Societies, the Prince of each Society was also the Supreme
Priest of it; and hence before Aaron was consecrated, Moses, who was the Prince
of Israel, officiated also as the Priest in that solemn Sacrifice by which the
Covenant with Israel was confirmed, Exodus 24.6. And long before Moses,
Melchisedeck, King of Salem, was also Priest of the most High God, Genesis 14.18.
And it is evident that originally Kings were the Highpriests of their
Countries. For so Aristotle observes, that (...), to Rule and Sacrifice were
Offices conjoined in the same Person, Polit. l. 3. So also Virgil Aen. 3. Rex
Anius, Rex idem hominum Phoebique Sacerdos, i. e. Anius in the same Person was
King of Men, and Priest of Phoebus; upon which Servius has this Note, Sane
majorum haec erat consuetudo ut Rex esset etiam Sacerdos vel Pontifex; it was a
Custom among the Ancients, that the King should be also Priest or High Priest.
Which Custom was continued for a long while in Egypt, and from thence was
derived to the Greeks, and from them to the Romans; for so Plut. Quaest. Romans
p. 279. tells us, (...), i. e. Of old Kings performed the most and greatest
parts of the Sacred Rites, and together with the Priests sacrificed the
Victims; but upon their exceeding their due bounds, and taking upon them to
domineer proudly and unjustly, many of the Greeks took from them all their
Civil Power, and only left them their Authority to sacrifice to the Gods; but
the Romans, as he goes on, utterly rejecting their Kings, appointed anoth^r to
succeed them in the High Priesthood, whom they wholly debarred from
intermedling with secular Affairs. Dionysius Halicarn. speaking of the power of
Kings, expressly tells us, (...), i. e. That they had the Government of all
Sacrifices and Sacred Rites, and whatsoever was to be done to the holy Gods was
done by them. And therefore the reason why Melchisedeck here is more
particularly taken notice of under the Character of a King and Priest, was, not
because there were no other Kings so but he, but perhaps because all other
Kings that were Cotemporary with him were revolted to Idolatry, so that he only
remained a Priest of the most High God. And in being a King and Priest
together, he was a Type of our Savior, who was a Priest, not after the Order
of Aaron, but after the Order of Melchisedeck. Heb. 5.10. For in Aaron the
Priestly Office was separated from the Kingly, which later remained in Moses,
after he by the command of God had devolved the Priesthood, which was
originally in himself, upon his Brother Aaron, and so according to divine
institution the Priesthood was to continue in the Family of Aaron, separate
from the Regal Power, till the coming of our Savior, who reunited those
Offices in himself, and became a Royal Priest after the ancient Order of
Melchisedeck. For upon the separation of these Offices none could be a Priest
of the Aaronical Order, but such as were descended from the Family of Aaron,
and therefore Christ could not be a Priest of that Order, because he descended
from the Family of Judah, and being of the Royal Lineage he resumed the
Priestly Office from the House of Aaron, and joined it to the Kingly Office
again, with which it was originally united; by which he abrogated the
Priesthood of the Aaronical Order, and in its room restored the ancient
Melchisedecan or Royal Priesthood. And hence the Author to the Hebrews
observes, that Christ pertains to another Tribe, of which no man gave
attendance at the Altar, for it is evident that our Lord sprang out of Judah,
of which Tribe Moses spoke nothing concerning the Priesthood, Heb. 7.13, 14.
and therefore by being a Priest of a different Tribe from that to which the
Aaronical Order was confined, he disannulled that Order, and erected another in
the room of it, viz. the ancient Order of Melchisedeck, which was before the
Aaronical. Hence S. Ambrose in Loc. and quomodo translatum est Sacerdotium? Ex
tribu ad tribum, de Sacerdotali ad Regalem, ut eadem ipsa sit Regalis and
Sacerdotalis; and intuere mysterium, primum fuit Regale Sacerdotium
Melchised^ch secundum consequentiam hujus sermonis; secundum etiam fuit
Sacerdotale in Aaron; tertium in Christo fuit iterum Regale; i. e. How was the
Priesthood translated? Why from one Tribe to another, viz. from the Sacerdotal
to the Regal, that so it might be both Regal and Sacerdotal; and this is the
Mystery; the first Priesthood of Melchisedeck was Regal; the second was
Sacerdotal in Aaron; the third was Regal again in Christ. For that which
distinguished the Melchisedecan from the Aaronical Priesthood, was not, as some
imagine, the difference of their Sacrifice, viz. that Melchisedeck sacrificed
only inanimate things, whereas Aaron sacrificed Animals also; for that
Melchisedeck sacrificed, there is no doubt, because he was Priest of the most
high God, but that he sacrificed inanimate things only, such as Bread and Wine,
there is not the least intimation in Scripture; only it is said, that when he
met Abraham he brought forth Bread and Wine, Genesis 14.18. that is, to refresh
Abraham's Soldiers after their Battle with Chedorlaomer, as the manner was in
those Countries, Vide Deuteronomy. 23.4. and Judge. 8.15. and 6.15. And what is all
this to his Sacrificing? But that he sacrificed Animate as well as Inanimate
things, is evident, not only because animal Sacrifices were generally used
before the institution of the Aaronical Priesthood, and it is very improbable
that he who was so eminently the Priest of the most High God should never offer
the accustomed Sacrifices; but also because Christ's Sacrifice was an animate
one, who was a Priest after Melchisedeck's Order, and not of the Order of
Aaron, Heb. 7.11. so that if the difference between these two Orders consisted
in this difference of their Sacrifice, Christ must be rather a Priest of the
Aaronick than the Melchisedecan Order. And how could the Acts of the Priesthood
of Aaron be Typical of our Savior's, which is Melchisedecan, as the Scripture
all along makes them, if they were of a different nature from those of
Melchisedeck? How could Aaron's bloody Sacrifices be Typical of our Savior's
Priesthood, which was after the Order of Melchisedeck, if Melchisedeck's
Priesthood admitted no bloody Sacrifice? As to the Acts of their Priesthood
therefore, for any thing that appears to the contrary, these two Orders were
the same, but in this they apparently differed, that whereas the Regal Power
was united to Melchisedeck's Priesthood, it was wholly separated from Aaron's,
who in all probability was the first High Priest in the World that was not a
King as well as a Priest. The Priestly acts therefore of these two different
Orders being the same, we shall better understand the nature of our Savior's
Priesthood, though it be of the Order of Melchisedeck, by the account we have
of the Aaronical, than by that of the Melchisedecan Order; because the former
is far more distinct and particular than the later. For of the Acts and
Functions of Melchisedeck's Priesthood there is very little mention in
Scripture, whereas those of Aaron's are described at large in all their
particular Rites and Circumstances. The Priestly Office therefore in general
consists in officiating for sinful men with God, in order to the reconciling of
God to them, and obtaining for them his Favor and Benediction. To which end
there are two Offices necessary to be performed, First, to offer Sacrifice for
them, and thereby to make some fitting reparation to God for their past sins
and provocations; Secondly, To present that Sacrifice to God, and in the Virtue
and Merit of it to interceed with God in their behalf in order to the Restoring
them to his Grace and Favor. And accordingly we read of the Jewish High
Priest, who of all their other Priests was the most perfect Type and
Representative of Christ in his Priestly Office, and this more especially in
Celebrating the Mysteries of the great day of Expiation, that on this day he
was appointed to bring the Beast to the door of the Tabernacle, which was set
apart to die for the Sins of the People, and to kill it there with his own
hands; by which action he did, as the Peoples Representative, offer a life to
God as a reparation for those manifold sins, by which they had justly forfeited
their own lives to him; after which he was to take the Blood of it, and present
it before the Lord in the Holy of Holies, sprinkling it seven times with his
finger upon and before the Mercy-Seat, by which action he interceded with God
to accept that Blood in lieu of the forfeited lives of the People; and
accordingly the whole performance is called making an Atonement for the
Children of Israel for all their sins once a year, Lev. 16 34. But for the
fuller explication of the Priestly Office, it is necessary we should briefly
explain these two essential Acts of it, viz. of sacrificing, and presenting the
Sacrifice to God by way of Intercession for the People.

As for the first of these the Apostle tells us, that every High Priest is
ordained to offer gifts and Sacrifices, Heb. 8.3. And that he is ordained for
men in things pertaining unto God, that he may offer both Gifts and Sacrifices
for sins, Heb. 5.1. It is true indeed to sacrifice, in a strict sense, i. e. to
kill the Sacrifice, seems not to have been so peculiar to the Priestly Office,
as to present the blood of the Sacrifice before the Lord by way of
Intercession, the later of which was so appropriate to the Priesthood, as that
it was never allowed upon any occasion whatsoever for any but a Priest to
perform it; but as for killing the Sacrifice, it seems that not only the
Priests, but sometimes the Levites, vid. 2 Chronicles. 30.17. yea, and sometimes the
People themselves were allowed to perform it, vid. Lev. 4.24, 29, 33. though it
is probable that the Levites were allowed it only in cases of necessity, and
the People only in private and particular sacrifice; but in the public and
general Expiation wherein Christ's dying for the sins of the World was more
eminently expressed and represented, not only the presenting the blood of the
Sacrifice, but the killing it too, was peculiarly appropriated to the
Priesthood. So that though in private and particular Expiations the People had
a right to sacrifice, or kill the Victim, yet in all public ones, such as our
Savior's was, that right was incommunicably inherent in the Priesthood. Now
the killing of those sacrifices which were designed for expiations of sin, was
a transferring of punishment from the People to the Victim; for, you must know,
the Jews had two sorts of Laws, viz. Civil and Ritual; their Civil Laws were
enforced according to their strictest sanction, with the Penalty of death,
which Penalty, in many cases, allowed by God, admitted of this mitigation, that
the life of a Beast should be accepted in exchange for the forfeited life of
the Offender. Their Ritual Laws were enforced with the Penalty of legal
uncleanness, and being separated upon that account from the Congregation and
Public Worship; which Penalty also was thus far relaxed, that if they offered
the life of a Beast in Sacrifice, their uncleanness should be thereby purged,
and themselves restored to the benefit of the public Worship. In both which
cases the Sacrifice was evidently substituted to suffer for the Offender, and
in the first case he was substituted to suffer that very punishment which the
Offender had incurred. And therefore you find that the greater Crimes were no
otherwise to be expiated, but by the blood of the Offender himself, whereas for
lesser ones the blood of a Beast was accepted, which is a plain Argument, that
that punishment which in greater sins was exacted of the Criminal himself, was
in the case of smaller sins transferred from the Criminal to the Sacrifice, and
that the punishment of the Beast was instead of the punishment of the Man. And
this is most evident in the case of the Scapegoat, who upon the High Priest's
laying his hands upon his head had the sins of the People transferred on him,
and was thereby so polluted, that he defiled the man that led him into the
Wilderness, who was therefore obliged before he returned to the Camp to
lustrate himself by washing his Clothes, and bathing his flesh in water, Lev.
16.26. And so also those expiatory Sacrifices, whose blood was carried into the
Holy place, and their bodies burnt without the Camp, had the sins of the People
so imputed to them, and were so defiled by that Imputation, that they were
ordered to be carried without the Camp immediately, lest they should defile the
whole Congregation, and those who carried them out and burnt them, were so far
actually defiled by them, that it was unlawful for them to return to the Camp,
till they were legally purified; which is a plain argument, that in these
Sacrificial Expiations the sin and guilt of the People was still transferred
upon the Sacrifice, and consequently that the death of these Sacrifices was
instead of the death of those Criminals; and accordingly, Lev. 17.11. we are
told that it is the blood, i. e. of the Sacrifice that makes an atonement for
the Soul. And indeed this was the sense which all Nations had of Expiatory
Sacrifices, viz. that their death was instead of the Punishment due to the
Offenders that offered them. For thus the Jews by making Expiation generally
understand suffering Punishment for another in order to his being released from
suffering it himself. For thus wherever it is said by them, Ecce me in
Expiationem, the meaning is, En me in ejus locum, ut port^m iniquitates ejus,
i. e. I stand in such a ones place that I may bear his Iniquities; and so, Ecce
me in expiationem R. Chijae and filiorum ejus, i. e. castigationes quae
obveniunt mihi sint in expiationem R. Chijae and filiorum ejus; Behold I am for
an expiation of R. Chijah and his Sons, i. e. Let the afflictions that happen
to me be for an expiation of R. Chijah and his Sons. So when all the People
were to say to the High Priest, Simus nos expiatio tua, the meaning was, In
nobis fiat expiatio tua, nosque subeamus tuo loco quicquid tibi evenire debet:
Let us be thy Expiation, that is, let thy Expiation be made upon us, and let us
undergo in thy stead whatsoever evil thou have deserved, of which see more,
Buxt. Lexic. Chald. p. 1078. And accordingly in the Form of Prayer they used at
the killing the Sacrifice, they plainly expressed the substitution of it in the
room of their own forfeited lives, Obsecro Domine, peccavi, rebellis fui, etc.
O Lord I obsecrate, I have sinned, I have been rebellious, I have acted
perversely, I have done this and that evil, of which I now heartily repent, let
this be my Expiation, and let those evils which might justly fall upon my head
fall upon the head of my Sacrifice, Outram de sacrif. p. 273. And so also for
the Gentiles, Eusebius Demonst. l. 1. tells us, that they looked upon their
(...) or expiations, as (...), i. e. that their lives were a commutation for
the lives of those that offered them, as who should say a life for a life; and
accordingly Porphyry tells us, that the first original of the sacrifice of
Animals was, (...), i. e. Certain occasions requiring that a life should be
offered for a life, Abstin. l. 4. and hence they were wont to curse the
Sacrifice, and solemnly to impr^cate all those evils on it which themselves had
deserved, vid. Herod. Euterp. and Serve. in Aeneid. 3. From all which it is
abundantly evident that this Priestly Act of sacrificing or killing the
expiatory Sacrifice, was nothing else but a translating the punishment that was
due to the Offerer from his person to his Victim or Sacrifice. But then

Secondly, Besides this, another Sacerdotal Act was pres^nting the blood of the
Sacrifice to God by way of Intercession for the People. For when the Sacrifice
was slain, the Priest was to take the blood, and sprinkle some of it round
about the Altar of burnt Offerings; and the rest of it, say the Jews, was
poured out by the Priest on the Southside Floor of the Altar, where there were
two holes through which it ran into a Channel that conveyed it into the Valley
of Kidron; but in the Sin Offerings for the High Priest and the Congregation,
he was to carry the blood within the Sanctuary, and to sprinkle of it seven
times before the Vail of the Sanctuary, and to put some of it upon the Horns of
the Altar of Incense, after which the Remainder of the blood was to be disposed
of, as was said before, on the Altar of Burnt Offerings. And at the great day
of Expiation, the High Priest himself, having slain the Sacrifice, was to carry
the blood of it into the Holy of Holies, and there with his finger to sprinkle
the blood of it seven times before the Mercy-Seat. Now this sprinkling of the
blood was nothing else but a solemn presenting of the life of the sacrificed
Animal to God, as an exchange or price of Redemption for the forfeited life of
the Offender. For whatsoever was offered upon the Altar was always looked upon
as religiously presented to God; so that by sprinkling the blood on the Altar,
which is the Vehicle of life, and therefore is sometimes called the Life, vide
Genesis 9.4. the Life was solemnly tendered and presented to God as to the supreme
Lord of life and death; and the meaning of this tendry, was to move God by way
of Intercession to accept of that life instead of the Offenders, which was
forfeited into his hands. For since, as a Learned Author of our own has
observed, all Divine Worship, whether natural or instituted, was either to
implore or to commemorate God's grace and favor, this solemn sprinkling of the
blood in expiatory Sacrifices must necessarily respect the imploring of God's
Pardon of those sins for which the Expiation was designed. So that in
performing this Rite the Priest was a silent Intercessor with God in the behalf
of the People, and his action was a solemn Deprecation, of which this was the
natural language and meaning; O Lord I beseech thee be merciful to these guilty
Supplicants, in lieu of whose blood, which I acknowledge is justly forfeited to
thee, I here present thee the life of this sacrificed Animal, whose blood I am
sprinkling on thy Altar, humbly imploring thee to accept it as a ransom for
their lives, and in consideration of it to release them from that mortal
penalty in which they stand bound to thy Justice. Upon which Intercession of
his, God's high displeasure was atoned, and the Priest thereupon Authorized to
bless the People, i. e* to declare that God was appeased and reconciled to them.

And thus you see what the Office of Priesthood is, and in what acts it
consists; in sum therefore it consists in sacrificing to God for the sins of
the People, and interceding with him in the virtue of the Sacrifice to be
propitious and merciful to them.

I proceed now in the second place to show that both these Acts of the Priestly
Office among the Jews, were designed and intended by God for Types and Shadows
of the Priesthood of our Savior. For as for the first, viz. Sacrificing, the
Scripture plainly tells us that it was instituted for a Typical representation
of the death of our Savior. For so the Author to the Hebrews makes the
Sacrificed body of our Savior to answer to, and succeed in the room of the
whole body of the Jewish Sacrifices, as the true Antitype of those Types and
Shadows, Heb. 10.5, 6, etc. Wherefore when he comes into the World, speaking
of Christ, he says, Sacrifice and Offering thou would not, but a body have
thou prepared me, that is, a body to be sacrificed in the room of that former
Sacrifice and Offering; In burnt Offerings and Sacrifices thou have had no
pleasure; Then said he, verse 9. Lo I come to do thy will O God; that is, to
die a Sacrifice for the sins of the world; and hereby, says he, he takes away
the first, that is, those Typical Sacrifices, that he may establish the second,
that is, that great Sacrifice of Christ's body; for so it follows, verse 10. By
the which will we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus
Christ once for all, in which words he plainly makes all the Jewish Sacrifices
in general to be Types and Figures of the great Sacrifice of our Savior's
Death. And indeed as those Sacrifices were all of them to be slain, and to be
all sound and immaculate, they were so far forth at least express Types of our
Savior, both as to his death, and unspotted innocence and purity. But then as
for those Sacrifices whose bodies were burnt without the Camp, they were more
peculiarly Types than any of the rest, of our Savior's Sacrifice, because they
had not only all those things appertaining to them by which the other
Sacrifices represented it, but besides that they were Expiations for sin, as
well as the Sacrifice of our Savior, and by their being burnt without the Camp
did more eminently prefigure our Savior's being Crucified without the City.
Hence the Apostle, Heb. 13.10, 11, 12. We have an Altar whereof they have no
right to eat which serve the Tabernacle; for the Bodies of those Beasts whose
blood is brought into the Sanctuary by the High Priest for sin are burnt
without the Camp, lest they should pollute the Congregation, as being defiled
and cursed upon the account of the Peoples guilts which were transferred upon
them; Wherefore Jesus also that he might sanctify the People with his own
blood suffered without the Gate, that is, as an Expiatory Sacrifice, that took
upon him the guilts of Mankind, and thereby became polluted and accursed; in
which words the death of our Savior is plainly represented as the true
Antitype of the Expiatory Sacrifices of the Jews; and accordingly, as all Types
have much less in them of that which they prefigure than their Antitypes, so
those Expiatory Sacrifices had something of real Expiation in them, though much
less than the Sacrifice of our Savior. For so Heb. 9.13, 14. For if the blood
of Bulls and of Goats and the ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the unclean,
sanctify to the purifying of the flesh, (by which it is evident that there was
a real Expiation made by those Sacrifices, so far as concerned the purifying
men's flesh, i. e. releasing them from corporal punishments and legal
uncleanness;) How much more, says he, shall the blood of Christ, who through
the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your Consciences
from dead works; where the same expiation in kind, that was made by those Legal
Sacrifices, is expressly attributed, though in a much higher degree, to the
Sacrifice of our Savior; which plainly argues the former to be a Type and
Shadow of the later.

And then as for the second Act of the Jewish Priesthood, viz. his presenting
the blood of the Sacrifice to God by way of Intercession for the People, this
was also instituted for a Typical representation of our Savior's presenting
the blood of his sacrificed body to God by way of Intercession for Mankind. And
hence his blood is called the blood of sprinkling, which speaks better things
for us than the blood of Abel, Heb. 12.24. which is a plain allusion to the
High Priest's sprinkling the blood of the Sacrifice before the Mercy-Seat on
the great day of Expiation, by which action, as I showed before, he interceded
with God to be propitious to the People in consideration of that blood which he
there presented in their behalf. And therefore as the Holy of Holies was a Type
of Heaven, Heb. 9.24. and the High Priest's entering thereinto after he had
slain the Sacrifice, a Type of our Savior's entering into Heaven after the
Sacrifice of himself, Ibid. verse 7, 11, 12. so the High Pries^'s sprinkling
the blood before the Mercy-Seat, was also a Type of our Savior's presenting
his blood to the Father in Heaven, and there pleading it in our behalf; and
hence he is said to have entered into the Holy place, that is, into Heaven the
Antitype of the Holy of Holies, and to have obtained Eternal Redemption for us
neither by the blood of Bulls and Goats, as the Jewish High Priest did, but by
his own blood, Heb. 9.12. where the High Priest's entering into the Holy of
Holies with the blood of Bulls and Goats is plainly opposed, as a Type to its
Antitype, to Christ's entering into Heaven with his own blood, and therefore
the High Priest's interceding for the People in the Holy of Holies in virtue of
the blood of their Sacrifices must necessarily be Typical of Christ's
interceding for us in Heaven in the virtue of his. Thus as God cast and
contrived the Rites and Ceremonies of the Jewish Law in general into a
prefiguration or visible Prophecy of the Mysteries of the Gospel, that so by
those Emblematical Predictions he might intimate beforehand those glorious
truths to pious and inquisitive minds, which he intended afterward more
plainly to reveal, (vid. Col. 2.17. and Heb. 10.1.) so particularly in the
Jewish Priesthood he drew a rude draught and representation of the future
Priesthood of our Savior, that so by that figurative Sacrifice and
Intercession he might visibly foreshew and intimate to the World the Sacrifice
and Intercession of our Savior. For thus it is evident from Philo that the
Jews understood their High Priest to be a Type of the Eternal Word or Messiah;
for thus in his Allegories he makes the Temple to be an Embl^m of the World,
(...), in which God's firstborn Divine Word is the High Priest; and in several
other parts of his Writings he makes the High Priests Crown and Vestments to be
Types and Representations of the dignity and perfections of the Eternal Word,
by which it is evident, that by their Typical High Priesthood the Jews were in
some measure instructed in the nature of the Priesthood of our Savior.

Thirdly, and lastly, I shall now proceed to explain the Priesthood and
Priestly Acts of our Savior corresponding to that ancient Priesthood in which
they were prefigured. In General therefore the Priesthood of our Savior
corresponding to that ancient Priesthood consists in offering up himself a
Sacrifice for our sins, and in presenting that Sacrifice to God in our behalf,
and thereby interceding with him to be merciful and propitious to us. So that
the Priesthood of our Savior consists in these two acts:

First, In offering up himself a Sacrifice for our sins.

Secondly, In presenting that Sacrifice to God by way of Intercession for us;
of each of which I shall discourse at large.

SECT. IV. Concerning the Sacrifice of our Savior.
IN handling the first of these, viz. the Sacrifice of our Savior, I shall
endeavor, first, to show that the death of Christ had in it all the requisite
conditions of a most real and complete Sacrifice for sin. Secondly, To make
appear how effectually God's exacting such a Sacrifice in order to his being
reconciled to sinners conduces to their reformation.

First, That the death of Christ had in it all the requisite conditions of a
real and most complete Sacrifice for sin. Now to make both a true and perfect
expiatory Sacrifice, there are five things indispensibly necessary:

First, That in being sacrificed it should be substituted in the room of an
Offender to be punished for him in order to his being released from his own
Personal obligation to punishment. For in all those Legal expiations which
prefigured this great Expiation of our Savior, the killing of the Sacrifice,
was, as I showed before, a real transferring and inflicting upon it the
punishment due to the Offender that offered it, in order to his being excused
from suffering it in his own person.

Secondly, Another necessary condition of an Expiatory Sacrifice is that it
should be pure, sound, and unblemished; and indeed this condition is required
in all kinds of Sacrifices, whether Expiatory, or Eucharistical, that they
should be pure or Legally clean, and that they should be sound and without
blemish. For so Lev. 22.20. But whatsoever has a blemish that shall ye not
offer, for it shall not be acceptable for you; and ver. 21. It shall be
perfect, i. e. sound and entire, to be accepted: there shall be no blemish
therein; and then he goes on to particulars, it shall not be blind, or broken,
or having a W^n, or scurvy, or scabbed, verse 22. Now though the legal
uncleanness and the natural blemishes here forbidden in Sacrifices had nothing
of sin or immorality in them, yet the prohibition of these natural blemishes in
Sacrifices that were incapable of moral ones, denotes the necessity of a moral
cleanness and unblemishedness in that great Expiatory Sacrifice for the sins of
the World which they Typified and prefigured; and hence Christ is called, A
Lamb without blemish and without spot, 1 Pet. 1.19.

Thirdly, Another necessary condition to a perfect Expiatory Sacrifice is, that
it should be of such an intrinsic worth and value as that its death may be, in
some measure, an equivalent Commutation for the punishment which the Offender
deserves. For the end of punishing, whether it be the Offender himself, or
another in his stead, is to secure and maintain the Authority of the Law; in
order whereunto it is highly requisite that the punishment should ordinarily be
equivalent to the demerit of the Crime; otherwise it will not be a sufficient
motive to warn and deter men from committing it. And herein consisted the
imperfection of the ancient expiatory Sacrifices, that what they suffered was
much short of what the Offenders they suffered for deserved; for they only
substituted the life of a Brute in the room of the life of a Man, which is of
far greater worth and value; and therefore by how much less valuable the life
of a Beast is than the life of a Man, by so much less was the punishment
transferred upon the Sacrifice, than the guilt contracted by the Offender.

Fourthly, Another necessary condition to the making of a true and perfect
Sacrifice was that it should be free and unforced on the part of the Offerer.
For since he had deserved the punishment in his own Person, it was very fit,
both that the Sacrifice that was to undergo it for him should be something that
was his own, otherwise he could have no right to substitute it in his own
stead, or to offer its life to God in exchange for his own; and that he should
freely offer it to be killed in his stead, otherwise he had not been consenting
to the exchange, without which it must have been invalid, and consequently the
Expiation void; and hence Lev. 1.3. it is required that he should offer it of
his own voluntary will at the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation before
the Lord.

Fifthly, It is also a necessary condition to a true and perfect Sacrifice for
sin that it should be admitted and accepted by God in the room and stead of the
punishment that is due to him from the Offender himself. For by violating his
Laws we give God a right to exact the Penalty of them at our own hands; so that
if he pleases he may refuse to admit of any Substitute to suffer for us, and if
he will insist upon his right to punish us in our own persons, and refuse to
admit of any exchange; what another suffers for us will signify nothing to our
discharge or acquittal, because it is not our own suffering who stand
personally obliged to God to suffer the utmost evil that our sin deserves; and
therefore to admit another to suffer for us is an Act of pure Grace and Favor
in him, which he may grant or refuse as he pleases. So that the Expiatory
virtue of all Sacrifice lies in God's admitting and accepting it in exchange
for that personal punishment we owe him; and hence he is said to have given
them the blood upon the Altar to make an atonement for their Souls, Lev. 17.11.
that is, to have admitted and accepted that Blood which was offered on the
Altar as an Atonement for their lives which were forfeited to him. And thus you
see what are the necessary conditions of a real, and perfect, Expiatory
Sacrifice; all which, as I shall now show you, do fully concenter in the Death
and Sacrifice of our Savior. As

I. In dying or being sacrificed he was substituted in the room of sinful men
to be punished for them in order to their being released from their personal
obligation to punishment. And hence, Tit. 2.14. he is said to have given
himself for us that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to
himself a peculiar people zealous of good works, that is, he gave his life in
exchange for ours, and thereby became our (...). For by what follows, it is
plain that his giving himself for us here is to be understood by way of an
expiation, for it was, first, to redeem us from all iniquity, which is the very
phrase by which the virtue and efficacy of Propitiatory Sacrifices is
expressed; for so (...), which signifies to redeem in the Greek, is the same
with (...) which signifies to expiate by Sacrifice in the Hebrew; and
accordingly the Greek word (...), which in the Greek signifies the price of
redemption, is frequently used for the Hebrew Copher, which signifies a price
to reconcile or propitiate. So that Christ's giving himself for us to redeem us
from all iniquity, must signify, according to the common acceptance of the
Phrase, his laying down his life for us as the price of our propitiation with
God. For so among the Jews that common form of speech, Let me be your
redemption, was as much as to say, let me bear your Iniquities, and undergo the
punishment of them that you may escape, Buxt. Lex. Chald. 10.78. Agreeably to
which in Heb. 9.15. Christ is said to die for the redemption of transgressions,
that is, to buy off the punishment of them with his own blood. For so he is
said to have given himself (...), i. e. a ransom or price of Redemption for
all, 1 Timothy 2.5, 6. and to have given his life as a (...) or ransom for many,
Matthew. 20.28. But then secondly, his giving himself for us was to purify us,
which also refers to the purifications which were made by Expiatory Sacrifices.
For so the word (...) signifies, to cleanse from guilt by Sacrifice. Thus Lev.
16.30. On that day shall the Priest make Atonement for ye to purify ye, that
ye may be pure from all your sin before the Lord; and so the word is generally
taken not only in the Writings of Moses, but also in all other Authors, by whom
Expiatory Sacrifices are promiscuously called (...), and (...), i. e. atoning,
sanctifying, and purifying. Agreeably to which, the blood of Christ is said to
purify us from all sin, i. e. from the guilt of all sin, 1 Ioh. 1.7. For it
was from that that the blood of Sacrifices did immediately purify men. And
hence he is said to have died for our sins, 1 Cor. 15.3 to have given himself
for our sins, Gal. 1.4. and to have once suffered for our sins, the just for
the unjust, 1 Pet. 3.8. and his Blood is said to be shed for many for the
remission of sins, Matthew. 26.28. and to be a Propitiation for our sins, 1 John
4.10. by which expressions it is evident that our sins were the cause, and the
expiation of them the end of Christ's suffering; and it is upon this account
that he is said to bear our sins in his own body on the tree, 1 Pet. 2.24. that
is, to undergo the punishment of them in those exquisite torments he endured
upon the Cross, and to be made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. even as the Expiatory
Sacrifices were made sin, i. e. Piacula, that underwent the punishment of sin
for the Offenders that offered them, Lev. 4.3, 29. and also to be made a curse
for us, Gal. 3.13. that is, by having the guilts of our sins transferred on
him, even as the Sacrifices were cursed, as was showed before, by the very
translation of the guilts of the people upon them; and accordingly, as by this
Translation those Sacrifices were rendered cursed and unclean, and as such,
were to be burnt without the Camp, so our Savior upon the same account
suffered without the Gate, Heb. 13.11, 12. And to name no more, in Isa. 53. we
are told, That he should bear our griefs, and carry our sorrows, and be wounded
for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities; that the Chastisements
of our peace were upon him, and that by his stripes we should be healed; that
the Lord has laid upon him the iniquities of us all, and that for our
transgressions he was stricken, that his Soul was made an Offering for sin;
that he should bear our iniquities, and be numbered with the transgressors, and
bear the sins of many, and make intercession for the transgressors; all which
expressions do as plainly denote him to be substituted to be punished for us,
in order to our release, as it is possible for words to do; and, unless we will
admit that to be the sense of Scripture, which the words of it do as plainly
import as they could have done if it had been its sense, it will be impossible
to determine it to any sense whatsoever; because men may prevaricate upon the
plainest words, and with quirks of Wit and Criticism pervert them to a contrary
meaning. And I dare undertake by the same Arts that our Adversaries use to
avoid the force of these Testimonies, to elude the plainest words that the Wit
of man can invent to express this Proposition, that Christ's Death was a
punishment for our sins; which to any reasonable man is a sufficient answer to
all the Socinian Cavils. And indeed the whole current of Scripture runs so
clear against them, that they do as good as acknowledge, that according to the
most common and natural acceptance of its words, it fairly implies the
Doctrine we contend for, viz. that the Death of Christ was a real punishment
for the sins of the World; but their main Plea is, that it is unjust, in the
nature of the thing, to punish one man for the sins of another, and therefore
we ought rather to impose any sense on the words of Scripture, how foreign
soever, than attribute to God so great a piece of injustice, as the punishing
his own Son for the sins of the World. But as for the Justice of this
procedure, I shall endeavor by and by to clear and vindicate it.

II. He died in pure and spotless Innocence; and this was highly necessary to
his being an Expiatory Sacrifice for the sins of others. For had he been a
sinner, he had deserved to die upon his own account, and the utmost effect of
his Death could have been only the Expiation of his own sin, by which his life
must have been forfeited to the divine Justice; and it is impossible that he
who has forfeited his own life, should by his death redeem the forfeited lives
of others. And accorcordingly, Heb. 7.26, 27. we are told, that such an High
Priest became us who is holy, harmless, and undefiled, separate from sinners,
and made higher than the Heavens, who needed not daily, as those High Priests,
to offer up sacrifice first for his own sins, etc. because the Sacrifice which
he offered was his own life; so that had he been obliged to offer that for his
own sins, it could have made no Expiation for ours; the bare payment of a man's
own debt being no satisfaction for other men's. And therefore herein the Apostle
places the virtue and efficacy of Christ's blood, by which it was rendered
sufficiently precious to be a ransom for the sins of the World, that it was of
a Lamb without spot or blemish, i. e. the blood of a most holy and innocent
person, who never deserved the least evil on his own account, and therefore was
truly precious, and sit to be a ransom for the sins of others, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
And accordingly he is said to be made sin for us, i. e. to be devoted as a
Sacrifice for our sins, who knew no sin, 2* Cor. 5.21. where you see the great
Emphasis of his Sacrifice is laid upon his Innocence, as that which was
necessary to qualify him to be a Sacrifice for others. So that by that
spotless obedience of Christ's life, through the whole course of which he did
no sin, neither was there any guile found in his mouth, he consecrated himself
an acceptable Sacrifice to God for the sins of the World.

III. His Death was of sufficient intrinsic worth and value to be an
equivalent commutation for the punishment that was due to the whole world of
sinners. For the reason why God would not pardon sinners without some
commutation for the punishment that was due from them to his Justice, was that
he might preserve and maintain the Authority of his Laws and Government. For
had he exacted the punishment from the sinners themselves, he must have
destroyed the whole Race of Mankind; and had he pardoned them, on the other
hand, without any punishment at all, he must have exposed his authority to the
contempt and outrage of every bold and insolent Offender; and therefore to
avoid these dangerous extremities of severity and impunity, his infinite wisdom
found out this expedient, to admit of some exchange for our persons and
punishment, that so some other thing or person being substituted in our stead,
to suffer and be punished for us, neither we might be destroyed, nor our sins
be unpunished. This therefore being the reason of God's admitting of Sacrifice,
it was highly requisite that the punishment of the Sacrifice should bear some
proportion to the guilt of the Offenders; otherwise it will not answer God's
reason of admitting it. For since the reason of his admitting it was the
security of his Authority, the less he had admitted, the less he must have
secured his Authority by it. For to have exacted a small punishment for a great
demerit, would have been within a few degrees as destructive to his Authority
as to have exacted none at all; to punish but little for great Crimes, is
within one remove as mischievous to Government as total impunity; and therefore
to support his own Authority over us, it was highly requisite that he should
exact not only a punishment for our sin, but also a punishment proportionable
to the guilt and demerit of it. For there is no doubt but the nearer the
punishment is to the demerit of the sin, the greater security it must give to
his Authority. And upon this account the Sacrifices of the Jews were infinitely
short of making a full expiation for their sins; because being but brute
Animals, their death was no way a proportionable punishment to the great
demerit of the sins of the People. For what proportion could there be between
the momentany sufferings of a Beast, and those eternal sufferings which the
sins of a man do deserve? The death of a Beast is a punishment very short of
the death of a Man, but infinitely short of that eternal death to which the
man's guilts do oblige him; and accordingly the Expiations which were made for
Men by the death of those Beasts were very short and imperfect. For so the
Apostle tells us, that they only sanctified to the purifying of the flesh, Heb.
9.13. that is, to the acquitting them from their Corporal Penalties and legal
Uncleannesses; but could not at all make them perfect as pertaining to their
Consciences, i. e. could not expiate the guilt of any wilful sin, by which
their Consciences were laid waste and wounded, ver. 9. And accordingly the
Heathen seem to be aware how short the death of Beasts was of the punishment
which was due for the sins of Men. For though in ordinary cases they sacrificed
Beasts, as well as the Jews, yet in great extremities, when they conceived
their Gods to be highly displeased with them, even the most civilized of them
sacrificed Men; which shows, that they thought the death of Beasts to be an
insufficient expiation for the sins of men. And indeed it cannot be denied but
that the Sacrifice of a Man, as such, is much more proportionable to the
punishment which the sins of men deserve, than the Sacrifice of a Beast;
because a Man is a much nobler Creature, as being far advanced above a Beast by
the Prerogative of his Reason; and consequently his death, considered as a Man,
must be a much more valuable exchange for the punishment that is due to those
he dies for. But herein the Heathen were miserably mistaken, that they did not
consider that the men whom they sacrificed, were sinners as well as themselves,
and that it is a much greater flaw in an Expiatory Sacrifice to be a Sinner
than to be a Brute. For whereas the latter only renders it less effectual and
valuable; the former, as was shown before, renders it utterly void and
insignificant; and therefore though the death of a Man, considered as such, is
of much more value than the death of a Beast, yet to expiate for the sins of
men, there is more internal virtue and efficacy in the death of an innocent
Beast, than of a sinful Man; because the latter can expiate only for his own
sin, whereas the former can have no sin but that of others to expiate. Since
therefore men were all spotted and blemished with Sin, there was no life so fit
for them to offer to God, in commutation for their forfeited lives, as that of
innocent Brutes; so that the best commutation they could make was infinitely
short of their demerit. And suppose that the men which the Heathen offered had
been all pure and innocent, yet their lives would have been only an equivalent
commutation for the forfeited lives of an equal number of sinners; unless
therefore one half of Mankind had been innocent, and they had been sacrificed
for the other half that was guilty, it had not been an equal Commutation so
much as for the temporal punishment which was due to God from the guilty; but
then for their eternal punishment a Hecatomb of Angels had been short and
insufficient. For what proportion is there between a temporary death and an
eternal misery? Since therefore, in great compassion to us, God has thought
meet to accept of a Sacrifice in lieu of that punishment which was due to him
from Mankind, and since to secure his own Authority, it was highly requisite
that what this Sacrifice suffered for us, should be in some measure equivalent
to what we had deserved, and since we had deserved to suffer for ever, it
necessarily follows that this Sacrifice must be something infinitely more
precious and valuable than the blood of Bulls and Goats, yea, than the lives of
Men or Angels; and what can that be but the blood of the Eternal Son of God,
the infinite dignity of whose Person rendered his sufferings for us equivalent
to the infinite demerit of our sins. For it was the dignity of his Person that
gave the value to his sufferings, and inhanced his temporary Death to a full
equivalence to those endless miseries which we had deserved. For if the life of
a King be (as David's People told him) worth ten thousand lives, of what an
infinite value must the life of the Lord of glory and of the Prince of life be,
who being the Son of God, of the same Nature and Essence with his eternal
Father, must from thence necessarily derive upon his Sacrifice an immensity of
worth and efficacy. And hence we are said to be purchased with the blood of
God, Acts 20.28. and to have the life of God laid down for us, John 3.16. and
to be redeemed not with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, but with the
precious blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. and accordingly the Author to the
Hebrews makes the virtue and efficacy of Christ's blood to consist in the worth
and value of it; For if the blood of Bulls and Goats, etc. sanctified to the
purifying of the flesh, how much more shall the blood of Christ, who through
the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your consciences
from dead works to serve the living God, Heb. 9.13, 14. By all which it is
evident that it was the infinite dignity of Christ's Person which derived that
infinite merit on his Sacrifice, whereby it became an equivalent to the
infinite demerit of our sins. Nay, of such an infinite value and worth was his
Sacrifice, that it not only countervailed for the punishment due for our sin,
but did abundantly preponderate it; upon which account God engaged himself, not
only to remit that Punishment, in consideration of it, but also to bestow his
Spirit and eternal life on us; both which, as has been shown before, are as
well the purchase of Christ's blood, as the remission of our sins. For God
might have remitted our punishment without superadding the gift of his Spirit
and eternal life to it; and therefore since, in consideration of Christ's
blood, he has superadded these Gifts to the remission of our punishment, it is
evident that his blood was equivalent to both, i. e. that it was not only a
valuable consideration for the pardon of our sins, but also for the assistance
of his Spirit, and our eternal happiness.

IV. His Death was on his part voluntary and unforced. For since as a Sacrifice
he was to be innocent, and yet to undergo the punishment of our sin, he could
not be the one, and do the other without his own free consent and approbation.
For no innocent person can be justly made obnoxious to punishment but by his
own Act and Choice; because punishment bears a necessary respect to sin, and
the desert of suffering evil does originally spring out of doing evil. So that
an innocent person, considered as such, cannot deserve to be punished, nor
consequently be justly obliged thereunto; but yet, notwithstanding his
innocence, he may by his own Will and Consent oblige himself to undergo a
punishment which otherwise he did not deserve, and when he has so obliged
himself, the punishment may be justly exacted of him. For though he has no sin
of his own to be punished for, yet he may by his own act oblige himself to
undergo the punishment of another man's. And therefore though merely as an
innocent person he cannot deserve to be punished, either upon his own account,
or any other man's, because having no sin of his own he cannot be guilty of
another man's; yet so far as he has the free disposal of himself, he may
substitute himself in the room of one that is guilty, and thereby render
himself obnoxious to his punishment. As for instance, suppose that by some
criminal action of his own a man has forfeited his liberty or life to the Law,
it is certain that no innocent man, as such, can be thereupon obliged to suffer
death or imprisonment; but suppose that this innocent man having the free
disposal of himself shall voluntarily offer his own life or liberty to the
Magistrate in exchange for the forfeited life or liberty of the Criminal, and
the Magistrate shall think meet to accept it, in this case he is justly liable,
notwithstanding his innocence, to undergo the punishment that was due to the
Offender. For if he may justly offer this exchange, as there is no doubt but he
may, supposing that he has the free disposal of himself, to be sure the
Magistrate may justly accept of it, because the life of the Offender is as much
in his disposal as the life that is offered him in exchange for it, is in the
disposal of the Offerer; so that he has as much right to give the Offerer the
Offender's life for his, as the Offerer has to give his own life for the
Offenders; and when both Parties have a right to the goods which they exchange
with each other, and the goods which they receive are on both sides equivalent
to the goods which they give, it is impossible the exchange should be injurious
to either; the Magistrate cannot be injured, because for the life of the
Offender which he gives he receives the life of the Offerer which is
equivalent; the Offerer cannot be injured, because for his own life which he
gives he receives the life of the Offender which is dearer to him; and neither
Party being injured, the exchange must be just and equal on both sides. Now
that Christ had the free disposal of his own life, he himself tells us, John
10.18. No man takes my life from me, but I lay it down of my self; I have
power to lay it down, and I have power to take it up again, this commandment
have I received of my Father; And that the lives of our Souls were in God's
free disposal, as being justly forfeited to him by our sins, the Scripture
assures us when it tells, that all have sinned, and that the wages of sin is
death. Christ's life therefore being in his own free disposal, he had an
undoubted right to exchange it with God for the lives of our Souls, and the
lives of our souls being in God's free disposal, he had as undoubted a right to
exchange them with Christ's for his life upon the free Tendry which he made of
it. And in this exchange neither Party could be injured, because they both
received an equivalent for what they gave; Christ gave his own life to God, for
which God gave him the lives of our Souls in exchange, which were far dearer to
him; God gave the lives of our Souls to Christ, for which Christ gave him his
own most precious life in exchange, which, considering the infinite dignity of
his Person, was at the least tant-amount. It is true indeed, both Parties
having a right to the free disposal of the goods which they exchange with each
other, to render the exchange just and valid it was necessary that both should
be freely consenting to it; now that God was freely consenting I shall show by
and by; and that Christ was so too the Scripture expressly testifies; for so we
are told, that he gave himself for our sins, Gal. 1.4. and that he gave his
life a ransom for many, and gave his flesh for the life of the World, Matt.
21.28. and in a word, that he gave himself for us that he might redeem us from
all iniquity, Tit. 2.14. and that he laid down his life for us, 1 John 3.16.
all which plainly imply, that by his own voluntary consent he substituted
himself to suffer in our stead that we might escape, and freely exchanged his
own life with God for the lives of our Souls which were forfeited to him. And
if, notwithstanding his innocence, it were just in God to expose him, without
any respect to our sins, to all those bitter sufferings he endured, (and that
it was so the Socinians themselves must acknowledge, or charge God with
injustice) how much more was it just when of his own accord he substituted
himself to bear our punishment for us, and freely exchanged his life for our
Salvation?

V. And lastly, His Death was admitted and accepted by God in lieu of the
punishment which was due to him from Mankind; and it is this that compleats it
an Expiatory Sacrifice, and without this it had been altogether insignificant
to the expiation of sin, notwithstanding all the abovenamed qualifications.
For it is the personal punishment of the Offender which sin gives God a right
to, and which the Obligation of his violated Law exacts; since therefore all
Mankind had sinned, they all stood bound to God to suffer the desert of their
sin in their own persons, and therefore the suffering of another in our stead
can signify nothing toward the releasing us from this Obligation, unless God
in pure Grace and Favor to us shall please to admit and accept it; because
another suffering is not ours, and it is ours that God has a right to. Indeed
the punishment of the guilty person himself, supposing it to be equal to his
fault, does without any interposal of Grace, extinguish the guilt of it, and by
its own force and virtue dissolve his Obligation to punishment; because when a
man has suffered as much as he deserves, he has suffered as much as the Law
can oblige him to, and so consequently cannot be obliged to suffer any more;
but should another suffer for me even as much as I deserved to suffer my self,
it will be altogeth^r insignificant to the expiation of my guilt, unless God in
mere grace will accept it for my suffering, because it is not another
suffering but my own that the obligation of his Law demands and exacts of me;
and although the others suffering for me may as effectually secure the Honor
and Authority of God's Law as if I had suffered what I deserved in my own
person, yet it is evident that in admitting the others suffering instead of
mine, God remits and relaxes the Obligation of his Law, which requires that I
should suffer in my own person. And therefore notwithstanding that Christ has
suffered for us, and God has admitted his suffering for ours, yet this being
out of mere grace and favor to us, he is still truly said to pardon and
forgive us for Christ's sake, Ephesians. 4.32. because for the sake of Christ's
suffering he graciously remits to us the Obligation of his Law which requires
the punishment of our sin at our own hands; and since his remitting to us the
Obligation of his Law for the sake of Christ's suffering was pure grace and
favor, he was not at all obliged to remit it unconditionally, but being
absolute Master of his own graces and favors he might remit it upon what terms
and conditions he pleased. So that though if we had suffered in our own persons
the utmost of what our sin does deserve, he had been obliged in justice to
discharge us without any farther condition, yet since out of his own free grace
he has admitted another to suffer for us, he may admit it with what
limitations he pleases, and if he shall think meet (as he has done) to limit
it to our repentance and amendment, all that Christ has suffered for us will
be insignificant to our discharge from our obligation to punishment unless we
repent and amend. So that the Death of Christ, you see, does not expiate men's
sins as their personal punishments do, by their own natural virtue, but by
virtue of God's accepting it upon his own terms and conditions. And without
God's accepting it, it would not have been at all an expiation for the sins of
the World, and without the conditions upon which he accepts it, viz. our
repentance and amendment, it will not be at all an Expiation for ours. Now God
has solemnly declared his acceptance of Christ's Death as an Expiation for our
sins; for it was God that laid upon him the iniquities of us all, Isa. 53.6.
that gave his only begotten Son, John 3.16. and sent him to be a propitiation
for us, 1 John 4.10. which plainly imply his free acceptance of him; And
therefore Christ is said to have given himself for us an Offering and a
Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5.2. i. e. for an Expiation
that was highly grateful and acceptable to him. So that now the expiation of
our sins by the blood of Christ wholly depends on our performing the condition
on which God has accepted it, and since it is upon condition that we repent
and amend, that God has accepted the blood of Christ in exchange for the
eternal punishment we owe him, unless we perform this condition, the Blood of
Christ will not at all avail us, but we shall still remain as much obliged to
undergo that punishment, as if he had never died for us at all. God's
acceptance indeed has made the Death of Christ available for us under those
conditions and limitations upon which he accepted it, but if when he has
accepted it conditionally, we expect that it should avail us absolutely and
unconditionally, we miserably deceive and abuse our own souls. Thus far
therefore God's acceptance of Christ's Death instead of the punishment we have
deserved has rendered it an effectual expiation and ransom for sinners, that if
they repent and amend they shall be released and acquitted from the obligation
they lie under to suffer eternal punishment in their own persons, and entitled
to everlasting life and happiness. And thus the Death of Christ, you see, had
in it all the necessary qualifications of a real and complete propitiatory
Sacrifice; I proceed therefore in the second place to show what a wise and
effectual method this of God's admitting Christ's Sacrifice for sinners is to
reduce and reform Mankind, which will evidently appear by considering these
five things:

First, That the Sacrifice of Christ's Death was a most sensible and affecting
acknowledgment of the infinite guilt and demerit of our sin. For thus under the
Law the offering of Propitiatory Sacrifices implied a most solemn and sensible
confession of the guilt of the Offerer. For his laying his hand upon the head
of his Sacrifice, was a Symbolical action by which he solemnly acknowledged to
God that he had justly deserved to suffer that death himself which his
Sacrifice was suffering for him; and accordingly the Jews have this Maxim, Vbi
non est peccatorum confessio, ibi non est impositio manuum, quia manuum
impositio ad confessionem pertinet; where there is no confession of sins there
is no imposition of hands, because the imposition of hands appertains to
Confession. For so Lev. 5.5. they are particularly directed to confess their
sins upon their bringing their Trepass Offering before the Lord, and, as has
been shown before, they had a set Form of Confession in all their expiatory
Sacrifices, and particularly in that solemn Propitiation, viz. the dismission
of the Scapegoat, the High Priest is directed to lay both his hands upon the
Goat's Head, and to confess over him all the iniquities of the Children of
Israel, Lev. 16.21. so that as Confession is a kind of audible Sacrifice, so
Sacrifice was a kind of visible Confession; and the demerit of their sin being
thus represented to their Eyes by the death of their Sacrifice, was far more
apt to move and affect them with horror and detestation of it, than any audible
Confession how severe or pungent soever. And accordingly our Savior in
offering up himself as an expiation for our sin, did as it were, lay his hand
upon his own head, and, as our Representative, solemnly acknowledge to God that
we had justly deserved to suffer for our sin a punishment equivalent to that
which he was undergoing for us. And what a dreadful one must that be which is
equivalent to the Death of the Son of God? What less punishment than our
everlasting misery can countervail the temporary death of him who was so
eminent and innocent, who was God-man united in one person, and the Lamb of God
without spot or blemish? If the Jews by sacrificing a Beast did make such a
moving acknowledgment, that they themselves deserved to die, how much more did
Christ by sacrificing himself for us, acknowledge in our stead that we deserved
to die eternally? So that whatsoever virtue there is in the most bitter and
pathetick confession to create in men's minds a horror and detestation of their
sins, all that and much more there is in the Sacrifice of our Savior, whose
Blood cried louder against our sins, and made a far more Tragical confession of
their demerit than it is possible for the most sorrowful Penitent to do with all
the Eloquence of his grief and bitter strains of self-abhorrence. And hence our
Savior is said to have condemned sin in the flesh, Romans 8.3. i. e. to have
solemnly acknowledged by his dying for it, what a dreadful punishment it
deserves.

Secondly, It is to be considered also, that the Sacrifice of Christ's Death
was a most ample declaration of God's severity against our sins. All wise
Governors ought so to exercise their Mercy, as that it may not be prejudicial
to their Authority by giving Offenders encouragement to kick against it; but
whilst their mercy is easy, and apt to be moved by slight Reasons and Motives,
it will infallibly expose their Authority, and render it cheap and vile in the
eyes of bold and insolent Offenders; the Reasons therefore which move a Prince
to pardon Criminals ought to be such, if possible, as give all manner of
discouragement to them from presuming upon impunity for the future. God
therefore being inclined by the infinite benignity of his Nature to show mercy
to sinners, was obliged in wisdom to show it in such a way, and upon such
reasons as might sufficiently discourage them from presuming upon his Mercy to
the prejudice of his Authority; and there is no reason could be so sufficient
to this end, as a valuable Sacrifice to suffer in our stead, and bear the
punishment of our sin; which reason carries with it such an awful severity, as
must needs dishearten any considering sinner from presuming upon impunity if he
go on in his sin. For next to exacting the punishment of the Offender himself,
the most dreadful severity he could have expressed was not to remit it upon any
consideration but this, that some other should undergo it in his stead; and by
how much greater and more valuable the person is, who undergoes it for us, so
much greater and more formidable God's severity appears in remitting it to us.
Since therefore in consideration of our Pardon, God would admit no meaner
Sacrifice than the precious Blood of his own Eternal Son, he has hereby
expressed the utmost indignation against our sin, that he could possibly do,
unless he had absolutely resolved never to pardon it at all. So that now we
have all the reason that Heaven or Earth can afford us, to tremble at his
severity, even while we are within the Arms of his mercy. For what man in his
Wits would take encouragement to sin on from a mercy that cost the Blood of the
Son of God? He that can presume upon such a reason of mercy has courage enough
to outface the flames of Hell, and if Hell it self had stood open before us,
and we had seen the damned Ghosts weltering in the flames of it, it would not
have given us such a loud and horrible warning of God's severity against our
sin as this tremendous Sacrifice of the Son of God does. If then a mercy that
is so secured from being made an encouragement to sin by the terrible reason
and consideration upon which it is founded cannot deter us from sinning on,
there is no wise mercy that we are capable of, and consequently no mercy that
the great God can indulge with safety to his Authority. For what mercy can be
safe from our abuse and presumption, if this be not that is thus guarded with
thunder, and attended with the utmost severity that mercy could possibly admit
of? Wherefore if after I have seen my Savior in his Agony deprecating with
fruitless cries that fearful Cup which I deserved; if after I have beheld him
hanging on the Cross, covered with Wounds and Blood, and in the bitter Agony of
his Soul heard him crying out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And,
in a word, if after I have seen that God, to whom he was infinitely dear and
precious, turn a deaf ear to his mournful cries, and utterly refuse to abate
him so much as one degree or circumstance of a most shameful and tormenting
death in consideration of my Pardon; If, I say, after such a horrible spectacle
I have heart enough to sin on, I am a courageous sinner indeed, or rather a
desperate one, not to be affected or restrained by all the terrors of Hell.

Thirdly, This Sacrifice of Christ is also to be considered as a most obliging
expression of the love of God and our Savior to us. For if God had so pleased
he might have exacted our punishment at our own hands, and made us smart for
ever in our own Persons, and this notwithstanding we had heartily repented. For
though to repent is the best thing a sinner can do, yet it does not alter the
nature of the sin he repents of, so as to render it less evil or less
deserving of punishment; nor indeed is Repentance a sufficient reason to move
the all-wise Governor of the World to grant a public Act of pardon and
indulgence to sinners; it being inconsistent with the safety of any Government,
Divine or Humane, so far to encourage Offenders, as to indemnifie them by a
public Declaration merely upon condition of their future repentance and
amendment. For all men are naturally apt to presume that God will be better to
them than his word, and therefore had he declared that he would pardon them
upon their repentance without any other reason, this would have encouraged them
to hope that he might pardon them, though they repented not at all, or at least
though they repented but by halves. Wherefore since our repentance is not a
sufficient reason to oblige God to grant a public Pardon to sinners, and since
this was the best reason we could offer in our own behalf to move him
thereunto, it hence necessarily follows, that he might have justly exacted the
punishment of our sin of us, and made us smart for it for ever, notwithstanding
the best reason we could have offered him to the contrary. But such was his
goodness toward us, as to admit another to suffer in our stead, that so
neither we might be ruined, nor our sins be unpunished. And then that the
punishment of our sin might be a sufficient reparation to his injured
Authority, he admitted his own Son upon his voluntary offering himself to
undergo it for us, who by the dignity and innocence of his Person rendered that
temporary Death he underwent for us equi^alent to that eternal Death which we
had deserved. Now what a Prodigy of love was this, that the God of Heaven whom
we had so infinitely offended, should part with his own Son for us, and freely
consent that he should undergo our punishment! Which while I seriously
consider, it puzzles my conceit, and out-reaches my wonder; so that though I
have infinite reason to rejoice in it, yet while I am contemplating it, I seem
to be looking down from some stupendous Precipice, whose height fills me with
a sacred horror, and almost oversets my Reason. But Oh! the amazing love of
the Son of God toward us, that he should put himself in our stead, and
interpose his own Breast as a living Shield between ours and his Father's
Vengeance! which, considering the greatness of his Person, and of our
unworthiness, is such a stupendous expression of Love, as no Romance of
Friendship ever thought of! And what is the proper influence of all this love,
but to oblige us for ever to God and our Savior, in the bands of a reciprocal
affection; to melt down our stubbornness and enmity against them, and draw us
on to our duty with the Cords of an invincible indearment? For is it possible
my sins should be as dear to me as the Son of God was to his own Father, and
yet the Father left him out of love to me, and shall not I leave them out of
love to him? And when the Son of God has been so kind to me as to lay down his
life for me, can I be so ungrateful to him as to dote upon those sins which he
hated more than all the shame and torment which he endured on their account;
those sins that were the cause of all his sufferings, the Thorns that gored his
Temples, and the Nails that pierced his hands and feet? Sure if we are not
utterly lost to all that is modest and ingenuous, tender or apprehensive in
Humane Nature, it will be impossible for us to resist these endearing instances
of the love of God and our Savior, which carry warmth and fervor enough with
them to melt the most obdudurate natures.

Fourthly, Christ's Death and Sacrifice is also to be considered as a sure and
certain ground of our hope of pardon, if we repent and amend. For it was upon
the virtue of Expiatory Sacrifices that all Mankind depended for their
reconciliation with God; and therefore these Sacrifices were a principal part
not only of the Religion of the Jews, but of the Gentiles too, who besides
their Eucharistical, had their constant Expiatory Oblations to atone and
pacify their Gods. And this more especially in times of public Danger and
Calamity, when they conceived their Gods to be most offended with them; at
which Seasons they were wont to offer up their most costly Sacrifices, and
devote not only Hecatombs of Beasts to their Altars, but many times the more
precious lives of Men, Women, and Children, imagining that the more valuable
the life was, the greater virtue there was in it to appease the angry Deity.
And upon this sacred Rite did all the World build their hope of reconciliation
with God, as being conscious that by their sin they had forfeited their own
lives to him, and that there was no other way to redeem them, but by making a
commutation with him, and offering him another life for their own, which was
therefore called (...), i. e. a life for their life, and (...), i. e. the price
of their Redemption. But alas so miserably defective were the very best of
their Sacrifices, that they could not rationally depend on them with any
confidence or assurance. For as for the Heathen Sacrifices, God had never
promised to accept them, and it being an act of pure grace and favor in him to
admit of such a commutation, it wholly depended on his own goodwill, whether he
would admit it or no; and without some express revelation it was impossible for
them to know which way his Will was determined in the case. And then even their
most precious Sacrifices, which were the lives of Men, were infinitely short in
value to redeem the Lives and Souls of those that offered them; those
sacrificed men being sinners themselves, and they but a few sinners for many.
And as for the Jewish Sacrifices, though God in many cases had promised to
accept them in commutation for the lives of their Bodies, yet those being only
the lives of Brutes, which were but negatively innocent, as being incapable of
Sin or Virtue, could merit nothing of God, and consequently were infinitely
short of a valuable commutation for the forfeited lives of their Souls. All
which considered, there was no relying on them for Redemption from the
Obligation they lay under to eternal punishment. But now all these defects are
abundantly supplied in the Sacrifie of our blessed Savior. For his life was
not only infinitely valuable by reason of his personal Union to the Godhead,
and so in it self an equivalent Ransom; he was not only no Sinner, which the
best of the Heathen Sacrifices were; he was not only Negatively innocent, which
was all that the Jewish Sacrifices were; but he was also perfectly righteous,
and by virtue thereof infinitely dear and acceptable to God; and, to crown all,
God himself both by express Revelation, and by raising him from the dead, has
openly declared his acceptance of his precious blood, as a Ransom for the sins
of the World. And upon this most sure and certain ground stands our hope of
pardon and reconciliation with God. So that in the precious blood of this our
meritorious and accepted Sacrifice we openly behold the mercy of God inviting
us into grace and favor, and with outstretched arms ready to receive and
embrace us; which gives us the most effectual encouragement in the World to
return to our duty. I confess if we had no such Sacrifice to depend on, the
sense of our past guilts might justly discourage us from all thoughts of future
repentance; for though the natural goodness and benignity of God might happily
give us some small hope, yet on the other hand the consideration of his natural
abhorrence of sin, and the mighty Obligations he lies under to punish it, as he
is a wise and righteous Governor, would very much dash our hope out of
countenance. So that the utmost encouragement we could have had, would be that
which the King of Nineveh gave his People, Who can tell if God will turn and
repent, and turn away from his fierce anger that we perish not? Jonah 3.9. But
now we can certainly tell, that if we will turn from our sins, he will turn
from his anger; for our hope depends not on a doubtful peradventure, but upon a
full, perfect, and sufficient Sacrifice, paid down to, and accepted of God.
What then should hinder us from returning to him, who are thus firmly assured
of his gracious reception, and do certainly know beforehand, that all our past
provocations shall be blotted out, and our penitent Souls embraced with the
same grace and favor as if we had never offended?

Fifthly, and lastly, This Sacrifice of Christ is also to be considered as the
Seal and Confirmation of the New Covenant. For thus of old Covenants between
God and Men were wont to be sealed and transacted by Sacrifice. So Genesis 15.
Abraham, by God's Command, being to strike Covenant with him, offered a
Sacrifice, which he divided in the middle, laying each Moiety one against the
other, between which God passed in the likeness of a burning Lamp, and so made
a Covenant with him, saying, Unto thy Seed will I give this Land; in which Rite
of passing between the parts, God condescended to the manner of Men; for so the
Jews, when they struck Covenant with God, were wont to cut the Sacrifice in
sunder, and pass between the parts thereof, Ier. 34.18, 19. by which action
they made this imprecation on themselves, Thus let me be divided and cut in
pieces if I violate the Oath I have now made. And accordingly, the blood of the
Sacrifice is called by Moses, The blood of the Covenant, Exodus 24.8. and the
Jews are said to make a Covenant with God by Sacrifice, Psalm. 50.5. For all
Expiatory Sacrifices were regularly attended with Peace Offerings, in both
which the Priest or the People were God's Guests, and in token of
reconciliation did eat and drink with him of the provisions of his Altar or
Table. For in the burnt-offerings, the sin offerings, and the
trespass-offerings, the Priests only, as the Proxies and Representatives of the
People, were admitted to be God's Guests; but then in the Peace Offerings which
followed them, the People themselves were admitted to his Table to partake with
him of those sacred Viands. So that in the first the Priests, as the Peoples
Representatives, struck Covenant with God for them, in the second they struck
Covenant with God for themselves. Thus as it was the Custom of all Nations to
solemnize their Covenants with one another, by eating together, so God, in
condescension to the manner of men, and to confirm their Faith in his Promises,
did by the same Rite engage himself in Covenant with them. And in the same
manner the Sacrifice of our blessed Lord was a Seal and Ratification of the New
Covenant; upon which account it is called, as the Jewish Sacrifices were, the
blood of the Covenant, Heb. 10.29. Heb. 13.20. For his Sacrifice upon the Cross
was the meritorious Sin-offering, in which he, as the High Priest, the Head and
Representative of his Church, did solemnize the New Covenant between God and
us, and obtained of his Father an inviolable Ratification of his Promise of
Grace and Eternal life. For in that dreadful transaction God did solemnly
engage himself to Christ in the behalf of his Church, to perform to her what he
had promised, to the utmost, upon the terms specified in the New Covenant. And
therefore Christ is said to have made reconciliation in his own body on the
Cross, and to have slain the enmity thereon, Ephesians. 2.16. and to have made peace,
that is, a Covenant of peace, through the blood of the Cross, Col. 1.20. But
then to this Sin-offering there follows a Peace Offering, and that is the
Lord's Supper, in which the Church, for her self, by eating and drinking at
this Table, strikes Covenant with God, and upon those holy signs of Christ's
Body and Blood, gives to, and receives from God assurance of mutual Amnesty and
Friendship; and hence, 1 Cor. 10.16, 20. this holy Supper is called, The
Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, and drinking the Cup of the Lord,
and being partakers of the Table of the Lord. For when God in this Supper does
by the hand of his Priest present his Bread and Wine to us, he does thereby
renew his Covenant with us, and when we receive, and eat and drink God's
Viands, we thereby renew our Covenant with him. Thus God in great condescension
to our desponding minds has been pleased to ratify his Covenant with us in
our own way and manner; not that this ratification does render his Covenant
surer in it self, for nothing can be surer than his promise; and yet for the
confirmation of our diffident minds, he is sometimes pleased to add his Oath to
his Promise, and, for the same reason, to his Promise and Oath he has
superadded these federal Ratifications, which being the same with those legal
Forms and Rituals by which men were wont to ratify their Covenants and
Agreements with one another, are upon that account more apt to assure and
confirm our minds. And now what a mighty influence must this solemn
confirmation of the New Covenant have upon us, to excite and quicken our Piety
and Virtue, and render us actively zealous of good Works? For when God has not
only owned all the promises of the New Covenant to be his, by the many
miraculous attestations he has given them, but has also vouchsafed by all
those federal Rites, that were most sacred among men, to oblige himself to
perform them, we have abundant reason to believe, not only that it is he that
has promised all the good things of this Covenant, but also that he is fully
resolved to perform those promises to us, if we perform the conditions of them;
since by the Blood of his own Son he has engaged himself to him in our behalf,
and by the Sacramental signs of the Body and Blood of his Son he has engaged
himself to us in our own persons to perform what he has promised to the utmost
punctilio. So that now our Faith in the Covenant stands upon a firm and
immovable foundation, as having not only the Promise and the Oath, but also
the Seal of God to depend on; and having all the good things of the Covenant
thus solemnly consigned to us, what abundant encouragement does it give us to
return to God and our Duty? For now we are not only assured of his pardon and
gracious reception, but also of the assistance of his blessed Spirit to back
and enforce our pious endeavors, and to enable us to conquer all those
resistances of flesh and blood with which we are to contend; and to encourage
us to contend with all our might, we have an immortal Crown of Glory proposed
to us as the reward of our victory, and are firmly assured, that after we have
spent a few moments here in the practice of Piety and Virtue, we shall be
removed from hence into that triumphant state of Immortality, there to reign in
unspeakable glory and delight among the blessed Conquerors above, and sing
Hallelujahs with them for ever. For to all these blessed things we are entitled
by the ratifications of the New Covenant. Having therefore these great and
precious Promises sealed to us by the blood of Jesus, Let us cleanse our selves
from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of the
Lord* 2 Cor. 7.1.

And thus you see how effectually the Death of Christ, as it is a Sacrifice for
sin, contributes to our reformation. But after all, it must be acknowledged
that it contributes only as a concurrent cause with our own endeavors; it does
not work upon us as if we were dead Machines, that have no vital principle of
action in us; nor yet as necessary Agents, that have no free will or principle
of self-determination; it draws us indeed, but it is with the cords of a man,
i. e. with a powerful grace and persuasion, but does not drive or hale us with
any violent or irresistible Agency. For after all the powerful influence of his
Death to reform and amend us, we are still in our own disposal, and so may
resist and baffle the efficacy of his Death, and in despite of it continue in
our wickedness if we please. But if we do, it is at our own eternal peril, and
we must one day expect to answer, not only for the blood of our own souls,
which in despite of the most powerful method of saving them we have wilfully
ruined and destroyed, but also for the blood of our Savior, which we have not
only defeated, but trampled on; and if both these be brought to our account, it
had been better for us, not only that we had never been born, but that our
Savior himself had never been born, since all that he has done to save us
will be brought in judgment against us, as an horrid aggravation of our guilt,
to inflame the reckoning of our punishment. So that unless we concur with this
great design of Christ, by endeavoring our own reformation to the utmost of
our power, his Death will not only be as insignificant to our happiness as it
is to the redemption of Devils, but even those vocal wounds of his, which were
made to plead for, will accuse and condemn us, and that eloquent Blood, which
in its Native Language speaks better things for us than the blood of Abel, will
like the Souls under the Altar, raise a cry of vengeance on us as high as the
Tribunal of God. Wherefore as we would not find this blessed Sacrifice, which
was designed for our City of refuge, converted into an avenger of blood let us
diligently concur with it to our utmost ^ower in this n^cessary design of our
reformation, that so being washed white and clean in the blood of it, we may
appear before God holy, and unblameable, and unreproveable in his sight. And
thus I have given an account of the first Act of Christ's Priesthood, viz. his
Sacrifice.

SECT. V. Of Christ's Intercession, or presenting his Sacrifice to God in
Heaven, by way of Advocation for us.
I NOW proceed to the second Act of our Savior's Priesthood, corresponding to
that ancient Priesthood, in which it was typified and prefigured, viz. his
presenting his Sacrifice to God in Heaven, thereby to move God, as our
Advocate, to be merciful and propitious to us. In discoursing of which I shall
endeavor,

First, To explain the nature of that Advocation which he performs by
presenting his sacrificed body in Heaven.

Secondly, To show the admirable tendency of this Method of God's communicating
his graces and favors to us, through the Intercession and Advocation of our
Savior to reduce and reform Mankind.

As for the First, viz. the Nature of this our Savior's Advocation for us in
Heaven, it may be thus defined, It is a solemn address of our blessed Savior
to God the Father in our behalf, wherein by presenting to him his own
Sacrificed body, and by continuing and perpetuating the presentation of it, he
does effectually move and solicit him graciously to receive and accept our
Prayer, and to empower him to bestow on us all those graces and favors, which
in consideration of his Sacrifice God has promised to us. For the better
understanding of which Definition I shall distinctly explain the several parts
of it, which are these four:

First, It is a solemn address of our blessed Savior to God the Father in our
behalf.

Secondly, This Address is performed by the presenting his Sacrificed body to
the Father in Heaven.

Thirdly, It is continued and perpetuated by the perpetual Oblation or
presenting of this his sacrificed body.

Fourthly, In virtue of this perpetual Oblation he does always successfully
move and solicit God; and this,

First, To receive and graciously accept our sincere and hearty Prayers; and,

Secondly, To empower him to bestow on us all those graces and favors which in
consideration of his Sacrifice God has promised to us.

I. This Advocation of Christ in Heaven is a solemn address to the Father in
our behalf. And this is implied in the very word Advocation; for the proper
business of an Advocate is to address in the behalf of his Client, to the Party
with whom he is concerned, or to plead the Cause of his Client with some Person
with whom he has some difference, or from whom he expects some favor. Now S.
John tells us, that we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, 1 John 2.1. which must therefore necessarily imply his addressing to
the Father in our behalf, in order to the composing that difference which sin
has made between him and us, and to the obtaining for us his mercy and favor.
For in this sense the Greek word (...), which we here render Advocate, is
generally used among all Authors, vide Outram de Sacrif. p. 360. And so also
the word Intercession signifies to address for one person to another, in order
to the reconciling some matter of difference between them, or to the obtaining
from the one some favor for the other. And therefore since Jesus Christ is
said to intercede for us at the right hand of God, Romans 8.34. this Intercession
also must necessarily imply his making application to God in our behalf. For so
the Phrase (...), which we render to intercede for, signifies to advocate or
plead the cause of another; as on the contrary (...) does always signify to
accuse, Romans 11.2. 1 Maccab. 8.32. and 1 Maccab. 10.61. and 1 Mac. 11.25. And
consequently when our Savior is said (...), it must necessarily denote his
addressing himself to God as our Advocate, to plead our cause, and solicit our
interest; and accordingly, Heb. 9.24. we are told that Christ is entered into
Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us, which phrase
cannot without infinite force be otherwise understood, than of his appearing
for us as our Advocate to God. By all which it appears that in this his
intercession for us, our Savior addresses to God the Father, from whose
bountiful hands he procures and receives all those blessings and favors which
he derives to us. So that the Father is the Fountain whence all our blessings
flow, and the Son is the Channel that receives them thence, and conveys them
down to us. For, as he is Mediator, the Son can bestow nothing on us in his own
right, independently from the Father, whose Minister he is, and by whose
Commission and Authority he acts; And since they are all his Father's goods
which he bestows upon us, he cannot justly bestow them without his leave and
consent, the obtaining of which is the great business of his Intercession,
whereby he continually moves and solicites the Father to grant to him those
good things in our behalf, which as the high Almoner of the Father's graces and
favors he bestows upon us. So that whatsoever he gives to us he receives of
the Father, and whatsoever he receives of the Father he procures by his
intercession with, and address to him in our behalf.

II. This address is performed by the presenting his sacrificed body to the
Father in Heaven. For thus, as was showed before, the High Priest's address to
God, for the People, consisted in presenting the blood of the sacrifice to him,
in sprinkling it upon and before the Mercy-Seat, which was the Throne of the
divine Majesty. For he made no vocal Prayer for them in the Holy of Holies, and
consequently he performed not his intercession by words, but by actions; and
the principal action he performed there was sprinkling the blood of the
Sacrifice, which action was a very significant Intercession, importing this
Sense, O God, I beseech thee, accept this blood which I offer thee for the
lives of thy People which are forfeited to thee. And accordingly our blessed
Savior after he had offered up himself a Sacrifice for our sins upon Earth,
ascends into Heaven, the true Antitype of the Holy of Holies, and there
presents not his blood but his sacrificed body to the Father, that body which
not long before bled and died on the Cross, and which, as it seems probable,
carried with it all the wounds it received in its Crucifixion; for by the story
of Thomas it is certain it retained them after its Resurrection. And by thus
presenting his sacrificed body to the Father, he did what the High Priest did
when he sprinkled the blood of his Sacrifice, i. e. he interceded for us with
God; and indeed he interceded more prevalently by this significant action, than
if he had used all the Eloquence of Men and Angels. For his wounds are vocal,
and his blood speaks, yea, and not only speaks better things for us than the
blood of Abel spoke, but also expresses what it speaks far more powerfully and
emphatically than it is possible for any verbal Oratory to do. So that by the
presenting to his Father his wounded and bleeding body, which carries with it
an inexhaustible fountain of Rhetorique and Persuasion, he makes the most
moving and pathetical intercession for us, the sense of which is this, though
the full force and Emphasis of it no Language can express, O my Father behold
this sacrificed body of mine, which, by thy consent and approbation, has been
substituted to bear the punishment which was due to thee from Mankind; and
through the wounds of which I have cheerfully poured out the precious blood of
God, as a ransom for the sins of the World; for the sake of this blood
therefore be thou so far propitious to those miserable sinners it was shed for,
as, upon condition they shall repent, to accept it in exchange for the lives of
their Souls which are forfeited to thee, to release them from the Obligation
they are under to die eternally, and upon their final perseverance in
well-doing to crown them with eternal life; and that this blood which at thy
command I have willingly shed for them may not, through their inability to
repent and persevere, be utterly ineffectual to them; O send thy Holy Spirit to
assist their weak faculties, to excite their endeavors, and cooperate with
them. This is the Language of Christ's sacrificed body in Heaven, and these are
the better things which his blood bespeaks for us. For his blood bespeaks those
good things for us in Heaven for which he shed it upon Earth, i. e. the
remission of our sins, and our eternal life; of which blessings his blood being
the price that God had promised to accept, his presenting it to him in Heaven
not only speaks for, but humbly demands them, as carrying with it the
unanswerable claim of an accepted Price to a stated Purchase. So that this
address which Christ makes for us to God in heaven is not performed by him
after the manner of a prostrate Supplicant, with bended knees, up-lifted hands,
and lowly supplications, but in such a manner as comports with the Kingly
Majesty he is advanced to, and so as at the same time to assert his own right
of purchase in the blessings he addresses for, and yet to acknowledge God to be
the supreme fountain and disposer of them. And this the Scripture tells us he
performs by appearing in the presence of God for us, and presenting his
sacrificed body to him as a standing motive to prevail with him to be
propitious to us, and to crown us with all those graces and favors in
consideration of which he laid down his life for us. And accordingly he is said
to offer himself to God for us in heaven, Heb. 9.25. and to offer his one
Sacrifice, i. e. to God in heaven, for sin for ever, Heb. 10.12. By which
offering or presenting his Sacrifice to God, he does at once claim for us by
the right of his purchase all those good things for which he paid down the
price of his blood, and also by a silent desire pray to God to bestow them upon
us, whereby he acknowledges him to be the sovereign disposer of them. So that
this significant action of Christ's presenting his sacrificed body to God is
both a Claim and a Prayer, or rather it is a Prayer backed and enforced with a
rightful claim to the blessings he prays for. For so for that particular
blessing of the Spirit, he himself tells us, I will pray the Father and he
shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, John
14.16. not that he offers up any other Prayer to the Father but what his wounds
and blood continually make, which with incessant importunity do move and
solicit God in our behalf; but his meaning is this, by presenting that
Sacrifice to my Father in Heaven, which I am going to offer on the Cross, and
by which, among other blessings, I shall purchase of my Father his Holy Spirit
for you, I will pray him to send his Holy Spirit to you, I will pray him by my
wounds and blood, which are a thousand times more moving and eloquent than any
vocal Prayer I can offer in your behalf; for while they pray him to send his
Spirit to you, they lay an undeniable claim to what they pray for, as being the
dear and inestimable price by which I am purchasing his Spirit for you. From
all which it is evident that this address which Christ now makes for us to his
Father in Heaven, consists in the presenting his sacrificed body to him, by
which he both prays to him, and claims what he prays for.

III. It is by the continued and perpetual oblation or presentment of this his
sacrificed body to the Father that Christ continues and perpetuates this his
address or intercession in our behalf. For the first presenting or o^lation of
his sacrificed body in Heaven was the beginning and commencement of his
intercession, and the whole progress of his intercession is nothing but that
same oblation continued and perpetuated. For as the High Priest was interceding
for the people all the time that he was presenting the blood of the Sacrifice
before the Lord, so Christ is interceding for us all the while that he is
presenting his sacrificed body in Heaven. For it is by the presence of his
sacrificed body that he intercedes, and therefore so long as his body is
present in Heaven, so long he must be interceding by it in our behalf. So that
between the Jewish High Priest's Intercession and Christ's there is this vast
difference, that the former presented himself in the Holy of Holies with his
Sacrifice, and consequently interceded by it, but once a year, viz. on the
great day of Expiation, whereas the latter continually presents his Sacrifice
in Heaven, and so does continually intercede by it; and whereas the blood which
the High Priest presented was so mean and inconsiderable that the whole virtue
of it was still spent in one Act of Intercession, as not being available enough
for him to intercede with it twice, insomuch that in every new act of
Intercession he was still fain to present new blood; the blood of Christ was of
that infinite moment and value as that though he makes a continued and
perpetuated Intercession by it, yet the virtue and efficacy, the power and
prevalency of it with God remains fresh and unimpaired, so that he needs not
sacrifice again that so he may have new blood to present, but with that which
he shed 1600. years ago he still intercedes for us with the same effect and
success as when he first presented it to his Father in Heaven. Upon which
account there was no need that he should offer himself often, as the High
Priest entered into the holy place every year, with blood of others: for then
must he have often suffered, since the foundation of the World; but now once in
the end of the world has he appeared to take away sin by the sacrifice of
himself, Heb. 9.25, 26. So that Christ's one Sacrifice being of perpetual
virtue and efficacy, and being, as such, perpetually presented to the Father in
heaven, he therewithal makes a continued and uninterrupted Intercession for us,
and will continue to do so to the end of the World. Hence we are said to be
sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus once for all, Heb. 10.10.
And whereas every Priest stands daily ministering and offering oftentimes the
same Sacrifices which can never take away sin, this man after he had offered
one Sacrifice for sins for ever sat down on the right hand of God, verse. 11,
12. and this offering his one Sacrifice for sins in heaven being for ever, it
is a perpetually continued act of Intercession for us. For so it is said that
he ever lives to make intercession for us, Heb. 7.25. i. e. he ever lives in
Heaven, so as by his perpetual presence there to make perpetual Intercession
for us. And upon the account of the perpetuity of this his Priestly Act of
Intercession he is said to have an unchangeable Priesthood not barely because
he continues for ever, for so he might have done and yet ^eased to have been a
Priest, but because he continues for ever exercising his Priesthood, or
presenting his Sacrifice, Heb. 7.24. And hence also he is said to be a Priest
for ever after the Order of Melchisedeck, that is, not only to be a Royal
Priest, as Melchisedeck was, which, as I showed before, was the proper
Character of Melchisedeck's Priesthood, but to be a Royal Priest for ever, Heb.
7.17. For Melchisedeck was not only a Royal Priest, but also a Type or Shadow
of an eternal Royal Priest; and that, as he was without Father, and without
Mother, without descent, or Genealogy, having neither beginning of days, nor
end of life, but made like unto the Son of God, abides a Priest continually,
Heb. 7.3. where the Phrase (...), without descent, or Genealogy, explains what
is meant by without Father, and without Mother, i. e. without any Father or
Mother mentioned in the Genealogies of Moses; so the Syriac version, whose
Father and Mother are neither of them recorded in the Genealogies; in which he
very much differed from the Aaronical Priests, whose Fathers and Mothers names
were constantly recorded in the Jewish Genealogies, as appears from Esdr.
11.62. and so also Philo on the Decalogue tells us, (...), i. e. the descent
and Progeny of the Priests is kept with all manner of exactness. So that there
being no Genealogy at all of Melchisedeck in Scripture, he is introduced into
the History like a man dropped down from Heaven, for so the Text goes on, having
neither beginning of days, nor end of life, i. e. in the History of Moses,
which, contrary to its common usage, when it makes mention of great men, takes
no notice at all of the time, either of Melchisedeck's birth or death; and
herein he is made like unto the Son of God, i. e. by the History of Moses,
which mentions him appearing and acting upon the Stage without either entrance
or exit, as if like the Son of God he had abode a Priest continually. So that
as Moses's History treats of Melchisedeck, without taking any notice of his
beginning or end, as if he were a Royal Priest for ever, so Christ in truth and
reality is a Royal Priest for ever, because by the perpetual Oblation and
presenting his Sacrifice to the Father, he perpetually exercises his
Priesthood, and makes a continued intercession for Mankind.

IV. This address being made by the continued Oblation or presenting of his
sacrificed body to the Father, is in the virtue thereof always effectual and
successful. For his Sacrifice, as has been shown at large, was the price of
his purchase of those blessings he intercedes for; the price which God by a
solemn agreement with our Savior had obliged himself to admit and accept. For
the only blessings he intercedes for, are those which are specified in the New
Covenant, which New Covenant God granted to Mankind in consideration of the
meritorious Death and Sacrifice of our Savior; and accordingly when he went to
offer up himself a Sacrifice for us, he tells us that it was (...), according
to what was determined, or agreed on between his Father and himself, Luke
22.22. And hence our Savior tells us, that his Father in consideration of what
he was to suffer, did (...), Covenant to him a Kingdom, Luke 22.29. which
Kingdom includes a Kingly power to bestow upon his faithful Subjects the
Rewards of his Religion, which are the blessings of the New Covenant; and of
this Covenant, by which God obliged himself in consideration of Christ's Death,
to bestow this Kingly power upon him, that of Heb. 10.7. seems to be intended,
then said I, Lo I come, in the Volume of the Book it is written of me, to do
thy will O God; where (...), which we render the Volume of the Book, may
perhaps be more truly translated the Instrument, Indenture, or Covenant that is
between thee and me. For so the Hebrew (...), to which the Greek (...) answers,
signifies any sort of writing, and particularly a Bill, Deuteronomy. 24.1. according
to which sense, (...) must here signify the volume or folding of a Bill, or,
which is all one, an Indenture or Covenant. When therefore he s^ith, Lo I come,
in the Indenture or Cov^nant which is between thee and me, by which thou has^
bequeathed or covenanted to me a Kingdom, or power to bestow such and such
blessings on my faithful Subjects, in this Covenant, I say, it is expressed or
written, that I should come to do thy will, i. e. to offer up that body which
thou have prepared for me, a Sacrifice for the sins of the World, ver. 5. And
indeed how could it have been foretold of him, as it is Isa. 53. that he should
justify many by bearing their iniquities, and that he should see the travail
of his soul, i. e. for our Salvation, and be satisfied, had not the Father
obliged himself by Contract and Covenant to justify and save us, in
consideration of his Sacrifice? And indeed this whole Prediction carries with
it a Promise from the Father to Christ, that upon the consideration of his
Death and Sacrifice he should be effectually empowered to save and justify us.

Since therefore the Sacrifice of Christ was the great consideration upon which
the Father granted to him the blessings of the New Covenant in our behalf, and
since it is by presenting that Sacrifice, and in the virtue of it, that he
intercedes with the Father for those blessings, we may confidently assure our
selves he cannot fail of success, because he intercedes with a righteous God,
of whom by presenting to him the consideration of his grant, he has acquired a
right to obtain the blessings he intercedes for. For now he intercedes for us
with the price of our Redemption in his hands, so that he does not act
precariously, or as a mere Orator, that begs and supplicates without any claim,
and so may be denied and rejected without any injustice, but whatsoever he asks
he asks in the right of his Sacrifice, by accepting of which inestimable
consideration the Father has obliged himself to grant what he aks for. So that
now he cannot be denied those Favors which he craves in our behalf, without
manifest injustice, because by mutual Contract between himself and his Father
he has purchased to himself a right to obtain them, and has bought and paid
for them with his own blood. And how can we imagine that the most just and holy
God can ever be so outragiously unjust to his own Son, as to be deaf to his
Intercessions, while he intercedes in the right of that precious blood, which
his Son freely paid, and he as freely accepted, in consideration of those
blessings he intercedes for? It being therefore evident, by what has been
said, that the Intercession of Christ is a most effectual and successful
address to the Father, to all the intents and purposes for which it is made, it
now remains only that we give an account to what intents and purposes it is
that he makes this address to the Father:

First, Therefore it is to move and solicit him graciously to receive and
accept our sincere and hearty Prayers; and,

Secondly, To obtain of him Power and Authority to bestow on us all those
Graces and Favors which in consideration of his Sacrifice God has promised us.

I. One intent or purpose of Christ's making this address to the Father, is to
move and solicit him graciously to receive and accept our sincere and hearty
Prayers. For thus the Incense which the Priests offered twice a day upon the
Golden Altar, and which the High Priest offered once a year in the Holy of
Holies, was a Symbol or Emblem of the Prayers of the People, which they
mystically offered up to God with it; and hence the Psalmist, Let my prayers be
set forth before thee as Incense, Psalm 141.2. and S. John calls the Odours
that filled the Golden Vials, the prayers of the Saints, Rev. 5.8. and that the
Prayers of the Saints were offered with the Incense upon the Golden Altar, is
evident from Rev. 8.3. And accordingly while the High Priest was offering the
Incense in the Holy of Holies, the People in their Court offered up their
silent and mental Prayers to God; for so Ecclus. 50.15, 18, 19, 21. we read
that whiles Simon the High Priest was offering the Incense to God, all the
People fell on their faces to the ground, and besought the Lord most High in
prayer, till the Ministry of the Lord was done, i. e. till the High Priest had
offered the Incense; and S. Luke makes mention of the Peoples praying without
in the time of Incense, Luke 1.10. By all which it is evident, that this fuming
of the Incense by the Priests and High Priest, was nothing but a mystical
Oblation of those Prayers to God, which the People were pouring out while the
Mystery was performing. Since therefore the High Priest was a Type of Christ,
and his entrance into the Holy of Holies a Type of Christ's entrance into
Heaven, his offering Incense there, which was a mystical Oblation of the
Prayers of the People, must necessarily be a Type of Christ's offering and
recommending our Prayers to his Father, which he promised his Disciples he
would perform when he came to Heaven, John 16.26, 27. In that day ye shall ask
in my name, and I say not unto you that I will pray the Father for you, which
in our Savior's way of expression (which is, when he mentions two things, to
pass by, and seemingly deny the one, that so he may the more illustrate and
amplify the other, Vide John 12.4. Joh. 5.45, 46, 47.) plainly implies that he
would, for the Father himself loves you, because ye have loved me. And
therefore it is through him that we are said to have access unto the Father,
Ephesians. 2.18. and by him to have access to the divine grace, Romans 5.2. and in him
to have boldness and access with confidence, Ephesians. 3.12. and Rev. 8.3. he is
represented as that Angel of the Covenant, who at the Golden Altar before God,
does offer up the prayers of the Saints, incensed by the merit of his
Sacrifice. For it is the Sacrifice of Jesus that hallows and consecrates all
our prayers and good works, the best of which have so many sinful defects and
imperfections cleaving to them, as would render them abominable to the pure and
holy God, were they not purged and expiated by this great Propitiation. And
though Prayer be a duty we stand eternally obliged to by our continual
dependence upon God, yet in this degeneracy of our Nature there are so many
sins do still accompany our Prayers, as that were they not expiated by some
very acceptable and meritorious satisfaction, the cry of them would drown the
cry of our Prayers, and for ever hinder their access to the divine ear and
aceptance. So that it is only in the virtue of that Sacrifice with which our
Savior intercedes for us in Heaven, that our Prayers have admittance thither;
it is his blood alone that purifies our polluted Supplications, and outcries
the guilt of those sins that go along with them. For by presenting that
Sacrifice to his Father, with which he made satisfaction for our sins on the
Cross, he continually moves and solicites that those sinful defects which
cleave to our Prayers may be pardoned and remitted; upon which motion of his
our Prayers are continually purged from the guilt of those defects, and
thereupon introduced into the divine acceptance as pure and innocent, spotless
and unblemished devotions. And as by presenting his Sacrifice he purges the
guilt of our Prayers, so he enforces and seconds them. For, as has been shown
before, the very presenting his Sacrifice is a Symbolical Prayer for those very
blessings which we pray for; and not only so, but a Prayer that is enforced
with a just claim, and does plead the right of Purchase to all the blessings it
sues for, and so cannot justly be denied or rejected. And when he thus prays
with us, and continually joins the cry of his Blood to the cry of our Prayers,
we may safely depend upon it, that we shall prevail, and find free access to
the Throne of God's grace and acceptance. And hence we are said to have
boldness to enter into the Holy of Holies, that is, to draw near by Prayer to
God, by the Blood of Jesus, by a new and living way which he has consecrated
for us through the vail, that is to say, his flesh, Heb. 10.19, 20. And our
Savior himself assures us, that whatsoever we shall ask in his name, he will
do it; and again he repeats it, If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do
it, John 14.13, 14. that is, he will procure it for us, by joining his
Intercessions with our Prayers, for so ver. 16. he explains himself, I will
pray the Father.

II. The other intent and purpose of his making this Address or Intercession
for us to the Father, is, to obtain of him Power and Authority to bestow on us
all those graces and favors which in consideration of his Sacrifice God has
promised us. It is not to move the Father to bestow on us the blessings of the
New Covenant immediately with his own hand that our Savior intercedes, but to
empower himself, as Mediator between the Father and us, to bestow them upon us,
according to the terms and conditions upon which they are proposed to us. For
though it is most certainly true, that every good and perfect gift comes down
from above, even from the Father of Lights, yet it is as certain that they come
not down to us from the Father immediately, but are all derived to us through
the hands of the Son, who by his continual Intercession obtains continual power
and authority of the Father to derive and confer on us all those heavenly
gifts. So that as the High Priest, when he had presented the blood of the
Sacrifice in the Holy of Holies, was Authorized by God to bless the people,
vide 1 Chronicles. 23.13. even so our blessed Savior* by presenting his meritorious
Sacrifice in Heaven, and in the virtue thereof interceding for us with the
Father, is continually authorized by him effectually to bless us, i. e. to
confer on us the blessings of the New Covenant upon the terms and conditions
that they are therein proposed. For this power he obtains of God by his
perpetual Intercession; and hence he is said to be able to save all those to
the utmost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession
for us, Heb. 7.25. where his power, or ability to save us to the utmost, i. e.
to confer on us all the blessings of the New Covenant, is expressly attributed
to his ever living to make intercession for us, which is a plain Argument, that
the intent of his Intercession is to move God to authorize him to save us,
seeing that in answer to his Intercession he is continually empowered and
authorized thereunto. For it is to be considered, that this power and
authority, and the exercise of it, appertains to his Kingly Office, which he
first arrived to, and still continues in, by virtue of his Intercession; and
indeed herein consists the Royalty of his Priesthood, in that by interceding
for us as Priest in the virtue of his Sacrifice, and continuing to do so, he
first obtained, and still continues vested with Kingly Power and Authority to
bestow on us those heavenly blessings he intercedes for; and it is to this
purpose that he intercedes, not that the Father would bestow them on us
immediately, but that he would put and continue it in his power to bestow them,
as Mediator between the Father and us; so that he acquired and holds his
Royalty by his Priesthood, and that Kingly Power by which he gives us the
blessings of the New Covenant, God gave and continues to him by way of answer
and return to his Priestly Intercession. And hence he is said upon his offering
one sacrifice for sin for ever, i. e. upon the perpetual Oblation of his
Sacrifice in Heaven, to have sat down on the right hand of God, i. e. in the
Throne of his Kingly Power and Authority, Heb. 10.12* and accordingly Ephesians. 4.8.
we are told, that upon his ascending up on high, i. e. to present his
sacrificed body in heaven, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men,
which necessarily implies, that he had received power and authority from his
Father to give them; and so Psalm. 68.18. whence these words are quoted,
expresses it, He received gifts for men, i. e. upon the presenting his
Sacrifice, as Priest, he received of the Father those Gifts for men which by
his Kingly power he afterward distributed among them. So that what he gives by
his Kingly power, he receives by his Priestly, and both the gifts which he
gives, and the authority by which he gives them, are the fruits and returns of
that perpetual Intercession which he makes by his Sacrifice. And that by his
Intercession our Savior has acquired this Royal power of giving us the
blessings of the New Covenant he himself does plainly enough intimate; for thus
of the Spirit, which is one of those great blessings, he tells his Disciples,
It is expedient for you that I go away, i. e. to Heaven to intercede for you,
for if I go not away the Comforter will not come, i. e. he will not come but
upon my Intercession; but if I depart I will send him unto you, namely, by that
Royal Authority which upon my Intercession I shall receive from the Father,
Ioh. 16.7. And accordingly St. Peter tells the Jews that Christ being exalted
by the right hand of God, and having received of the Father the promise of the
Holy Ghost, i. e. upon his Intercession in Heaven, he has shed forth this
which ye now see and hear, i. e. the miraculous virtues of the Holy Ghost, Acts
2.33. And so for remission of sins, he tells us, that he has the Keys of hell
and death, Rev. 1.18. i. e. power to bind or loose, to pardon or condemn; and
lastly for eternal life, he expressly tells the Church of Laodicea, To him that
overcomes will I grant to sit with me on my Throne, even as I have overcome,
and am sat down with my Father on his, Rev. 3.21. By all which it is
abundantly evident that Christ has a Royal power delegated to him from the
Father upon his intercession, to grant and bestow all the blessings of the New
Covenant upon those that comply with its terms and conditions. For so all the
graces and favors of God are in Scripture said to be derived in, by, or
through Jesus Christ; for so Ephesians. 1.3. God the Father is said to bless us with
all spiritual blessings in or through Christ; and Romans 6.23. Eternal life is
said to be the gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord; and we are said to be
heirs of God, or inheritors of his blessings, through Christ, Gal. 4.7. which
plainly implies, that though it is from God the Father originally that all our
mercies are derived, yet it is through God the Son immediately that they are
all derived to us, and that whatsoever God bestows upon us he bestows by the
hand of Jesus Christ, whom upon his first Oblation of his precious Sacrifice in
heaven, and continual intercession with it, he constituted and continues the
Royal distributer of all his graces and favors to the World. And therefore
since there is no doubt but that that which he obtains by his intercession is
the thing which he intercedes for, it necessarily follows, that the thing which
he intercedes for is power to bestow on us the blessings of the New Covenant,
because he has actually obtained that power by his Intercession.

Having thus given as plain and as brief an account as I could of this second
Priestly Act of our Savior, viz. his Intercession for us in Heaven by the
continual Oblation of his Sacrifice there, I proceed in the second place to
show the admirable tendency of this method, of God's communicating his Graces
and Favors to us through the intercession of our Savior, to reduce and reform
Mankind; which will plainly appear by considering the following particulars:

First, This method naturally tends to excite in us a mighty aw and reverence
of God's Majesty.

Secondly, It also tends to give us the strongest conviction of God's hatred
and abhorrence of our sins.

Thirdly, It also tends most effectually to secure us from presuming upon God's
mercy while we continue in our sins.

Fourthly, It tends to encourage us to draw near to God with Cheerfulness and
freedom.

Fifthly, It tends to give us the most ample assurance of his gracious
intentions toward us if we repent and return to our duty.

I. This method of God's communicating his Favors to us through our Savior's
intercession is naturally apt to excite in us a mighty aw and reverence of the
divine Majesty. For in this degenerate condition wherein our Nature is inverted
and turned upside down, and our sensitive faculties have got the ascendant of
our Reason, rational Objects have incomparably less force on, and prevalence
with us, than material and sensitive. And hence it is that we are so unapt to
be affected with the Majesty of God, though in it self infinite and
incomprehensible, because it being purely spiritual, is objected only to our
Faith and Reason, and does not strike upon our sense with the Rays of a visible
glory. And hence it was that under the Old Testament God so frequently
exhibited himself to men's eyes, in sensible appearances, as particularly
sometimes in a humane shape, and sometimes in a body of light or of shining
flame, that so by making an impression of his great Majesty on their sense he
might affect them with a suitable aw and dread of it. And for the same reason
that he conversed with them in these sensible appearances, he also treated with
them by a Mediator on Mount Sinai; for God commanded that bounds should be set
round about the Mountain which the People were forbid upon peril of death to
break through unto the Lord to gaze, and only Moses, their Mediator, together
with his Brother Aaron, were permitted to ascend the Mount, and to have
immediate access to him; and by thus keeping them at a distence from his sacred
presence, and only suffering them to approach him by their Mediator, he took an
effectual course to inspire their minds with a reverential aw of his divine
Majesty, which is in it self so infinitely sacred and August that it seems it
would have been an high Profanation in them to have conversed with it
immediately. And accordingly God by keeping us at a distance from him, and
allowing us to have access to him only by our Mediator, expresses the greatness
of his Majesty, which is too sacred to be mingled in conversation with us, too
sublime to admit of the immediate addresses of poor Mortals, yea, and which no
Mortal must approach without the Mediation of his own Eternal Son; for thus
Plato in his Sympos. gives it as an instance of the Majesty of God, (...). i.
e. God does not mingle himself with men, but all the converse and intercourse
between him and us is transacted by the Mediation of Demons. And if it were
thought so great an instance of God's Majesty, that he would not be approached
by us without the Mediation of Angels, to what an infinite height must he be
exalted above us, when no less a person than he who is God-man can so much as
give us access to him, or present our Prayers and Supplications at his feet. O!
what an awful sense therefore of the Majesty of God should this consideration
beget in our minds! For how can we think of him without dread and reverence
when we consider how he is secluded by the infinite sacredness of his own
Majesty from all immediate converse and intercourse with us, and how he is
exalted so infinitely above us, as that we cannot have access to him so much as
by our Prayers and Supplications without the interposition of a Mediator who is
greater than the greatest of all the Kings on Earth, or Angels in Heaven?
Surely he who can thus think of God without being struck into a profound aw and
reverence of his Majesty, must have a mind so hardened against all the
impressions of Reason, as that no wise thought can ever move or affect it.

II. This method of God's communicating his favors to us through our Savior's
Intercession tends also to give us the strongest conviction of God's hatred and
abhorrence of our sins. For doubtless to convince us how deeply he resents our
sinful behavior toward him, the most effectual course he could take, next to
that of banishing us from his presence for ever, was to exclude us from all
immediate intercourse with him, and not to admit of any more addresses or
supplications from us but by the hand of some Mediator. Hereby he plainly
demonstrates how infinitely pure and abhorrent to sin his nature is, that he
will not suffer a sinful Creature to come near him but by Proxy, nor accept of
a service from a guilty hand, nor listen to a Prayer from a sinful mouth, till
it is first hallowed and presented to him by a pure and holy Mediator. If
therefore we are not infinitely conceited of our selves, this procedure of his
cannot but lay us low in our own eyes, and make us deeply sensible of our own
vileness and baseness. For how infinitely detestable must our sins be in his
eyes, when notwithstanding all his kindness and benevolence toward us, he
keeps us at such a distance from him, and will not be prevailed with, without
some powerful intercession, so much as to hear our Prayers, or to have any kind
of communication or intercourse with us? And accordingly you find that when the
three Friends of Job had treated him so despitefully and uncharitably, God to
manifest his displeasure against them, commands them to make use of Job's
Mediation, Job 42.7. My wrath, says he to Elephas, is kindled against thee,
and against thy two Friends, for ye have not spoken of me the thing that is
right, as my servant Job has: therefore take unto you seven Bullocks and seven
Rams, and go to my servant Job, and offer up for your selves a burnt Offering,
and my servant Job shall pray for you, for him will I accept, lest I deal with
you after your folly; as if he should have said, that you may see how ill I
resent your severe and cruel usage of that good man, know, that if you offer to
address to me immediately for your selves, I will certainly throw your Prayers
back upon your faces; as therefore you hope to be restored to my favor, go to
that injured Friend of yours, and beseech him to mediate for you, and I will
hear him though I will not hear you. And after the same manner does God
manifest his high displeasure against our sins, that he will not suffer us to
approach him immediately, to present our Petitions to him with our own hands,
but will have them all presented to him by a hand that is more acceptable to
him than our own, and not only so, but by the greatest and most acceptable hand
in the World, even that of his own Eternal Son, the Son of his Essence and
delight, in whom he is for ever well pleased. For it is through him alone that
we have access to the Father, whom our sins have so horribly incensed against
us, that no Advocate in Heaven or Earth, less great and less dear to him than
his own Son, can prevail with him to be reconciled to us upon our most
unfeigned repentance, or so much as to accept of our humble Supplications. O
good God! what a woeful distance have my sins made between thee and me, that
notwithstanding the infinite goodness and benignity of thy nature I cannot be
admitted to thee, nor expect any favor at thy hands upon any less powerful
interest or application than that of thine only begotten Son; but O stupid
creature that I am, to make light of those sins that have so highly incensed
thee against me, that none in Heaven or Earth but only that dearly beloved Son
can prevail with thee to cast a propitious eye on me, or so much as to give me
access to the footstool of the Throne of thy grace!

III. This way of God's communicating his favors to us through the
intercession of Christ is also most apt to secure us from presuming upon God's
mercy while we continue in our sins. There is no one thing does more
universally obstruct the reformation of men, than their confident presumption,
that God will be merciful to them notwithstanding they persist in their
rebellions against him. For all men have a natural notion of the infinite
goodness and benevolence of the Divine Nature, together with which all bad men
have a natural desire to sin without disturbance; when therefore their
Conscience begins to clamor against their wickedness, and to vex and persecute
them for it, the mercy of God is the usual Sanctuary they fly to. Peace,
froward Conscience, cry they, God is a most gracious and merciful Being, hard
to be provoked, and easy to be pacified; fear not therefore, his mercy is
infinitely greater than my faults, and I am sure so good a God as he is can
never find in his heart to destroy his Creature and Offspring for such
Peccadillo's as these. With such presumptions as these they commonly lull their
Consciences asleep, and so sin on securely in despite of all the threats and
warnings of Heaven that Thunder about their ears. Now to prevent such
presumptions as these, and dash them quite out of countenance, there is no
consideration in the world can be more effectual than this of God's
communicating his mercies to us through the intercession of our Savior. For
if, notwithstanding the goodness of his nature, he will not be propitious to
us, no not upon our repentace, without being moved thereunto by the powerful
intercession of his own Son, how can we ever expect that he should be
propitious to us whether we repent or no? Is it likely he should be more
indulgent to us for our own sake, than he is for his Son's sake and our own
together; or that, when all that his Son can obtain for us is to receive us
into favor in case we will lay down our Arms, that we by our own interest
should prevail with him to receive us while we persist in our obstinacy and
rebellion; in short, if our repentance, which is the best thing we can render
him, be not sufficient to move him to pardon us, without being seconded and
enforced with the powerful Oratory of our Savior's Intercession, what should
move him when we have neither repentance nor a Savior to intercede for us? For
our Savior will not intercede for us unless we repent, and our repentance will
not prevail for us, unless he intercede; what hope have we therefore while we
continue impenitent, when our repentance it self, which is the best thing we
can do to move God to be propitious to us, is insufficient without Christ's
intercession, and when without our repentance Christ will not intercede for us;
and if the tears of a penitent suppliant will not prevail with him without an
Intercessor, what hope is there that the affronts of an impenitent rebel
should? But suppose we might reasonably presume upon the benignity of God's
nature, that he will be propitious to us, notwithstanding our impenitence, yet
it is to be considered, that now he has placed the dispensation of his mercy
in the hand of a Mediator, who is not left to dispose of it arbitrarily, as he
shall think fit, but is confined and limited to dispose of it only to penitent
offenders. For Christ's Trust can extend no farther than to dispense God's
mercy to us upon the terms of that Covenant of which he is Mediator, which
Covenant proposes mercy to us only upon condition of our repentance. So that
now we can expect no mercy from God, but what passes through the hands of Jesus
our Mediator, who cannot, without violating his trust, dispense the mercy of
God to us except we repent and amend. For now God cannot dispense his mercy to
us immediately, without displacing his Son from his Mediatorship, and his Son
cannot dispense his mercy to us unconditionally, without transgressing the
bounds and limits that are prescribed to him; and therefore since God has
restrained himself to dispense his mercy only through his Son, and restrained
his Son to dispense it only to penitents, for us to presume upon the mercy of
God while we continue impenitent, is the greatest nonsense in the world; it is
to suppose either that God will cancel the Economy of his mercy for our sakes,
and resume the dispensation of it immediately into his own hands, merely to
favor and encourage us in our Rebellion against him, or that Christ will
betray the trust which his Father has reposed in him, and dispense his mercy
to us contrary to his Orders; that is, either that God the Father will depose
his Son for our sakes, or that God the Son will be unfaithful to the Father for
our sakes, both which suppositions are equally absurd and blasphemous. Whilst
therefore God proceeds with us in this established method of granting his mercy
to us only through his Son, and confining his Son to dispense it to us only
upon the conditions of the New Covenant; to flatter our selves with hopes of
mercy while we continue impenitent, is to presume both against reason and
possibility.

IV. This way of God's communicating his Favors to us through the mediation of
Christ is also most apt in it self to encourage us to approach him with
Cheerfulness and freedom. For it is a natural effect of guilt to suggest to
men's minds dreadful and anxious thoughts of God, and whilst we are under such
thoughts of him, how is it possible for us to approach him immediately, and
without any Friend or Advocate to introduce and speak for us, with any
cheerfulness or freedom? For with what confidence can I address to an incensed
and offended God, purely upon my own fund or interest, when I am conscious of a
thousand times more evil in me to provoke him against me, than of good to
recommend me to his favor? Unless therefore I am secured of some powerful
friend in Heaven, that is infinitely more acceptable to God than I can modestly
hope to be, and that will agitate for me, and solicit my cause with all his
power and interest, my sense of the innumerable provocations I have given him
to turn his back upon me, must either render me quite desperate of success at
the Throne of his grace, or cause me to approach it with unspeakable horror
and confusion. So that my intercourse with God must either be wholly
interrupted, or rendered very difficult and uneasy to me; because my slavish
dread of him must either chase me from his Altars, or drag we to them with
violence and reluctance. And hence it is, that under the sense of our guilt we
naturally fly to the Intercessions of others whom we believe to have more
interest with God than our selves; because we cannot modestly promise our
selves a free admittance and access to him upon our own account. Which probably
was the Reason of the first institution of Demon-worship among the Heathens,
whose minds being stung with the sense of their own guilts, they were not able
to approach God without fearful despondence and anxiety; whereupon they began
to cast about (as it is natural for guilty minds to do) how they might procure
some other Beings, that were in great favor with God, to interpose with him in
their behalf; and having learned by an universal Tradition, that there was a
sort of middle Beings, called Angels or Demons, between the Sovereign God and
Men, they began to address to these, and to bribe them with Sacrifices and
sacred honors to intercede with God in their behalf. And hence Apuleius de
Demon. Soc. calls these Demons, Mediae potestates per quas and desideria
nostra and merita ad Deos commeant; inter terricolas coelicolasque vectores
hinc precum inde donorum; qui ultro citroque portant hinc petitiones inde
suppetias, seu quidam utrumque interpretes and salutigeri; i. e. They are
middle powers by whom our desires and merits are presented to the Gods; they go
between Heaven and Earth, and carry from hence the Prayers of men, and from
thence the Gifts of God; from Earth they go with Petitions, and from Heaven
they return with Supplies, or they are the Interpreters of both Worlds, that do
continually carry and report the mutual salutations of both to each other. By
which it is evident that they thought it very necessary, in order to God's
accepting their addresses, that they should be presented and recommended to him
by some better Beings than themselves; their guilty minds, it seems, suggesting
to them that it would be high presumption for such great offenders as
themselves, to approach the divine Majesty, without being introduced and
Patronized by some more pure and holy Beings. And I am very apt to think that
the great cause of that Spirit of bondage which possessed the ancient Jews, and
rendered them so diffident and tremulous in all their approaches to God, was
their want of an explicit knowledge of the Mediator. For what dismal and
melancholy expostulations do we frequently meet with in their addresses to God;
such as, Will thou be angry for ever? Have thou forgotten to be gracious? Will thou remember thy loving kindness no more? Which plainly shows, that their
guilt suggested to them such frightful apprehensions of God, as did very much
cramp their hope and confidence in him. And hence the Apostle opposes this
Spirit of bondage in them to that Christian Spirit of Adoption, by which we cry
Abba Father, i. e. by which we approach God with great freedom and assurance,
and go to him as Children to a kind and merciful Father, Romans 8.15. Now if you
would know from whence this Christian freedom and assurance proceeds, the
Author to the Hebrews will inform you, Heb. 10.21, 22. Having therefore an
High Priest over the household of God, i. e. to mediate and intercede for us,
let us draw near with a true heart and full assurance of faith; and Heb. 4.14,
15, 16 the Apostle urges our having a compassionate High Priest in Heaven to
intercede for us, as an argument to encourage us to come boldly to the Throne
of grace. And indeed what greater encouragement can we have to draw nigh unto
God with an humble confidence, than this consideration, that the highest
Favorite he has in Heaven or Earth is our Advocate; and that he is not only
infinitely concerned for us, as being akin to us by nature, and having a
compassionate sense of our infirmities; that he does not only employ in our
behalf all the favor and interest he has with God as he is the Son of his
Essence, and the Object of his delight, but that he ever intercedes for us in
the right and virtue of that Meritorious Sacrifice with which he bought and
purchased all those heavenly blessings he intercedes for. So that now all we
have to do is to return to God by an unfeigned repentance, which if we do, he
stands engaged to undertake our cause; and what may we not expect from the
Patronage of so great and powerful a Mediator? For how great soever our past
sins are, his interest in Heaven is far greater; how loud and clamorous soever
our past Provocations are, his Blood and Wounds are far louder; and how
importunately soever our past guilts may imprecate the divine Vengeance upon
us, his Intercessions do far more importunately and prevalently deprecate it.
So that now we cannot reasonably doubt of a free admission to God in any case
whatsoever wherein our Savior will make use of his interest for us with God,
and therefore since in all cases he does continually employ his interest for
us, but only in that of our impenitence, every Penitent sinner in the World
has a door of access set open to him by the Intercession of Jesus, through
which he may freely enter, and with an humble confidence apply himself to God
for mercy, and for grace to help him in the time of need. Thus by the Mediation
of our Savior, God has taken off that Imbargo which men's guilts had laid upon
their commerce with Heaven, and made way for a free and generous intercourse
between himself and his Creatures.

V. And lastly, This way of communicating his Favors to us through the
Mediation of Christ, is most apt to assure our diffident minds of God's
gracious intentions to perform to us all the good things which he has promised
us upon our performing the conditions of them. It is true, if God had only
promised them, we should have had abundant reason to believe him on his own
bare word, without any farther security; but alas, to be diffident and
distrustful is the inseparable property of guilty minds, and so great is our
guilt and ill desert, and so inestimable are the blessings and favors which
God promises us, that when we reflect upon both, and compare them together, it
so confounds our Reason, and astonishes our Faith, that notwithstanding all the
security God has given us, we can hardly believe without trembling and
diffidence. So that had not God given us some other security besides that of
his own bare word and promise, it would have extremely puzzled our Faith to
believe that God sincerely intended such mighty goods for such unworthy
Subjects. For when ever we reflected on our own guilt and ill-desert, we must
have looked upon God as our adverse Party, as one that was concerned only for
his own right and honor, to retrieve from us that natural homage we owed him,
and had hitherto unjustly detained from him; and we should have been but too
apt to suspect, that when once he had obtained this end of us, he would be much
less concerned to make good our right to his promise, than he was to recover
his own to our duty. Now although this had been a most unreasonable suspicion
after the God of Truth had passed his word to the contrary, yet there is
nothing so unreasonable which guilty minds are not apt to suspect; and
therefore out of great condescension to this pitiable infirmity of his sinful
Creatures, God thought meet, upon his entrance into a New Covenant with us, not
only to oblige himself thereby to bestow on us the most inestimable favors if
we performed our part, but also to put the making good of his Obligation into a
third hand, namely, into the hand of a Mediator, who by the nature of his
Office is as much obliged to secure our right as God's, as being equally
concerned for both parties; as well that God should make good to us what he
has promised, as that we should make good to him what he requires. So that now
we have no longer to do with God immediately as our adverse party, but all our
intercourse with him is by a Mediator, who by his Office is obliged to be on
our side as well as God's, and to see that what he has promised be performed
to us, as well as that what he requires be performed by us. And hence our
Savior is called the Mediator of the New Covenant, and the Mediator of a
better Covenant; which expressions plainly bespeak him to be an Authorized
security on both sides, for the mutual performance to each other of what they
stand respectively obliged to by this Covenant; and hence also he is called the
Sponsor or surety of a better Covenant, because he stands engaged for the
performance of both Parties, so far as it was possible for him to oblige them
thereunto; for us, to oblige us by the strongest motives to repent and
persevere in well-doing; and for God, to oblige him by the most powerful pleas
to pardon and crown us with eternal life; the later of which he performs by his
Intercession, wherein by continually pleading that precious blood which God
has long since accepted in consideration of our pardon and eternal life, he
continually obtains Power and Authority from God to bestow on us the blessings
he intercedes for. So that now we have not only God's Word, but also the
Suretiship of our Savior to depend on; who not only stands engaged to us for
God, that he shall perform all his promises to us, but has also right and
power upon the just claim of his Sacrifice to oblige him to perform them. So
that, as God, in condescension to the pitiable diffidence of guilty minds, has
been graciously pleased to seal his Promises with his Oath; so, that he might
leave us no umbrage of distrust, he has superadded to both the collateral
security of a Mediator for the performance of them; of a Mediator that has
purchased of him all the blessings he has promised us, and paid for them with
his own blood, and so is not only obliged to sue for them at the Throne of his
grace, but also Authorized to claim them at the Tribunal of his Justice; and,
in a word, of a Mediator in whose hands he has actually deposited all the
blessings he has promised us, and made his Executor in trust for the
performance of his bequests to the heirs of promise. So that now to distrust
the performance of his Promise to us, is not only to suspect God's Word and his
Oath, which are altogether as sacred and inviolable as his Godhead, but also
to question the security, and arraign the fidelity of a Mediator that died for
us; that purchased for us with his own blood all the blessings which God has
promised us, by virtue whereof he not only rightfully claims them of God, but
has also actually received them in our behalf. So that now we cannot be
defeated of them unless he will withold them from us, and he cannot withhold
them from us without violating his trust, since it is for us, and in our behalf
that God has deposited them in his hands; and can we imagine that he who was
so true and kind a friend to us, as to lay down his life to purchase them for
us, will be now so unkind and unfaithful together, as to detain them from us,
when God has entrusted him with them in our behalf, and fully empowered and
authorized him to bestow them upon us? Having therefore the security not only
of God's Promise and Oath, but also of our Savior's kindness and fidelity, for
the performance of God's part of the New Covenant if we perform ours, what an
infinite encouragement must it give us to forsake our sins, and return to our
duty? For now, if we repent, we have no more reason to question God's pardoning
and forgiving us; if we persevere to the end in well-doing, we have no more
cause to doubt of his crowning us with eternal happiness, than we have to
distrust our present being and existence. If therefore the most ample assurance
that God himself can give us of his mercy and our happiness, has any force in
it to oblige us to repent and amend, this our Savior's Intercession you see
fairly proposes to us; so that if this proposal does not effectually influence
our hope, and thereby excite and animate our endeavors, it is impossible that
any encouragement should ever move or affect us.

And thus you see, in all these several particulars, how effectually this way
of God's communicating his Favors to us through the Intercession of our
Savior, tends to our reformation and amendment; what a fruitful Topic of
motives it is to induce us to repentance, and how pathetically it addresses to
every affection in us that is capable of persuasion; what awful and reverential
thoughts of Almighty God it suggests to our minds, to dispose our stubborn
Wills to an humble submission to him; what a horrible representation it makes
of our sins, and of God's wrath and indignation against them, and what a
dreadful alarm it gives to our fear to rouse and awake us out of our sinful
security; And, in a word, how powerfully it encourages us to draw near unto
God, and to make our addresses to him with an humble and generous freedom, and
what vast assurances it gives to our hope of his gracious intentions toward
us, if we repent and amend. All which considered, one would think it were
impossible for any man that believes and understands this wonderful method of
mercy, not to be moved and affected by it; and certainly that man who has
obstinacy enough to withstand all its persuasions, and finally to defeat and
baffle those powerful attempts which it makes to reclaim him, is a Creature not
to be moved by Reason and Argument. For in this he has conquered the greatest
motives of all sorts that can be urged to persuade men, and when once he is got
beyond the reach of persuasion, and no motive of ingenuity, or hope, or fear
can affect him, his condition is desperate, and his obstinacy incurable.
Wherefore, as we would not finally disappoint this wonderful contrivance of God
to reclaim us, and thereby render our selves for ever desperate, let us at
length be persuaded seriously to consider the Motives and Arguments it proposes
to us, and never to cease urging and pressing them upon our own souls, till
they have conquered our obstinate Wills and prejudiced Affections, and finally
captivated us into a free compliance with their powerful persuasions. For if
through our wilful neglect and inconsideration this mighty project of mercy
prove utterly unsuccessful with us, it is certain we have sinned our selves
past all hope of recovery, and it will be in vain to make any farther
experiment on us. And when we have once baffled this last and most powerful
remedy of the divine Goodness, what remains but that it should give us up, and
utterly abandon us to the just desert and dire effects of our own folly and
obstinacy!

SECT. VI. Of the Kingly Office of our Savior.
WHen I first entered upon this Argument of the particular Offices of our
Mediator, I proposed to handle them in the same order that he performed and
executed them; and accordingly, as he began with his Prophetic Office, of
which his whole life was a continued Ministry, so I have treated of this Office
in the first place; and as from his Prophetic he proceeded to his Priestly
Office, one part of which he executed on the Cross, where he offered himself a
Sacrifice for the sins of the World, and the other upon his Ascension into
Heaven, where he presented, and still continues to present his Sacrifice to the
Father by way of intercession for us, so I proceeded in the next place to treat
of his Priesthood in both the parts of it; and now in the last place, in
pursuit of the same order, I proceed to his Regal or Kingly Office, which was
the last he entered upon, after he had finished his Prophecy, offered his
Sacrifice, and presented it to his Father in Heaven. For so in Scripture the
Regality of Christ is always spoken of as successive to both his Prophetic and
Priestly Office, and as the fruit and reward of his faithful discharge and
execution of them. So Phil. 2.8, 9, 10. it was because he humbled himself, and
became obedient to death, even the death of the Cross, that God highly exalted
him, and gave him a name which is above every name, that at the name of Jesus
every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things
under the earth* And Romans 14.9. the Apostle tells us, that it was for this end
that Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the
dead and living; and accordingly the Angels in St. John's Vision, attribute his
advancement to his Regal dignity to the merit of his Death and Sacrifice, Rev.
5.12. Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive Power, and Riches, and
Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing. And hence his
sitting at the right hand of God, which is the great Scripture-Metaphor by
which his Regal Authority is expressed (of the sense and meaning of which vide
Pearson's Exposition of the Creed, p. 277, 278, 279.) is mentioned as the fruit
and consequence of his Death and Intercession. So Heb. 1.3. When he had by
himself purged our sins, i. e. by dying for us on Earth, and presenting his
Sacrifice in Heaven, he sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high; and
Heb. 10.12. But this man after he had offered one Sacrifice for sins for ever,
sat down on the right hand of God; and so also 1 Pet. 3.22. we are told, that
it was upon his going into Heaven, i. e. to present his Sacrifice to his Father
there, that he was advanced to the right hand of God, and that Angels, and
Authorities, and Powers were made subject to him. For his going into Heaven was
a Priestly Act, corresponding to the High Priest's going into the Holy of
Holies, to present his Sacrifice to God there; so that Christ's first arrival
into Heaven, and presenting his Sacrifice there, is the beginning and
commencement of his Intercession, in answer to which he first received of his
Father that Royal Power and Authority which he exercises both in Heaven and
Earth; and it is by virtue of the continuance of that his Priestly
Intercession, that this his Royal power is continued and perpetuated to him. So
that as he is a Royal Priest, i. e. a Priest invested with Regal power to
bestow the blessings he intercedes for, so he is a Sacerdotal King, i. e. a
King that holds his Regal power in the right and virtue of his Priestly
Intercession. For it is by the continuance of his Intercession that he obttains
the continuance of his Royal Authority to bestow those blessings on us which he
intercedes for. So that as Christ intercedes in the virtue of his Sacrifice, so
he rules in the virtue of his Intercession. And accordingly you find in
Scripture his Ascension into Heaven, there to intercede for us, represented as
a Triumphal progress to his Coronation, wherein, after the manner of Princes in
that glorious Solemnity, he scatters a Royal Largess among his Subjects, Ephesians.
4.8. It is true, before his Ascension he tells his Disciples, that all power
was given him in Heaven and Earth, Matthew. 28.18. but this it is evident he
spoke by way of Prolepsis or Anticipation, a very usual Scheme of speech in
Scripture, which is to express things of certain futurity as if they were
actually existing; according to which Scheme all power is given me imports no
more than all power is shortly to be given me, i. e. upon my Ascension into
Heaven. For so it is evident our Savior must be understood in that parallel
expression, John 5.22. The Father judges no man, but has committed all
judgment to the Son; which words he spoke long before his Death, when it is
evident, that all judgment, i. e. Universal, Regal authority was not actually
committed to him* but there was only a certain futurity of it. For so he
himself tells us, that his sitting down with his Father on his Throne, or
investiture with that Regal Authority which he now exercises, was the reward
and consequence of his overcoming, or consummate victory on the Cross, Rev.
3.21. By all which it is evident, that it was upon his Ascension into Heaven,
and Oblation of his Sacrifice there, by way of Intercession, that Christ was
installed in his Universal, Mediatorial Kingdom. It is true, our Savior had a
particular Kingdom in this World, viz. the Jewish Church, not only before his
Ascension, but before his Incarnation, as I shall show hereafter; but as for
that Right of Dominion over the Gentile world too, by which he became universal
Lord and King, he was not invested with it till his Ascension into Heaven. And
therefore he himself tells us, that his Mission into this world was purely to
the lost Sheep of the house of Israel, Matthew. 15.24. and accordingly in the
pursuance of this his Mission, when he sent forth his Ministers to preach his
Gospel, he orders them not to go into the way of the Gentiles, nor to enter
into the City of the Samaritans, but to go rather to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel, Matthew. 10.5, 6. which implies that at that time he was not
actually authorized to subdue and reduce the Gentiles under his dominion, but
that his Authority extended only to the Jewish Nation: but when he had told his
Disciples, in that proleptical speech after his Resurrection, that all power
was given him in Heaven and Earth, it immediately follows, go ye therefore and
teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, etc. as if he had
said, now my Commission and Authority is enlarged, and I am made Universal Lord
and King, go ye therefore in pursuance of it, and by your Ministry endeavor to
reduce all Nations under my dominion. And hence it was that the Mystery of the
calling of the Gentiles into the Kingdom of Christ was not revealed till after
his Ascension* vid. Acts 11.18. because it was upon his Ascension that he
received his Universal, Kingly Authority over them, and till then it was to no
purpose to reveal it. So that it was over the Gentile world peculiarly that he
received Power and Dominion upon his Ascension into Heaven; he was King of the
Jews long before, but upon his Ascension he was invested with a right of
Dominion over the Gentiles too, and thereupon became the Universal Lord and
Monarch of the World under the most High God and Father of all things: but this
I shall have occasion farther to explain hereafter.

In the prosecution of this great Argument I shall endeavor these six things:

First, To give an account of the Beginning and Progress of this Kingdom of
Christ.

Secondly, To explain the Nature and Constitution of it.

Thirdly, To show who are the Ministers of it under Christ.

Fourthly, To assign and explain the Regal Acts which Christ has, and does,
and will hereafter exercise in it.

Fifthly, To give an account of the End and Conclusion of it.

Sixthly, and lastly, To show the reason and wisdom of this method of God's
governing sinful men by this his Mediatorial King Christ Jesus.

SECT. VII. Of the Rise and Progress of Christ's Kingdom.
AS for the first, viz. the beginning and progress of Christ's Kingdom, I shall
endeavor to give an account of it in these following Propositions:

First, That the Kingdom of Christ is founded upon the New Covenant.

Secondly, That the new Covenant commenced immediately after the Fall, and was
afterward particularly renewed to Abraham and his Posterity.

Thirdly, That upon its first Commencement Christ was the Mediator of it, and
so he continued all along in that particular renewal that was made of it to the
People of Israel.

Fourthly, Therefore that as Mediator of this Covenant Christ was King of all
that were admitted into it, and particularly of Abraham and his Posterity, or
the People of Israel with whom it was renewed.

Fifthly, That after his coming into the world he still retained his Title of
King of Israel in particular, till they finally rejected him, and the Covenant
in which his Kingdom is founded.

Sixthly, That though the main body of that Nation rejected him, yet there was
a Remnant of it that received and acknowledged him as their rightful Lord and
King.

Seventhly, That this Remnant still continued the same individual Kingdom of
Christ with the former, though very much reformed and improved.

Eighthly, That to this individual Kingdom of Christ thus reformed and improved
was superadded all those Gentiles that were afterward converted to
Christianity.

First, That the Kingdom of Christ is founded in the New Covenant. For it is by
the New Covenant that he engages himself to us to be our gracious and merciful
Lord, and that we engage our selves to him to be his faithful and obedient
Subjects; and from these mutual Engagements results the relation of King and
Subjects between him and us. So that the Church or Kingdom of Christ consists
of all those People, Nations, and Kindreds, who have been admitted into this
Covenant Relation to him, wherein by a solemn Vow of Fealty and Allegiance,
they have indispensably obliged themselves to serve and obey him; but of this I
shall have occasion to discourse more largely hereafter.

Secondly, Therefore this new Covenant commenced immediately after the Fall,
and was afterward in a particular manner renewed to Abraham and his Posterity.
For the New Covenant was a Plank thrown forth to Mankind immediately after that
woeful Shipwreck that was made by the Fall. For no sooner had God denounced his
deserved Doom on our lapsed Parents, but to support them from sinking into
utter desperation, he subjoyns that gracious promise, Genesis 3.15. The Seed of
the woman shall bruise the Serpent's head; where by the Seed of the woman, not
only Christian, but the ancient Jewish Interpreters understand the Messiah, and
by the Serpent the Devil, who in the form of a Serpent had tempted our first
Parents to that fatal revolt which drew after it all those miserable
consequents which their Posterity have groaned under ever since; by the Messiah
his bruising the Serpent's head, is meant his assaulting and crushing under
foot the very seat of all his strength and power, and finally rescuing mankind
from under his Dominion and Tyranny. For this Promise was the first dawning,
the morning Twilight of the New Covenant; and, so far as we can find, the only
discovery of it to the Old World, and therefore in all probability was the sole
ground and object of that faith by which Abel and Enoch were justified in the
sight of God, Heb. 11.4, 5. For though that Promise was but a dark and obscure
intimation of the Gospel Covenant, yet thus much it plainly proposed to them,
that from the first Parents of the World there should descend a certain Person,
who should conquer the Devil that had conquered them, and thereby repair the
damage of their Apostasy; by believing of which, it seems, and acting
accordingly, they found grace and favor in the sight of God; but however it is
apparent that the New Covenant was in force in the time of the Old World,
because it is evident both that the faith of the Ante-diluvian Patriarchs was
actually accepted by God, and that their faith could upon no other account have
been accepted by him, but only in the virtue of this New Covenant.

But after the Flood God more clearly and expressly renewed this gracious
Covenant with Abraham and his Children, Genesis 12.2, 3. where he promises to
bless him, to make his name great, and himself a blessing, and to bless them
that blessed him, and curse them that cursed him, and in him, that is, in the
Messiah, who should descend from him, vid. Gal. 3.16. to make all the Families
of the Earth blessed; which Covenant he again renews to him, Cap. 13. and Cap.
15. and then in Chap. 17. he yet again renews it more largely and solemnly,
assuring him not only that he should be a Father of many Nations, etc. but that
that Covenant should extend to his Posterity as well as to him, and that he
would be a God to him, and to his Seed after him; immediately after which he
institutes the Ceremony of Circumcision for a perpetual Seal and Ratification
of his Covenant between him and them; and upon this Covenant it was that the
Jewish Church was founded. For so Circumcision, which was the standing Seal of
this Covenant, was also the standing Rite of admission into that Church; which
is a plain argument, that to be a Member of that Church, and a Confederate in
this Covenant was one and the same thing, because they were admitted both by
one and the same Rite. Now from the New Testament it is evident, that this
Covenant with Abraham, upon which the Jewish Church was built, was the Gospel
or New Covenant. For so Gal. 3.8. the Apostle calls the delivery of this
Covenant preaching the Gospel to Abraham, which must be apparently falls, if
this and the Gospel Covenant were not the same; and in verse 29. he tells them,
if ye be Christ's, i. e. true Christians, then are ye Abraham's Seed, i. e.
that spiritual Seed to whom the Covenant with Abraham extends, and heirs
according to the Promise, i. e. of that Covenant; but how could they be
Abraham's seed, by being Christians, and heirs to the promise of Abraham's
Covenant, if the Seed with whom Abraham's Covenant was made, were of a
different Religion from Christians, and the Covenant it self were of a
different kind from the Christian Covenant? But that it was the very same,
appears yet further, because, in the first place, it requires the same
Condition, viz. an obediential or practical Faith. For so, Genesis 15.6. it is
said, that Abraham believed in the Lord, and he accounted it to him for
righteousness, i. e. though he had formerly been guilty of many sins, and at
present could not challenge any reward from God, yet upon that obedient faith
which he exercised, God acquitted and justified him, or, which is the same
thing, dealt with him as if he had been perfectly righteous; and accordingly
his Circumcision, which was the Ratification of that Covenant, is in Romans 4.11.
called the Seal of the righteousness of faith, i. e. of his Justification, or
being accounted righteous, and dealt with accordingly by God, upon his Faith or
practical Assent to God's Promise. And accordingly the Apostle, Gal. 3.9. thus
concludes, so then they which be of faith, i. e. sincere Believers, as Abraham
was, are blessed with faithful Abraham; in which words he expressly asserts that
Abraham and Christians are blessed upon the same terms, viz. upon an
obediential and practical Faith.

And as Abraham's required the same Condition with the New Covenant, so it also
contained the same Promises. For although those Promises according to the
outside and literal sense of them, do contain only temporal blessings, yet it
is apparent, that they had all the eternal blessings of that New Covenant
locked and treasured up in the mystical sense of them. For thus S. Paul
expressly tells us, that the Justification of the New Covenant was couched in
that Promise that was made to Abraham, Gal. 3.8. The Scripture foreseeing that
God would justify the Heathen through faith, preached the Gospel before unto
Abraham, saying, In thee shall all Nations be bl^ssed; which necessarily
implies, that in that bl^ssing was included their Justification in the sight of
God. And as for divine Grace and Assistance to enable men to repent and
persevere in well-doing, the Prophet Micah tells us, that one part of God's
performing his truth unto Jacob, and his mercy to Abraham, consisted in his
subduing our iniquities, and casting our sins into the depths of the Sea, Micah
7.19, 20. And lastly, as for eternal life, the Apostle plainly tells us, that
God gave the inheritance, i. e. of Justification to etern^l life, to Abraham by
promise, Gal. 3.18. upon which gift we are assured that Abraham looked for a
City which has f^undations, whose builder and mak^r is God, Heb. 11.10. Since
therefore both the conditions required, and the blessings promised, in
Abraham's and the New Covenant were in all particulars the same, it necessarily
follows, that they were one and the same Covenant. It is true indeed, as to the
manner of the revelation of it there was a vast difference; for whereas in the
Gospel it is revealed throughout with the greatest clearness and perspicuity,
and in plain and literal terms, it was delivered veiled to Abraham and his
Posterity under general and obscure expressions, which at best exhibited to
them but a dark and confused apprehension of it. But however it is still the
same Covenant, notwithstanding it be thus differently expressed, even as it is
the same Sun that sometimes is overcast with clouds, and other times shines
forth with a full splendour.

Thirdly, From the very first Commencement of this Covenant Christ was Mediator
of it, and so has continued all along under that particular Renewal of it,
which God made to the People of Israel. For the Scripture expressly affirms,
that he is the Mediator and Surety of this New and better Covenant, that is,
that it is he who as our Advocate with God obtains for us the Blessings of this
Covenant, and who as our King under God dispenses them to us; and if he be thus
the Mediator of this Covenant now, he must have always been so, even from the
Fall, upon which it commenced, to his Ascension into Heaven, otherwise the New
Covenant, upon which he now Mediates, must have been four thousand years
without a Mediator; which, considering the whole state and condition of it, can
by no means be allowed. For besides that, the Fall of man was the reason why
God withdrew himself from all immediate converse with him, and that therefore
it is reasonably to be presumed, that whatsoever converse he had with him
afterward, it was through a Mediator, there is nothing more evident from
Scripture than that this very Covenant, which is the standing Medium of God's
converse and intercourse with men, was granted to us by God in consideration of
Christ's Death and Sacrifice. Since therefore it was granted long before Christ
died, even from the Fall of Adam, it must be granted upon Christ's obliging and
engaging himself to the Father to die for us in the fullness of time; which
engagement of his was virtually and in effect an offering up himself a
Sacrifice for us; God being as much secured of it upon his engagement, as if he
had actually performed it. Upon which account he is called the Lamb slain from
the foundation of the world, Rev. 13.8. because upon his obliging himself to
die for us, which was immediately after the Fall, the Event became as certain
and infallible as if in that very moment he had breathed out his Soul upon the
Cross. And accordingly God proceeded on it as on a sure and certain Fund, and
in consideration of it granted the new Covenant to the World. Hence the Apostle
tells us, that it was by means of his death that there was redemption for the
transgressions that were under the first Covenant, Heb. 9.15. Since therefore
it was in consideration of Christ's future Sacrifice that God first granted
this Covenant to men, it necessarily follows, that upon the same consideration
he at the same time appointed Christ to be the Mediator of it, because, as I
showed before, he is Mediator in the right and virtue of his Sacrifice by which
he obtained it; and therefore since his Sacrifice had the same virtue in it
when it was future, as it has now when it is past, he had the same right to be
Mediator of it then, as he has now. In short, Christ's Sacrifice was as
certain in God's account, and therefore as prevalent with him, before, as after
it was offered; and therefore since his Mediatorship of the New Covenant is
wholly owing to the prevalence of his Sacrifice, there was the same reason why
God should admit him to be Mediator of it before it was offered as after; and
accordingly long before he offered up his Sacrifice, he is called the Angel or
Minister of the Covenant, Mal. 3.1. And St. Paul expressly tells us, that four
hundred and thirty years before the Law of Moses this Covenant was confirmed of
God to Abraham in Christ, Gal. 3.17. and if it was then confirmed in Christ, it
is certain that then Christ was the Mediator of it.

Fourthly, Christ's being always Mediator of this Covenant necessarily implies
his having been always King under God of all that ever were admitted into it,
and particularly of the People of Israel; because his Kingly Office is so
necessary and essential a part of his Mediatorship, that he cannot be properly
a Mediator without it. For to mediate as he does between God and men, is to act
Authoritatively for and in the behalf of both parties; so that if he act only
for one, he cannot be truly said to be a Mediator between both; but in his
acting Authoritatively for God consists his Royalty or Kingly Office, as you
may see p. 7, 8. and if his Mediatorial Office necessarily includes a Kingly
power, to be sure that power must extend to all that ever were admitted into
the Covenant upon which he Mediates. For how can any man be admitted into that
Covenant, of which he is the authorized Mediator, without being subject to all
the Authority which his Mediatorship necessarily implies?

Hence therefore it follows, that Christ has been always King of the Church of
God, or confederate Society of the true Worshippers of him, in all Ages of the
world. For thus in the Old world St. Peter tells us, 1 Pet. 3.19. that by that
very Spirit whereby Christ rose from the dead he went and preached to the
spirits in prison, i. e. by Noah, who by the immediate inspiration of the Holy
Spirit was a Preacher or Herald of Righteousness, Christ preached to the
Spirits or Souls of men, whilst they were yet shut up in, and united to their
bodies, long before that general separation of their Souls from their Bodies
which was made by the Flood; vid. Dr. Ham. in Loc. at this time, I say, whilst
they were yet alive, Christ preached to them, to warn them of that general
destruction which was pursuing them, and would ere long overtake them, unless
they speedily repented; which shows that long before the Flood Christ acted as
a King in issuing out by his Heralds his Royal Proclamations to men to declare
his Will and Pleasure to them, and warn them of the fatal consequence of their
disobedience to it.

Soon after the Flood mankind almost universally Apostatized from God to
Idolatry; so that the Church or Society of the true Worshippers of him was
quickly reduced into a very narrow compass; so that four hundred years after it
seems very probable that Melchisedeck was the only King in the world who was
not an Idolater. And now God seeing his Church almost totally extinguished by
this general defection of mankind from his Covenant; to recover and repair it,
he calls Abraham out of his Idolatry and Idolatrous Country, and with him and
his Posterity renews the New Covenant which the rest of mankind had renounced
and deserted; and to secure them from ever revolting from it, he seals and
ratifies it with them by a sign in their flesh, viz. that of Circumcision,
which he gave them as a mark to distinguish and preserve them distinct from the
Idolatrous Nations round about them. And when afterward the Posterity of
Abraham was multiplied in Egypt into a numerous Nation, and this Rite of
Circumcision being by Ishmael and Esau derived to their Posterity, and so made
common to other Nations with Israel, God to renew this distinction gives them
the Ceremonial Law upon their coming out of Egypt; one great design of which,
even as that of Circumcision, was to diversifie them from their neighboring
Idolaters by contrary rites and observances; and hence the Mosaic Law is
called by the Apostle a middle Wall of partition, Ephesians. 2.14. alluding to that
middle Wall in the Temple which divided the Court of the Jews from the Court of
the Gentiles, or Gentile Proselytes of the Gate, who because they were not
circumcised, were counted unclean, and upon that account divided from the
Circumcised by a Wall of stone of three Cubits high; and a little after, ver.
15. he calls this Law the enmity between the Jews and Gentiles, because one
great design of it was to divide and separate the Jews from the Gentiles, and
thereby to secure them from revolting from the New Covenant by mingling and
confounding themselves with Idolaters. By which means the New Covenant became
in a manner appropriate to Israel, none being allowed admission into it but
only such as freely submitted themselves to the distinguishing Laws of that
Communion by which they were separated from all other Nations. Hence the
Apostle tells us, that to them pertained the Covenants, Romans 9.4. i. e. the New
Covenant it self, together with Circumcision the Seal of it, which is also
called a Covenant. And the same Apostle puts together being Aliens to the
Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers to the Covenants of Promise, as
inseparable Concomitants, Ephesians. 2.12. And hence it is that they are styled God's
peculiar People, Deuteronomy. 14.2. and his peculiar Treasure, Psalm. 135.4. because by
this Covenant which passed between God and them they were separated to God from
all other Nations; and upon the same account also they are called the Lord's
portion, and the Lot of his inheritance, Deuteronomy. 32.9. The New Covenant therefore
being thus particularly confined to the People of Israel, whilst it continued
so, Christ who was always the Mediator of it must be particularly the
Mediatorial Head and King, that under the most High God and Father ruled and
governed that Church and People. But because upon the truth of this Assertion
this whole Argument depends, I shall endeavor, as briefly as I can, to evince
and prove it in these following Propositions:

First, That there was a certain extraordinary Angel who frequently appeared
and spoke to the Jewish Patriarchs, who is sometimes called Jehovah, and
sometimes the Angel of Jehovah, who ordinarily assumed to himself divine
Appellations, and to whom those holy men ordinarily rendered divine Honors,
and Vows, and Sacrifices.

Secondly, This extraordinary Angel was a divine Person, and no created Being.

Thirdly, That he was that divine Person that descended upon Mount Sinai, and
from thence removed into the Tabernacle, and thence into the Temple.

Fourthly, That this divine Person was not God the Father.

Fifthly, That he was God the Son.

First, That there was a certain extraordinary Angel, who frequently appeared,
and spoke to the Jewish Patriarchs, who is sometimes called Jehovah, and
sometimes the Angel of Jehovah, etc. Of which I might give innumerable
instances, but for brevities sake shall only mention two; the first is that of
Genesis 18. where we read of three men, that is as all agree, three Angels in
humane shapes, one of which in verse 13. is expressly called Jehovah; after
which upon their going toward Sodom, the same Jehovah speaks to Abraham again,
ver. 17. And Jehovah said, shall I hide from Abraham that which I am doing? and
so again ver. 20. then in ver. 22. it is said, that the men turned their faces
from thence* and went up to Sodom, but Abraham stood yet before Jehovah, i. e.
two of the Angels went their way to Sodom; for so Chap. 19. v. 1. we read but
of two of them that arrived thither; so that the Jehovah before whom Abraham
stood must be the third who stayed behind conferring with Abraham, in which
Conference Abraham several times addresses to him under the name of Jehovah,
and verse 25. calls him the Judge of all the earth, and then verse 33. it is
said, that Jehovah went away when he had made an end of speaking unto Abraham.
The other instance is in Genes. 28. from verse 12. where you have recorded the
Vision of Jacob's Ladder, above which, ver. 13. it is said, Jehovah stood and
said, I am the Lord God of Abraham thy Father, etc. upon which Jacob when he
awaked cries out, Surely Jehovah is in this place, ver. 16. thereupon he
sacrifices to him, ver. 18. calls the place Bethel, or the House of God, ver.
19. and offers a Vow to him, ver. 20. wherein he obliges himself to acknowledge
him for his God, ver. 21. but Chap. 31. ver. 11, 13. this divine Person is
called both the Angel of God, and the God of Bethel; and Jacob himself in Genesis
48 15, 16. calls him the God before whom his Father Abraham and Isaac did walk,
the God which fed him all his life long, and the Angel which redeemed him from
all evil. And with this God in the form of a man we find Jacob wrestling a
whole night together, supposing him, as it seems, to be an ordinary Angel,
Chap. 32. ver. 24. but understanding afterward who he was, he calls the name
of the place Peniel, because he had seen God face to face, ver. 30. which God
in Hos. 12.4, 5. is called both the Angel, and the Lord of Hosts. And this
divine Angel, or Angel of God, if you pursue the sacred History, you will find
is the very same that afterward appeared to Moses in the burning bush, and
under him conducted Israel through the red Sea and Wilderness in the appearance
of a Pillar of fire and cloud. For so he is all along called promiscuously
Jehovah, and the Angel of Jehovah, vid. Exodus 3.2, 4. Exodus 13.21. compared
with Chap. 14.19.

Secondly, That he was a divine Person and no created Angel, is evident not
only from his assuming to himself the incommunicable Name, but also the
incommunicable Attributes of Jehovah. For so he tells Jacob, not only that he
was Jehovah God of Abraham his Father, and the God of Isaac, Genesis 28.13. not
only that he was the God of Bethel, where he anointed a Pillar, and vowed a vow
to him, Genesis 31.13. but also that he was God Almighty, Genesis 35.11. whereas the
Psalmist tells us, that Jehovah is God's name alone, Psalm. 83.18. and
Almightiness, as all agree, is an incommunicable perfection of God; so that had
this Angel been a created Being, it would have been the highest degree of
Sacrilege and Profaneness in him to arrogate to himself that incommunicable
Name and Attribute. I know it is usually objected, that he assumed God's Name
and Attributes, not as due to his Person, but to his Character, as he was the
Ambassador of God, and so represented his Majesty; but where, I beseech you,
was it ever heard that an Ambassador was allowed to assume the Name and Titles
of his King? Would it not be deemed high Arrogance at least, if not High
Treason, for an English Ambassador in the delivery of his Embassy thus to
declare himself, I am that high and mighty Prince James the Second, King of
England, etc. And can it be thought that God, who under the Jewish Economy was
so peculiarly jealous of his honor, and had such peculiar reason for it,
considering the infinite proneness of that people to Idolatry, would not only
permit, but authorize a Creature to assume his Name and Attributes, and not
only avouch it self to be God, but also arrogate his incommunicable Perfections
and Prerogatives? The Prophets, we know, were God's Ambassadors as well as the
Angels, but yet they never presumed to call themselves God or Jehovah, or to
arrogate Omnipotence to themselves, which yet they had as much right to do as
this Angel, supposing him to be a created Being; but on the contrary, whereas
this Angel always spoke in his own name, and delivered what he said as his own
word, the Prophets always spoke in a different style, and still ushered in what
they delivered with a thus says the Lord; and the same to be sure this blessed
Angel would have done, had he been only an Ambassador from God. But besides
that he assumed God's Name, and Attributes; he not only admitted but required
divine honors to be rendered to him. For so, as has been shown before, he not
only admitted Jacob to offer Sacrifice, and a religious Vow to him, and therein
to devote himself to him as to his God, but also required him to make and
dedicate an Altar to him at Bethel, Genesis 35.1. so also he admitted Ioshuah to
fall on his face to the Earth and worship him, and not only so, but bids him
loose his shoe from his foot, telling him that the place whereon he stood was
holy, as being consecrated by his divine Presence, Josh. 5.14, 15. and the same
command, enforced with the same reason, he gave before to Moses out of the
burning bush, Exodus 3.5. and to name no more, he received a burnt-offering, and
a meat offering at the hands of Manoah and his Wife, Judge. 13.23. And is it
likely that any created good Angel would ever have admitted these things,
especially considering how strictly S. John was forbid by the Angel, at whose
feet he fell down to worship him, See thou do it not, I am thy fellow servant
-- worship God, Rev. 19.10. and so again, Rev. 22.9.

Thirdly, That he was also that divine Person that descended upon Mount Sinai,
and from thence removed into the Tabernacle, and thence into the Temple, is
evident from what is recorded of him, Numb. 22.22, etc. where we have the
History of the Angel of the Lord's meeting Balaam on the way as he was going to
curse the People of Israel; now that by that Angel there is meant this divine
Angel, or Angel Jehovah appears, first, from verse 32. where he tells Balaam,
Behold I come out to be an Adversary, because thy way is perverse before me, i.
e. it is contrary to that will of mine which I declared to thee, verse 12.
where it is said, That God said unto Balaam, thou shall not go with them, thou
shall not curse the People, for they are blessed, which is a plain evidence,
that this God and that Angel of Jehovah were the same Person. And then,
secondly, verse 35. it is said that this Angel of Jehovah said unto Balaam, go
with the men, but only the word that I shall speak unto thee, that thou shall
speak, whereas he that afterward spoke unto him, and instructed him what he
should say to Balak, is expressly called God and Jehovah; for so Numb. 23.4, 5.
it is said, that God met Balaam, and that Jehovah put a word into his mouth;
whence it appears, that this God and Jehovah was the same Person with that
Angel of the Lord that gave him that charge, but only the word that I shall
speak unto thee, that shall thou speak. But then, thirdly and lastly, Balaam
himself calls the app^rition of this Angel, the vision of the Almighty, Numb.
24.4, 16. which sh^ws that this Angel was the Almighty himself.

Now this Angel Jehovah, Balaam in his inspired Parable calls Jehovah the God
and King of Israel, and the God that brought them out of Egypt, Numb. 23.21,
22. which is the very style of that. God that descended upon Mount Sinai, I am
Jehovah thy God that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, Exodus 20.2. which
is a plain argument, that it was all but one and the same Person.

But then Judge. 2. we have the History of another Appearance of this great
Angel of Jehovah, who, as we are told in verse 1. came from Gilgal unto Bochim,
and by what he there says of himself, it is evident that he was that very God
that came down upon Mount Sinai, and afterward dwelt in the Tabernacle; for
there he declares, that it was he that made them go up out of Egypt, and
brought them to the Land which he swear unto their Fathers, which is the
language of that God that dwelt in the Tabernacle, vid. Exodus 33.1. that it was
he that said, I will never break Covenant with you, and ye shall make no League
with the Inhabitants of this Land, and that they should throw down their
Altars: but, says he, ye have not obeyed my voice; why have ye done this?
Wherefore I said, I will not drive them out from before ye, but they shall be
as thorns in your sides, and their Gods shall be a snare to you, ver. 1, 2, 3.
which are the very words of God from the Tabernacle, as you may see Exodus
34.12, 13. Numb. 33.55. which is a plain Argument, that this Angel and that God
that dwelt in the Tabernacle were one and the same Person.

And then that he was the God that afterward fixed his abode in the Temple is
very apparent. For, besides that no body questions but that it was the same
divine Person that brought Israel out of Egypt, led them through the
Wilderness, came down upon Mount Sinai, resided in the Tabernacle, and that
afterward removed into the Temple, we have a particular evidence, that this
person was the Angel Jehovah, in Isa. 6.1. where the Prophet tells us, that he
saw Jehovah sitting on a Throne, high and lifted up, and his train filled the
Temple; by which it is evident that he appeared to him in a visible form, else
how could the Prophet have seen him? and that sitting, which is a Corporeal
Posture; but this the second ver. puts out of all doubt, which attributes to
him a face and feet, implying that his appearance was in a humane form, the
very same in which this Angel Jehovah was wont to make his appearances to men;
and then that Prophet concludes, that he should certainly die, because his eyes
had seen the King, the Lord of Hosts; which is the same terrible apprehension
that men always expressed upon the appearance of this Angel Jehovah. Thus upon
the sight of him Manoah cries out, We shall surely die, because we have seen
God, Judge. 13.22. and so also Gideon, Judge. 6.22. and the Children of Israel,
Exodus 20.19. and Moses himself, Exodus 3.6. So that among the Ancients it seems
it was a received opinion, that the appearance of this illustrious one did
commonly abode death unto those that beheld him. Since therefore the Prophet
had the same dreadful apprehension upon his vision of God in the Temple, that
all men had before him upon the appearance of this Angel Jehovah to them, it is
at least very probable that that God and this Angel were the same divine person.

Fourthly, That this divine Person was not the most High God the Father. For
besides that our Savior tells the Jews, that they had not heard the Father's
voice at any time, nor seen his shape or appearance, John 5.37. which is a
plain evidence that that divine Person who spoke and appeared to their Fathers
in a humane voice or shape, was not God the Father, of whom the same Apostle
tells us, that no man has seen God at any time, John 1.18. whereas it is
expressly said of Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and the seventy Elders of
Israel, that they saw the God of Israel, viz. upon Mount Sinai, and, as it is
evident from the Text, it was in a humane shape that they saw him, for there
was under his feet as it were a paved work of Saphir stone, Exodus 24.9, 10. and
if he appeared to them with feet, it is reasonable to suppose that he appeared
with all the other parts of a humane body, for though Moses tells the People,
that they saw no similitude on the Mount, but only heard a voice, Deuteronomy. 4.12.
yet this does not at all hinder, but that Moses and the seventy Elders with him
might and did; for so when Moses desired to see the glory of God upon the
Mount, God tells him, thou art not able to see my face, i. e. by reason of the
glory and luster of it, for no man shall see my face and live, i. e. no man can
endure without great hazard of his life the brightness and splendour of my
countenance, and from this passage in all probability sprang that common
opinion in men's minds, that they should surely die whenever they saw God or the
Angel Jehovah; and then God proceeds, and tells Moses, that he would place him
in the Clift of the Rock, and cover him with his hand whilst he passed by, and
that when he was passed by he would take away his hand, and permit him to see
his back parts, Exodus 33.20, 21, 22, 23. by all which it seems evident that
this Apparition of God upon the Mount, which Moses and the Elders saw, was in a
humane form, since it had not only feet, but face, and hands, and back parts,
which is not only a farther Evidence that this God was the same divine Person
with that Angel Jehovah, who appeared so often in humane shape, but also a
plain argument that he was not God the Father, who, as S. John tells us, was
never seen in any shape or appearance whatsoever; besides all which, I say, how
can the Father, who is the first and supreme person in the holy Trinity, from
whom both the Son and holy Spirit are sent, be in any sense styled (as this
divine Person of whom we are treating is) the Angel of Jehovah? For the word
Angel, which imports a Messenger, implies some kind of Inferiority to him whose
Angel or Messenger he is, and therefore can in no sense be truly and properly
applied to the most high God and Father.

Fifthly, and lastly, That this divine Person was God the Son. For, First, that
it was he who appeared to the Patriarchs, and particularly to Abraham, those
words of our Savior plainly imply, in Ioh. 8.56. Your Father Abraham rejoiced
to see my day, and he saw it and was glad; where by Abraham's seeing of
Christ's day, must necessarily be meant his real, and actual, and personal
sight of Christ himself; for so the Jews understood it, Thou art not yet (say
they in the following verse) fifty years old, and have thou seen Abraham? As
much as if they should have said, How is it possible that ever thou should
personally and actually see Abraham, or he thee, as thy words do import, when
as yet thou art not fifty years old, and it is many Ages since that Abraham
died. If therefore the Jews did not mistake Christ's sense, it is plain that by
seeing his day he meant personally and actually seeing himself; but that they
did not mistake him is evident, because if they ^ad, Christ ought to have
corrected them by explaining himself into some other sense, and not suffer them
to run away with such a gross mistake in a matter of such mighty moment;
instead of which he plainly allows and c^untenances their sense in the Answer
which he gave them, verse 58. Verily, verily I say unto you, before Abraham was
I am; as much as if he had said, it is no such impossible matter as you imagine
that Abraham should see me and I him, because I have a fixed and eternal
existence, and therefore was in being before ever he was bo^n. So that either
the Jews apprehended Christ aright, and if so, Abraham really and actually saw
him, or Christ in his Answer prevaricated with them, and merely played upon
their mistake; and if Abraham personally saw Christ, it is certain that Christ
must be that divine Person that appeared to him. But then

Secondly, That it was he also that brought Israel out of Egypt, and descended
upon Mount Sinai at the gi^ing the Law to them, i. e. who declared himself to
be the Lord their God that brought them out of the Land of Egypt, is apparent
from Heb. 12.26. where it is expressly affirmed, that it was Christ's voice
which then did shake the Earth, i. e. when the Law was delivered in Thunder
from Mount Sinai, which is a plain argument, that Christ was that Jehovah, who
came down upon Mount Sinai, and whose voice caused the whole Mount to quake
greatly, Exodus 19.18. the same also is evident from Ephesians. 4.8. Wherefore he
says, i. e. the Psalmist, Psalm 68.18. when he, i. e. Christ (of whom he had
been speaking just before, verse 7. ascended up on high, he led captivity
captive, and gave gifts unto men; so that either Christ must be the Person of
whom the Psalmist speaks, or the Apostle must grossly mis-quote and mis-apply
him; and if he be the same Person, then from that Psalm it is evident: First,
That it was he that went before the People, and marched with them through the
Wilderness, verse 7. to 15. Secondly, That it was he that was among the
thousands of Angels in Sinai in the holy place, and by their Ministry
promulgated the Law from thence; verse 17. Thirdly, That it was he who was the
God and King, whose goings were seen in the Sanctuary, ver. 24. Fourthly, That
it was he who was the God of the Temple at Jerusalem, verse. 29. For all these
things are expressly spoken of him that ascended on high, and led captivity
captive, and received gifts for men, verse. 18. which the Apostle tells us was
Christ.

Thirdly, That it was he also that conducted them through the Wilderness into
Canaan, appears from that of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 10.9. Neither let us tempt Christ
as some of them, i. e. of the People of Israel in the Wilderness, also tempted,
or as some Copies read it, as some of them also tempted him, and were destroyed
by Serpents; and although in most Copies him be not expressed, yet in all it is
necessarily implied; for if they tempted in the Wilderness, it is certain that
they tempted some body, and to understand by that some body any other than
Christ, who is the only Person before mentioned, is against all Grammar and
reason; against Grammar, which allows no other Accusative to be understood by
the Verb than that of some thing or person aforesaid in the same Sentence;
against Reason, because if we understand any other Accusative but him or Christ
who is the only Person aforementioned, we must make the Apostle speak loosely
and indeterminately, whereas otherwise it is evident he speaks most strictly
and certainly; for there is no word in the Text but only Christ which
determines the Accusative that the Verb tempted implies; so that if that does
not determine it, it must be left wholly indeterminate, but if it does, it must
be him or Christ; and to make the holy Oracles speak loosely and vagrantly
where they may as well be understood to speak strictly and determinately, is
not only impious but unreasonable. If therefore it was Christ that some of the
Jews tempted in the Wilderness, it necessarily follows in the first place, that
Christ was with them there, and secondly, that he was that God against whom
they spoke, Numb. 21.5. which is the place the Apostle here refers to, where it
is said, that the People spoke against God and against Moses, for which God
sent fiery Serpents among them, ver. 6. If therefore Christ was with them in
the Wilderness, and was that God against whom they spoke in the Wilderness,
there is no doubt but that he was that God that led them through it, and
brought them into Canaan.

Fourthly, That it was he who dwelt in the Jewish Tabernacle and Temple is
evident from John 12.41. These things said Isaias when he saw his glory and
spoke of him; the occasion of which words is this; at ver. 37. St. John takes
notice of the perverse Infidelity of the Jews in not believing in Christ,
notwithstanding all the Miracles he had shown them, ver. 38, 39, 40. which he
shows was no more than what the Prophet Isay had long before foretold of them,
Isa. 6.9, 10. and then he concludes, ver. 41. These things said Isaiah when he
saw his glory and spoke of him, where by his glory it is evident the Apostle
means Christ's glory, and by speaking of him, speaking of Christ; for so in
ver. 37. where the discourse begins, it is plain he means Christ when he tells
us, that yet they believed not on him, and in ver. 42. it is as plain that he
means him still, when he tells us, that nevertheless among the chief Rulers
also many believed in him; and if by him he means Christ, as all agree he does,
both in ver. 37. and 42. either the four Verses between must be included within
a Parenthesis (which we have no reason to imagine, seeing there is ^o note of a
Parenthesis to be found in any Copy, nor does the discourse it self require it,
which from Verse to Verse runs all along in a close and continued dependence)
or by him, must be meant Christ, in ver. 41. also; and if it was Christ's glory
which Isaiah saw, and Christ of whom he spoke, then it is evident that Christ
was the God who inhabited the Temple. For so in Isa. 6.1. which is the place
St. John here refers to, Isaiah tells us, that in the year that King Vzziah
died he saw the Lord sitting on a Throne high and lifted up, and his Train
filled the Temple; if therefore Christ was this Lord, as St. John affirms, it
is certain from these words that it was he who sat upon the Throne in the
Temple, and had his Train or Retinue of Angels there.

Fifthly and lastly, That Christ also was that Jehovah and divine Lord and King
who under the most high Father presided over the Jewish Church, is evident from
several places of the New Testament, compared with the Old, from whence they
are cited. I shall only instance in two, the first of which is Ephesians. 5.14.
Wherefore he says, that is the Prophet Isaiah, awake thou that sleep, and
arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light; which words are a
Paraphrastical reference to Isa. 60.1. Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and
the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee; but now unless we suppose Christ to
be this Lord or Jehovah, the Prophet is so far from saying here, that Christ
shall give thee light, as St. Paul affirms, that he makes no mention at all of
him; either therefore Isaiah says no such thing as, Christ shall give thee
light, which is to give the lie to St. Paul, or else the true sense of that
saying of Isaiah, The glory of the Lord is risen upon thee, must be, that
Christ shall give thee light; which it cannot be, if Christ and that Lord were
two distinct persons; but that they are one and the same, is evident from Isa.
44.6. Thus faith Jehovah, the King of Israel, and his Redeemer, the Lord of
Hosts, I am the first, and I am the last, and besides me there is no God; which
divine Character of I am the first, and I am the last, he elsewhere gives
himself in Chap. 41.4. and Chap. 48.12. of this Prophecy. Now this very
Character of the God of Israel Christ assumes to himself, Rev. 1.11. I am Alpha
and Omega, the first and the last; so again, ver. 17. and Chap. 2.8. and Chap.
22.13. Now how can we, with any reverence to our Savior, suppose that he would
ever have assumed to himself this distinguishing Character of the God of
Israel, and that in the very same words, and without ever explaining them into
a different sense, had he not been the very same Person? since he could not but
foresee that he should hereby endanger the misleading of his Church, and
tempting her into a false opinion of his Person. For what man that was not
prepossessed with a contrary opinion, would ever have thought that our Savior
did not mean himself to be the God of Israel, when he thus verbatim applies to
himself his personal Character without any kind of restriction or explication?
Should any man hear a voice from an invisible Person seriously pronouncing, I
am William the Conqueror, (as S. John did this voice from Christ, I am the
first and the last) would he not presently conclude either that this Person was
the Ghost of that victorious Prince, or that that voice was a designed
delusion? Since therefore our Savior declares, that he is the first and the
last, which is the essential Character by which Jehovah the King of Israel
describes himself, and does no where intimate a different sense of this
Character as applied to himself, from what it signified as applied to the
Jehovah, it necessarily follows, that either he meant not sincerely, or that
himself and that Jehovah the King of Israel were the same Person. And
accordingly, Zach. 9.9. which all agree is a Prophecy of our Savior, he is
expressly called the King of Israel, Rejoice greatly, O Daughter of Sion, shout
O Daughter of Jerusalem, behold thy King comes unto thee; the most natural
sense of which Phrase thy King, is he that is now thy King, not he that is
hereafter to be so; and if then when this Prophecy was delivered, he was King
of the Daughter of Zion, or People of Israel, to be sure he was always so; and
therefore the Prophet Malachi calls the Temple which was the Palace of the
divine King of Israel, the Temple of Christ, Mal. 3.1. Behold I will send my
Messenger, i. e. John Baptist, and he shall prepare my way before me, and the
Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his Temple, even the Angel of the
Covenant whom ye delight in, behold he shall come, says the Lord of Hosts;
from whence I infer, first, that this Lord of Hosts, which is the ordinary
style of the God of Israel, was Christ, whose Messenger and forerunner John
Baptist was, vid. Luke 1.76. And secondly, That the Temple, which was the abode
of this Lord of Hosts, was the Temple of Christ; the Lord whom ye seek shall
suddenly come to his Temple; which cannot be meant of God the Father, because
in the next words he is called the Angel of the Covenant, which all agree is
Christ; if then the Temple of Jerusalem was the Temple of Christ, and he was
that Lord of Hosts that dwelt in it, it necessarily follows, that he was that
divine King of Israel who under God the Father governed the Jewish Church. And
now having proved at large this fourth Proposition, which is the principal
Hinge upon which the whole Argument turns, I proceed,

Fifthly, That after his coming into the World he still retained this his Right
and Title of King of Israel in particular, till they finally rejected him, and
Apostatized from that Covenant on which his Kingdom is founded. For he did not
at all divest himself by his Incarnation, of that Royal Authority he was vested
with as he was the Eternal Word and Son of God, hereafter to be incarnate. For
this his Royal Authority, as I showed before, is necessarily implied in his
Mediatorship of the New Covenant, of which, as I have also showed, he was
always Mediator without any discontinuance or interruption. So long therefore
as the New Covenant continued in force with the Jews in particular, so long he
was their Mediatorial King in particular, under God the Father. Now it is
certain that the New Covenant continued in force with them so long as they
continued to be the Church of God, because it was the New Covenant that made
them so; and it is certain they continued the Church of God many years after
the Incarnation of our Savior, even till such time as by their obstinate
rejecting of our Savior, and incurable Apostasy from that Covenant which made
them the Church and People of God, they had finally incensed him to reject
them, to break off his Covenant Relation to them, and utterly to dispark and
un-Church them. And therefore we find that for several years both our Savior
and his Apostles continued in close Communion with the Jewish Church,
frequented their Temple and Synagogues, and joined with them in all the
Solemnities of their Public Worship; by which they owned them to be the true
Church of God, and consequently to be yet in Covenant with him. Since therefore
they continued in the New Covenant after Christ's Incarnation, Christ must also
continue the Mediator of that Covenant to them, and consequently their
Mediatorial King. And hence he is styled, the King of the Jews in particular,
after his Incarnation; for so the Wisemen in their enquiry after him, Where is
he that is born King of the Jews? Matt. 2.2. And that he was born King of the
Jews, not merely as he was descended from the Loins of David, but by a Title
that he had Antecedent to his birth, viz. as he was the Son of God, hereafter
to be Incarnate, is evident by that confession of Nathanael, Joh. 1.49. Rabbi
thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel; where his being the King
of Israel is consequent to his being the Son of God; and so John 12.13. they
who attended him in his progress to Jerusalem salute him with a Blessed is the
King of Israel that comes in the name of the Lord; which S. John makes the
accomplishment of that forementioned Prophecy, Zach. 9.9. Rejoice greatly, O
daughter of Zion -- behold thy King comes unto thee sitting on an Asses Colt,
verse 14, 15. And this Title our Savior assumes to himself in that good
confession he made before Pontius Pilate, who asking him, Art thou King of the
Jews? He answered him, Say thou this of thy self, or did others tell it thee
of me? And when Pilate presses him for a more explicit answer, he tells him,
My Kingdom is not of this world; as much as if he had said, I know the Jews,
mine enemies, have insinuated to thee, that by assuming to my self this Title
of King of the Jews, I design to usurp the temporal Dominion of Caesar thy
Master; but let not that trouble thee, for though it is most certain that I am
King of the Jews, yet my Kingship and Caesar's are of a quite different nature,
and do no way clash or interfere with one another; for whereas his Kingdom is
Temporal, mine is purely spiritual, and not of this world; and when Pilate
insists farther, Art thou a King then? Jesus answers, Thou say I am a King,
i. e. thou say truly so, to this end was I born, and for this cause came I
into the world, that I should bear witness to the truth, John 18.33, 34, 35,
36, 37.

And as he retained the Title of King of the Jews after his Incarnation, so we
frequently find him exercising his Royal Authority among them. For in the first
place, he not only authoritatively explained to them those old and eternal Laws
of Morality which he delivered to them from Mount Sinai, and enforced them with
new Sanctions and Motives; but he also gave them two new Laws, viz. that of
Baptism, and that of the Lord's Supper, to be continued in force to the end of
the world. Secondly, He erected a perpetual form of Government and Discipline
in his Church, and gave Commission to his Apostles to exercise and administer
it, and to derive down their Commission to all succeeding Generations. Thirdly,
he actually forgave sins, Matthew. 9.2. compared with the sixth, where he does
not only pronounce to one that was sick of the Palsy, Son, thy sins are
forgiven thee; but declares that he did it by that power and authority which he
had upon earth to forgive sins. All which being acts of Regal power, do
sufficiently manifest that, even whilst he was upon Earth, he was vested with
Royal Authority, and that by assuming our nature he did not divest himself of
his ancient Royalty, but still continued King of the Jews so long as they
continued a Church.

Sixthly, That though the main body of the People of Israel rejected Christ,
and were thereupon rejected by him, yet there was a Remnant of them that
received and acknowledged him for their rightful Lord and King. For so, as S.
Paul observes, it is foretold of Isaiah concerning Israel, Though the number of
the Children of Israel be as the sand of the Sea, a remnant shall be saved,
Romans 9.27. and accordingly it proved in the event. For though the much greater
part of the Jewish Nation obstinately persisted in their Infidelity and
Rebellion against the blessed Jesus their King, notwithstanding all those
powerful Arts and Methods he had used to reclaim and save them; yet there was a
great number of them that willingly received and loyally adhered to him. For
not only the Disciples which he gathered whilst he was upon Earth, but also the
first Converts after his Ascension into Heaven, were generally of the Jewish
Nation, within which not only his own Personal Ministry was confined, but also
the Ministry of his Apostles for some time after his Ascension. For so S. Paul
and Barnabas tell the Jews, that it was necessary the Word of God should first
have been spoken to them, Acts 13.46. But this Proposition is so manifest from
the whole Gospel, that I shall not need to insist any farther upon it.

Seventhly, Therefore that this Remnant still continued the same individual
Church or Kingdom of Christ with the former, though very much reformed and
improved. For it still remained upon the same basis with the former, as having
the self-same Covenant for its Charter, which is the form that Identifies all
Societies, and, notwithstanding the perpetual change and renovation of their
parts, still continues them the same individual Politic bodies. Since
therefore that remnant of Israel, who believed in Christ, continued still in
the same Covenant with that whereupon the old Jewish Church was founded, it
necessarily follows, that they were not a new or distinct Church, but still
remained the same individual sacred society with the old. So that they were the
unbelieving Jews that revolted from their old Church, by rejecting the Mediator
of that Covenant by which it was formed and constituted; but as for the
believing Jews, who embraced and acknowledged him, they still continued in it,
and so remained the same continued Church, as being still united and
incorporated by the same Charter.

But though it was the same continued body with the old Jewish Church, yet was
it very much reformed and improved by our blessed Savior. For, in the first
pl^ce, whereas before it was extremely corrupted through the many false glosses
and superstitious traditions of their Elders, and like an un^^est Garden, was
all overgrown with Thorns and Weeds, its Religion being almost dwindled away
into Ceremonies, and outward observances, and evaporated into a dead show and
formality; our blessed Savior repaired its ruins and decays, removed its
rubbish, and reformed its disorders, and restored it to its primitive beauty
and purity. For the great design of all his Sermons and Parables was to explain
the Laws of it into their Genuine sense, and to rescue them from the false
Glosses and Comments of the Scribes and Pharisees; to reprehend and expose its
hypocrisy and formality, and to refine its Religion from all those corrupt and
heterogeneous mixtures with which it was dashed and sophisticated. That Remnant
of the Jews therefore who believed in Christ, and submitted to his Doctrine,
when all the rest of them finally rejected him, were the same individual
continued body with the Old Jewish Church, as purified and reformed from its
errors and corruptions. For by submitting to our Savior's regulations they did
not commence into a new Church, but still continued the same body, only with
this difference, that whereas before it was distempered with sundry corrupt
humors, now it was thoroughly purged and recovered.

And as our Savior restored that Church to its ancient purity, so, secondly,
he advanced and improved it to a far more perfect state than it was in even
under its primitive Constitution. It is true, as for the Religion of that
Church it was for substance the same with that which our Savior and his
Apostles taught; it proposed to them the same Covenant, and the same Mediator,
and the very same Doctrines, and Articles concerning this Mediator, to create
in them the same belief, and oblige them to the same practice, only with this
difference, that whereas it proposed him to their belief as hereafter to be
incarnate and sacrificed, to rise and to ascend into heaven; it proposes him to
ours as actually incarnate and sacrificed, and as actually risen and ascended;
but this is only a circumstantial difference, since that, as to all the
purposes of his Mediation, his future Incarnation and Sacrifice, etc. had the
same virtue and influence with his actual. But though as to the main the
ancient Jewish Religion was the same with ours, yet in respect of clearness,
and easiness, and amplitude, there is a vast difference between them. For,
first, as to clearness, it is evident that it was much more darkly and
obscurely revealed to the ancient Jews than it is to us; for to them it was
revealed only either in general Promises, out of which they were fain to argue
and deduce particulars; or in temporal Promises, that carried a mystical sense
with them, and obscurely implied the spiritual blessings which the Gospel
proposes; or in dark Types and material Figures and Emblems, which were
Prophetic Pictures, or, as the Apostle calls them, shadows of good things to
come. For thus in that general Promise, In thy Seed shall all the Nations of
the Earth be blessed, was included Christ, and all those particular blessings
which we receive by and through him; under those temporal promises of
deliverance from their enemies, and peace^ble possession of Canaan, was couched
their deliverance from sin and hell, and their eternal rest and happiness in
heaven; and under their legal Sacrifices, the all-sufficient Sacrifice of the
blessed Mediator was exhibited and represented to them; and in a word, under
the High Priest's offering the blood of the Sacrifice in the Holy of Holies,
was intimated the Mediator's intercession for them in heaven. Thus both the
Promises and Types of the Jewish Religion were all of them obscure revelations
of Christianity, which is nothing but Mystical Judaism, or Judaism explained
into its spiritual sense and meaning. And accordingly the Apostle makes a Jew,
according to the spiritual sense of the Jewish Religion, to be the same with a
Christian; for he is not a Jew, says he, i. e. in a spiritual sense, that is
one outwardly, neither is that Circumcision which is outward in the flesh, but
he is a Jew who is one inwardly, i. e. who is a Jew according to the inward and
spiritual sense of Judaism; and Circumcision is that of the heart, in the
Spirit and not in the Letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God, Romans
2.28, 29. and if the spiritual Jew be a Christian, then the spiritual Judaism
must be Christianity. But though this obscure revelation of Christianity was
sufficient to enable men, that sincerely attended to it, to grope out their way
to eternal happiness; yet it is impossible it should ever give them, without
some farther revelation, a distinct and explicit understanding of it. In
general they understood that there was a rich vein of spiritual sense running
all through the Letter of their Law; that there were glorious mysteries wrapped
up within those weak and beggarly elements, like precious Diamonds under a
rough coat. For so not only the Author to the Hebrews, but also Philo the Jew
in his Allegories of the Law, and almost in all his other Writings, makes the
Rites and Ceremonies of the Jewish Religion to be Types and Figures of Divine
and Moral truths; and particularly the High Priest and his Vestments to be a
figure of the eternal Word and his perfections. And as they understood this in
general, so from sundry passages in the book of the Psalms it is apparent that
the good Jews had a prospect beyond the outside and letter of their Law, even
into the Mystical sense and meaning of it; and that through its dark shadows
they saw a great deal of the substance and reality of the Gospel. Hence David
observes in Psalm. 25.14. that the secret, i. e. mystery, of the Lord is with
them that fear him, and he shall show them his Covenant; which implies that
there was something of a Cabala of the spiritual sense of the Law among the
true Israelites, by which they were instructed a great deal farther than the
bare Letter and outside of it; especially considering that Prayer of David,
Psalm 119.18. Open thou mine eyes that I may behold wondrous things out of thy
Law, which is a plain argument, that under the literal since of that Law which
was plain and obvious, and had nothing of depth or mystery, he saw a spiritual
and mystical sense, in which some very wonderful truths were included. For if
there had been no more in it than the literal meaning, it is not to be im^gined
he would have prayed as he does, ver. 19. Hide not thy Commandments from me;
and ver. 27 Make me to understand the way of thy Precepts, so shall I talk of
thy wondrous works; which plainly sh^ws that there were mysteries co^^hed under
the Letter of the Law, which were both wonderful in themselves, and very
difficult to be understand; and accordingly, ver. 69. he tells us, that he had
seen an end of all perfections, but that God's Commandments were exceeding
broad, which shows that he had discovered something in that Law beyond the
literal sense of it (which was far from being exceeding broad) even a vast Mine
of mystical sense, whose bottom he was not able to reach. Now this mystical
sense, as has been showed, was Christianity, which under that dispensation of
it was so overcast with clouds and darkness, that in all probability the most
pious and inquisitive minds had but very imperfect and confus^^ ^pp^ehensions
of it.

But when our Savior came into the World he unveiled the Jewish Religion, and
decyphered all those mystical Characters wherein its spiritual s^^ce was
expressed; and what he had revealed before only in obscure generals, and
mysterious types* he now delived to the world in plain and explicit Articles
of Faith. And having unriddled all those Types and Shadows, and turned them
inside outward, and revealed their hidden sense to the world in plain and
naked Propositions, he utterly repealed and abrogated them as things of no
farther use; those sacred truths which they contained, and darkly intimated,
being now made manifest, and set forth to open view in a far more clear and
glorious light. For the proper use and design of all those Types was to teach
the Gospel; so the Apostle, the Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us unto
Christ, Gal. 3.24. but it is evident they were designed to teach it but darkly
and mysteriously. For the Jews being bred among the Egyptians, who were wont
to express their divine and moral Doctrines by sensible Images or
Hieroglyphics, God in compliance therewith (the Jews being infinitely fond of
the manners of Egypt) thought it meet at first to express the Gospel to them
in the same typical manner, i. e. to represent the whole method and Economy of
it in visible signs and figures, which he intended only for a rude draught of
the Gospel, which he purposed afterward to draw to the life, and express more
clearly and exactly. When therefore our Savior had fully revealed to the World
the sense and meaning of those Types, and expressed what they did so
mysteriously signify in plain and clear Propositions, they from thenceforth
became altogether useless, and for that reason were repealed, and utterly
expunged out of the Rubric of divine Worship. So that now the Gospel which
hitherto ran under ground in a dark and mysterious Channel, broke forth into a
visible stream from underneath that surface of Types and Shadows which had
hitherto covered and in a great measure concealed it from the sight and view of
the world. And therefore we need no longer grope after it among Shadows and
Vmbrages, as the good Jews were fain to do under the Mosaic Dispensation,
those Doctrines of it which before were all Mystery and overcast with Types and
Shadows, being now brought forth from behind the Curtain into open view, and
presented barefaced to our understandings in a most plain, and easy, and
familiar sense. Since therefore the Types of the Law, and Jesus Christ taught
the same Religion, and only he taught more plainly and clearly what they taught
more darkly and mysteriously, it hence necessarily follows, that those
believing Jews who received and acknowledged Christ, espoused no new Religion,
but still adhered to that good old Religion which the significant Rites and
Ceremonies of their Law had all along preached to them; and that it was only
the unbelieving Jews who rejected Christ's Doctrine, that were the true
Apostates from the ancient Judaism, which preached and exhibited to them all
those holy mysteries of which the Religion of our Savior is composed; but as
for those of them who believed in Jesus, they continued steadfast in the mystic
and spiritual sense of their ancient Religion, and though they forsook their
old Schoolmaster, the Law, under which they had been trained and educated, yet
still they retained their old Lesson. For the Doctrine of Jesus was the
standing Doctrine of their Legal Types, which they taught darkly and obscurely,
but he most clearly and distinctly; and therefore though those believing Jews
still continued in the same Doctrine, yet they had very good reason to change
their Teacher, and from being the Disciples of the Law to become the Disciples
of Jesus, under whose instruction they were sure to improve far beyond what
they had hitherto done under their old Master. Since therefore Christianity is
nothing but the ancient Judaism explained and unriddled, it hence necessarily
follows, that the believing Jews, by embracing it, did not commence a new
Church distinct from the ancient Jewish one, but were the same Church, still
continued and improved; the same Church, because founded on the same Religion;
but the same Church improved, because enlightened with a far more distinct and
explicit knowledge of that Religion.

And as our Savior did very much improve the Religion of the Jewish Church in
respect of clearness and perspicuity, so he did also in respect of easiness.
For besides those many Rites and Ceremonies which the Law of Moses superadded
to it, as Types and Shadows of the Gospel, there were sundry others superadded
to it by the same Law, partly in conformity to the more innocent Rites of the
Egyptians, among whom the Jews were educated, and of whose Rites and Manners
they were pertinaciously fond; and partly in opposition to their Magical and
Idolatrous ones, vid. Vol. 1. p. 45, 46. For the Primitive Jewish Religion was
that which the Patriarchs and their Posterity professed and practiced before
the giving of the Law, and to which the Ceremonial Law was but a superaddition;
but by reason of the vast number of Rites and Ceremonies which this Law
contained (which yet considering their state and temper was very necessary for
them) their Religion was rendered exceeding cumbersom and grievous to them; and
therefore the Apostle justly calls it a yoke which neither they nor their
forefathers were able to bear, Acts 15.10. But our Savior when he came into
the World, who was the substance and accomplishment of all those Ceremonial
Types and Prophetic Pictures, unloaded it of all those burthensom appendages,
and thereby restored it to that ancient ease and liberty in which it was before
that yoke of bondage was imposed on it: nay, and not only so, but also rendered
it more easy than ever, for whereas before the Law it had annexed to it that
painful Rite of Circumcision, which was the Primitive Seal of that Religion or
Covenant, our blessed Savior exchanged it for a much gentler and easier, viz.
that of Baptism. For whereas Circumcision was not only an infamous Rite among
the greatest part of the Gentile World, and upon that account unfit to be the
sign of initiation into the Church of Christ, which was now to be enlarged and
propagated through the World; but also a bloody and painful one, and upon that
account more apt to affright men from, than to ini^iate them into his Church;
Baptism was a Rite that both Jews and Gentiles reverenced, and that is very
easy and practicable in its own nature. So that whereas the ancient Judaism
was rendered a yoke of bondage (as the Apostle calls it, Gal. 5.10.) through
those numerous Rites and Ceremonies that were superinduced upon it, our Savior
disburthened it of them all, and thereby rendered it an easy yoke, as he
himself calls it, Matt. 11.30. Since therefore Christianity, for the main, is
nothing but the ancient Judaism released from the bondage of the Ceremonial
Law, and restored to its Primitive easiness and freedom, it hence follows, that
by embracing Christ and his Doctrine the believing Jews did not turn to a new
Religion, nor consequently constitute a new Church, but still continued in
their Old Religion, which our Savior only bettered and improved, and rendered
far more easy and practicable.

Thirdly and lastly, Our Savior very much improved the Jewish Church and
Religion in respect of the extent and Amplitude of it. It is true, the Gentiles
who embraced the Jewish Religion were always allowed admission into the Jewish
Church. For so at first not only Abraham himself and his Children, but his
Servants also were admitted into Covenant with God, and thereby made his Church
and People. And in the Reigns of David and Solomon, as Mr. Seldom de Iure l. 2.
cap. 2. observes, there were vast numbers of Converts to the Jewish Church out
of all the Neighboring Nations; and in Ahasuerus's Reign many of the People of
the Land, of Media and Persia, became Jews, Esther 8.17. and afterward in
Hyrcanus's Reign the whole Nation of the Idumeans embraced the Jewish Religion;
all which, and many more, as the true Children of Abraham's faith, were by
Circumcision initiated into the Covenant God made with him and his Posterity,
and thereby became Co-members with them of the same Corporation, and Coheirs to
the same Promises. But though the Gate of the Jewish Church was never shut
against the Gentiles, yet, as I showed before, there were sundry of the Rites
of that Church instituted on purpose to divide and separate the Jews from the
Gentiles, to create a distance and mutual strangeness between them, that
thereby the Jews might be preserved and secured from mingling with the Gentile
Idolatries. Now by these distinguishing Rites, which begat an inveter^te mutual
prejudice between the Jews and Gentiles, the Jewish Church was very much
narrowed and contracted. For in the first place th^se distinguishing Rites by
prejudicing the Jews against the Gentiles restrained them from all free
converse and communication with them, and thereby from propagating their
Religion among them; and secondly, by prejudicing the Gentiles against the
Jews, they also prejudiced them against the Jewish Religion, and rendered their
minds extremely averse to the entertainment of it. Thus as these Ceremonious
singularities of the Jewish Church were to the Jews great preservatives against
the Idolatries of the Gentiles, so to the Gentiles they were very great
hindrances of their conversion to the Religion of the Jews. And therefore our
Savior, in order to his design of propagating Christianity among the Gentiles,
which is the true Spirit and Mystery of Judaism, found it necessary to remove
from it these offensive Rites, which lay as so many stumbling blocks in the way
to the conversion of the Gentiles to it, and so by pulling down this middle
Wall of partition between the Jews and Gentiles, and abolishing this enmity of
Ordinances which created such a vast distance between them, he opened and
prepared the way to the conversion of the Gentiles, and took a most prudent and
effectual course to make peace between them and the Jews, and to reconcile them
both into one body in the Cross, and and hereby to extend and enlarge the
Church into an universal Corporation.

In short therefore Christianity being nothing else but only Judaism separated
from all those Appendages of it, which rendered it obscure, and burthensom, and
narrow, it hence follows that that Remnant of Jews who received and embraced
it, were so far from renouncing their old Religion, that they still admitted,
and professed, and adhered to it under its greatest advantages and
improvements; that they renounced nothing of it but only its comparative
defects, and did only admit of these new reformations of it, by which our
Savior advanced it to its utmost luster and perfection, and rendered it
infinitely more clear, and easy, and extensive; and since it was their old
Religion thus reformed and improved that they still embraced and continued in,
upon their turning Christians, it necessarily follows, that they did not become
a new, distinct Church, but were only a continued succession of the Old one.
And hence it is that Christians in the New Testament are sometimes called Jews,
Rev. 2.9. i. e. reformed Jews, or, which is the same, true Christians; and
sometimes the Israel of God, Gal. 6.16. and sometimes the Children of Abraham,
Gal. 3.7. and sometimes a chosen generation, a Royal Priesthood, an holy
Nation, a peculiar people, which is the proper Character of the Jews, because
by their Faith and Religion, which is nothing but the true spiritual and
mystic Judaism, they were Jews and Israelites, and the Children of Abraham,
though they were not all so according to the Flesh, as the Apostle
distinguishes, 1 Cor. 10.18. and hence also it is that the Christian Church is
called the new Jerusalem, Rev. 3.12. because it is nothing but the Old
Jerusalem or Jewish Church renewed and enlarged.

Eighthly and lastly, That to this individual Church or Kingdom of Christ, thus
reformed and improved, was superadded all those Gentiles that were afterward
converted to Christianity. When the main body of the Jews had rejected our
Savior, his Kingdom was reduced to a very narrow compass, and consisted only
of one single Congregation of Christians in Jerusalem, which, through the
blessing of God upon the indefatigable industry of his Apostles and Disciples,
was by degrees spread and dilated over all the World. For this single
Congregation was the Primitive root out of which the vast stock of the
Catholic Church sprung, which has since branched forth it self into
particular Churches to all the ends of the Earth; for it is of this Church that
the Apostle speaks, Acts 2.47. when he tells us, that the Lord added to the
Church daily such as should be saved. So that all that were converted to the
faith of Christ were but so many additions to this Primitive Church, so many
living stones incorporated into this spiritual building, which by the industry
of its builders did soon increase and multiply into several other
Congregations; and these Congregations, though they were several, yet were not
separate or independent, but continued all of them united to the first, as
Homogeneous parts growing out of the same body, or distinct Apartments
superadded to the same building. So that the Christian Church began in one
Congregation, and by degrees enlarged it self, like a fruitful stock, by
branching forth it self into other Congregations in a continued unity with its
own body, which for the convenience of Worship and Discipline were afterward
formed into several (though not separate) particular Churches under the conduct
of their particular Pastors and Governors. And thus all the particular
Churches that are now in the World are only so many Lines drawn from this
Primitive Center, and united in it; and it is upon this account particularly
that they all of them constitute but one Catholic Church, because they all
grew out of one, and so are but comparts of the same body, and branches of the
same root, and are only that one Primitive Church multiplied into several
Churches living in the same Catholic Communion and Unity. And accordingly the
Gentile Converts are said to be grafted into the Jewish Church, which the
Apostle calls the good Olive tree in Romans 11.17, 18 For if some of the
branches, that is, the unbelieving Jews, be broken off, i. e. rejected from
being any more the Church and People of God, and thou being a wild Olive Tree,
growing in the wild common of the World without the Pale and Enclosure of God's
Church, were grafted in among them, i. e. incorporated with the believing Jews,
and made a member of the body of their Church, and with them partakest of the
root and fatness of the Olive Tree, i. e. communicatest with them in all the
blessings of God's Promise to Abraham, which is the foundation of their Church,
boast not against the branches, but if thou boast, consider thou bear not
the root, but the root thee, i. e. the Jewish Church grew not out of thee, but
thou out of that; she is no branch of thee, but thou of her, as being ingrafted
into her Stock, and added to her Communion. By which it is evident that the
converted Gentiles were all but so many superadditions to that Primitive Church
of Jerusalem, which was the only remainder of the ancient Jewish Church, and
which from one single Congregation did by degrees increase and multiply it self
into an infinite number of particular Churches in Union with it self from one
end of the World to the other.

And this, in short, is the Progress of Christ's Kingdom, which from Adam to
Abraham consisted of all such as were true Worshippers of God of whatsoever
Kindred or Nation; from Abraham to Jesus Christ principally of the Jewish
Nation; and when the greatest part of that Nation had revolted from Christ, and
renounced their relation to him, his Kingdom extended no farther than to the
small Remnant of the Jews that adhered to him, who made up but one single
Congregation, which Congregation by the diligence of its Ministers, and the
blessing of God increased and propagated from it self vast numbers of other
Congregations, and these were formed into particular Churches, which like so
many conquered Provinces were still united to that Primitive Kingdom, till at
last by a continued accession of new Conquests it was spread and enlarged into
an universal Empire.

SECT. VIII. Of the Nature and Constitution of Christ's Kingdom.
THE Kingdom of Christ and the Church of Christ are phrases of a promiscuous
use in holy Scripture, and do import the same thing. Thus Matthew. 16.18, 19.
Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church, and I will give unto
thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, where the Church and the Kingdom of
Heaven are the same thing. And thus to be translated into the Kingdom of
Christ, Col. 1.13. and called to the Kingdom of Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 2.12. imports
no more than to be made a member of the Church of Christ. And thus also by the
Kingdom, Matt. 13.38. by the Kingdom of God, Matthew. 21.31. by the Kingdom of
Heaven, Matt. 11.12. and by the Kingdom of Christ, Rev. 11.15. no other thing
can be intended but only the Church of Christ.

I confess the Kingdom of Christ taken in the largest sense extends a great
deal farther than the Church of Christ. For under God the Father he is
universal Lord and King of the World, his Kingly power being upon his Ascension
into Heaven extended, as was shown before, to the utmost limits of the
Universe. For so he himself tells us by way of Anticipation, that God has
given him power over all flesh, John 17.2. i. e. over all mankind. For his
Regal power extends as far as his power of judging which is one of the
principal Acts of his Regality, and his power of judging is over all mankind;
for so we are assured that God has appointed a day in which he will judge the
World by the man Christ Jesus, Acts 17.31. and that Christ is ordained of God
to be the Judge of quick and dead, Acts 10.42. and not only so, but that when
he shall sit down upon the throne of his glory all Nations shall be gathered
before him, Matthew. 25.31, 32. Since therefore by the right of his Royalty he
shall judge all Nations, it necessarily follows, that all Nations are under his
Empire and Dominion; and accordingly the Apostle tells us, that God has set
him at his own right hand in the heavenly places, far above all principality,
and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in
this world, but also in that which is to come, and has put all things under
his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to the Church, Ephesians. 1.20, 21,
22. So that the Kingdom of Christ in a large sense extends to all Nations in
the World, even to the Heathens and Infidels that never heard of his name, and
upon this account he is styled, The blessed and only Potentate, the King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, 1 Timothy 6.15. and so also Rev. 17 14.

But the Church is more peculiarly his Kingdom, as consisting of that part of
the World which owns and acknowledges his authority, makes a visible profession
of fealty to him, and submission to his Laws and Regulations. As for the other
parts of the World, they are all of right his Subjects, by virtue of that
Universal Regal Authority wherewith the most High God and Father of all things
has invested him, but de facto they are Slaves to the Prince of darkness, all
whose Dominions in this World are nothing but usurpations on the Kingdom of
Christ. But the Church is that part of the World that has thrown off the yoke
of this Usurper, and by a solemn Profession surrendered up it self to the
Authority of Christ its rightful Lord and Sovereign; and hence the Members of
the Church are said to be translated out of the Kingdom of darkness into the
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Col. 1.13.

The Church therefore being more peculiarly Christ's Kingdom, as being that
part of the World which is actually subjected to him, and under his Government,
I shall, with as much brevity as the Argument will admit, inquire into the
nature and constitution of it. In general therefore the Church or Kingdom of
Christ may be thus defined: It is the one universal society of all Christian
People incorporated by the new Covenant in Baptism under Jesus Christ its
supreme head, and distributed under lawful Governors and Pastors into
particular Churches holding Communion with each other in all the Essentials of
Christian Faith, and Worship and Discipline. For our better understanding of
which definition it will be necessary to explain the several parts of it.

First Therefore it is the one universal Society of all Christian People.

Secondly, Of all Christian People incorporated by the New Covenant.

Thirdly, Of all Christian People incorporated by the New Covenant in Baptism.

Fourthly, Of all Christian People incorporated under Jesus Christ its supreme
Head and Governor.

Fifthly, It is a Society of all Christian People distributed into particular
Churches.

Sixthly, It is distributed into particular Churches under lawful Pastors and
Governors.

Seventhly, It is distributed into particular Churches holding Communion with
each other.

Eighthly, The Communion which these particular Churches hold with each o^h^r
is,

First, In all the Essentials of Christian Faith; and

Secondly, In all the Essentials of Christian Worship.

Thirdly, In all the Essentials of Christian Discipline.

First, The Church or Kingdom of Christ is one universal Society consisting of
all Christian People, who, as was shown before, were at first comprised in one
single Congregation at Jerusalem, and then this single Congregation was the
whole Church or Kingdom of Christ, which by the continual accession of new
Converts, increased and multiplied by degrees, till at length it was spread
over the whole Earth. So that the Christian Society as it is now enlarged is
nothing but that Primitive Church diffused and dilated. For it was not diffused
into separate and independent Societi^s, but into similar parts and members of
the same Society, and therefore as a man is one and the same person when he is
full grown, as he was when he was an Infant but of a span long, because his
growth consists not in an addition of other persons to him, but only of other
parts of the same person; so the Church of Christ is the same individual Church
now, since it is grown to this vast Bulk and Proportion, that it was in its
infant state, when it extended no farther than one single Cong^egation, because
it grew not into other divided Churches, but only into other distinct parts of
the same Church; and therefore since its growth consisted only in new
accessions of similar parts to the same body, it must be as much one Body or
Society now, as it was at first, when it was but one single Congregation. For
this Congregation was the root out of which the Catholic Church sprang, or, as
our Savior phrases it, the grain of mustard seed, which, though a very small
seed, shot up into a mighty tree, in whose far-spread branches the Birds of the
Air came and lodged; and therefore as the stock and branches grow up from the
root in a continued Union with it, and all together make but one Tree, so all
the Christian People in the World sprang out of this single Congregation, and
as they sprang were still incorporated and united to it, so as that all
together they make but one Church. And this is that which in our Creeds is
called the holy Catholic or universal Church. For so the Apostle tells us,
that there is but one body, or Church, as well as one Spirit, one Lord, one
Faith, and one Baptism, Ephesians. 4.5, 6. and our Savior tells us, Other sheep have
I, meaning the Gentiles, which are not of this fold, meaning the Jewish Church,
and they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one fold and one shepherd,
John 10.16. For so the Gentiles, added to the Christian Jewish Church, are said
of twain to make one new man, Ephesians. 2.13. and both together are compared to a
building fitly framed together, growing into an holy Temple in the Lord, Ibid.
ver. 21. And indeed since all Christians do enjoy in common, and without any
distinction the same privileges and immunities, they must of necessity be all
of the same Community. For it is by their pe^uliar Faith, and Laws, and Rights
of Worship, and Promises, and Privileges that the Christian Society is
distinguished from the rest of the World; and therefore since these
peculiari^ies are by the very institution of Christian Society m^de common to
all Christian People, it is nonsense to suppose them distinguished by that
institution into separate and independent Communities. For how can they be
separate Societies which have nothing to separate and distinguish them, but
enjoy all things in common with one another.

Secondly, The Church is one universal Society of all Christian People
incorporated by the New Covenant: For this is that which distinguishes r^gular
Societies from confused multitudes, that wh^reas the latter are only locally
united, so that as soon as ^ver their parts are dispersed into distant places
they cease to be, and are utterly dissolved; the former are united by Laws and
mut^al stipulations, which are the Political Nerves and Ar^^ries, by which
their several parts, how remote and distant soever, are united to one another.
Even as it is in our City Companies, which are not only united while their
Members are met together in their Common Halls, but do also continue united
after they are dispersed abroad to their several homes, because that which
unites them is not their being together in the same place, but their being
obliged together under the same Laws and stipulations, and communicating with
one another in the duties and privileges of one and the same Charter; by
reason whereof though they suffer a continual defluence of old and access of
new parts, yet still they remain the same Societies, (even like natural bodies
that are under a perpetual flux of parts) because they still retain the same
Laws and Charters which are the s^atique Principles or Forms that individuate
them, and keep them still the same. And thus it is with the Church, which
partakes of the common nature of all other formed and regular Societies. For
hence in Scripture it is called a Kingdom, a City, or Commonwealth, and
compared to a natural Organized body, to denote that it is a Regular Society,
all whose parts are united together by legal bonds and ligaments. Now the legal
bond which unites the Church, and renders all its Members one regular
Corporation, is the New Covenant, by which all Christian People are in one body
obliged to all the duties it requires, and entitled to all the Privileges it
proposes, and by being all engaged together in this one Covenant, whereby they
are all concerned together in the same common duties and privileges, they are
all incorporate together into the same Community. And thus it was that the
Jewish People were all united into one Church, by their being all confederated
as one party in one and the same Covenant, whereby they all engaged themselves,
as one body, to be God's People, and God engaged himself to them, as to one
body, to be their God; which in Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18. is thus expressed, Thou have
avouched this day the Lord to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and to keep
his Statutes, and his Commandments, and the Lord has avouched thee this day to
be his peculiar People as he has promised thee. This therefore was that which
united them into one Religious Society, that they were all confederated with
God in one and the same Covenant. For thus says God, I entered into Covenant
with thee, and thou becamest mine, Ezekiel. 16.8. and hence God is said to be
married to that People, I^r. 3.14. and to be their Husband, Isa. 54.5. because
by the Covenant, which like a Matrimonial engagement was transacted between God
and them, they were all united into one Sp^use, and contracted to one Husband.
And in the same sense the Christian Church is called the Bride and the Spouse
of Christ, vid. Rev. 22.17. and Christ is called her Husband, 2 Cor. 11.2.
because we by contracting our selves to him in one and the same Covenant, do
all become one Party, and are incorporate together into one Spouse, and he by
contracting himself to us in one and the same Counterpart unites us in one
common Husband, and endows us in common with all his spiritual Goods and
Blessings. So that by the New Covenant, which is the Nuptial Contract between
Christ and Christians, and in which we are said to be married to Christ, Romans
7.7. we are not only united to one head and Husband, but are also incorporated
into one body and Spouse. And accordingly as the Jews by virtue of their
Covenant with God, were separated from all Nations, and united together into a
distinct body, upon which account they are called God's peculiar Treasure, a
Kingdom of Priests, and an holy Nation, Exodus 19.5, 6. so we Christians by
virtue of our Covenant with God in Christ are separated from all other
Societies, and made a distinct Corporation from the World; upon which account
we are also called, a chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, and holy Nation,
and a peculiar people, 1 Pet. 2.9.

Thirdly, The Church or Kingdom of Christ is the universal Society of all
Christian People incorporated by the new Covenant in Baptism. For so in humane
Contracts it has been thought meet even by the unanimous consent of all
prudent Lawgivers, that the mutual engagements of the contracting Parties
should not be legally Pleadable, till they have been first mutually sealed and
solemnly confirmed before witness. And accordingly God, who is wont to proceed
with men in humane Methods, has always thought meet to strike and ratify his
Covenants with them by some visible sign, or solemnity. For thus he struck his
Covenant with the Jews in that visible solemnity of Circumcision, which was the
sign by which God and that People sealed and consigned to each other their
respective parts of that Covenant, by which he stipulated to be their God, and
they to be his People. And till such time as this outward sign was transacted
between God and them, the Covenant it sealed was not in force so as to oblige
either Party, or give them a mutual claim in one another. And hence it is
called God's Covenant in their flesh for an everlasting Covenant, and they who
refused to admit this sign, unless it were under some great necessity (in which
case God accepted the sincere desire for the deed) were to be cut off from that
People, i. e. to be treated as Aliens from that Church, and that because they
had broken or rejected God's Covenant, i. e. by refusing that sign which was
the Seal and ratification of it, Genesis 17.13, 14.

But this bloody sign, as was shown before, being not so commodious for the
state of the Christian Church, which was to be diffused over all the World, our
Savior abolished it, and in its room introduced the sign of Baptism, which was
before used by the Jews for the initiation of their Females and Proselytes, and
which was much more acceptable to the Gentiles, as not being at all offensive
to them, (as Circumcision was) it being one of their own Religious Ceremonies,
and much less painful in its own nature. But though this was of a quite
different nature from Circumcision, yet it was instituted by our Savior to
supply its room, and to serve its religious ends and purposes, viz. to
transact, and seal, and ratify the new Covenant between God and us. For in
Baptism the Party Baptized makes a solemn Vow and Profession, by himself or his
Sponsor, of fidelity and Allegiance to God through Jesus Christ; and hence
Baptism is called the answer or promise of a good Conscience, 1 Pet. 3.21. For
in the Apostolic Age, as Orig^n tells us, in Number. Homil. 5. there were certain
questions proposed by the Minister to the Person to be Baptized, which St.
Cyprian calls Interrogatio Baptismi, the Interrogation of Baptism; Now the
questions proposed were first, (...); Will thou renounce the Devil? To which
the Party answered, (...), I do renounce; then he was asked again, (...)* Do
thou consent to resign thy self to Christ? To which he answered, (...), I do
consent; and this answer or promise being made with a sincere intention, was
that in all Probability which the Apostle here calls the answer of a good
Conscience, and if so, it is certain that these words do imply our formal
Covenanting with God in Baptism. Of the truth of which we have a large account
in Romans 6.3, 4, 5. Know ye not that so many as were baptized into Jesus Christ
were baptized into his death, therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into
death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the
Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life, for if we have been
planted together into the likeness of his death, we shall be also into the
likeness of his Resurrection; where it is plain that those Phrases, buried with
Christ, and risen with Christ are only the sense and signification of that
Eastern custom in Baptism, viz. of Plunging the Baptized person under water,
and raising him up again, which being Sacramental actions must be supposed to
have a peculiar import and significancy, and the significancy of them the
Apostle here plainly tells us wholly refers to the Death, and Burial, and
Resurrection of Christ; and therefore the plunging under water must necessarily
refer to Christ's Death and Burial, and the raising up again, to his
Resurrection. The true import therefore of these Baptismal actions must be,
First, a solemn profession of our belief, that as we are buried under water and
raised up again, so Christ died, and was buried, and raised up from the dead,
which being the principal Articles of Christianity do include all the rest.
Secondly, They also import a solemn engagement of the Party baptized to die to,
and endeavor utterly to extinguish all his sinful lusts and affections, even
as Christ died and was buried, and to rise from the spiritual death of sin into
newness of life, even as Christ rose from his natural death to live for ever.
Since therefore in their Baptism they did by the same actions signify their
belief of the Death, and Burial, and Resurrection of Christ, together with
their own resolution of dying to sin, and rising to righteousness, they might
very well be said to dye with Christ in those actions, to be buried with
Christ, and to rise with Christ, since what is represented as done together, is
representatively done together, and it is usual in Sacraments to call the
representing signs by the names of the things which they represent. For so the
Paschal Lamb is called the Passover, and the Bread and Wine in the Lord's
Supper the Body and Blood of Christ; and for the same reason the plunging under
water and raising up again in Baptism is here called dying with Christ, and
rising with Christ, because in the same actions Christ's natural Death and
Resurrection and our spiritual Death and Resurrection are represented together.
The meaning therefore of the above cited passage is plainly this, You cannot be
ignorant that when you were baptized into Jesus Christ you made a solemn
Profession that you would conform your selves to his Death in dying to sin even
as he died for it, so that in your Baptismal immersion you were
representatively buried with him, that so as Christ was raised from the dead,
so you in conformity thereto might live a new regenerate life; for if we
conform to his Death in dying to sin, as we promised to do in our immersion, we
shall be sure to conform to his Resurrection also in living to Righteousness,
as we promised to do in our rising out of the water again. By which it is
evident that Baptism is on our part a solemn engagement of our selves to
perform the conditions of the New Covenant. And indeed the very phrase Baptized
into Jesus Christ can import no less than a solemn resignation of our selves to
Christ in Baptism. For so the phrase Baptized into Moses, 1 Cor. 10.2. plainly
denotes the Jews giving up themselves to him, to be governed by him, as the
Minister of God. And accordingly the Apostle tells us, that so many as have
been Baptized into Christ have put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. and putting on Christ
is opposed by the Apostle to making no provision for the flesh to fulfill the
lusts thereof, Romans 13.14. and therefore must necessarily denote an engagement
of our selves to a strict observance of the Laws of Christian purity; or, which
is the same thing, a promise or stipulation, on our part, of universal
obedience to his Laws. By all which it is evident that in this solemnity of
Baptism we put our selves under Christ, as our Head, and Covenant with him to
be ruled by him in our Faith and Manners.

And as in this Ceremony of Initiation we strike Covenant with him, so does he
with us. For in this sacred Action the Minister is the authorized Proxy of
Jesus Christ, and therefore his giving the holy Sign is Christ's own action,
and does to all intents and purposes as much oblige him, as if he did it in his
own Person. For since Christ is not upon Earth, and so cannot transact the New
Covenant with us in his own Person, it is necessary he should do it by
Authorized Proxies, empowered by himself to do it in his Name; which Proxies
being thus Authorized by him, do as effectually oblige him by those federal
Rites which they perform in his Name, as if he himself had performed them in
his own Person. For he does what they do by his Authority, and is as
effectually obliged by what he does by them mediately, as by what he does by
himself immediately. For thus his Commission runs, by which he Authorized them
and their Successors to the end of the World, Go teach all Nations, baptizing
them in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; where that Phrase, in the
Name, plainly imports (as it generally does in other places of Scripture) by
the Authority. So that by this Commission Christ's Ministers are authorized and
constituted the legal Proxies of the holy Trinity, in the stead of those
blessed Persons to seal the New Covenant with the Baptismal sign to those whom
they baptize, and thereby legally to oblige the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost to
perform the Promises of it to all those Baptized persons who perform the
conditions of it. For that the Baptismal sign is a legal engagement upon God as
well as us to perform the New Covenant, is evident from Mark 16.16. He that
believes and is baptized shall be saved; where it is evident, that Baptism as
well as Faith does confer a right to Salvation; and therefore since Faith
confers it only as it is the Condition of the Covenant, Baptism must confer it
as it is the Seal of the Covenant. And accordingly S. Peter exhorts his
Converts to repent and be baptized for the remission of sins, and ye shall
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost; from whence it is evident, that Baptism as
well as Repentance has a great influence on our remission of sins, and our
communication of the Holy Ghost. Since therefore Faith and Repentance are the
whole condition of the promise of remission, and of the Holy Ghost, it
necessarily follows, that Baptism does not influence it as it is the Condition,
but as it is the Seal of the Promise. And so also in Baptism we are said to
wash away our sins, i. e. the guilt of them, Acts 22.16. because the sign of
Baptism seals to us on God's part the Promise of Forgiveness. By all which it
is evident, that Baptism is a federal Rite in which God and we do seal and
ratify to one another each others part of the New Covenant; and it is this
sealing that makes the Covenant obliging to both Parties, and gives to each a
legal Claim and Title to each others promise and engagement; to God it gives a
legal Title to all that duty which we promise, and to us it gives a legal Title
to all those blessings which God promises. So that till such time as we are
Baptized, the New Covenant is not struck between God and us, nor have we any
right or title to any of the blessings promised in it. And though we should
perform all that duty which the Covenant requires, yet this will not at all
entitle us to the blessings it promises. For he who engages to walk a Mile for
me upon my promise to give him a thousand pounds, has upon his performance a
just claim and title to the whole Sum; whereas he that walks ten Miles for me
without any such promise, has a right to no more than what in strict justice
he deserves. And therefore since what God promises in the New Covenant
infinitely exceeds the merit of what he requires, our performance of what he
requires does not at all oblige him to bestow the blessings of his promise on
us, unless we perform it upon a Covenant-engagement; and therefore till this
engagement is made and sealed in our Baptism, we can have no promise to rely
upon; and though we should nev^r so heartily endeavor to repent, we can^^t
claim the divine grace and assistance, and though we should actually repent, we
can plead ^o title to remission of sins, and though we should p^rsevere in
well-doing to the end, we cannot challenge eternal life. And since our
endeavors do not merit God's grace, nor our repentance his Pardon, nor our
perseverance eternal life, he is no more obliged to bestow these blessings on
us by his Justice than he is by his Promise. So that in this state all we have
to rely upon is the hope of an extraordinary mercy; that God will do for us
that which he never promised, and bestow upon us that which he is not obliged
to. But when once we have struck Covenant with him in Baptism, we have him fast
obliged to us to perform his part of the Covenant, whenever we perform ours;
and our being thus tied together as one party in one and the same Covenant by
this federal Rite of Baptism, is that which makes us one Catholic Church or
Community. For our admission into this New Covenant, which is the Churches
Charter, is our admission into the Church it self; and it is by being entitled
to all the blessings that belong to Christians in common, by virtue of the New
Covenant, that we become Members of the Christian Community. And hence we are
said to be Baptized into the body or Church of Christ, 1 Cor. 12.13. because
Baptism, which is our admission into the Christian Covenant, is only in other
words our admission into the Christian Church, which is nothing but the Body of
Christian People joined and confederated by the New Covenant.

Fourthly, The Church or Kingdom of Christ is one universal Society of all
Christian People incorporated by the New Covenant in Baptism under Jesus Christ
its supreme head. And it is this also that makes all Christian People one Body
and Society, because they are all united under one and the same supreme head
and Governor. For as several neighboring Congregations are called in
Scripture one Church, as I shall show hereafter; because they were all under
the Government of one and the same Bishop; so all the Churches under all the
Bishops in the World are in Scripture called one Church, because they are all
under one Governor, even Jesus Christ the supreme Bishop of our souls: And
accordingly the Apostle tells us, that as there is but one body, i. e. one
Church, so there is but one Lord or supreme Governor of that Church, Ephesians. 4.4,
5. and in Col. 1.18. he tells us, that Christ is the head of this body the
Church; and again, Ephesians. 5.23. that the Husband is the head of the Wife, even as
Christ is the head of the Church. For Christ being Mediator of the Covenant, by
which we are incorporated into a Religious Society, it must be under him, as
our immediate head and Governor, that we are incorporate by it; because as he
is Mediator of it for God, his Office is to govern us for and under God,
according to the terms and conditions of it.

Fifthly, The Church or Kingdom of Christ is one universal Society of all
Christian People [distributed into particular Churches] which distribution is
made for the convenience of divine Worship* For the Catholic Church being a
vast Body composed of infinite parts which are separated from each other by
vast distances of place, it is impossible for it to celebrate the Offices of
Divine Worship in any one Assembly or Congregation. At first indeed the whole
Catholic Church was only a single Congregation; but this in a little time
increased and multiplied so fast, that they could no longer exercise the
Public Worship of God together in one place or Assembly; and therefore the
first distribution of it was into several Congregations which in Scripture are
called by the name of Churches, as being similar parts of the Catholic Church,
even as every breath of Air is called Air, and every drop of water, water. For
thus those Believers who were wont to assemble in any one particular house to
worship God together are frequently called Churches: as for instances, the
Church in the house of Priscilla and Aquila, Romans 16.5. The Church in the house
of Nymphas, 1 Cor. 16.19. The Church in the house of Philemon, Col. 4.15. In
which houses in all probability there was an upper Room Consecrated and set
apart according to the Custom of the Jews for divine Worship, in which upper
Rooms not only the Believers of the Family, but several other neighboring
Christians were wont to assemble for the public exercise of Divine Worship.
And so where ever the Scripture speaks of several Churches in the same Country;
as for instances, the Churches of Judea, Gal. 1.22. of Samaria and Galile^,
Acts 9.31. it is evident, that by these Churches no more is meant but only the
several Congregations of Believers in those several Churches.

But these Congregations growing numerous, there was a second distribution made
of them, by which many of those Congregations neighboring upon one another,
were collected into one body, under one head or Bishop, who was the common
guide and Pastor of all the Members, whether Lay or Clergy, appertaining to
them. And these Collections of several Congregations under their several
Bishops or Governors, are in Scripture also frequently called Churches; for
thus for instance, the Church of Corinth contained in it several Congregations,
and therefore though in the Dedication of his Epistle the Apostle calls it, the
Church of God, in the singular number, which is at Corinth, 1 Cor. 1.2. yet in
the Epistle he enjoins, that the women should keep silence in the Churches, 1
Cor. 14.34* which is a plain Evidence, that in that Church there were several
Churches or Congregations; and so also we read of the Churches of Asia, and
Syria, Cilicia, and Macedonia, all which were large Countries; and did without
doubt contain in them several Congregations of Christians; and thus also we
read of the Church of Jerusalem in the singular number, and so of Antioch,
Eph^sus, etc. which Churches doubtless consisted of several Congregations in
and about th^se Populous Cities; which were all united into one body under the
care and inspection of one Bishop or Governor.

Now as the first distribution of the Catholic Church into distinct
Congregations was made for the convenience of Worship, it being impossible for
the whole Church, when it began to increase and enlarge it self, to celebrate
the divine Offices by the Ministry of one and the same Pastor; so this second
d^stribution of it into particular Churches, consisting of several
Congregations, was made for the convenience of Government and Discipline; it
being impossible for the whole Church to maintain its Order, Government, and
Discipline, under the single inspection of any one Bishop or Governor: But yet
notwithstanding th^se distributions the Churches unity still remains; for as
the Empire was but one, notwithstanding that for the convenience of Society and
Government it was distributed into several Cities and Regions, and those into
several Provinces, because they were all incorporated together under one Civil
head, the Emperor; so the Church is but one, though for the convenience of
Worship and Government it be distributed into several Congregations, and those
into several particular Churches or Episcopacies; because they are all
incorporate under one spiritual Head, even Jesus Christ the supreme Bishop and
Pastor of our Souls.

Sixthly, It is the universal Society of all Christian People distributed into
particular Churches under lawful Governors and Pastors, and it is this indeed
that constitutes them distinct Churches, viz. their being joined and united
together under distinct Pastors and Governors: For thus a single Congregation
is a distinct Church, because all the Members of it do locally Communicate
together in all the Offices of Divine Worship administered to them by a distinct
Pastor; and so also a Collection of several Congregations is a distinct Church,
because they all participate together of the direction and conduct of a
distinct Governor. For, as I showed before, the reason of these distributions
of the Catholic Church first into single Congregations, was the Convenience of
Worship, and then into several Collections of several Congregations was the
Convenience of Government; and therefore since that which serves the
convenience of Worship is the having distinct Pastors to administer it, and
that which serves the convenience of Government is the having distinct Rulers
to exercise it, it hence necessarily follows, that that which makes a
Congregation a distinct distribution of the Catholic Church, must be its
worshipping together under a distinct Pastor; and that which makes a Collection
of Congregations a distinct distribution of the Catholic Church, must be its
being united together under a distinct Governor; because without their Pastor
or their Governor they want the formal reason of their being distributed into
distinct Churches. And indeed there is no Church whatsoever, whether it be a
single Congregation or a Collection of Congregations, can act as a Church
without a Pastor or Governor. No Congregation can lawfully communicate in the
public Offices of Divine Worship without a lawful Pastor to administer it: no
Collection of Congregations can lawfully exert any act of Church Government
without having an authorized Governor to exercise it. For the administration
of all Church-Offices is committed by our Savior into the hands of the
Churches Officers; it is to them that he has given the keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, i. e. Authority to admit, or exclude, or readmit men into the Communion
of the Church: It is they alone whom he has made the Keepers of the Seals of
the New Covenant, viz. Baptism and the Lord's Supper; they alone whom he has
authorized to teach the Gospel, to bless the People, and to offer up the
Public Prayers of Christian Assemblies. And these are the proper acts of a
Church considered as a Church; so that without Pastors or Governors there is
no Church can perform any of those acts that are proper to a Church: and
therefore since all action proceeds from the Essence of the Agent; Pastors and
Governors, without which Churches as such cannot act, must necessarily be
essential to Churches: and hence the Apostle tells us, that the great purpose
for which Christ ordained Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, and Pastors, and
Teachers was, (...), for the compacting or joining together the Saints as one
body in Church Communion and Society, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. and hence also you find
the Churches of Asia following the number of the Angels or Rulers of them; Rev.
1.20. which plainly implies, that therefore they were seven distinct Churches,
because they had seven distinct Rulers or Bishops; and therefore though the
Ordination of Pastors and Bishops is not consined to the Ministry of any
particular Church, but extends to the Ministry of the Church Catholic, for so
S. Paul, Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, all are yours, and you are
Christ's, that is, they are all Ministers of the Catholic Church in common, of
which you are Members, and as such you have all a share in them, 1 Cor. 3.22,
23. yet it is the particular application of this their general capacity to this
or that particular number of Christians or Congregations of Christians, that
constitutes them particular Churches; and being first authorized Ministers of
the Catholic Church, they carry along with them into the particular Church
they are sent to, all that Church Authority and Power by which it acts and
operates as a Church: So that without Pastors or Governors particular Churches
are nothing but so many Bodies without Souls, to animate and act them; and
therefore as in natural Bodies the form that acts them does also constitute
their Kind and Species, so in these Ecclesistical Bodies the Pastors and
Governors, that move and act them as Churches, do also constitute them
Churches. What these lawful Pastors and Governors are, I shall have occasion
to discourse hereafter, when I come to treat of the Ministers of Christ's
Kingdom; it being sufficient at present to show the necessity of them to the
constituting particular Churches.

Seventhly, The Church is one universal Society of all Christian People
distributed into particular Churches [holding Communion with each other] by
holding Communion with each other, I mean, owning each other as parts of the
same body, and admitting each others Members, as occasion serves, into actual
Communion with them in all their Religious Offices. It is true, in the
Primitive Churches there were sundry prudential acts of Communion passed
between them, such as their formed and communicatory Letters, by which the holy
Bishops gave an account to each other of the state and condition of their
respective Churches, and consulted each others judgment about them; but these
were not at all essential to that Communion which they were obliged, as true
Churches, to maintain with one another. All the Communion which they are
obliged to, as they are similar parts and distributions of the Catholic
Church, is that they should not divide into separate Churches, so as to exclude
each others Members from Communicating in each others Worship, when ever they
have occasion to travel from one Church to another. For so long as there is no
Rupture between distant Churches, no declared disowning of each other, no
express refusal of any act of Communion to each others Members, they may be
truly said to maintain all necessary Communion with each other. And that this
Communion is absolutely necessary between all those particular Churches into
which the Catholic Church is distributed will evidently appear from these four
considerations. First, that by Baptism, as was showed before, all Christian
People are made Members of the Catholic Church, and by being made Members of
it they are all obliged to Communicate with it; for how can they act as parts
of the whole, that hold no Communication with the whole? They who are Members
of any Society have not only a Right to communicate in all the common Benefits
of it, but also an Obligation to communicate in all common Offices of it; and
therefore since by Baptism we are made Members of the Catholic Church or
Society of Christians, we are thereby not only entitled to partake with it in
all its Privileges, but also obliged to join with it in all its Offices. But
then secondly, it is farther to be considered, that the Catholic Church being
all distributed into particular Churches, we can no otherwise communicate with
it, than by communicating with some particular Church; for how can we
communicate with the whole, that is all distributed into parts, without
communicating with some part of the whole? And since the whole is nothing but
only a Collection of all the parts, what Communion can they hold with the
whole, who hold no Communion with any part of it? So long therefore as there is
any such thing as a visible Catholic Church upon Earth, we are obliged by our
Baptism, unless necessity hinder us, to maintain a visible Communion with it;
and so long as this Catholic Church is all distributed into so many particular
visible Churches, we cannot visibly communicate with it, unless we communicate
with some one of those particular Churches. For how can we be in Communion with
the whole body, when we are out of Communion with all the parts, unless we can
find a body to communicate with without all its parts, or some universal Church
without all particular Churches. But then thirdly, it is also to be considered
that as we cannot Communicate with the universal Church without Communicating
with some particular one, so neither do we Communicate with the universal
Church by Communicating with any particular one, unless that particular one be
in Communion with the Church Universal. For if I cannot communicate with the
whole without being in Communion with some part of the whole, it is impossible
I should communicate with the whole unless I communicate with some part that is
in Communion with the whole. It is as possible for a Finger to communicate with
a body by being joined to an Arm that is separated from the body; as it is for
a Christian to Communicate with the Church Catholic by being joined to a
Church that is separate from the Church Catholic. But then fourthly and
lastly, There is no particular Church can be in Communion with the Catholic,
that separates it self from the Communion of any particular Church that is in
Communion with the Catholic. For they who separate from any part of any whole,
must necessarily separate from the whole, because the whole is nothing but all
the parts together; and it is a contradiction to say, that they who are
separated from any one part are yet united to all. How then is it possible for
any Church to separate it self from the Communion of any other Church, which is
a true part of the Church Catholic, without separating it self from the
Communion of the Church Catholic it self; since the Church Catholic is
nothing but a Collection of all true Churches; and to be at the same time
united to all true Churches, and separated from one true Church, is the same
absurdity as to be separated from all true Churches, and yet united to one. In
short, the Catholic Church is one, by the Communion of all its parts, and
therefore they who break Communion with any one part must necessarily disunite
themselves from the whole. For when two Churches separate from one another, it
must be, either because the one requires such terms of Communion as are not
Catholic, or because the other refuses such as are. Now that Church which
requires sinful or uncatholick terms of Communion, does thereby exclude not
only one, but all parts of the Catholic Church from its Communion, because
they are all equally obliged not to Communicate with any Church upon sinful
terms of Communion, and that Church which excludes all parts of the Catholic
Church from its Communion, must in so doing separate it self from the Communion
of the Catholic Church. And so on the other hand, that Church which refuses
the Communion of any other Church upon lawful and Catholic terms, does thereby
separate it self from Communion of all parts of the Church Catholic, because
it separates from a part that is in Communion with all the parts of it; for
that Church which may be lawfully Communicated with is in Communion with all
other Churches that are in Communion with the Catholic Church; and therefore
that Church which separates from its Communion cannot be in the number of those
Churches that are in Communion with the Catholic Church; and how then can this
separating Church be in the Communion of the Catholic Church, when it is out
of the Communion of any one of those Churches of which the Catholic Church
consists? All those particular Churches therefore into which the Catholic
Church is distributed, must be in Communion with each other, otherwise they are
so far from being distributions of the Catholic Church, that they are only so
many Schisms and divisions from it. For if every Christian is obliged by his
Baptism to Communicate with the Catholic Church; and if he can no otherwise
Communicate with it than by Communicating with some particular Church, which is
in Communion with the Church Catholic; and lastly, if no particular Church can
be in Communion with the Church Catholic which is not in Communion with all
the Churches of which the Church Catholic consists; then it is absolutely
necessary that all those Churches into which the Church Catholic is
distributed should maintain a Catholic Communion with one another.

Eighthly and lastly, The Communion which these particular Churches into which
the Catholic Society of Christians is distributed, hold with each other is
threefold: 1. In all the Essentials of Christian Faith: 2. In all the
Essentials of Christi^n Worship. 3. In all the Ess^ntials of Christian
Discipline.

I. In all the Essentials of Christian Faith; By the Essentials of Christian
Faith, I mean those Doctrines, the belief of which is necessary to the very
being of Christianity; for as in all Arts and Sciences there are some first
Principles upon which the whole Scheme of their Doctrines depends, and the
denial of which like the removing the foundations of a building dissolves and
ruins the whole structure; so in Christianity there are some Principles so
fundamental to it, as that the removal of them shakes the whole Scheme of it in
pieces. Now the great Fundamental, as the Apostle tells us, is Jesus Christ,
for other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ, 1
Cor. 3.11. so that by removing the belief of Jesus Christ from the Christian
Religion, we necessarily sink and dissolve the whole structure; and accordingly
the Apostle pronounces those men Apostates from Christianity who hold not the
head, which is Jesus Christ, Col. 2.19. but yet the bare belief of Jesus
Christ, or of this Proposition, that Christ came from God, and was his Messiah
and Anointed, is not all that is essential to the Christian Faith, which
includes not only his Mission from God, but also the end of his Mission, viz.
to be a Mediator between God and Man. For Christianity, as it is distinguished
from Natural Religion, is nothing but the Religion of the Mediator, as
consisting wholly of the Doctrine of the Mediator, together with the duties
thence arising; so that whatsoever Proposition the Mediatorship of Christ
necessarily and immediately implies, it is a fundamental Article of the
Christian Faith, which no man can deny, without innovating the whole Religion,
and turning it into a quite different Doctrine from true and real Christianity.
For this Proposition, that Christ came from God to Mediate between God and Man,
includes the whole Doctrine of the Gospel: and therefore whatsoever Proposition
is either so necessarily included in it, or so inseparably conjoined with it,
as that the denial of it does by necessary and immediate consequence overthrow
the Mediation of our Savior, it must be essential to the Christian Faith; and
the more necessary Connection there is between any particular Doctrine, and
this all-comprehending Doctrine of the Mediation, the more necessary and
essential it is to the Christian Faith.

Now whosoever believes not, or at least denies any Essential part of the
Christian Faith, is not a Christian, and that not only because he wants a part
of that Faith which denominates men Christians, but also because by
disbelieving that part he does by necessary consequence overthrow the whole of
Christianity, for so Tertul. de Praescr. c. 37. expressly asserts, Si Haeretici
sunt, Christiani esse non possunt, i. e. they who are Heretics cannot be
Christians; and hence it is that Heretics, who are such as obstinately deny
any fundamental Article of Christianity, are in Scripture ranked in the same
C^ass with Heathens and Infidels; for all true Christians are required to shun
and avoid them as unclean persons, the very touch of whose conversation was
enough to defile them, Romans 16.17. and the Governors of the Church are
required to anathematize or exclude them from all Christian Communion, Gal.
1.8. to reject them, Tit. 3.10. and withdraw themselves from them, 1 Timothy 6.5.
that is, to treat them as Heathens and Infidels, who have no right or title to
Christian Communion; and if Heretical persons are to be thus treated, then much
more are Heretical Churches, and if every single Heretic be condemned of
himself, as the Apostle affirms, Tit. 3.11. i. e. excommunicated by his own
Sentence or Doctrine, whereby he voluntarily departs from the Church, and so
cuts off himself from its Communion, then certainly so is every Heretical
Community; and therefore as such must be utterly unqualified for Christian
Communion. And if Heresy excommunicates not only Heretical Persons, but
Heretical Societies, then a common Agreement in all the Essentials of Christian
Faith, which is the opposite of Heresy, is necessarily included in Catholic
Communion; and accordingly the Scripture frequently presses all Christian
People to this common agreement, as to a most essential part of their Communion
with each other: For so they are required to mind or think one and the same
thing, Phil. 2.2. to stand fast in one spirit with one mind, 2 Cor. 13.11. to
walk by the same rule, and think the same thing, Phil. 1.27. to be joined
together in the same mind, and in the same judgment, 1 Cor. 1.10. To hold fast
the form of sound words, 2 Timothy 1.13. to strive together for the faith of the
Gospel, Phil. 1.27. and to keep that which is committed to us, 1 Timothy 6.20.
which is that one form of Doctrine which was delivered to us, Rom^ 6.17. The
meaning of all which is not to oblige us to be of one mind and judgment in all
points of Religion; for that is no more in our power than it is to be all of
one stature or complexion; but that we should all unanimously consent in all
those fundamental Articles of which that one Faith consists, which is the
common Creed of Christians: So that it is not the differing of one Church from
another in Doctrines that are either remote from or near the foundations of
Christianity, that dissolves their Communion in the Christian Faith; but so
long as the essential Doctrines of the Gospel are secured on both sides, no
corrupt Doctrines on either side can warrant a breach of Communion between
them. It is true, if the erring Church imposes the belief of its errors as a
Condition of its Communion, no Church or Christian, that believes them to be
errors, can lawfully Communicate with it, be those errors never so small or
inconsiderable; not that in themselves they are a sufficient cause of
separation, but because they who do not believe them cannot profess they do,
without telling a lie, which is a condition that is simply unlawful: And so
also when the errors are such as do corrupt the vital and essential parts of
her Worship, so that there is no communicating with her in her Worship without
communicating in her corruptions; all Churches and Christians are obliged to
abstain from its Communion, not because of the errors simply considered in
themselves, but because they profane and desecrate her Worship with those
sinful intermixtures they infuse into it; so that we cannot join with her in
her Worship, without joining with her in her sin: so that there is no error can
separate any Church or Christian from the Catholic Communion of Faith, but
only Heresy, which is a perverse renunciation of some essential part or
fundamental Article of that Faith.

Secondly, The Communion which the particular Churches, of which the Catholic
Church consists, hold with each other is in all the Essentials also of
Christian Worship. By the Essentials of Christian Worship, I mean the
Invocation of the one Eternal God through the one Mediator Jesus Christ, and
the participation of the two Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord's Supper. Hence
the Apostle tells us, that as there is but one common Faith wherein all true
Christians communicate with each other, so there is but one Lord, Ephesians. 4.4. and
but one God for us to address to, and one Mediator between God and man for us
to address by, 1 Timothy 2.5. and therefore to address to this one God by this one
Mediator, is an essential part of Christian Worship. And the same Apostle tells
us, that there is but one Baptism, Ephesians. 4.4. and but one bread of which we are
all partakers, 1 Cor. 10 17. and therefore to participate of these Sacraments
must also be essential to Christian Worship; so that all those particular
Churches that admit each others Members upon lawful terms to communicate with
them in worshipping this one God, through this one Mediator, and in this one
Baptism, and one Eucharistical Bread and Cup, are so far in Communion with the
Church Catholic. For in these acts of Christian Worship consists the principal
part of Christian Communion, and therefore that Church which refuses either to
admit other Churches to communicate with her in these acts of Worship, or to
communicate with them in them upon lawful terms, does so far separate it self
from the Christian Communion, I say upon lawful terms, because if it either
require unlawful, or refuse lawful ones, it utterly excludes all other Churches
from its Communion. If on the one hand it has sophisticated its Worship with
any unlawful intermixtures, so that there is no participating with her in the
one, without partaking with her in the other; If we cannot pray with her to the
one God by the one Mediator, without praying to Creatures too, or praying by
other Mediators also: If we cannot partake with her in her Baptism, without
partaking with her in some sinful and impure Rites of Baptism: In a word, if we
cannot be admitted to receive the Lord's Supper with her, without receiving it
by halves, or being obliged to pay divine homage to its Elements; in this case,
I say, all Christians and Christian Churches are utterly excluded by her from
communicating with her in the Essentials of Christian Worship. And so on the
other hand, if a Church forbid its Members to Communicate upon occasion with
any other Church in these acts of Christian Worship, upon lawful terms, in so
doing it divides it self from the Communion of the Church Catholic; and though
that Church it refuses to communicate with, should through the neglect of its
Discipline have a great many bad men as well as good in it; though it should
require the observation of a great many indifferent Rites, Customs, and
Ceremonies, yea, and of contrary Rites and Customs to its own; yet so long as
the Essentials of its Worship are kept pure and entire, and are not so blended
with unlawful intermixtures* but that we may safely partake of them, without
being at all obliged to partake of any sin; in this case I say to refuse to
Communicate with it, is to separate from the Communion of the Catholic Church.
For for the same reason that any Church refuses to Communicate with this
Church, it must refuse to Communicate with all other Churches in the World,
because we cannot to this day, nor ever could Communicate with any Church in
the World in which there was not some defect of Discipline, some intermixture
of bad men with good, and some indifferent Modes and Ceremonies of Worship.

Thirdly and lastly, Another thing wherein those particular Churches into which
the Catholic Church is distributed do communicate with each other, is in the
Essentials of Christian Regiment and Discipline; for though the particular
Modes and Circumstances of Christian Government and Discipline are not
determined by divine Institution, but left for the most part free to the
prudent ordering and disposal of the Governors of particular Churches; yet
there is a standing form of Government and Discipline in the Church instituted
by our Savior himself, which, as I shall show hereafter, is this, that there
should be an Episcopacy, or Order of men authorized in a continued Succession
from the Apostles (who were Authorized by himself) to oversee and govern all
those particular Churches into which the Church Catholic should be hereafter
distributed* to Ordain inferior Ministers to teach, and instruct, and
administer the holy Offices to particular Congregations; and having Ordained
them, to guide and direct them in the discharge of their Functions, to
prescribe the particular Rules of outward Order and Decency to the People of
the respective Churches committed to their Charge, to confirm the weak, and
admonish the disorderly, and correct the obstinate, by excluding them from the
Communion of the Church of Christ. These things therefore being all of divine
Institution, are the Essentials of Christian Government and Discipline, in
which all Christian Churches are obliged to Communicate with each other. And
this being the standing Government and Discipline of the Catholic Church, no
particular Church or Community of Christians can refuse to communicate in it
without dividing it self from the Communion of the Church Catholic; I say,
refuse to Communicate in it, because it is possible for a Church to be without
this Government and Discipline which yet does neither refuse it, nor the
Communion of any other Church for the sake of it. A Church may be debarred of
it by unavoidable necessities in despite of its power, and against its consent,
and under this circumstance I can by no means think such a Church to be
separated from the Church Catholic; it is indeed an imperfect and defective
part of the Catholic Church, and if this defect of it be any way owing to its
own negligence, it is a very great fault in it, as well as an unhappiness. But
though this instituted Government is necessary to the perfection of a Church,
yet it does not therefore follow that it is necessary to the being of it. For
even in the Jewish Church, wherein all things were determined by divine
institution, even to the minutest Circumstances, there were sundry notorious
deviations from that Institution, which yet did not un-church them. It was a
great deviation in them to offer Sacrifice in their High Places, after God had
determined them to Sacrifice only at the Temple at Jerusalem: It was another
great deviation in them, to make Priests out of other Families, after God had
determined them to the Family of Aaron; and yet it is certain, that neither the
one nor the other did un-church them: And if these deviations from divine
Institution, which were the effects of their negligence, did not yet un-church
them, it is not to be imagined that such deviations from it as are the pure
effects of necessity should un-church others. For though no necessity can
dispense with the Eternal Laws of good and evil, because the observance of them
depends wholly upon our Wills, and there is no such necessity can happen to us,
as can put them out of the power of a willing mind, yet as for positive
Institutions, there are a thousand necessities may occur, any one of which may
render them wholly unpracticable, and then no man can be obliged to do that
which is impossible; as for instance, the whole Family of Aaron might have been
extinct, and if it had, it is evident that positive institution by which God
required the Jews to choose their Priests out of the Family of Aaron, must have
been wholly unpracticable, and consequently the Obligation of it must have for
ever expired; and they must have been obliged, notwithstanding that positive
Institution, either wholly to have dropped their Priesthood, and with that their
Public Worship, (which was much more necessary to them than that their Priests
should be all of such a Family,) or to have chosen their Priests out of other
Families of the Tribe of Levi; and if in this exigence they had done the later,
there is no doubt but that the Divine Providence which created the necessity,
must thereby have designedly dispensed with its own institution, and so have
left them free to make Priests out of other Families. And by the same reason,
when ever the divine Providence does by unavoidable necessity deprive any
Church of its Episcopacy, it thereby, for the present at least, and whilst the
necessity continues, releases it from the obligation of the Institution of
Episcopacy, and allows it to administer its Government and Disscipline by a
Parity of Presbyters. And therefore so long as it does not renounce the
Episcopacy, but still continues in Communion with other Churches that enjoy it,
it ought to be looked upon and communicated with as a true Member (though a
maimed one) of the Church Catholic; For the Catholic Church never denied her
Communion to any Christian or Community of Christians upon any unavoidable
deviation from positive Institution. It was without doubt as great a deviation
from positive Institution for Laymen to Baptize, as for a Parity of Presbyters
to Govern or Ordain, etc. and yet in cases of necessity the Catholic Church
always allowed the Baptism of Laymen, as deeming Baptism in it self more
necessary than the administration of Baptism by persons in Holy Orders, and
therefore where such persons could not be had, she thought meet rather to admit
that Laymen should administer it, than to suffer such as were qualified for it
to die unbaptized. And why may we not reasonably suppose that the Catholic
Church will admit Presbyters to Govern and Ordain, where there are no Bishops
to be had, since it has admitted Laymen to Baptize, where there are neither
Bishops nor Presbyters to be had? Since the later is as great a deflection from
positive Institution as the former: And if the Catholic Church may be
reasonably presumed to allow it in such necessary cases, we must acknowledge
either that she has not Authority enough to provide against her own
necessities, which supposes her to be very defective; or that her allowance is
sufficient to authorize such persons to Rule and Ordain, as well as to Baptize,
in case of necessity, as are not authorized by positive Institution.

But though a Community of Christians may be a true part of the Catholic
Church, and in Communion with it, though it has no Episcopacy; yet it is plain
case, that if it rejects the Episcopacy, and separates from the Communion of
it, it thereby wholly divides it self from the Communion of the Catholic
Church. For whether Episcopacy be of divine Institution or no, this is matter
of fact granted on all hands, that for twelve hundred years at least all those
Churches into which the Catholic Church has been distributed have been
subject to the Episcopal Government and Discipline, and therefore they who now
separate themselves from the Episcopal Communion as such, must in so doing
separate themselves from the Communion of all Churches for twelve hundred years
together, and then either all those Churches must be out of the Communion of
the Catholic Church, and consequently during all that time there must be no
such thing as a visible Catholic Church upon Earth; or else those Communities
of Christians which separate from all those Churches must be Schisms and
Separations from the Catholic Church.

SECT. IX. Concerning the Ministers of the Kingdom of Christ.
HAving in the foregoing Section treated at large concerning the Nature and
Constitution of Christ's Kingdom, I shall in the next place show who the
Ministers are, by whom he Rules and Governs it. And these are all included
under a fourfold Rank and Order.

First, The first and supreme Minister by which Christ rules his Kingdom is the
Holy Ghost.

Secondly, The second and next to him are the Angels of God.

Thirdly, The third are Princes and Civil Governors.

Fourthly, The last are the Bishops and Pastors of the Church.

I. The supreme Minister by which Christ rules his Kingdom is the Holy Ghost,
or Third Person in the Holy Trinity, of whose Person and Ministry under our
Savior in his Kingdom I have treated at large from P. 49. to P. 98.

II. Therefore the next Order of Ministers by which Christ rules his Kingdom
are the Angels of God, that is, the whole world of Angels, whether they be good
or bad, Angels of Light, or Angels of Darkness. In the prosecution of which
Argument I shall endeavor first to prove the thing, viz.

That the Angels, both good and bad, are the Ministers of Christ in the
Government of his Kingdom.

Secondly, To show wherein their Ministry does consist. First, That the Angels,
both good and bad, are Christ's Ministers in his Kingdom; For as for the good
Angels, they are subjected to Christ by the Order and Appointment of God
himself; who is the Father of Spirits, and to whom they are inviolably
obedient: And for the bad, they are subjected to him by just Conquest, contrary
to their own Wills and Inclinations. Of each of which I shall endeavor to give
some brief account.

First, The good Angels are subjected to Christ by the Order and Appointment of
God, to whom they are always inviolably obedient. It seems at least very
probable, that before our Savior was Exalted upon his Triumphant Ascension
into Heaven to the universal Empire of the World under God the Father, the
Angelical Powers were not all of them subjected to his Mediatorial Royalty, but
that some of them had their distinct Regencies and Presidentships, immediately
under God the most high Father, over such and such Nations and Countries as he
in his Grace thought meet to allot to them, for so it is evident the Septuagint
thought, when in Deuteronomy. 32.8. instead of he, (i. e. God,) set the bounds of the
Nations according to the number of the Children of Israel, they render it, He
set the bounds of the Nations according to the number of the Angels of God; for
as the ancient Jews distributed the Gentile world into seventy two Nations, so
they also reckoned seventy two Angels that presided over them; and indeed
considering what follows, ver. 9. For the Lord's portion is his People, Jacob
is the lot of his inheritance, it seems very probable that this translation of
the Septuagint was the true sense of the Original, viz. that whereas God
distributed the Gentile world into so many Nations as there were President
Angels to be their Guardians and Governors, he reserved Israel to himself as
his own Lot and Portion, over which he intended to preside immediately in his
own person; and therefore, as a learned Writer of our own has observed, it is
not at all improbable but that instead of (...) i. e. the Sons of Israel, as it
is now in our Hebrew Copies the ancient reading whence the Septuagint
translated might be (...) i. e. the Sons of God, and that El might either be
mistaken by the Transcribers for a final abbreviation of Israel, or changed
into Il, which is the contraction of Israel, and if in the ancient Hebrew it
was the Sons of God, it is no wonder that the Septuagint rendered it the Angels
of God; the Sons of God being in Scripture a very common Appellation of Angels.

But whether this be so or not, it is evident, that when God threatened to
withdraw his personal presence from Israel upon their worshipping the golden
Calf, and to put them under the Conduct of an Angel, Exodus 33.2, 3. the meaning
of it was, that he would no longer preside over them in his own Person, but
subject them to the Government of a President Angel, and therefore ver. 20. he
bids them beware of this Angel, and obey his voice, and not provoke him; for,
says he, he will not pardon your iniquities: which plainly shows, that this
Angel was to have had a ruling power over them to pardon or punish them at his
own pleasure; so that that which God here Threatened was, that he would put them
in the same condition with other Gentile Nations, who were subjected to the
Government of particular Guardian Angels, and so change their Theocracy into an
Angelocracy. And so as it is evident Moses understood him, for ver. 15, 16. he
thus prays, If thy Presence go not with me, carry us not up hence, for wherein
shall it be known here that I and thy People have found grace in thy sight, is
it not that Thou go with us, so shall we be separated, I and thy People,
from all the People that are on the face of the Earth: where it is very plain,
that that which distinguished Israel from all other Nations was this, that God
himself in his own Person immediately presided over them, and that if this
distinction were taken away by God's withdrawing from them, and subjecting them
to the Presidence of an Angel, they would be left in the same condition with
other Gentile Nations, who must therefore be supposed to be under the immediate
Conduct of President Angels. And this is most evident of the Kingdom of Persia,
and the Kingdom of Greece in particular, Dan. 10.13, 20. where there is mention
made of two Angels under the Character of the Prince of Persia, and the Prince
of Greece, and also of a Third, viz. Michael who is styled one of the chief
Princes, and Michael your Prince, ver. 21. and elsewhere the great Prince which
stands for the Children of thy People, Dan. 12.1. and upon what other account
can we suppose them to be styled the Princes of those Countries, but because
they presided over them as their Guardians and Governors. It is true, as for
the last of them, viz. Michael, he is supposed by very learned Expositors to be
no other than God the Son, who, as I have proved at large, was always the
Prince and Guardian of Israel; but if he were not God the Son, but merely a
created Angel, it is certain he was not the President or Guardian of Israel;
since, as was shown before, they had no other Guardian but God himself; but in
all probability he was the Prince of those Angels that ministered to God the Son
in his Guardianship and Government of Israel; and consequently that Angel of
his to whom he intended to subject them, when he threatened to withdraw his
personal Conduct from them, upon which account he might be called their Prince,
because under Christ he had a Principal share in the Protection and Government
of them. Now these Guardian Angels seem to have been Archangels, or the Princes
of the distinct Orders of Angels; for so Michael is not only styled an
Archangel, Jude 9. but he is also said to have an Army of Angels under his
Command and Conduct, and with them to have fought with the Dragon or Satan (who
was also an Archangel) and his Angels, Rev. 12.7. Now though Michael (supposing
him to be a created Spirit) was not a Guardian Angel, yet the Prophecy of
Daniel by stiling him one of the Chief Princes plainly assures us that he was
an Angel of the same Rank and degree with the Princes or Guardian Angels of
Persia and Greece; from whence it follows, that those Guardian Angels were
Archangels, as well as he, and consequently that they also had their Angels or
appropriate Armies of Angels, under their Conduct and Command, in which Armies
of theirs (whose Ministry without doubt they always used in the Administration
of their respective Guardianships) there is no question but there was an exact
Order and Regiment, which cannot well be supposed without supposing in them
particular Officers subordinated to each other under their respective Princes
or Archangels; and this seems to be implied in that distinction which the
Apostle makes between these heavenly Spirits, Col. 1.16. Whether they be
Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers; where by Thrones he seems
to mean the respective Princes or Archangels of the several Orders; by
Dominions or Lordships, the Reguli or chief Dignitaries under the Archangels;
by Principalities, their Governors of such Provinces or Cities as were within
their Guardianships; by Powers, their inferior Magistrates or Officers.

These Archangels therefore, who were the Tutelar or Guardian Angels of
Countries, together with their respective Cohorts or Armies of Angels, seem not
to have been subjected to the Mediatorial Dominion of our Savior, till after
his Ascension into Heaven; at which time it seems God totally dissolved those
Angelocracies, or Angelical Governments of Countries and Nations, and subjected
both them and the Archangels (together with their Armies of Angels) that
governed them to the Mediatorial Scepter of our Lord and Savior; upon which he
who before was King only of the Jews, vid. P. 224, 225. became universal Lord
and Emperor of the World, for so Heb. 2.5. we are told, That to the Angels God
has not put in subjection the World to come, or future Age, as it is in the
Greek; where by the future Age it is evident he means the time of the Gospel;
for this is the very Phrase used by the Septuagint: to express the State of
Christianity, Isa. 9.6. where Christ is called (...), The Father of the future
Age. This passage therefore of God's not subjecting the future age to the
Angels, plainly implies that he had subjected the past age to them, by
constituting them the Guardians of Nations, but that now in this age of the
Gospel he has wholly dissolved that Economy by subjecting both the Guardians,
and the Nations they guarded, to the Dominion of our Lord and Savior; so that
now the whole world of Angels is in the same subjection to Jesus Christ, as it
seems Michael and his Angels were before Christ's Exaltation, that is, they are
now no longer subject as Deputy Governors of Provinces and Nations, who as
such were empowered to do good or hurt to those who were under their
Government, according to their own discretion, but as the immediate attendants
of his person to whom nothing is left arbitrary, but all they do is determined
by the sovereign Will of him who imploys them; for thus the Scripture declares,
that upon his Ascension into Heaven he was vested with a new Dominion over the
Angelical World; so 1 Pet. 3.22. we are told, that it was upon his going into
Heaven, and sitting down at the right hand of God, that Angels, and
Authorities, and Powers were made subject to him; and in Ephesians. 20.21. that God
raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in heavenly places
far above all Principality, and Power, and Might, and Dominion, i. e. above all
Angels of what rank and quality soever, and every name that is named, not only
in this World, but also in that which is to come; and accordingly, Col. 2.10.
he is said to be head of all Principality and power, i. e. of all the heavenly
Hierarchy, as well as earthly Dominions; thus also the Apostle tells us, that
upon his Ascension into Heaven God has given him a name above every name, that
at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, i. e. that every Being should
acknowledge subjection, either of things in Heaven, or of things on Earth, or
things under the Earth; i. e. whether of Angels, or Men, or Devils. And as all
these Angelical Powers are now subjected to Christ, so do they all of them
minister under him in his Kingdom; for so Heb. 1.14. they are said to be all of
them ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be Heirs of
Salvation, and in so doing they must necessarily minister under him who is the
Captain of our salvation; and accordingly in Rev. 5.6. those seven Angels which
in Z^ch. 4.10. are said to be the seven eyes of the Lord which run to and fro
the whole Earth; and therefore styled the Watchers, Dan. 4.13. as being the
chief Instruments of the divine Providence, are called the seven eyes of the
Lamb, by whose Ministry and Agency he inspects and governs his Kingdom, which
plainly implies, that they now minister to the Exalted Mediator in the same
capacity that they heretofore ministered to God Almighty himself.

2. And then secondly, as the good Angels are subjected to Christ by the
Ordination and appointment of God, so the bad are subjected to him by just and
lawful Conquest, for so the Scripture assures us, that our blessed Savior
subdued them to his Mediatorial Empire by pure dint of just force and violence;
for so we find in his lifetime he frequently contested with these evil
spirits, and in despite of all their power and malice continually vanquished
and repelled them. Thus in his Temptation in the Wilderness with only that
powerful Command, Get thee hence Satan, he put the Devil to flight, Matthew.
4.10, 11. so also upon his approach toward the two possessed Gergesens the
Devils that possessed them made a hideous outcry, What have we to do with thee
Jesus thou Son of God, art thou come hither to torment us before the time? and
were forced to depart immediately upon his Command, Matthew. 8.29. -- Nor did he
only vanquish them himself in all the personal conflicts he had with them, but
he also gave his Disciples authority over all Devils, Luke 9.1. insomuch that,
Luke 10.17. his Disciples acquaint him, Lord even the Devils are subject unto
us through thy Name; but these were only so many successful skirmishes with
those Powers of darkness in which they fought against him, sometimes in single
Combat, and sometimes in smaller Parties; but the main Battle in which they
engaged him with all their power and might, and by winning of which he
completed his Conquest, and finally subdued them to his Empire, seems to have
been that which he fought in his last Agony, wherein after they had reduced him
to the utmost distress, he struck them with the spiritual Thunderbolts of
inward horror and confusion, and in a Panick Dread forced them to turn their
backs and flee from him. For first, it is evident that before he entered the
Garden where his Agony seized him, he expected some terrible assault from these
Infernal Powers; so he tells his Disciples just before he went thither,
Hereafter I will not talk much with you, for the Prince of this world comes
and has nothing in me, i. e. give me leave now to discourse freely with you,
because within a very little while I shall be so engaged, that I shall not be
at leisure to discharge my mind to you; for the Prince of Devils is just now
mustering up all his Legions against me, and is coming to make his last effort
upon me; but this is my comfort, he will find nothing in me, no sinful
inclination to take part with him, no guilty reflection to expose me to his
Tyranny, John 14.30. and accordingly, Luke 22.53. when the Jews had apprehended
him, he expostulates the case with them, why they did not lay hands on him
before, when he was daily with them in the Temple; and then answers himself,
But now is your hour and the power of darkness; as much as if he should have
said, I need not wonder you did not seize me sooner, for this alas is the
appointed time wherein my Father had decreed to let loose the Devils and you
upon me. Which plainly shows that in that dismal hour he was assaulted by the
Devils as well as by the Jews; for in all probability those crafty and
sagacious spirits had smelt out the merciful design of his approaching death,
viz. that it was to be a ransom for the sins of the World; and therefore though
they were desirous enough of his death, as is apparent by their animating Judas
and the Jews against him, yet dreading the end and intention of it, they
resolve to employ all their Art and Power to tempt and deter him from
undergoing it, and either to prevail with him to avoid it by a shameful
Recantation, or at least not to consent to it; that so being forced and
involuntary, it might be void and ineffectual. In which black design of theirs
God himself thought meet so far to favor them as to give them his free
permission to try him to the utmost; that so having experienced in himself the
utmost force of Temptation that Humane Nature is liable to, he might thereby be
touched with a more tender sympathy with it, or as the Author to the Hebrews
expresses it, That having suffered himself being tempted he might be able to
succor them that are tempted, Chap. 17.18. But then secondly, if we consider
the woeful Circumstances of his Agony, it is evident, that it was the effect of
some far more powerful cause than merely a natural fear of his ensuing Death
and bodily Torment; for no sooner was he entered on that Tragic Stage, but he
began to be sorrowful, says S. Matthew, Chap. 26.37. or to be sore amazed, as
S. Mark, Chap. 14.33. or to be very heavy, as both; which words according to
their native signification declare him to have been all on a sudden oppressed
with some mighty damp, which arising from some fearful spectacle or
imagination, overwhelmed his Soul with an unknown and inexpressible anguish, an
Anguish that sunk and depressed him into as deep a dejection as it was possible
for an innocent mind to endure, causing him to groan out that sad complaint, My
Soul is exceeding sorrowful even unto death, (...), i. e. My Soul is
encompassed with grief, and like a desolate Island surrounded on every side
with an Ocean of sorrows, and that even unto death, as if it had been struggling
under some mortal Pang, and the pains of Hell had got hold upon it. And so
intolerable was his Passion, that though he liberally vented it both at his
Eyes and Lips in Tears, and Sighs, and sorrowful complaints; yet that was not a
sufficient discharge for it, but through all the innumerable Pores of his body
it poured out it self as it were in great drops of blood, Luke 22.44. All which
considered, I can by no means think that that which occasioned this bitter
Agony was merely the prospect of what he was going to suffer from the hands of
men, since not only some Martyrs, but some Malefactors have suffered much more
with less dejection; and if you consult the History, you will find that he bore
his death far better than his Agony, from whence we have just reason to believe
that the later was more grievous to him than the former, and that the
Crucifixion of his body on the Cross was nothing near so painful to him as the
crucifixion of his mind in the Garden. And since his sufferings in his Agony
are described with more Tragical Circumstances than his sufferings on the
Cross, we have just reason to conclude they were inflicted on him by more
spiteful and powerful executioners, and consequently that he endured the
Tortures of men only on the Cross, but of Devils in the Garden, where being
left all alone naked and abandoned of the ordinary supports of his Godhead, and
having only an Angel to stand by and comfort him ( i. e. to represent such
considerations to him of the benefits and advantages of his Death, as were most
proper to fortify him against the Temptations which the Devils were then
urging to deter him from it) he was in all probability surrounded with a mighty
Host of Devils, who exercised all their power and malice to persecute his
innocent soul, to distract and fright it with horrid Phantasms, to afflict it
with dismal suggestions, and vex and cruciate it with dire imaginations and
dreadful spectacles. Thirdly, If we consider that strange unaccountable
drowsiness which seized his Disciples whilst he was in his Agony, it seems to
have been the effect of a Diabolical power; for before he entered into the
Garden he had expressly told them that the Hour was come, wherein he was to be
taken from them by an untimely death; so that one would have thought the dear
love which they bore him, together with the infinite Concern they had in him,
might have been sufficient to have kept them awake for a few hours; yet,
notwithstanding he desired them to watch with him, (being loath it seems to be
left alone in a dark night among a company of horrid and frightful Specter)
upon his return to them he found them fast asleep, and though he gently
upbraided them with their unkindness, What could ye not watch with me one hour?
Yet he no sooner left them but they fell asleep again; for as the Text tells
us, their eyes were heavy. Heavy indeed, that could not hold up for a few hours
upon such an awakening occasion. It is true indeed S. Luke attributes this
prodigious drowsiness of theirs to their sorrow, and so it is usual in
Scripture to put the apparent cause for the real, when the real cause is secret
and invisible. But how can we imagine that mere sorrow should necessitate three
men to fall asleep together under the most awakening Circumstances, all things
considered, that ever happened to Mortals? Why did it not as well force them to
fall asleep again afterward, when their Lord was apprehended, condemned, and
crucified? At all which times they were doubtless rather more sorrowful than
they were in the Garden; and therefore it seems very probable that there was a
much more powerful cause than sorrow in the case, viz. a preternatural
stup^faction of their senses by some of those malignant spirits that were then
conflicting with our Savior, who perhaps to deprive him of the solace of his
Disciples company, did by their Diabolical Art produce that extraordinary
stupor that oppressed them; that so having him all alone, they might have the
greater advantage to tempt and terrify him. Fourthly and lastly, If we
consider the warning our Savior gave his Disciples, when they entered the
Garden with him, of the extraordinary danger they were in of falling into
temptation, it seems very probable that he expected and found there an
extraordinary Concourse of Tempters or evil Spirits; for as soon as they were
entered with him into the Garden, S. Luke tells us, that he bid them pray that
ye enter not into Temptation, Luke 22.40. and when notwithstanding this
admonition they fell asleep the first time, he bids them again, watch and pray
that ye enter not into Temptation, Matthew. 26.41. which words plainly imply our
Savior's apprehension of some extraordinary danger they were in of being
tempted in the very time and place of his Agony, and what more probable account
can be given of this apprehension of his than this, that he ^ound vast numbers
of evil spirits there, by whom he himself at that very time was furiously
tempted and assaulted, and that therefore having experienced their power and
malice in himself, he thought meet to admonish his Disciples (who were much
less able to resist them than he) to stand upon their guard lest they should
tempt them as they had tempted him.

For these reasons it seems highly probable that this last Agony of our Savior
was nothing else but a mighty struggle and conflict with the powers of
darkness, who having by God's permission mustered up all their strength against
him, intending once more to try their fortune against him, and if possible to
tempt or deter him from prosecuting his design of redeeming the World, were in
the end gloriously repulsed by his persevering resistance, and forced to flee
before him; and of this his glorious victory over them he made an open show
upon the Cross, where in despite of all those terrors and temptations they had
exercised him with, if possible to divert him from laying down his life for the
World, he freely and voluntarily poured out his Blood as a Sacrifice for the
sins of mankind. And hence the Apostle tells us, Col. 2.15. that on his Cross
he spoiled Principalities and Powers, viz. in that victorious Act of laying
down his life to ransom us from their power in despite of their most exquisite
temptations to the contrary, and made an open show of them triumphing over
them. And by this glorious Victory he finished his Conquest of those Infernal
Powers, so that from thenceforth they never durst assault him more, but like
vanquished Slaves, were forced to yield their unwilling Necks to the yoke of
his Empire, and (though with infinite Reluctance) to obey his Will, and execute
his Orders; and hence we are told, that by his Death our Savior has destroyed
him that has the power of Death, that is, the Devil, Heb. 2.14. so that now at
his powerful Name every knee must bow, or every Being yield obeisance, not only
of things in heaven, and of things on earth, i. e. of Angels and Men, but of
things under the earth too, i. e. of Devils, who notwithstanding they are
incensed with an implacable animosity against him, and would gladly pull him
down from his Throne, if they had but Power answerable to their Malice, yet
having long since experienced the might of his victorious Arms, even then when
they had him at the greatest advantage, and being thereby driven into
everlasting despair of prevailing against him, they have from thenceforth been
forced by the mere dread and terror of his power, to submit themselves to him,
and to become his Servants and Ministers in his heavenly Kingdom; so that now
whatsoever they do, it is by his Permission or Order who holds their
mischievous power in Chains, and lets it loose, or restrains it as he pleases.

And thus having proved at large that both the good and bad Angels are Christ's
Subjects and Ministers, I proceed in the second place to show wherein their
Ministry to Christ in his Kingdom consists.

And in the first place, I shall show wherein the Ministry of good Angels
consists.

And secondly, wherein consists the Ministry of bad Angels. And because the
Philosophy of the Nature and Operations of Angels is far above the ken of our
short-sighted understandings, I shall not presume to inquire any farther into
the Ministry of either good or bad Angels than the Scripture gives me light, in
which we find these seven following instances of the Ministry of good Angels
under Christ.

First, They declare upon occasion his Mind and Will to his Church.

Secondly, They guard and defend his Subjects against outward dangers.

Thirdly, They support and comfort them upon great undertakings, and under
pressing Calamities.

Fourthly, They protect them against the rage and fury of evil spirits.

Fifthly, They further and assist them in all their Religious Offices.

Sixthly, They conduct their separated Spirits into the Mansions of Glory.

Seventhly, They are to attend and assist Christ in the great solemnity of the
day of Judgment.

I. One instance of the Ministry of Angels in the Kingdom of Christ is their
declaring upon occasion his Mind and Will to his Church and People; for thus
most of those Prophetic Messages which God from time to time sent to the World
were conveyed to the Prophets by the Ministry of Angels; so Daniel for instance
had all his Visions from an Angel of God, vid. Dan. 8.16. and Chap. 9.22, 23.
as also Chap. 10.11. so also the Prophet Zechariah, vid. Chap. 1.9, 14, 19. and
Chap. 2.3, 4. and sundry other instances there are of it in the New Testament,
vid. Matt. 1.20, 21. as also Chap. 2.13, 20, 22. and Luke 1.13, 30, 31. and
many other places; and it was an ancient and Catholic Doctrine among the Jews,
that all Prophecy was communicated by the Mediation of Angels; whence the
Pharisees, describing St. Paul as a Prophet, thus pronounce concerning him, We
find no evil in this man, but if a Spirit or Angel has spoken to him, let us
not fight against God, Act. 23.9. And accordingly we find our Savior sending
forth his holy Angels on Prophetic Messages to his Church; for so St. John
received his Revelations from Christ by the hand of an Angel, Rev. 1.1. Rev.
22.16. And an Angel is sent from Christ to Philip to bid him go to the
Ethiopian Eunuch to expound to him the Prophecy of Isaiah, Acts 8.26. And
Cornelius received a Message from Christ by an Angel, requiring him to send to
Ioppa for St. Peter to instruct him in the Christian Religion, in Acts 10.3, 4,
5. But since that Christ has revealed his whole Will to his Church, and
transmitted it down by a standing Scripture, this Ministration of the holy
Angels is in a great measure ceased, and to this written Word of his we are
entirely referred, as to the perpetual Rule of our Faith and Manners; insomuch
that if thenceforth even an Angel from heaven should preach any other Gospel to
us than what we have there received, he is pronounced accursed, Gal. 1.8. Not
but that sometimes, and upon great Emergencies, they may be still sent from
heaven with new Messages to us to discover some useful secret, or to inspire
our minds with the notices of some future contingencies, that are of great
moment to us, though this very rarely, it being no part of their ordinary
Ministry. But since the Revelation of the Gospel was completed, to be sure
they never reveal any new Doctrine to us; they may be assisting Geniuses to our
understandings, to excite in them a true apprehension of what is already
revealed, by impressing our imaginations with clear and distinct Idea's and
Representations of things that are revealed more obscurely: But to suppose that
they still reveal new Doctrinal truths to us, is not only to deny the
perfection of written Revelation, but to open a wide door to all manner of
Enthusiasm.

II. Another instance of the Ministry of Angels in the Kingdom of Christ is
their guarding and defending his Subjects against outward dangers; for thus the
Angels are said to encamp round about those that fear God to deliver them,
Psalm. 34.7. And though I see not sufficient reason to be fully persuaded that
every faithful Subject of the Kingdom of Christ has an appropriate Guardian
Angel appointed to him, yet from that Caution of our Savior, Matt. 18.10. it
is evident that he imploys his Angels to attend as an invisible Lifeguard upon
the persons of all good Christians; for, says he, Take heed that ye despise
not one of these little ones, for I say unto you that in heaven their Angels do
always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven, i. e. those blessed
spirits which are appointed by God to be their Guardians upon Earth have yet
their continual returns and recourse to God's glorious Presence in Heaven; and
having always access to him to offer up requests or complaints in their behalf,
it must needs be a very dangerous thing for any to presume to despise or offend
them, lest he thereby provoke those mighty spirits to sue out and execute some
Commission of vengeance upon him. From whence it is evident that the blessed
Angels are greatly concerned in the vindication and protection of the faithful,
and that that promise, Psalm. 91.10, 11, 12. is still in force, viz. There shall
no evil befall thee, for he shall give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee
in all thy ways; they shall bear thee up in their hands left thou dash thy foot
against a stone: And this they do sometimes by removing such evil accidents
from us as in the course of necessary causes must have befaln us; for there is
no doubt but these powerful Spirits have a mighty influence upon necessary
causes, (at least upon a great many of them) and can retard, or precipitate, or
vary, or divert their motions, as they see occasion, and thereby prevent a
great many accidents which must otherwise have befaln had they permitted them
to proceed in their natural courses. Other times again they divert the
mischievous intentions of our Enemies by injecting sudden fears into them, and
brandishing horrid Phant^sms before their imaginations (as the Angel did the
flaming Sword before Balaam) when they are just upon executing their Malice.
Sometimes again they warn us of dangers approaching, either by some external
sign, or unaccountable impression on our fancies, by which we are vehemently
solicited, without any visible Cause or Reason, either to proceed very
cautiously in the ways where our danger lies, or to stop and forbear a while,
or steer some other course. Of all which there are innumerable instances to be
found in History.

III. Another instance of the Ministry of Angels in the Kingdom of Christ, is
their supporting and comforting his faithful Subjects upon difficult
undertakings, and under great and pressing Calamities: for thus not only our
Savior himself was comforted in his last Agony by an Angel from Heaven, Luke
22.43. but St. Paul also tells us, that being in imminent danger of being
shipwrecked in a storm in his voyage to Rome, there stood by him in the night
an Angel of God, whose he was, and whom he served, saying, fear not, Paul, thou
must be brought before Caesar, and lo God has given thee all them that sail
with thee, Acts 27.23, 24. So also when the Apostles by an Order from the High
Priest were cast into the common Prison, the Text tells us, That an Angel of
the Lord by night opened the Prison doors, and brought them forth, and said, go
stand and speak in the Temple to the People all the words of this life, Acts
5.19, 20. So also in the ancient Martyrologies of the Church we meet with
sundry relations of the appearances of Angels to the suffering Martyrs, and of
the wonderful Comforts they administered to them to support their Faith and
Patience under their Agonies and Torments. And although since the Cessation of
Miracles they do not Ordinarily perform this Ministry to us in visible
appearances, yet there is no doubt, but as they are Spirits, they have
spiritual and invisible ways of conversing with our Spirits, and of
administering Comforts to us in our needs and extremities; for though they can
have no immediate access to our mind, which is a dark Mysterious Chamber, into
which no other Eye can penetrate but his who is the searcher of all hearts, yet
that they can vehemently impress our Fancies with joyous Representations, and
thereby exhilarate our drooping spirits to that degree, as to transport us into
Raptures of bodily passion, is not to be doubted, there being so many sensible
experiments of it in the ancient Prophets, whose imaginations were sometimes so
vehemently impressed with frightful Idea's by the Angels which conversed with
them, as that they immediately fell into an Agony, and were seized with
unaccountable horrors and tremblings; and not only the Prophets themselves that
saw the Angel were thus affected, but sometimes their Companions too that saw
him not, of which you have an instance in Dan. 10.7. where Daniel tells us,
that he alone saw the vision of the Angel, and that the men that were with him
saw not the Vision, but a great quaking fell upon them, so that they fled to
hide themselves; which is a plain evidence of the great power which the Angels
have over our bodily passions, even when they are invisible to us; so as to
strike what note soever they please upon them, whether it be Fear, or Sorrow,
or Joy; and it being in their power to excite our Passions to what degree they
please, there is no doubt but that being ministering Spirits they can and do
minister Joy and Comfort to us, when ever our case and circumstances require it.

IV. Another instance of the Ministry of Angels in the Kingdom of Christ is
their protecting his Subjects against the Rage and Fury of evil Spirits; for
considering with what a fierce and indefatigable malice those malignant
spirits, which in vast numbers rove about in the Air, are animated against
mankind, and especially against the Subjects of Christ, their most dreaded and
implacable enemy, and considering also the mighty power they have, as they are
Angels, to do mischief, it is not to be imagined but that were they not opposed
and restrained by a mightier power than their own, they would never be able to
forbear exercising their direful rage and cruelty upon us, till they had
converted this Earth into Hell, and made this School of our Probation the place
of our Torments; and as for the Kingdom of Christ, whose Subjects have so
solemnly renounced their Yoke and Dominion, to be sure they would never cease
infesting it with the fiery darts of their malice, till they had utterly ruined
and destroyed them; and therefore to prevent their mischievous attempts, God in
mercy has thought meet to commit us to the Guardianship of his holy Angels,
and to send them forth under the Conduct of Jesus our Mediator, to fight
against these Hellish powers in the defense of his Church and People, for so
God promised Jerusalem, Zech. 2.5. that he would be as a wall of fire round
about her, i. e. as the most learned Expositors suppose, by surrounding her
with a Guard of Angels, whom in the defense of his People against evil Angels
he makes a flaming fire, as the Psalmist expresses it, Psalm. 104.4. and in
Rev. 12.7. we read of a War in Heaven, (or the airy Region, of which the Devil
is called the Prince) Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon, and the
Dragon fought and his Angels; which War Michael undertook, as the foregoing
verses tell us, in the defense of the Woman that was clothed with the Sun,
which all agree was the Christian Church; so also in verse 9. of S. Iude's
Epistle we read that Michael the Archangel contended and disputed with the
Devil about the body of Moses, or Jewish Church, so called for the same reason
that the Christian Church is called the Body of Christ. And it is very probably
supposed, that that Hedge which the Devil complained God had set about Job, and
about his house, by which he was hindered from breaking in upon him, was no
other than a Guard of Angels, by which he was driven back as often as he
attempted to execute his Rage and Malice upon him, Chap. 1.10. Now by what
means or instruments the good Angels war against and repel the evil ones, is, I
conceive, an enquiry beyond our Cognizance, Revelation (from whence we receive
all our notions of the state and Economy of the invisible world) being wholly
silent in the case, only thus much we may say without any way presuming beyond
our Capacity, that spiritual Agents can as easily strike upon spirits as bodily
Agents do upon bodies; and though we, who are Spectators only of corporeal
motion, can give no account of the manner how one spirit acts upon another, yet
there is no reason at all to doubt but that they have some way of impressing
one another, and communicating to each other a mutual sense and feeling of each
others pleasures and displeasures; and if so, then it is easy to suppose, that
the more powerful any spirit is, the stronger and more exquisite impressions of
its displeasure it can make upon other Spirits, and consequently that the Good
Angels, who by preserving their innocence, and improving their perfections,
have augmented and redoubled their natural strength and vigor, are much more
powerful than the bad ones, (who have rather impaired it) and so are much more
able to withstand and repel the violent impressions of the bad Angels, than the
bad Angels can theirs; so that though the bad Angels may, and oftentimes do
resist and oppose the good, yet they can never conquer them, but in the
conclusion are still forced to flee before them, as being unable to withstand
their more powerful impressions. Since therefore we wrestle not with flesh and
blood, i. e. only with flesh and blood, but against Principalities, against
Powers, against the Rulers of the darkness of this World, against spiritual
wickednesses in high Places, i. e. against the several Ranks of Devils that are
in the Air under the Command and Conduct of Beelzebub their Prince, Ephesians. 6.12.
And since these Apostate Spirits are by much too strong and powerful for us; so
that were we left to grapple with them alone, by our own single strength, they
would infallibly vanquish and lead us captive to eternal ruin, God has
thought meet to subject his holy Angels to the command of our compassionate
Mediator; that so when ever we are too hardly beset by these evil spirits, he
might send them forth to guard and protect us against them, and either to
assist us in our conflicts with them, or to chase them away from us, when we
are no longer able to withstand them; and accordingly we have a sure word of
promise, that if we resist the Devil he shall fly away from us, Iam. 4.7. not
that our weak resistance is in it self sufficient to put those daring and
mighty Spirits to flight, but the meaning without doubt is, that if when they
assault us with any temptation to sin, we do but oppose them with a sincere
resolution, God will not permit us to be vanquished by them; but when ever they
press too hard upon us, will be sure to send down some good Angel to us to
repel and drive them away from us; for so he has promised, that he will not
suffer us to be tempted above what we are able, but will with the Temptation
also make a way to escape that we may be able to bear it, 1 Cor. 10.13. which
plainly implies, that should God suffer him, the Devil can tempt us above what
we are able; and this without doubt he is ordinarily hindered from by the
timely interpositions of the holy Angels, who when our strength begins to fail,
are always ready to second us, and with their victorious arms to encounter and
put to flight those evil spirits that do so importunately tempt us.

V. Another instance of the Ministry of Angels in the Kingdom of Christ is
their furthering and assisting his Subjects in the Works and Offices of
Religion; for since they are said to minister to them who shall be heirs of
salvation, there is no doubt but that they minister to them in the discharge of
their Religious Obligations, upon which their Salvation depends; and since, as
our Savior assures us, there is joy in the presence of the Angels of God over
one sinner that repents, Luke 15.10. we cannot but suppose that so far as their
own ability, and the Laws of the invisible World will permit them, they do
promote and further our repentance; since in so doing they contribute to their
own joy; and in a word, since the Scripture assures us, that the Angels are
present in our holy Assemblies (which that passage of S. Paul seems necessarily
to imply, 1 Cor. 11.10. For this cause ought the woman to have power over her
head, i. e. to be veiled in the sacred Assemblies, because of the Angels, or
out of a decent respect and reverence to those blessed Spirits who are supposed
to be present there) since, I say, they are present in our Religious
Assemblies, we cannot reasonably suppose them to be present merely as Idle
Auditors and Spectators, who have nothing else to do but only to observe and
gaze upon our holy solemnities; and therefore must conclude that their great
business there is to assist us in the performance of them, to remove our
indispositions, and recollect our wanderings, to fix our attention, excite our
affections, and inflame our devotions: for besides, as they are the Ministers
of the divine Providence, they have many opportunities of presenting good
objects to us, and removing temptations from us, of disciplining our natures
with prosperities and afflictions, and of so ordering and varying our outward
Circumstances, as to render our duty more facile and easy to us; besides which
I say, as they are Spirits they have a very near and familiar access to our
souls; not that they can make any immediate impressions on our Understanding or
Will, which are a sphere of light to which no created spirit can approach, it
being under the immediate Economy of the Father of Spirits; but yet being
Spirits there is no doubt but they may, and oftentimes do insinuate themselves
into our fancies, and mingle with the spirits and humors of our bodies, and by
that means never want opportunity both to suggest good thoughts to us, and
raise holy affections in us. For that they can work upon our fancies, is
apparent, else there could be neither Angelical nor Diabolical dreams, and if
they can so act upon our fancies, as to excite new images and representations
in them; they may by this means communicate new thoughts to our understandi^g,
which naturally Prints off from the fancy those Ideas and Images which it there
finds set and composed. And as they can work upon our fancies, so there is no
doubt but they can influence our spirits and humors; else they have not the
power so much ^s to cure or inflict a disease; and by thus working upon our
spirits they can moderate as they please the violence of our passions, which
are nothing but the flowings and reflowings of our spirits to and fro from our
hearts; and by influencing our humors they can compose us, when they please,
into such a sedate and serious temper as is most apt to receive religious
impressions, and to be influenced by the Heavenly motions of the Holy Ghost.
These things I doubt not the blessed Angels can and frequently do, though we
perceive it not, and though by the Laws of the world of Spirits they may
probably be restrained from doing their utmost for us, that so we may still act
with an uncontrouled freedom, and be left under a necessity of a constant and
diligent endeavor; yet this we may be sure of, that as the evil Angels are
always busy to pervert and seduce us from our duty, so the good are no less
active to reduce us to, and assist us in it.

VI. Another instance of the Ministry of Angels in the Kingdom of Christ is,
their conducting the separated Spirits of his faithful Subjects to the Mansions
of Glory. It was an ancient Tradition among the Jews, that the Souls of the
Faithful were conducted by Angels into Paradise, of which the Chaldee
Paraphrase makes mention on Cant. 4.12. and this Tradition of theirs is
confirmed by our Savior, Luke 16.22. where he tells us, that when Lazarus
died, he was carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom, i. e. into that place of
refreshment where the Soul of Abraham, who was the Father of the Faithful,
dwells, and in all probability that fiery Chariot and Horses wherein Elias was
mounted up to Heaven, 2 Kings 2.11. was nothing but a Convoy of Angels; and
accordingly Tertullian de anima, c. 52. styles the Angels Evocatores animarum,
i. e. the Messengers of God, that call forth the lingering souls out of their
bodies, and show them the Paraturam diversorii, the preparation of those
blessed Mansions where they are to abide till the Resurrection. And this Office
the good Angels do perform to the Souls of the faithful, not merely to
congratulate their safe arrival into the world of blessedness, though there is
no doubt but that they, who do so heartily rejoice in the Conversion of
sinners, are ready enough to congratulate their Glorification; but that which
seems to be the great reason of this Ministration of theirs, is to guard holy
Souls, when they leave their bodies, through those lower Regions of the Air,
which are the Seat and Principality of the Apostate Angels, who may therefore
be very reasonably supposed to be continually lying in wait there, like birds
of prey to seize upon the Souls of men, as soon as they are escaped out of the
Cage of their bodies into the open Air, and either to s^are and terrify them
in their passage to Heaven, or to lead them away captive into their dark
Prisons of endless horror and despair; and therefore to prevent their
affrighting good souls (which is all the hurt they can do them) as they pass
along through their Territories, they are no sooner parted from their bodies,
but they are taken into the custody of some good Angel or Angels, who guard
them safe through the Enemies quarters, and beat off those evil Spirits from
them that would fain be infesting and assaulting them; and it is not at all
improbable, but that by this very thing those evil Spirits do distinguish what
Souls do belong to them from what do not, viz. their being destitute of, or
attended with this holy Guard of Angels. When they behold a separated Spirit
under this Heavenly Convoy, they fly away from it with infinite rage and envy
to see it irrecoverably rescued out of their power to make it miserable; but
when they perceive one destitute and abandoned of this Angelick guard, they
immediately seize it as their own, and so commit it to their Chains of
darkness. And as the good Angels do guard good Souls as they pass through the
Air, against the power and malice of the Prince of the power of the Air; so
they also conduct and guide them to their Mansions of blessedness. For when the
departed Soul is waf^ed through the Air into those immense tracts of Ether,
wherein the Sun and all the Heavenly bodies swim, how would it be possible for
it in such a vast and unknown Continent ever to find its way to the Seat of the
blessed, without the conduct of some experienced guide? And who can be better
experienced in that Celestial Road, than those winged Messengers of the
Almighty King, who in the execution of his high behests are always traveling
to and fro between Heaven and Earth? And therefore our Savior has committed
the separated Spirits of his faithful Subjects to these most skilful and
faithful Guides, who in pursuance of his Commission are some or other of them
still attending upon every good man's decease, to receive his Soul into their
Custody, as soon as ever it is expired, and to guard it against evil Spirits,
as it passes through the Air, and thence to conduct it through all those
spacious fields of Ether, which extend themselves far and wide beyond all the
visible lights of Heaven, to those happy abodes which the divine goodness has
prepared for glorified Spirits.

VII. And lasty, Another instance of the Ministry of Angels to our Savior in
his Kingdom, is their attending and assisting him in the great solemnity of the
day of Judgment; for thus in all his most solemn and conspicuous works of
Providence our Savior has still been pleased to make use of the Ministry of
his holy Angels; so when he came to ratify his Covenant with Jacob, the
mysterious Preface of that great solemnity was a Ladder reaching from Heaven to
Earth, and the Angels ascending and descending upon it, which was doubtless
intended for an Emblem of that Everlasting Covenant by which Man was to ascend
to God, and God to descend to Man; so also when the Law was delivered by him
upon the Mount, the Angels descended with him, and pitched their Tents about it
in Circles of flaming fire, to signify to the People those flames of vengeance
that would certainly pursue and seize them, if they were not obedient to those
words that were thence delivered to them; so also when he was born into the
world, the holy Angels came down to sing his Christmas Carol, and at once to
proclaim and celebrate his Nativity; and it is the opinion of some learned men,
that that multitude of the heavenly Host, which St. Luke speaks of, and who
sang that Anthem of Glory be to God on high at our Savior's Nativity, Luke
2.13. contained the whole Nation of Angels, because in Heb. 1.6. it is said,
that when God brought in the first begotten into the world he said, let all the
Angels worship him, that is, as they understand it, when our Savior was born,
God gave order to all the Angels of Heaven to come down and do homage to him,
who was ere long to be their Sovereign Lord under the most high Father. Thus
also a little before Jerusalem was destroyed, Josephus tells us, that the
Heavens were spread with Troops of armed men, who without doubt were the
blessed Angels that by their fantastic combats in the Air did presignifie the
ensuing Tragedy of that bloody City. It is no wonder then if the great
solemnity of Doomsday, of which Ierusalem's desolation was only a mournful
Type, shall also be adorned and illustrated with the presence and attendance of
the holy Angels: For this great Transaction is to be the winding up of the vast
bottom of divine Providence over the whole Race of fallen and degenerate Mankind,
and the close and conclusion of the Mediatorial Kingdom of our Lord and
Savior; and therefore will without doubt be performed with the greatest
Grandeur and Magnificence. This is to be the great Day of our Savior's
Triumph, wherein his Friends shall be Crowned, and his Enemies made his
footstool; and such a solemnity may well deserve the attendance and Ministry
of all the heavenly Angels, who accordingly shall then descend with our Savior
from the highest Heavens in bright aetherial bodies, such as shall render them
gloriously conspicuous to all the lower world, and so fit to adorn the Triumphs
of that glorious day; for so the Scripture assures us, not only that he shall
descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the
Trump of God, 1 These. 4.16. but also that he shall come in his glory, and all
his holy Angels with him, Matt. 25.31. and that he shall be revealed from
heaven with his mighty Angels, and that he shall come in his own glory, and in
his Father's, and of his holy Angels, Luke 9.26. and in a word, that he shall
come in the glory of his Father with the holy Angels, Mar. 8.38. But what their
Ministry is to be in that great Day, I shall hereafter have occasion to show,
when I come to discourse of that solemn transaction.

And now having explained the Ministry of the good Angels under Christ, I
proceed to treat of the Ministry of the evil Angels to him, which principally
consists in these four particulars:

First, In trying and exercising the virtues of his Subjects.

Secondly, In chastening and correcting their faults and miscarriages.

Thirdly, In searing and hardening his incorrigible Rebels.

Fourthly, In executing his vengeance on them in another World.

I. The Ministry of evil Angels to Christ, consists in trying and exercising
the virtues of his Subjects; for this being the state of our trial and
probation, wherein we stand Candidates for those everlasting preferments in the
other World, our blessed Lord has thought meet to surround us with
Difficulties and Temptations, that so being in continual conflict with them we
may never want opportunity to exert and exercise our virtues, and to give the
most glorious proofs of our Courage and Constancy: For difficulty is the Spur
of Endeavor, and the Whet-stone of Virtue, without which the fairest Graces
that belong to Humane Nature would be altogether Useless, Worthless, and
Vnactive; such as Faith and Patience, Temperance and Equanimity, Courage and
Resignation to God, all which would scarce deserve the name of Virtues, if they
had not some difficulties to contest withal. Now one of the greatest
difficulties with which our blessed Lord tries and exercises these Graces of
our Nature, is the Temptations of evil Spirits, who as so many assisting
Geniuses to the corrupt inclinations of our Nature, are permitted by him to
rove about the World in innumerable swarms to Tempt and Elicite those
inclinations into action, and these being Spirits, have a much nearer access to
the Souls of men than any material Agents whatsoever; for though they are
totally debarred from all kind of intercourse with the immediate operations of
the reasonable Soul, and can no more look into its thoughts, than we can into
the bowels of the Earth, yet our Fancies and Imaginations lying open to them,
there is no doubt but they can and oftentimes do make what use they think fit
of the Animal Spirits there, and dispose, and order, and distinguish them, just
as the Painter does his numerous Colors that lie confusedly before him in
their several Shells into the Pictures and Phantasms of whatsoever Objects they
please, and continue and repeat those Pictures in our fancies as long and as
often as they think meet; and then considering what the natural use of the fancy
is, both to the Understanding and Will, and how it prompts the one with matter
of Invention, and supplies it with variety of Objects to work on, and draws
forth or elicits the other to choose or refuse those Objects it presents
according as they are amiably or odiously represented; considering these
things, I say, it is notorious what mighty advantages the evil Spirits have of
insinuating their black suggestions to our minds. And then they being very
subtle and sagacious by nature, and having had above five thousand years
experience to cultivate their Talent of tempting and seducing us, ( that having
been their trade ever since they became Devils) to be sure they can never be at
a loss when or how to apply themselves to us, and to nick us with such
temptations as are most convenient to our several inclinations, conditions, and
circumstances; and accordingly, 2 Cor. 2.11. the Devil is said to have his
Methods or Devices, i e. his stated Rules by which he governs his mischievous
practice of tempting and seducing souls, and 2 Timothy 2.26. we are told of the
snare of the devil, or his crafty devices to entangle and captivate men's Souls.

Now though the design of these evil Spirits in tempting Christ's Subjects is
doubtless to seduce and ruin them, yet it is evident that the design of Christ
in permitting them to tempt them is only to try and exercise them, and rouse
them out of their sloth and inactivity, and by the continual alarms of these
their restless Adversaries to keep them upon their guard, and make them more
watchful and vigilant; and accordingly from the consideration of that
permission which these evil Spirits have to tempt us, we are in Scripture
frequently exhorted to activity and vigilance; so 1 Pet. 5.8. Be sober, be
vigilant, for the Devil your Adversary goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking
whom he may devour; So also, Ephesians. 6.11. Put on the whole armor of God, that
ye may be able to stand against the Wiles of the Devil. Since therefore the
Devil's tempting us is used by Christ as a motive to excite our activity, it is
evident that Christ's intention in permitting him to tempt us is to excite and
stimulate us thereunto. It is true, the Devil's Temptations may, and often have
a quite contrary effect on us than Christ intended; they may seduce us from our
innocence and duty, and thereby involve us in everlasting perdition; but if
they do, it is our own fault, and through our own consent, without which they
can never prevail against us, for we are assured, that if we resist the Devil
he will fly away from us, and that we shall not be tempted by him above what we
are able: and we are furnished by our Savior with sufficient strength and
assistance to repel his most powerful temptations; but if instead of employing
our strength, and exercising our virtue in a vigorous resistance of him (which
is the thing Christ intended in permitting him to tempt us) we will tamely
suffer our selves to be led Captive by him, we must thank our selves for all
the dire and miserable consequents of it.

II. Another instance of the Ministry of these evil Angels to Christ is their
chastening and correcting the faults and miscarriages of his Subjects. Thus
upon great and high provocations he many times lets loose these evil Spirits
upon us, and permits them to pain and punish us either immediately by
themselves, or mediately by their Instruments; for so only to prevent St.
Paul's being exalted above measure through the abundance of his revelations,
there was given a Thorn in the flesh, the Messenger of Satan to buffet him, i.
e. as it seems most probable, some evil Spirit was sent to him from Satan, the
Prince of Devils, to inflict some corporal pain or disease on him (for so the
grieving thorn, Ezekiel. 28.24. signifies a sore bodily affliction) and though he
sought the Lord thrice for this thing that it might depart from him, yet could
he receive no other Answer, but My grace is sufficient for thee, see 2 Cor.
12.7, 8, 9. and it is very probable that those weaknesses, diseases, and deaths
which were inflicted on the Corinthians for their irreverent communication of
the Lord's Supper, vid. 1 Cor. 11.30. were inflicted by the Ministry of evil
Angels, to whose power and malice they were abandoned by our Savior, as a just
Chastisement of their profaneness; for so it is evident the incestuous person
was corrected upon the Sentence of his Excommunication, which was, that he
should be delivered up unto Satan for the destruction of his flesh, 1 Cor. 5.5.
where the delivering him up to Satan seems to have been in answer to Satan's
demanding of him; for so in Scripture the Devil is sometimes called, The
accuser of the Brethren, which accuses them before God day and night, Rev.
12.10. and sometimes the (...), which signifies, an Adversary in Court of
Judicature, that impleads and accuses us before God, 1 Pet. 5.8. Now this
accusation of his is sometimes false and groundless, as in the case of Job,
upon which account he is called, (...), the Calumniator; but sometimes he
accuses us truly, for faults that are real and highly criminal, upon which he
requires us of God as he did St. Peter, Luke 22.31. i. e. he requires us as the
Executioner does a Malefactor, to sift or winnow us as Wheat, i. e. to shake
and afflict us; and when ever God is pleased to answer this request, he is
truly said to deliver us up to Satan; and this power of delivering up to Satan
such persons as are justly accused of great and scandalous sins, God has
communicated to his Church, upon which delivery in the Primitive Ages (when
there were no Magistrates to second the Churches Censures with Corporal
punishments) Satan as the Lictor or Executioner of our Savior immediately
seized the Criminal, and inflicted on him some bodily disease or torment, which
St. Ignatius calls, (...), the punishment of the Devil, Epist. ad Roman. for so
in our Savior's time, and before and after it, it was usual for evil Spirits,
by God's permission, to inflict diseases and torments on men's bodies, of which
there are innumerable instances in the Gospels, and the Writings of the
Primitive Fathers; and that this was then the usual consequence of
Excommunication, is evident from that phrase, For the destruction of the flesh,
which plainly signifies some corporal punishment consequent to that Tremendous
Sentence* which is therefore called a Rod, 1 Cor. 4.21. because of the bodily
correction that followed it.

But since the power of corporal punishments has been derived by Christ upon
Christian Magistrates, he very rarely chastens his Subjects with any bodily
pains by the immediate Agency of evil Spirits, but has wholly deposited it in
the hands of the Temporal Powers, who are now his sole Ministers and Revengers
to execute wrath upon those that do evil. But yet still upon occasion he so far
makes use of the Ministry of the Devils in correcting us, as to permit them to
excite wicked men, and especially wicked Princes and Governors to plague and
persecute us: When he sees his Church or any particular part of it degenerating
from the purity of his Religion, or waxing cold and remiss in their love and
duty to him, he many times gives a loose to these malignant Spirits, who always
burn with inveterate rancour against it, and permits them to provoke and
stimulate its Enemies to exert and employ their power against it; So that
whatsoever mischiefs wicked Princes or men do to the Church of Christ, or to
any part of it, they do it only as the Instruments of these evil Angels* and by
their mischievous suggestions and instigations; for so Christ tells the Church
of Symrna in Rev. 2.10. The Devil shall cast some of you into prison, that is,
the wicked Governors there shall do it by the instigation of the Devil, to
whom I will certainly give permission to instigate them thereunto, for so
Christ is said to have the Keys of the bottomless Pit, Rev. 1.18. that is,
power to confine or let loose those evil Spirits, that inhabit it, at his
pleasure; and when he thinks fit, to confine them, we find the Church enjoys
peace, and rest, and prosperity, Rev. 20.1.2, 3, 4. but no sooner does he let
them loose again, but they are immediately instigating the wicked powers of the
Earth to fight against it and persecute it, Ibid. ver. 7, 8, 9. from whence it
is evident that the power of these evil Spirits to excite evil Princes or men
to persecute his Church is under the restraint and determination of our
Savior, that they can proceed no farther in this their mischievous design,
than he thinks meet to permit them, and consequently, that in all those
persecutions to which they excite their Instruments, they are but the Ministers
and Executioners of Christ, even as the Dog is the Shepherds in worrying the
straying sheep into the fold.

III. Another instance of the Ministry of evil Spirits to Christ is their
hardening and confirming incorrigible and obstinate sinners in their wicked
purposes. For when notwithstanding all those powerful Methods which in the
administration of his Government Christ uses to reduce and reclaim men, they
still persist in their Rebellion, when they have conquered his Grace, quenched
his Spirit, broke through all his persuasions, and baffled all his Arts of
saving them, he many times withdraws from them those powerful aids of his
Spirit, and of his holy Angels, which they have wilfully neglected, and utterly
abandons them to the powers of Darkness, whom from thenceforth he freely
permits to tempt and seduce them, and to ^oul them on at their pleasure from
sin to sin, and from one degree of sin to another, till they have filled up the
measure of their iniquities; and this without doubt is the severest punishment
that Christ inflicts upon sinners on this side Hell; for this is a kind of
Damnation above ground to be delivered up alive to those restless Furies, who
having free leave to back and ride us at their pleasure, to be sure will never
cease stimulating and spurring us on from wickedness to wickedness, till they
have leapt us headlong into the everlasting burnings. And this, I conceive, is
the meaning of Gods hardening sinners so often mentioned in the holy Scripture,
which does not at all imply, that God by any positive act of his own infuses
any sinful quality into men's Wills to excite or stimulate them to sin, as some
men have blasphemously enough asserted, for God cannot be tempted with evil,
neither tempts he any man; but when men have a long while hardened themselves
against all the powerful impressions of his Grace, and in the pursuit of their
wicked courses have turned a deaf ear to all his persuasions to the contrary,
then as a just punishment of their incorrigible obstinacy, he many times
withdraws from them the influences of his Grace, and delivers them up to Satan,
or, which is the same thing, permits him to seize them as his own, and to take
possession of them, and as a wicked soul to animate and act them in all their
wickedness; for so the Devil is said (...), to work in the Children of
disobedience, so that these Children of disobedience are a sort of (...), of
persons that are possessed and acted by the Devil. And too many deplorable
instances there are of wicked men that sin on at that rate as if they were
really acted by some Diabolical Genius, that are hurried into such monstrous
extravagancies of wickedness, as are neither pleasant, nor profitable, nor
reputable; so that they gratify no passion or appetite in humane nature by
committing them, but do seem to sin merely for the sake of sinning, out of a
kind of preternatural malice, when they can scarce give any other reason to
themselves why they do such an action, but only this, because it is wicked; so
truly Diabolical is their love of wickedness, so abstract from all those
motives which are wont to affect the passions and appetites of men, that it is
hardly resolvable into any other reason, but that they are delivered up by God
to be informed and acted by the Devil; who having once obtained the possession
of them, continually plies them with Temptation, and never ceases urging and
pressing them forward from one degree of wickedness to another, till at length
he has seared and hardened them into final and incurable Impenitence. And this
in particular was the case of Judas, who having long persisted in his Thievery
and Sacrilege, notwithstanding all those warnings and admonitions our Savior
had given him to the contrary, was at length abandoned to that Devil to whose
Temptations he had been so obsequious, upon which it is said, that the Devil
entered into him, Luke 22.3. and the Devil being in possession of him,
immediately provokes and irritates him to the foulest and most horrible villainy
that ever any mortal Creature was guilty of; for so, John 13.2. we are told,
that the Devil put it into the heart of Judas to betray Christ. But as yet it
seems he was not totally abandoned to the Devil, who had only permission to
make that black and dire proposal to him; after which our Savior attempts by
the most Pathetick persuasions to prevent his compliance, Mark 14.21.
notwithstanding which, the Wretch being still enticed by his own covetousness
to listen to that horrid suggestion, our Savior having marked him out for a
Traitor by giving him the Sop, it is said again, that Satan entered into him;
and upon this second entrance our Savior gives him up for desperate; for, that
thou do, says he, do quickly, John 13.27. as much as if he had said, now I
find the Devil has the full possession of thee, and that henceforth there
remains no more hope of reclaiming thee, go therefore and dispatch thy wicked
purpose as soon as thou please. So that now, it seems, he was entirely
delivered up to the Devil, who thereupon immediately hurries him to the
execution of his black design.

IV. And lastly, Another instance of the Ministry of evil Spirits to Christ is
their executing his vengeance on incorrigible sinners in the other World. For
since, as I have shown before, our Savior makes use of the power and malice of
these evil Spirits to correct and chasten men in this life, why may we not
thence conclude, that he makes use of the same to plague and punish them in the
life to come; especially considering that they bear the same malice to us in
the other life that they did in this; for they tempt us to sin here for no
other end but that they may make us miserable there; and therefore to be sure
that same malice of theirs which excites them now to contribute all they can to
our sin, will equally provoke them then to contribute all they can to our
misery, and render them altogether as active in tormenting us in Hell as they
were in tempting us upon Earth; and then considering that Spirits can act upon
Spirits, as well as Bodies upon Bodies, and that the more powerful any Spirit
is, the more vigorously it can act upon other Spirits, we may be sure that
those evil Spirits being Angels by nature, are incomparably more powerful than
the souls of men, and therefore can act upon them with unspeakable more force
and vigor than one Soul can on another; for the weaker any Spirit is, the more
passive it must necessarily be to those Spirits that are stronger and more
powerful, and therefore by how much weaker wicked Souls are than wicked Angels,
by so much more passive must they be to their power, and consequently, be so
much more liable to be vexed and tormented by them; and since in all
probability the disproportion which Nature has made between the power of
Ang^ls and Souls is far greater than that which sin has made between the power
of one Angel and another, we may reasonably conclude, that wicked Souls are far
more impressible by the power of wicked Angels than wicked Angels are by the
power of good Angels; and therefore since the good Angels can make such violent
impressions upon the wicked ones as they are not able to endure, but are still
forced to fly before them, as often as they encounter them, vid. P. 965. what
intolerable impressions can wicked Angels make upon wicked Souls when they are
abandoned by God to their malice and fury, for though our Souls are no more
impressible by corporeal action than the beams of the Sun are by the blows of a
Hammer, yet that they can feel the force of spiritual action, we find by every
days experience; for so a thought which is a spiritual action, if it be very
horrible or dismal, does as sensibly pain and aggrieve our Souls, as the most
exquisite Corporeal torment can our Bodies. Now there is no doubt but evil
Spirits can suggest preternatural horrors to our minds, and repeat and urge
them with such Importunity and vehemence, as to render them most exquisitely
painful and dolorous, of the truth of which we have a woeful Example in that
miserable Wretch, Francis Spira, who upon that woeful breach he made in his
Conscience by renouncing his Religion, notwithstanding he had received several
kind admonitions from Heaven to the contrary, was forsaken of God, and
delivered up alive into the hands of those dire Tormenters of Souls; whereupon
though he had not the least symptom of bodily melancholy, he was immediately
seized with such an inexpressible Agony of mind, as amazed his Physicians,
astonished his Friends, and struck terror into all that beheld him; for he was
so near to the condition of a damned Spirit, that he verily believed Hell it
self was more tolerable than those invisible lashes that his Soul endured
without any intermission, and therefore he often wished that he were in Hell,
and as often attempted to dispatch himself thither in hope to find sanctuary
there from those direful thoughts which continually preyed upon his Soul. Now
that these Horrors were inflicted on him by Diabolical suggestion is evident
both by the impenetrable hardness and obstinacy of his mind against all the
motives of Repentance that accompanied them, and by the horrible blasphemies
they frequently extorted from him. And if now in this life they have so much
power to torment our minds, whenever God thinks it meet to let them loose upon
us, what will they have hereafter, when our wretched Spirits shall be utterly
abandoned to their mercy, and they shall have a free scope to exert their fury
on us; and glut their hungry malice with our Torment and vexation? And since it
is evident they do not want power, we may certainly conclude even from that
natural malignity that is in the temper of a Devil, they do not want Will to
plague and torture us in the other World. And this Will and Power of theirs our
Savior makes use of as the Common Executioner of his Vengeance upon
incorrigible sinners in the other Life; for as soon as ever a wicked Soul
departs from its Body, it is immediately consigned into the hands of those
Diabolical Furies, who like so many hungry Hounds seize it with infinite
greediness, and fall a tearing and worrying it with horrible suggestions
without any pause or intermission, and by continually recording its sins to it,
and reproaching it with the folly of them, and putting it in mind of that
dismal eternal futurity it must suffer for them, do incessantly sting and vex
it with swarms of dire reflections and tormenting thoughts, which are the only
Instruments of Torment that can fasten upon a Soul. And hence in Matt. 18.34.
the Devils, to whom the wicked Servant was delivered up by his Master for his
cruelty toward his fellow Servant are called Tormenters, as being the Ministers
of our Saviors just Vengeance upon wicked and incorrigible offenders.

And thus having shown at large that the good and bad Angels are the Ministers
of Christ, and wherein their Ministry to him consists, I proceed to the

III. Third sort of the Ministers of Christ's Kingdom, viz. The Kings and
Governors of the World; for though there are many Infidel Kings in the World
that know not Christ, and that never submitted themselves to his Empire, but
instead of that do openly defy and persecute his holy Religion, yet these of
right are subject to him, though in fact they are inslaved to the Devil, and he
has the disposal of their Crowns, and the command of their power, and does
actually employ and use it, even as he does the power of the Devils, in the
prosecution of the righteous ends of his Government. And though too many of
those Kings who by their visible profession of Christianity, have actually
submitted themselves to the Scepter of Christ, have yet together with
Christianity espoused the Interest of sundry Antichristian Principles, in
pursuance of which they have been as inveterate Enemies and Persecutors of the
truth as it is in Jesus as any of the Heathen Kings or Emperors; yet these
also, notwithstanding their maladministration are the Subjects and Ministers
of our Savior, and it is by his Authority and Commission that they Reign, and
by his Omnipotent Providence that all their wicked designs and actions are
overruled to gracious ends and purposes: so that all the Sovereign Powers of
the Earth are subjected by God to the Dominion of our Savior, and in their
respective Kingdoms and Empires are only his Substitutes and Vicegerents; for
so we are told not only that all judgment is committed to him, and that all
power is committed to him in heaven and earth; and that he is Heir of all
things, and has power over all flesh, but also that he is King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords, the only Potentate, the head of all Principality and Power, and
the Prince of all the Kings of the Earth, vid. P. 810. and so the Fathers of
the Council of Ariminum tell Constantius the Arrian Emperor, that it was by
Christ's Donation that he held his Empire, (...), by him, i. e. Christ thou art
appointed to Reign over all the World, upon which account Liberius advises him,
(...), do not fight against Christ who has bestowed this Empire upon thee; do
not render him Impiety instead of Gratitude: and to the same purpose Athanasius
tells us, (...). (i. e.) that Christ having received the Throne, has
translated it from Heathen to holy Christian Kings to return them back to the
House of Jacob. So that both from Scripture and the current Doctrine of the
Primitive Church, it is evident that all the Sovereign Powers upon Earth are
subjected to our Savior, and are only the Ministers and Viceroys of his
universal Kingdom.

But for the farther prosecution of this Argument I shall show in the first
place, that by this their subjection to Christ they are not deprived of any
natural Right of their Sovereignty, and secondly, that they are obliged by it
to certain Ministries in the Kingdom of Christ.

First, That by their subjection they are not deprived of any natural Right of
their Sovereignty, for when our Savior pronounced the Sentence Give unto Caesar
the things that are Cesars, he thereby renewed the Patent of Sovereign Powers,
and reinvested them in all the natural Rights of their Sovereignty which
doubtless are included in the things that are Cesars, for upon the Pharisees
asking him that captious question, Is it lawful to pay Tribute to Caesar? He
does not answer yes it is lawful, which yet had been a sufficient reply to
their Question, but calls for a Tribute Penny, and having asked them whose Image
and Superscription that was upon it, and being answered Cesars, he returns them
an Answer much larger than their Question, Give unto Caesar the things that are
Cesars, (i. e.) it is certain that you are obliged not only to pay Tribute to
Caesar, but also to render him whatever else is due to him by virtue of his
Sovereign Power, for Sovereign Power being immediately founded on the Dominion
of God has from thence these two unalienable Rights derived to it, to which
all the essential Rights of Sovereignty are Reducible: First to Command in all
things as it judges most convenient for the public good, where God has not
Countermanded, for the Power of Sovereigns descending from God can only be
limited by God or themselves; for if they are limitable by any other Power,
they are Subjects to that Power, and so can no longer be Sovereigns, and if
they are limitable only by God or themselves, then where they are not limited
either by God or themselves, they must necessarily have a right to command.
Secondly, The other unalienable Right that is derived to them from God is to be
accountable only to God; for by deriving to them Sovereign Power God has
exalted them above all Powers, but his own, and therefore since no Power can be
accountable but to a superior Power, and since Sovereigns have no Superior
Power but God, it is to God only, from whom they received their Power, that
they are accountable for the administration of it. These therefore are the
natural Rights of Sovereign Powers, and these Rights remain entire and
inviolate in them notwithstanding their subjection to the Mediatorial Scepter
of our Savior, as I shall endeavor to show in the particulars.

First, Therefore by this their subjection to Christ they are not deprived of
their natural Right of Commanding in all cases as they shall judge most
convenient for the public Good, where God has not countermanded them, For the
Christian Religion is so far from any way retrenching the power of Princes,
that it abundantly confirms and enforces it, by requiring us to submit to every
Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, to be subject to the higher Powers, and
that not only for wrath, but for conscience sake, to submit to Principalities
and Powers, and to obey Magistrates, to render Tribute to whom Tribute is due,
Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor, (i. e.) to
submit to all the lawful impositions of our Princes, whether it be of Taxes, or
of any other matter whatsoever, and in all the New Testament there is only one
limitation made of our obedience, which is a natural and eternal one, and that
is that we ought to obey God rather than Man, that is, when Man's Command and
Gods do apparently clash and interfere with each other; for in this case the
Magistrate has no Right to be obeyed, because his Will is countermanded by a
Superior Authority, by which Exception this general Rule is confirmed, that in
all cases whatsoever, whether Temporal or Spiritual, Civil or Ecclesiastical,
Sovereign Powers have an unalienable right to be obeyed. For if their Right to
be obeyed in the Kingdom of Christ extended only to Civil and Temporal causes,
their Authority would be very much lessened and Retrenched by their subjection
to our Savior; since before their subjection to him it undoubtedly extended to
all causes whatsoever; because being Sovereign under God, it could have no
other bounds or limits but what God had set to it; and therefore since before
their subjection to Christ, God had bounded their Authority by no other Law but
that of Nature, it must either be made appear that the Law of Nature did then
limit their Authority only to Civil causes, (which I am sure is impossible) or
it will necessarily follow that it extended also to Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical, and if it did so then, it must do so still, unless it be made
appear that Christianity has retrenched and lessened it. It is true, Christ
has erected a standing form of spiritual Government in his Church, and it is
as true that all Government, whether Spiritual or Temporal, includes a
Legislative Power in it, or a power of commanding its Subjects; but this is no
limitation of the commanding power of Sovereign Princes, who must still be
obeyed in all things where Christ has not countermanded, though the Church
should command the contrary, for Christ never authorized the Governors of his
Church to control the commanding Power of Princes, but has left all matters
of indifference as absolutely to their disposal and determination as ever they
were before his spiritual Government was erected, and matters of indifference
are the sole matter both of purely Civil and purely Ecclesiastical Laws, and
therefore after the Church by its Legislative power has restrained any matter
of Indifference, the Civil Sovereign, in whose disposal all matters of
indifference are, may, if he see good occasion, release and free it again, and
impose the contrary matter of indifference, and if he does so, all Christian
People are obliged by the express Commands of Scripture to obey him; for the
Scripture-commands of obedience to the Temporal Sovereignty have no such
exception as this annexed to them, except the Church command the contrary; and
in matters of duty what have we to do to make exceptions where God has made
none? And indeed where there are two Legislative Powers, the one must
necessarily be subject to the other, or it will be impossible for the Subject
in many cases without sinning to obey either. For when ever the Commands of the
Civil State do happen to clash with the Commands of the Church, either the
Church must be obliged to submit to the State, or the State to the Church, or
the Subject cannot possibly obey the one without sinning against the other. If
it be said, that the Church must submit to the State, in things appertaining to
the State; and the State to the Church, and so both are supreme in their own
Province, I would fain know what is to be done when these two Powers differ
about the things which appertain to the one and to the other; the State says
this appertains to me, and so commands it, the Church says this appertains to
me, and so forbids it; now in this case it is certain that one or the other
must be obliged to give way, or the Subject can neither obey nor disobey either
without sinning* and which soever of the two it be that is obliged to give way,
by virtue of that Obligation it must be subjected to the other. So that now the
Question is only this, which of the two Legislative Powers is Supreme, and it
would be impertinent to say that they are both Supreme in their proper
Province, the one in Civil, and the other in Spiritual causes, because it is in
suspense whether the cause in which they countermand each other be Civil or
Spiritual, so that in this case I must either be obliged to obey neither, which
is notoriously false, or whatsoever the cause be in it self, to yield obedience
to the one, and to disobey the other, and if I must obey the Civil Power,
whether the cause be Civil or Spiritual, then the Civil Power must be supreme
in both; as on the contrary, if I must obey the Church Power whether the cause
be Spiritual or Civil, it will as necessarily follow that the Church Power is
supreme in both. Which later we are as sure is false, as the Scripture is true;
for in (...) matters it is agreed on all hands, that the Scripture concludes
all men, as well Clergy as Laity, under the obligation of Obedience to the
Civil Sovereign, and that none are exempt, no not the Apostles themselves, or
the Bishops succeeding them in the spiritual Government, whether we consider
them separately or conjunctly; and if in all Civil Causes I am obliged to obey
the command of the Civil Power, then it is most certain that if the Cause in
contest between that and the spiritual Power be really Civil, I am obliged to
disobey the countermand of the spiritual Power; but if on the contrary I must
disobey the Command of the Civil Power, supposing the cause to be spiritual,
which way can I turn my self without danger of sinning, so that unless one of
these two Powers are Supreme in both causes, when ever any cause happens to be
contested between them, (as to be sure many must between two Rival Powers) I
can neither obey nor disobey without sinning against one or both; and can we
imagine that God, who is the God of Order and not of Confusion, would ever
involve us in such inextricable difficulties by subjecting us to two supreme
Powers, that are so subject to clash and interfere with one another? Wherefore
although, as I shall show by and by, the Church is invested with a Legislative
Power, whereby it can restrain things that were free and indifferent for its
own security, and decency, and order; yet this Power is subordinate to the
Civil Legislation (which is in all causes Supreme) and cannot enact against it,
control or countermand it in any indifferent matter, whether Temporal or
Spiritual, but stands obliged to recede to the Civil Sovereign who has the
supreme disposal of all indifferent things, and in all contested cases to veil
its Authority to his.

And accordingly we find that during the first three hundred years when the
Civil Powers were Enemies to Christianity, and did no otherwise concern
themselves with it than to ruin and extirpate it, the Church made Laws for it
self, and by its own Legislative Power enacted whatsoever it judged convenient
or necessary for its own security or edification; but yet it never presumed in
any indifferent matter to contradict the Laws of the Empire, nor did ever any
Christian, because he was a Subject of the Church, refuse to obey his Prince in
any case whatsoever, where God had not countermanded him; as is most evident
from hence, because in all the History of those times we do not find one
instance of any Christian that suffered for so doing. In those days, there were
no Martyrs for indifferent things, which to be sure there must have been, had
the Church then taken upon it to determine indifferences contrary to the Edicts
of the Emperor; but the only thing they then suffered for, was their refusal
to disobey the express Will of God, in compliance with the wicked Wills of men;
which is an unanswerable Argument, that in those days the Church never assumed
to it self any supreme Authority over indifferent things, either in Spirituals
or Temporals, but left that in those hands where God had placed it, viz. in the
hands of the Civil Sovereign, with whose Imperial Laws its Canons never
interfered, with whose Legislative Power it never justled for the Wall, but
cheerfully submitted to it in all things, wherein it was not determined to the
contrary by the express Will of God. And when afterward the Civil Sovereign
embraced Christianity, he did not thereby divest himself of his Supremacy over
all indifferent things in all causes whatsoever, but by his own Authority he
not only convened General Councils, and for the most part presided in them (as
particularly in that of Ephesus, Chalcedon, the sixth General one in
Constantinople, called Trullo, and several others) and enforced their Canons
with his own Imperial Edicts, but many times made Laws, even in Church matters
without them; to which the Ecclesiastical Governors yielded the same Obedience
as they did to the Decrees of the most ecumenical Councils: for so, not only
Constantine, who was the first Christian Emperor, made Laws concerning the
Festivals of the Church, Ordaining what might, and what might not be done upon
the Lords Day, and not only several of those Ecclesiastical Laws in Gratian's
Collection are now confessed on all hands to be the Laws of Princes, but the
first Titles of the Code are all of them concerning E^clesiastical matters, and
so also in the Laws of the Goths and Vandals, the Authenticks and Capitulars of
the French Kings, there are numerous instances of the Legislative Power of
Kings in Ecclesiastical matters, and this power was openly asserted by the
French Ambassadors in the Council of Trent, viz. that the Kings of France
following the examples of other Christian Emperors had frequently made Laws for
the Church, which were so far from being countermanded by the Bishops of Rome,
that they received many of them into their own Canons, and that the Gallican
Church had been always governed by the Ecclesiastical Laws which were made by
their Kings, and Cardinal Cusanus tells us, lib. 2. Cath. Concord. c. 40. that
he himself had collected Eighty six Chapters of Ecclesiastical Laws, made by
the ancient Emperors; besides many others of Charles the Great and his
Successors, in which there are many things concerning the Popes and all other
Patriarchs, declaring that he never read that ever any Pope was asked to
confirm those Laws, or that ever they were accounted the less obligatory
because they wanted the Papal confirmation. And indeed before Pope Hildebrand,
who was the first Bishop that challenged the Supreme Legislation in
Ecclesiastical affairs, it is notoriously known that the greatest Prelates of
the Church frequently addressed themselves to the Emperor for such good Laws,
as the present necessities of the Church called for. Thus Pope Damasus
entreated the Emperor Honorius to make a Law for the more Regular Election of
the Popes. Thus also Sergius, Patriarch of Constantinople, supplicated the
Emperor Heraclius to forbid by a Pragmatick Sanction the admission of any man
into the Clergy, unless it were into a dead Place; and it was, (as it is
thought,) upon S. Ambrose's entreaty that Theodosius made a Law for the
disanulling of Marriages within the Prohibited degrees: so when the Emperor
Justinian turned the ancient Canons of the Church into Imperial Laws, he was so
far from being accused of being an Usurper of the Ecclesiastical Power, that
Pope Adrian IV. highly extolls him for so doing, though in his 133 Novel that
Emperor affirms, that (...), nothing is impervious to the inspection and
cognizance of the King, in which S. Austin accords with him, when he affirms
the Kings do nothing but their duty, Cum in suo regno bona jubeant, mala
prohibeant, non solum quae pertinent ad humanam societatem, verum etiam quae
pertinent ad divinam Religionem, i. e. when they make good Laws, not only
concerning humane Society, but also concerning divine Religion; by all which it
is evident that the Civil Powers for several ages after they became Christians
did claim and exercise a supreme Legislative Power in causes Ecclesiastical as
well as Civil, and this without any contradiction from the Bishops and
Governors of the Church; for as for that saying, Quid Imperatori cum Ecclesia?
What has the Emperor to do with the Church? It was not the Language of the
Church, but of that fireband Donatus, who was the Ringleader of one of the
most factious and turbulent Heresies that ever infested the Christian World;
and if in those instances wherein they exerted their Legislative Power in
Ecclesiastical Causes, the Church had no power to Control or Countermand them,
then neither has it in any other instance of the same nature; and if so, then
notwithstanding their subjection to our Savior, they still retain their
Supreme Commanding Power over all matters of indifference, whether it be in
Civil or Ecclesiastical causes. But then

Secondly, By this their subjection to our Savior, they are not deprived of
their natural Right of being unaccountable to any but to God alone through
Jesus Christ; for all the difference between the state of Sovereign Powers in
this matter, before and after their subjection to Christ's Mediatorial Scepter,
is only this, that before they were accountable to God only immediately, whereas
now they are accountable to God only through Jesus Christ; for Christ being
Authorized by God to Mediate for him, or, which is the same thing, to be his
Vicegerent in the World, all things are now subjected to him, and God now rules
and judges, rewards and punishes all men by him whether they are Subjects or
Sovereigns, Vassals or Emperors; for so in the great transaction of the last
day we are told that the Kings of the Earth shall be arraigned before his
Judgment Seat, Rev. 6.15, 16, 17. but though they are now accountable
immediately to Christ, who during this Evangelical Economy is to rule and
judge for God; yet in respect of any Earthly Tribunal, they remain altogether
as Sovereign and unaccountable as ever: for to be Sovereign and unaccountable
are convertible terms, and it is nonsense to say, either that any Power is
unaccountable which has any Superior, or that any Power is accountable which
is Sovereign and Supreme, so that by necessity of nature those Powers which are
Sovereign upon Earth must be unaccountable to any Power upon Earth, because to
call to account is an Act of Superiority, and that which is Supreme can have no
Superior to account to; so that unless it be made appear that Christ has
erected some earthly Tribunal that is Superior to the Tribunals of the Supreme
Civil Powers, he must of necessity have left them as unaccountable as he found
them. Now it is plain, that our Savior erected no other Tribunal in this
World, but only that of the Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Government, which he
was so far from advancing above the Tribunal of the Civil Sovereign, that while
he was upon Earth he acknowledged himself to be subject and accountable
thereunto, though he was then the Supreme Bishop and Head of that spiritual
Regiment, and this he did not only by Recognizing Cesar's Right of receiving
Tribute from him, of which I have spoken before, (for by bidding them render to
Caesar the things that are Cesars he leaves Sovereign Princes in the quiet
possession of all those Rights which he found them possessed of, and requires
their Subjects to pay them whatsoever is essentially due to their Sovereignty,
and whatsoever the Laws and Customs of Nations had before determined to be
their Right) but also by acknowledging before Pilate the Right of the Civil
Tribunal to call him to account, Ioh. 19.1. where he confesses that the Power
by which Pilate arraigned him was given him from above, and by reprehending S.
Peter for endeavoring by force to rescue him out of the hands of the Civil
Powers, Put up thy Sword, says he, into his place, for all that take the sword
shall perish by the sword, Matthew. 26.52. in which words it was far from his
intention to prohibit the use of the Sword either to Governors, who, as S.
Paul tells us, bear not the Sword in vain, or to private persons in their own
lawful defense; for he commands his own Disciples to buy them swords to defend
themselves against Robbers and lawless Cutthroats, who, as Josephus tells, did
very much abound in those days, Luke 22.36. but all that he intended was to
forbid drawing the Sword against lawful Authority in any case whatsoever,
though it were for the defense and security of his own person; for this was S.
Peter's case, who in the defense of his Savior resisted the High Priests
Officers who came armed with a lawful Authority to seize and apprehend him; in
which our Savior plainly owns himself accountable to the Civil Authority of
his Country: for if he had not been so, it could be no fault in S. Peter to
endeavor to rescue him from its Ministers, and if Christ himself, while he was
upon Earth, were subject to the Civil Authority, what an high piece of
arrogance is it for those who are at most but his Vicars and Ministers, to
claim or pretend an exemption? And if it were so great a fault in S. Peter, to
draw his Sword against lawful Authority, though it were in the defense of his
Saviors Person, then doubtless it is no less a fault in his Successors to
pretend a Right from S. Peter to draw their Swords against Sovereign Princes,
though it be in the defense of their Saviors Religion. And as our Savior
owned himself subject and accountable to the Civil Tribunal, so S. Paul's
injunction is universal, Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers; and
surely every Soul must include the whole body of the Clergy as well as of the
Laity, unless we can produce some clear and express exception to the contrary,
and as the Command extends universally to all, so does the reason of it also,
for the Powers that are, are ordained of God; and if we must be subject to
them, because they rule by God's Authority, then it is certain there are none
that are subject to God, but are under the force and obligation of this Reason.
And then he goes on, Whosoever resists the Power (of whatsoever Degree or
Order of men he be) resists the Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall
receive to themselves damnation; and if, according to the Law of our Savior,
it be a damnable sin for any person or persons whatsoever to resist the Civil
Authority, then it is a plain case, that our Savior has not at all depressed
the Sovereignty of the Secular Powers by subjecting it to any Superior
Tribunal; but has left it as absolute and unaccountable as ever it was before
it was subjected to his Empire. And thus having proved that Sovereign Princes
are not divested of any natural Right of their Sovereignty by their subjection
to the Mediatorial Scepter of our Savior, I proceed in the

Second place, To show what those Ministries are, which they are obliged to
render to our Savior by virtue of this their subjection to him. In general it
is foretold, that upon their Subjection to Christ they should become nursing
Fathers and nursing Mothers to his Church, Isa. 49.23. that is, that they
should tenderly cherish, protect, and defend it, and liberally minister to it
whatsoever is necessary for its support and preservation; and to be sure Christ
expects of them that they should accomplish this Prediction by doing all those
good Offices to his Church which the relation of a foster Father or Mother
imports: For when God Predicts any good thing of men, it is plain that he would
have them be what he foretells they shall be; so that in this case the Prophecy
carries Precept in it, and does not only signify what shall be, but also what
ought to be. When therefore God Prophesies of Kings that they shall be nursing
Fathers to his Church, he does as well declare what they should be as what they
shall be; and so he foretells of them, and commands them in the same breath. If
therefore we would know what those Ministries are, which Christ now requires
Sovereign Powers to render to his Church, our best way will be to inquire what
those Duties are which are implied in the relation of a foster Father to his
foster Child. Now the Duties of this Relation may be all of them comprehended
under these four particulars:

First, To protect and defend it against harms and injuries.

Secondly, To Cultivate its manners with good Precepts and Counsels.

Thirdly, To correct and chasten its faults and irregularities.

Fourthly, To supply it with decent Raiment and convenient Sustenance,
answerable to which Sovereign Powers being constituted by our Savior the
foster Fathers of his Church are by virtue of this Relation obliged.

I. To protect and defend it in the Profession and exercise of the true
Religion.

II. To fence and Cultivate its peace and good Order, either by wholesome Laws
of their own, or by permitting and requiring it to make good Laws for it self,
and if need be, enforcing them with Civil Coercions.

III. To chasten and correct the irregular and disorderly members of it.

IV. To make provision for the Decency of its Worship, and for the convenient
Maintenance of its Officers and Ministers, which answers to the decent Raiment
and convenient Sustenance with which the Foster-Father is obliged to supply his
Foster-Child.

These Particulars I shall but very briefly insist on, it being none of my
Province to instruct Princes and Governors.

I. One of those Ministries which Princes by virtue of their Subjection to
Christ, are obliged to render to his Church, is to Protect and Defend her in
the Profession and Exercise of the true Religion, that is, not only to permit
her openly to Profess the true Religion and to perform the public Offices of
it without disturbance or interruption, but also to fence her with legal
securities, and guard her with the Temporal Sword against the power and malice
of such as would disturb and persecute her; and therefore Sovereign Powers are
concerned above all things impartially to inquire and studiously to examine
what the true Religion is, lest being imposed upon by false pretenses, they
misemploy that Power in the Patronage of Error, which was given 'em for the
Protection of the Truth.

II. Another of those Ministries which Princes are obliged, by virtue of their
Subjection to Christ, to render his Church, is to Fence and Cultivate its Peace
and good Order, either by wholesome Laws of their own, or by permitting and
requiring it when occasion requires to make good Laws for it self, and if need
be, by enforcing 'em with Civil Coercions: for so when the Church was either
broken by Schisms or corrupted by Errors and disorderly Customs; it was always
the practice of Christian Kings and Emperors, even from the time that they
became Christians to restrain and give a check to those Divisions and
Disorders, either by their own Royal and Imperial Edicts, or by convening the
Ecclesiastical Governors to Councils, there to consult and agree upon such good
Laws and expedients as the present necessities of the Church required; and
because these Laws being grounded upon mere Spiritual Authority could as such
be enforced by no other Penalties than Spiritual, which by bold and obstinate
Offenders were frequently despised and disregarded, therefore those holy Kings
and Emperors thought themselves obliged, as they were the Ministers of Jesus,
to strengthen and reinforce 'em with temporal Sanctions and Penalties, by which
means they became the Laws of the Empire, as well as of the Church: Of all
which I have given sufficient Instances, and all this was no more than what
they were obliged to by virtue of their Subjection to Christ; for being
subjected to him they are his Viceroys in the World, and do Reign and Govern by
his Authority; and since their Authority is his, they must be accountable to
him, if they do not employ it for him in Ministering to the necessities of his
Church and Kingdom; and therefore if when it is in their power to check a
prevailing Schism or Corruption in the Church by wholesome Laws and Edicts, they
refuse or neglect to do it, they must doubtless answer to him from whom they
received their power, and who being himself the Supreme Head of the Church,
has constituted 'em its Guardians and Nursing-Fathers.

III. Another of those Ministries which Princes are obliged to render his
Church is to Chasten and Correct the irregular and disorderly Members of it;
for though there are Spiritual Rods and Corrections which Christ has solely
committed to the Spiritual Government, and which if men understood and
considered the dire effects and consequences of 'em, are sufficient to restrain
and keep in awe the most obstinate Offenders, yet when men are stupefied in sin
and do feel nothing but only what pains or pleases their bodies, these
Spiritual Corrections are insignificant to 'em, they being such as make no
impression on their corporeal Senses, and so when men are hardened in Schism or
Heresy, to be sure they will despise the Ecclesiastical Rods, as being
confidently persuaded that they cannot be justly applied to 'em, and that where
they are applied unjustly they are only so many Spiritual scare-crows that can
only threaten, but not hurt 'em; and therefore in these cases the Secular
Powers are obliged by virtue of their Subjection to Jesus, to second the
Spiritual with the Temporal Rod, and to awe such offenders with corporeal
corrections as are fearless and insensible of the Censures of the Church. And
conformable hereunto has been the constant practice of all good Kings and
Emperors, even from their first Conversion to Christianity, as might easily be
demonstrated by innumerable Instances out of Ecclesiastical History; for they
not only made Laws enforced with temporal Penalties for the regulation of the
Clergy, as well as Laity, not only commanded and obliged their Bishops in case
of notorious neglect to execute the Church Censures on the Schismatical,
Heretical and disorderly of both sorts; but when they found those Spiritual
Executions ineffectual, they very often seconded 'em with temporal, such as
pecuniary mulcts, Imprisonments and Banishments; and though in the case of
error and false belief they were always very tender and gentle, yet whenever
they found men busily propagating their Errors into Sects and Divisions, to the
disturbance of the Churches peace, they thought themselves obliged to restrain
their petulancy with temporal Chastisements. And indeed as they are the
Viceroys of our Savior they are ex officio the conservators of the peace of
his Kingdom, and stand obliged to exert that Authority he has devolved upon
'em in the defense of its Unity and good Order, which in many cases they can no
otherwise do, but only by restraining the Schismatical and disorderly with the
terror of temporal corrections, so that as well in the Church as in the Civil
State they are the Ministers of God to us for our good, and therefore if we do
that which is evil, we have just cause to be afraid, for they bear not the
Sword in vain, for they are the Ministers of God, Revengers to execute wrath
upon them that do evil, Romans 13.14.

IV. And lastly, Another of those Ministries which Princes are obliged to
render to Christ's Church by virtue of their subjection to him, is to make good
provision for the Decency of its Worship, and for the convenient maintenance of
its Officers and Ministers; to take care that it has decent and commodious
places set apart for the public Celebration of its Worship, and that those
places be supplied with such Ornaments and Accommodations as are suitable to
those venerable Solemnities that are to be performed in them; that so its
Worship may not be exposed to contempt by the slovenliness and Barbarity of its
outward appendages; and this is the clothing of the Church, which as it ought
not on the one hand to be too Pompous and Gaudy, that being naturally apt to
distract and Carnalize the minds of its Votaries, and to divert their attention
from those spiritual exercises, wherein the life and soul of its Worship
consists; so neither ought it on the other hand to be sordid and nasty, that
being as naturally apt to prejudice and distaste men against it, and to create
in their minds a loathing and contempt of it. Now the furnishing the Church
with such decent Places and Ornaments of Worship, as do become the grave
Solemnities of a spiritual Religion, being a matter of Cost and Charge must
necessarily belong to the Civil Powers who alone can lay Rates upon the
Subject, and have the sole Command and disposal of the public Purse; and
therefore by virtue of their subjection to Christ, they are obliged to take
care that such Religious Places and Ornaments be provided as the Decency and
convenience of his Worship do require. And then as for the Ministers and
Officers of his Church they are under the same Obligation to take care, that
they whose Office it is to serve at the Altar should live upon the Altar, and
that according to the different stations and degrees wherein they are placed,
that so they may neither be necessitated for a subsistence to involve
themselves in secular affairs, and thereby to neglect their spiritual Calling,
which is Burden enough of all conscience for any one man's shoulders, nor be
tempted to base Compliances with the lusts of men and the iniquities of times
for a maintenance; and that so Religion it self may not be exposed to contempt
through their wretched Poverty and indigence who are the Ministers of it, and
who for want of a fair and honorable subsistence can never obtain Credit and
Authority enough to do any considerable good in the World. And this is the food
and sustenance of the Church, without which it cannot long flourish either in
true Knowledge, or true Piety, but must insensibly wither away, and degenerate
into Barbarity and Ignorance. And accordingly, if you consult Ecclesiastical
History you will find that it was ever the practice of Pious Princes and
Emperors to take care both for the erecting of decent and convenient Churches
in all parts of their Dominions for the Celebration of Divine Worship, and to
furnish them with all the decent Accommodations and Ornaments that were proper
thereunto, and also for the endowing the Bishops and Pastors of the Church with
such honorable subsistences as becomes the Port and Dignity of their several
Orders and Offices; in which they did no more than what they stood obliged to,
as they were the Viceroys of Jesus, and the foster Fathers of his Church, by
virtue of which Relation to it they are bound in duty to supply it with decent
Raiment and convenient Food. And now having explained the subjection of the
Sovereign Powers of the Earth to our Lord and Savior, and shown what those
Ministries are which they are obliged to render to him in his Kingdom, I
proceed to the

Fourth and last sort of his Ministers, by which he governs his Kingdom, viz.
the Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Governors, in treating of which I shall
endeavor these three things:

First, To show that Christ has erected a spiritual Government to minister to
him in his Church.

Secondly, To show in what hands this spiritual Government is placed.

Thirdly, To show what are the proper Ministries of this Government.

I. That Christ has erected a spiritual Government in his Church. And indeed,
supposing the Church to be a regular and formed Society, subsisting of it self,
distinct from all other Societies, it must necessarily have a distinct
Government in it, because Government is essentially included in the very notion
of all regular Society, which without Rule and Subjection is not a formed
Society, but a confused multitude; for what else do we mean by a Humane
Society, but only such a company of men united together by such and such Laws
and Regulations? But how can any company of men be united by Laws, without
having in it some Governing Power to rule by those Laws, and exact obedience to
them? So that we may as well suppose a complete Body without a Head, as a
Regular Society without a Government. Now that the Church is a Regular Society,
utterly distinct from all Civil Society, is as evident as the truth of
Christianity, which all along declares and Recognizes the Law or Covenant upon
which it is founded, and by which it is united, to be Divine, and consequently
to be superior to, and independent upon all Civil Laws; and if that which
constitutes the Church be Divine Law and not Civil, then the Constitution of
the Church must be Divine and not Civil: for that which makes us Christians, at
the same time makes us parts of the Christian Church; and that which makes all
the parts of the Church makes the Church it self; which is nothing but the
whole, or Collection of all the parts together; and therefore as we are not
made Christians, so neither are we made a Christian Church by the Laws of the
Commonwealth, but by the Laws and Constitutions of our Savior, which were
promulgated to the World long before there were any Laws of the Commonwealth to
found a Christian Church on; for there was a Christian Church for three hundred
years together before ever it had the least favor or protection from the Laws
of Nations. In all which time it subsisted apart from all other Societies, and
was as much a Church or Christian Society as it is now; and as it is now it is
only a continued Succession of that Primitive Church, and therefore, as to the
Constitution of it, must necessarily be as distinct now from all other
Societies, as it was then, when it subsisted not only apart from, but against
the Laws and Edicts of all other Societies in the World; in short therefore,
since the Church of Christ is founded on a Charter, and incorporated by a Law
that is utterly distinct from the Charters and Laws of all Civil Societies, it
hence necessarily follows, that it self is a distinct Society from them all;
because that which individuates any Society, or makes it a distinct body from
all other Societies, is the Charter or Law upon which it is founded; and
accordingly our Savior tells Pilate when he asked him whether he was a King,
that he was a King indeed, but that his Kingdom was not of this world, Joh.
18.36. i. e. though my Kingdom be in this World, yet is it not of the World;
for neither are the Laws of it Humane but Divine, nor the powers of it external
but invisible, nor the Rewards and Punishments of it temporal but Spiritual and
eternal.

From the whole therefore these two things are evident;

First, That Government is Essential to formed and regular Societies.

Secondly, That the Church of Christ is in the Nature and Constitution of it a
formed and regular Society, distinct from all other Societies: from both which
it necessarily follows, that it must have a distinct Government included in
the very essence and being of it. And accordingly in the New Testament besides
the Civil Magistrates, we frequently read of Spiritual and Ecclesiastical
Governors, so Heb. 13.17. there is mention made of the Rulers that watch for
our souls, and a strict injunction to obey and submit our selves to 'em; and so
again in the 7th. and 24th. Verses, and in 1 Timothy 5.17. The Apostle speaks of
the Elders that Rule well who are to be accounted worthy of double Honor. And
indeed the Greek Word (...), which signifies a Bishop or Overseer, does in
Scripture always import, a Ruler or Governor: Vid. Hammond, Acts 1. Note 1.
and therefore being applied, as it is frequently in the New Testament, to a
certain Order of Men in the Christian Church, it must necessarily denote 'em to
be the Rulers and Governors of it; and this power to (...) i. e. Oversee, and
Rule and Govern the Church was derived to 'em from Christ the Supreme Bishop of
our Souls, even by that Commission he gave 'em, John 20.21. As the Father has
sent me so send I you, i. e. so I Commission you with the same Authority in
kind to Teach and Govern in my Kingdom, as I my self have received from the
Father; and accordingly as Christ is called the Pastor or Shepherd, which name
imports Authority to Govern his Flock (for so to feed and to rule are of the
same significancy in Psalm ^8.72. and Philo tells us, (...), i. e. that the
name of Shepherds employed Ruling and Governing Power) so they who were sent and
Commissioned by our Savior are styled (...) the Bishops and Overseers or
Shepherds in the Flock, to feed the Church of God, Acts 20.28. and they are
elsewhere commanded to feed; the Flock of God, and to take the oversight
thereof, 1 Pet. 5.2. And as they are called the Shepherds of Christ's Flock, so
they are also the Stewards of his Family, and as such they are constituted by
him the Rulers of his Household, to give them their portion of meat in due
Season, Luke 12.42. and, elsewhere they are called Governments or Governors,
(the Abstract, as it is very usual in Scripture being put for the Concrete;) 1
Cor. 12.28. and their Authority is said to be given from the Lord, 2 Cor. 10.8.
and they a^e said to be our Rulers in the Lord, i. e. by the Lords Commission
and Authority, 1 These. 5.12. and as such they are commanded to Rule with
diligence, Romans 12.8. from all which it is abundantly evident that the Church
of Christ is a formed Society subsisting of it self, distinct from all other
Societies, under a distinct Rule and Government. But this I shall make yet more
fully appear* when I come to treat of the several Ministries which the
Governors of the Church of Christ are obliged to render him.

I proceed therefore at present to the Second thing proposed, which was to
inquire into the nature of this Government in what hands Christ has placed it;
now the two main Rival forms of Church Government pretending to divine
Institution are the Presbyterial and Episcopal; the Presbyterial is that which
is seated in an equality or parity of Church Officers, the Episcopal is that
which is placed in a superior order of Church Officers, called Bishops; to whom
the other Orders of Presbyters and Deacons are subject and subordinate: the
latter of which I shall endeavor to prove, is the true form of Government
instituted by our Savior, and that

First, from the Institution of our Savior.

Secondly, From the practice of the Holy Apostles.

Thirdly, From the punctual conformity of the Primitive Church to both.

Fourthly, From our Saviors declared allowance and approbation of the
Primitive practice in this matter.

I. That the Government of the Church of Christ is Episcopal, is evident from
the Institution of our Savior, who in his lifetime instituted two distinct
Orders of Ecclesiastical Ministers, the one superior to the other, viz. that
of the twelve Apostles, and that of the seventy or seventy two Disciples; for
that these two were of distinct Orders, is evident from their being always
distinguished from one another and mentioned apart by different names and in
different Ranks and Classes; for to what purpose should the Scripture mention
the twelve and the seventy so distinctly as it every where does, if there were
not some distinction in their Office and Employment, for in Luke 6.13. we are
told that Christ called unto him his Disciples, and of them he chose twelve,
whom also be named Apostles, and Mark 3.13, 14. it is said that he called unto
him whom he would, that is, of his Disciples, and ordained twelve that they
should be with him and that he might send 'em forth to Preach, and what less
can this imply than that the twelve were separated by this Call and Ordination
of Christ to some distinct Office and Employment from the rest of the
Disciples. And that the Office of the twelve was superior to that of the
seventy, is evident not only from their being still placed first in the
Catalogues of Ecclesiastical Officers, see Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Cor. 12.28. in the
latter of which we are told that God constituted in the Church, first Apostles
wherein the Primary is attributed to the Apostolical Office; and not only from
the particular care which Christ took of these twelve above the rest of his
Disciples both in praying for and instructing them, of which there are a great
many notorious instances in the Gospels, but also from hence that their
immediate Successors were for the most part Chosen out of the seventy; for so
Simeon the Son of Cleophas succeeded S. James at Jerusalem, Philip S. Paul at
Caesarea, Clement S. Peter at Rome, and diverse others of the seventy according
to Dorotheus, Eusebius and others of the Fathers succeeded the Apostles after
their death in the Government of their several Churches, and Matthias, who as
Eusebius Epiphanius and S. Ierom affirm, was one of the seventy that was Chosen
and Ordained by the other Apostles to succeed Judas in the Apostolate, Acts
1.26. from whence it is evident that the Apostles were superior to the
seventy, otherwise it would have been no advancement to the seventy to succeed
'em; for all that Superiority which they acquired by their Succession, must
necessarily be inherent in the Apostles before they succeeded 'em; else how can
they be said to succeed 'em in it? and if we suppose 'em to be equal with the
Apostles in Office before they succeeded 'em, it is nonsense to say they
succeeded 'em; for how can a man be said to succeed another in any Office who
is actually vested with the same Office before he succeeds him. If therefore
the seventy received no more power after the Apostles, than they had under 'em,
they were as much Apostles before they succeeded 'em, as after; but if they did
receive more power, then the Apostles to whom they succeeded had more power
than they before they received it, and consequently were their Super^ours,
because a man can receive no more power by succeeding another in any Office,
than he to whom he succeeds had before, by virtue of the same Office. By all
which it is most evident, that by the Institution of our Savior the Apostles
were superior to the seventy, and yet it is as evident that the seventy were
Ecclesiastical Ministers, as well as they; for in Luke 10.1. we are told that
after these things the Lord appointed other seventy also, and sent 'em two and
two before his face, that is, to Preach his Gospel, and that by this Mission of
his they were authorized to be the Ministers of Religion, is evident from what
he tells 'em, Verse 16. he that hears you hears me, and he that despises
you despises me, and he that despises me despises him that sent me; from
whence it is plain that they were his Authorized Ministers, even as he was
Gods, because as the despising of him was a despising of God, by whom he was
sent; so the despising of them was a despising of Christ, by whom they were
sent; and accordingly by virtue of this Mission we find 'em acting as
Authorized Ministers of the Gospel; for so Ananias, who was one of 'em,
Baptized Saul, Acts 9.18. and Philip who was another Preached and Baptized at
Samaria. Acts 8.5.

So that here are plainly two sorts of Ecclesiastical Officers, the one
superior to the other, of our Saviors own Institution and appointment; and
therefore if his institution be still valid, there must still be a superiority
and subordination between the Officers and Ministers of his Church, and
consequently the Government thereof must still be Episcopal, i. e. by some
superior Officers presiding and superintending over other inferior ones. I
know it is objected that this superiority of the Apostles over the seventy was
only in Office but not in Power or Jurisdiction; but since it is the Office
that is the immediate Subject of the Power belonging to it, I would fain know,
whether superiority of Office must not necessarily include superiority in
Power; for Office without Power is an empty name that signifies nothing, and
every degree of superiority of Office must be accompanied with Power to exert
it self in Acts of superiority; otherwise 'twill be utterly in vain and to no
purpose. So that either the superiority of the Apostolic Office over other
Church-Offices must be void and insignificant, or it must have a proportionable
superiority of power over 'em inseparably inherent in it. But it is farther
objected, that supposing the Apostolate to be superior to the other
Ecclesiastical Orders in Power and Office, yet it was but temporary, it being
instituted by our Savior in subservience to the present exigence and necessity
of things, without any intention of deriving it down to the Church in a
continued Succession. To which I answer in short, that this is said without so
much as a plausible color of reason; for they allow both that our Savior
instituted this Office, and that in his institution he never gave the least
intimation to the World that he intended it only for a certain season. Now if
men will presume to declare Christ's Institutions Temporary, without producing
the least intimation of his Will, that he so designed 'em, they may with the
same warrant repeal all the Institutions of Christianity; and even the two
Sacraments will lie as much at their mercy as the Institution of the Apostolic
Order, which unless they can prove it repealed by the same authority which
established it, will be sufficient to prescribe to all Ages and Nations; for
the obligations of divine Commands are dissolvable only by divine countermands;
and for men to declare any divine Institution void before God has so declared
it; is to overruled the Will of God by their own arrogant Presumptions, for
though the matter of the Institution be mutable in it self, yet the form and
obligation of it is mutable only by the authority which made it; and therefore
though God has not declared that he instituted it for perpetuity, yet till he
declares the contrary, it must bind for perpetuity; especially if the reason of
the institution of it be not apparently altered, which cannot be pretended in
the case under debate, there being the very same reasons for a superiority and
subordination between Ecclesiastic Officers now, as there was when our Savior
first appointed and instituted it. Until therefore they can show either that
the reason of the institution is ceast, or that the institution it self is
repealed by some other Law; (neither of which was ever yet pretended,) they may
as reasonably dispense with most of the precepts of the Gospel (which are no
more declared perpetual than this) as with this of superiority and subjection
among the Ecclesiastical Orders, which is the proper form of the Episcopal
Government.

II. That the true Government of the Church is Episcopal, is evident also from
the Practice of the holy Apostles, who pursuant to the institution of our
Savior, did not only exercise that superiority in their own persons which
their Office gave 'em over their inferior Clergy, but also derived it down
with their Office to their Successors, which is a plain argument that they
looked upon our Saviors institution of this superior Office of the
Apostolate, not as a temporary expedient, but as a standing form of
Ecclesiastical Government, to be handed down to all succeeding Generations: for
though during our Saviors abode upon Earth and sometime after his ascension
into Heaven, the number of the Apostles was confined to twelve, yet when
afterward, through their Ministry the Church was spread and dilated not only
through Judea, but into the Gentile Nations, they added to their number several
other Apostles to whom they communicated the same Office and Degree of
superiority over the other Clergy, that our blessed Savior had communicated to
them, for so Eusebius lib. 1. cap. 11. (...), i. e. besides the twelve there
were many other Apostles in that Age after the similitude of the twelve; and of
the truth of this I shall give three or four instances.

The first is that of S. James of Jerusalem, the Brother of Jesus, who though
he was none of the Twelve, (for in that number there were but two Iameses, viz.
the Son of Alpheus, and the Son of Zebedee, neither of which was he, whom S.
Paul calls the Lords Brother, and S. Paul reckons him apart from the Twelve, 1
Cor. 15.5, 6.7.) is yet styled an Apostle by S. Paul, Gal. 1.19. but other
Apostles saw I none save James the Lords Brother. And S. Ierom in his Comment
on Isaiah styles James the thirteenth Apostle, that is, the first that was made
an Apostle after the Twelve, and that he was not merely a nominal Apostle, but
actually endowed with Apostolical Power and Superiority, is evident both from
Scripture and the unanimous consent of Ecclesiastical History: from Scripture
it is evident that this James was a man of great pre-eminence in the Church of
Jerusalem; for in the first Council that was held there we find him giving a
discisive Sentence in the matter of Circumcision, Acts 15. for after there had
been much disputing, ver. 7. and S. Peter, and S. Paul, and S. Barnabas had
declared their Judgment in the case, ver. 7.13. S. James after a short Preface
thus delivers himself, Wherefore my Sentence is that we trouble not them which
from among the Gentiles are turned unto God, and this Sentence of his
determines the Controversy, and puts a final end to all farther debate, which
plainly argues his great authority and pre-eminence in that place. Again Acts
21.17, 18. we are told, that when S. Paul and his company were come to
Jerusalem, the Brethren received him gladly, and that the next day following
Paul went in with them unto James, and all the Elders were present. Now for
what other reason should Paul go in to James more especially, or upon what
other account should all the Elders be present with James, but that he was a
person of the greatest note and figure in the Church of Jerusalem, and for the
same reason in all probability S. Paul mentions James before Peter and John,
discoursing of a meeting he had with them at Jerusalem, Gal. 2.9. because
though Peter and John were two of the Principal of the twelve Apostles, and S.
James was not so much as one of that number, yet in the Church of Jerusalem he
had the Priority of them both; now considering that S. James is called an
Apostle, and considering the Preference he had in all these instances above the
other Apostles at Jerusalem, it is at least highly probable that he was
peculiarly the Apostle of the Church of Jerusalem; but if to all this evidence
we add the most early Testimonies of Christian Antiquity, we shall advance the
Probability to a Demonstration; for by the unanimous consent of all
Ecclesiastical Writers S. James was the first Bishop of Jerusalem, for so
Hegesippus, who lived very near the times of the Apostles, tells us, that James
the Brother of our Lord, called by all men the Just, received the Church of
Jerusalem from the Apostles, vid. Eusebius. lib. 2. c. 23. so also S. Clement, as
he is quoted by the same Author, l. 2. c. 1. tells us, that Peter, James, and
John, after the Assumption of Christ, as being the men that were most in favor
with him, did not contend for the Honor, but chose James the Just to be Bishop
of Jerusalem; and in the Apostolical Constistitutions that pass under the name
of S. Clement, (which though not so ancient as is pretended, yet are doubtless
of very early Antiquity) the Apostles are brought in thus speaking, Concerning
those that were ordained by us Bishops in our life time, we signify to you
that they were these, James the Brother of our Lord was Ordained by us Bishop
of Jerusalem, etc. so also S. Ierom. de script. Eccles. tells us, that S.
James, immediately after the Passion of our Lord, was ordained Bishop of
Jerusalem by the Apostles. And S. Cyril, who was afterward Bishop of that
Church, and therefore a most Authentic Witness of the Records of it, calls
Saint James the first Bishop of that Diocese, Catech. 16. To all which we have
the concurrent Testimonies of S. Austin, S. Chrysostom, Epiphanius, S. Ambrose,
and a great many others; and S. Ignatius himself, who was an immediate Disciple
of the Apostles, makes S. Stephen to be a Deacon of S. James, Ep. ad Trall. and
therefore since Stephen was a Deacon of the Church of Jerusalem, S. James,
whose Deacon he was, must necessarily be the Bishop of it.

Upon this account therefore S. James is called an Apostle in Scripture,
because by being Ordained by the Apostles Bishop of Jerusalem, he had the
Apostolic Power and Authority conferred on him, for since it is apparent he
was none of the Twelve, to whom the Apostleship was at first confined, he could
no otherwise become an Apostle, than by deriving the Apostleship from some of
the Twelve, and therefore since that Apostleship, which he derived from the
Twelve, was only Episcopal Superiority over the Church of Jerusalem, it hence
necessarily follows that the Episcopacy was the Apostleship derived and
communicated from the Primitive Apostles.

The second Instance of the Apostles Communicating their Apostolic Superiority
to others is Epaphroditus, who in Phil. 2.25. is styled the Apostle of the
Philippians, But I suppose it necessary to send to you Epaphroditus my Brother
and companion in labor, and fellow soldier, (...), but your Apostle: for so
S. Ierom Com. Gal. 1.19. Paulatim tempore precedente and alii ab his quos
Dominus elegerat, Ordinati sunt Apostoli sicut ille ad Philippenses sermo
declarat dicens necessarium existimavi Epaphroditum, etc. i. e. by degrees in
process of time others were ordained Apostles by those whom our Lord had
chosen, as that passage to the Philippians shows, I thought it necessary to
send unto you Epaphroditus your Apostle. And Theodoret upon the place gives
this reason why he is here called the Apostle of the Philippians; (...), i. e.
he was entrusted with Episcopal Government as being their Bishop; so that here
you see Epaphroditus is made an Apostle by the Apostles, and his Apostleship
consists in being made Bishop of Philippi.

A third instance is that of Titus and some others with him, 2 Cor. 8.23.
Whether any do inquire of Titus, he is my partner and fellow helper concerning
you: or our Brethren be inquired of, they are (...), the Apostles of the
Churches, and the glory of Christ, where it is plain they are not called the
Apostles of the Churches merely as they were the Messengers of the liberality
of the Churches of Macedonia, for it was not those Churches, but S. Paul that
sent them, verse. 22. and therefore since they were not Apostles in relation to
those Churches whose liberality they carried, it must be in relation to some
particular Churches over which they had Apostolical Authority; and that Titus
had this Authority over the Church of Crete, is evident both from S. Paul's
Epistle to him, and from Primitive Antiquity: As for Saint Paul's Epistle, there
are sundry passages in it, which plainly speak him to be vested with
Apostolical Superiority over that Church; so Chap. 1. verse. 5. For this cause
left I thee in Crete that thou should set things in order that are wanting,
and ordain Elders in every City as I have appointed thee. For in the first
place, S. Paul here gives him the supreme judgment of things that were wanting,
with an absolute power to reform and correct them; which is a plain
demonstration of his Superiority in that Church. Secondly, he Authorizes him to
ordain Elders in every City, and whether these Elders were Bishops or
Presbyters is of very little consequence as to the present debate; for first it
is of undoubted certainty that there were Presbyters in the Church of Crete,
before Titus was left there by the Apostle; and secondly, it is as evident that
those Presbyters had no Power to ordain Elders in every City, as Titus had; for
if they had, what needed S. Paul to have left Titus there for that purpose?
What need he have left Titus there with a new power to do that which the
Presbyters before him had sufficient power to do? For if the Presbyters had
before the power of Ordination in them, this new power of Titus's would have
been not only in vain, but mischievous; it would have looked like an invasion
of the Power of the Presbyters, for S. Paul to restrain Ordination to Titus, if
before him it had been common to the whole Presbytery; and upon that account
have rather proved an occasion of strife and contention than an expedient of
peace and good order. From hence therefore it is evident, that Titus had a
Power in the Church of Crete which the Presbyters there before him had not, and
this Power of his extended not only to the establishment of good Order and the
Ordaining of Elders, but also to rebuking with all authority, i. e. correcting
obstinate offenders with the spiritual Rod of Excommunication, chap. 2. verse.
15. and taking cognizance of Heretical Pravity, so as first to admonish
Heretics, and in case of Pertinacy to reject them from the Communion of the
Church, chap. 3. verse. 10. from all which it is evident that this Apostolate of
Titus consisted in his Ecclesiastical Superiority, which was the very same in
the Church of Crete that the first Apostles themselves had in the several
Churches that were planted by them. And accordingly he is declared by the
concurrent Testimony of all Antiquity to be the first Bishop of that Church; so
Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 4. affirms him, (...), to have received Episcopal Authority
over the Churches of Crete. So also Theodoret. in Argum. Ep. ad Tit. tells us,
that he was ordained by S. Paul Bishop of Crete, and so also S. Chrysostom, S.
Ierom, and S. Ambrose, and several others of the Fathers and Ecclesiastical
Writers. This Episcopal Authority therefore which S. Paul gave Titus over the
Church of Crete is another plain instance of the Apostles making Apostles, or
deriving to others their Apostolic Power and Superiority over particular
Churches.

The fourth and last Instance I shall give is that of Timothy, who as it
appears by S. Paul's Epistles to him, had Episcopal Authority over the Church of
Ephesus; and this not only over the Laity to command and teach 'em, 1 Timothy
4.11. to receive Widows into the Churches Service or reject and refuse 'em, 1 Timothy 5.4.9.16. and to oblige the Women to go modestly in their Apparel and keep
silence in the Church, 1 Timothy 2.11, 12. but also over the Clergy, to take care
that suitable provision should be made for 'em, 1 Timothy 5.17. that none should be
admitted a Deacon till after competent trial, nor Ordained an Elder, till after
he had well acquitted himself in the Deaconship, 1 Timothy 3.10.13. to exercise
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over 'em, to receive Accusations against 'em, and
if he found 'em guilty to put 'em to open shame, 1 Timothy 5.19, 20. and S. Paul
charges him to exercise this his Jurisdiction without preferring one before
another, and without partiality, ibid. ver. 21. which if he had no Jurisdiction
over 'em, had been very impertinent; and as he had Jurisdiction over the Clergy
concredited to him, so had he also the Authority of Ordaining 'em; for the due
exercise of which S. Paul gives him that necessary rule, 1 Timothy 5.22. Lay hands
suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men's sins. And that this
Authority of his in the Ephesian Church over both the Laity and Clergy was
given by S. Paul for a standing form of Government there, is evident from
hence, because it was conferred on him after the Presbytery was formed and
settled in that Church; for in planting and cultivating this large and populous
Church which extended it self over all the Proconsular Asia, S. Paul had
labored for three years together with incredible diligence; which is a much
longer time than he spent in any other Church, and therefore by this time to be
sure he had not only constituted a Presbytery in it, as he did in all other
Churches, Acts 14.23. but also reduced it to much greater perfection than any
other, that so in the constitution of it, it might be a pattern to all other
Churches; and if so, then to be sure the Government which he had now at last
established in it was such as he intended should continue, viz. by a single
Person presiding over both Clergy and Laity. And that de facto it was so, we
have not only the Authority of S. Paul's Epistles to Timothy, but also the
concurrent Testimony of all Ecclesiastical Antiquity; for so Eusebius. Eccles.
Hist. lib. 3. cap. 4. tells us he was the first Bishop of the Province or
Diocese of Ephesus and the Anonimous Author of his life in Photius, that he was
the first that acted as Bishop in Ephesus, and that he was Ordained and
Enthroned Bishop of the Metropolis of Ephesus by the great S. Paul; and in the
Council of Chalcedon twenty seven Bishops are said to have succeeded in that
Chair from Timothy who was the first, and Saint Chrysostom Hom. 15. in 1 Timothy
5.19. tells us that it is manifest Timothy was entrusted with a Church, or
rather with a whole Nation, viz. that of Asia, upon which account he is styled
by Theodoret in 1 Timothy 3.1. (...), Timothy the Apostle of the Asiatiques, and
(to name no more of the great numbers of Authorities that might be cited) in
the Apostolical Constitutions we are expressly told, that he was Ordained Bishop
of Ephesus by S. Paul. This therefore is another evident instance of the
Apostles deriving down their Apostolic Authority. Other instances might be
given, but these are sufficient to show that the Apostles did not look upon our
Saviors institution of a superior Order of Ecclesiastical Officers, as a
temporary thing that was to expire with 'em, but as a standing Model of
Ecclesiastical Government, since they derived to others that superiority over
the Churches of Christ which he communicated to them. For from all these
instances it is most evident, both that the Apostolical Office did not expire
with the Twelve, but was transferred by 'em to others, and that that which is
now called the Episcopacy was nothing else but the Apostolical Office derived
from the Apostles to their successors: for in the Primitive Language of the
Church, Bishops are generally styled Apostles; for which no other reason can be
assigned but that they succeeded in the Apostolical superiority. Thus, as has
been shown before, S. James, Epaphroditus, Titus, and Timothy are styled
Apostles in Scripture, and by the Primitive Writers; Clemens Bishop of Rome who
was a Disciple of the Apostles is called (...) i. e. Clemens the Apostle, vid.
Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 4. and Ignatius Bishop of Antioch, (...) Apostle and
Bishop by S. Chrysostom; and Thaddaeus, who was sent b^ S. Thomas to the Prince
of Edessa (...) by Eusebius, and so are also S. Mark and S. Luke by Epiphanius;
and Theodoret lays it down for a general rule, (...), i. e. those whom we now
call Bishops were anciently called Apostles; but in process of time the name of
Apostle was left to them who were more strictly Apostles ( viz. the Twelve) and
the name of Bishop was restrained to those who were anciently called Apostles.
If therefore the practice of the Apostles, proceeding upon the express
institution of our Savior, be sufficient to found a Divine Right, we have this
you see to plead for a superiority and subordination of Ecclesiastical Offices;
since the Apostles did not only Ordain Presbyters and Deacons in the several
Churches they planted, but also Apostles or Bishops to preside over 'em; and if
their Ordaining of Presbyters be an argument of the perpetuity of the Office of
a Presbyter (as the Presbyterians themselves contend it is) why should not
their Ordaining Bishops also be as good an Argument of the perpetuity of the
Office of a Bishop? If either be perpetual, why not both? if not both, why
either? and how can we argue a perpetual power of Ordination in the Church from
the Ordination of Timothy and Titus for instance (as the Presbyterians do, Vide
Ius Divin. p. 159.167.) if the Office they were Ordained to were not perpetual,
and if it were perpetual, then so is Episcopacy, which is in nothing different
from that which they exercised in their Churches.

III. That the true Government of the Church is Episcopal, is evident also from
the Universal Conformity of the Primitive Church thereunto. It is objected by
the Adversaries of the Episcopal Government, that though our Savior indeed
Instituted a superior Order of Church Officers, viz. his Twelve Apostles to
precide over the rest, and Govern his Church, yet this was an extraordinary
Commission which he never intended they should derive down to the Church as a
perpetual Model of Government, but was limited to the persons of the Apostles,
and was to expire with 'em. Now that it was not limited to the persons of the
Apostles is evident, since as it has been shown before, the Astles derived it
to others; which they could not have done without violating their trust, and
exceeding the bounds of their Commission, had it been appropriated to their
persons, so that it must be allowed either that they proceeded irregularly in
transferring their superiority to others; or that their Commission did empower
them to transfer it; and therefore if it appear not only that they might
transfer it to some for the Government of some Churches, by virtue of their
Commission (of which the above cited instances are a full demonstration) but
also that they Universally transferred it to others for the Government of all
other Churches, then it is certain that either they mistook the intent of our
Saviors Commission, or the intent of it was to empower 'em to transfer it
unversally as a standing and perpetual Form of Ecclesiastical Government; in
short, if they understood the intendment of their own Commission (as to be sure
they did being guided by the Spirit into all Truth) to be sure they would never
have communicated their Apostolic Superiority to any, had it not been our
Saviors intention when he Commissioned 'em to Authorize 'em so to do; and for
the same reason we may be sure that so far forth as they did communicate it, it
was our Saviors intention that they should, now, as was shown before, to some
they did communicate it for the Government of some Churches, as to Timothy and
Titus for instance, for the Government of the Churches of Ephesus and Crete;
from whence it is evident that it was our Saviors intention that they should
communicate it to some; and for the same reason if it be made appear, that they
did communicate it universally for the Government of all other Churches, it
will necessarily follow, that it was our Saviors intention they should
communicate it as an universal form of Church Government. Now whether they did
communicate it universally or no, is a question about matter of Fact, and as
such, is decidable only by the Testimony of the most competent witnesses, and
the most competent witness, in this case, is the Christian Church in the Ages
next succeeding the Apostles, which Church attests with one universal consent
the universal derivation of a Superior Order of Ecclesiastic Officers from
the Apostles to preside over the Churches of Christ. And some Christian Writers
we have who were living in the very days of the Apostles, and were their
immediate Scholars and Disciples; others again, who lived in their days and
were their Disciples, who lived in the Apostles; and others who immediately
succeeded these: from all which we have ample Testimonies of the continued
Succession of this superior Order, even from the Apostles to whom our Savior
first derived it. Out of all which I shall only produce some few instances out
of an infinite number that might be given. Of the first sort are S. Clement
Bishop of Rome, and S. Ignatius Bishop of Antioch. S. Clement, who as Frenaeus
tells us, saw the Apostles, and conversed familiarly with 'em, makes mention in
his Epistle to the Corinthians of three Orders of Ecclesiastical Officers in
his time, whom he calls the High Priest, the Priests, and the Levites, which
words can be no otherwise understood than of the Bishop, Presbyter and the
Deacons: S. Ignatius who was the Disciple of S. Peter, and in his lifetime
Bishop of Antioch is so full and express in all those six Epistles he wrote on
the way to his Martyrdom, for the derivation of this superior Order from the
Apostles, that the adversaries of this Order have no other way to evade him but
by condemning those Epistles for Counterfeits; from which injurious sentence
they have of late been so triumphantly vindicated by a Learned Pen of our own,
that I dare say no man of Learning for the future will so far expose the
Reputation of his Understanding and Modesty as to call 'em in question again.
Now in all these Epistles the holy Martyr not only distinguishes the Clergy
into Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, but strictly injoyns the two latter as
well as the Laics to be Dutiful and Obedient to the former; and particularly
in his Epistle to the Trallians, what is the Bishop, says he, but he that has
all Authority and Power, what is the Presbytery but a sacred Constitution of
Counselors and Assessors to the Bishop, what are the Deacons but imitators of
Christ, and Ministers to the Bishop as he was to the Father, and as he every
where enjoins obedience to the Bishops as to the supreme Order in the Church of
Christ, so in the beginning of his Epistle to the Philadelphians he tells them,
that so many as belong to Christ are united to the Bishop, and that so many as
depart from him and his Communion, and associate themselves with the accursed
shall be cut off with them. And in his Epistle to the Magnesians he tells them,
that it highly became them to obey their Bishop, and not to contradict him in
any thing, for it is a terrible thing to contradict him, because in so doing
you do not so much despise him who is visible as the invisible God who will not
be despised, for his promotion is not from men but from God. And several of his
Cotemporary Bishops he mentions by name, viz. Onesimus Bishop of the Ephesians,
Policarp of the Smyrnians, Polybius of the Trallians, and Damas of the
Magnesians, and still as he mentions them he highly commends the Presbyters and
Deacons for their obedience to them. So in the beginning of his Epistle to the
Magnesians, Having been so happy as to see you by your worthy Bishop Damas, and
your worthy Presbyters, viz. Bassus, and Apollinus, and Zotion your Deacon,
whom I cannot but commend for his obedience to the Bishop and the Presbytery --
you ought not to contemn the youth of your Bishop, but to pay him all
veneration (as I know your holy Presbyters do) according to the appointment of
God the Father. And in his Epistle to the Ephesians, Let us be careful, says
he, that we do not oppose the Bishop as we would be obedient to God; and if any
man observe the silence of his Bishop, let him reverence him so much the more,
for every one that the Master of the Family appoints to be his Steward, we
ought to receive him as the Master himself, and therefore it is evident we
ought to respect the Bishop as our Lord himself: from whence I infer first,
that at the writing of these Epistles, which was not above eight or nine years
after the decease of S. John, there were Bishops every where constituted over
the Churches of Christ; for he not only mentions several Churches that had
Bishops actually presiding over them, but declares Bishops to be of Divine
Ordination, and that they were to be obeyed, (...) according to the appointment
of God the Father, and that (...), that they had their promotion not from men,
but from God; and not only so, but in his Epistle to the Trallians, he bids
them obey their Bishop as Christ and his Apostles had commanded them, in which
he necessarily supposes Bishops to be instituted by Christ and his Apostles,
and then he goes on; He who is within the Altar, that is, within the Communion
of the Church, is clean, (...), i. e. He is without the Altar who does any
thing without the Bishop and Presbyters and Deacons, and if any Christian
acting without the Bishop, etc. was without the Communion of the Church, then
to be sure no Community of Christians that did so could be esteemed a part or
Member of the Church; and therefore since according to the Doctrine of this
Primitive Age, Bishops were a Divine Ordinance, and were looked upon as
necessary to the very Constitution of Churches; we may from hence justly
conclude that there were then no Churches without them. And secondly, we may
from hence also infer, that since there were Bishops in this early Age
presiding over the Churches of Christ, several of them at least received their
Episcopal Orders immediately from the hands of the Apostles: For at the time
when these Epistles were written, Ignatius himself had been above forty years
Bishop of Antioch, at which time sundry of the Apostles were living; and
therefore considering the singular Eminence of the Church of Antioch, whereof
he was Bishop, as being immediately planted by S. Peter and S. Paul, and that
wherein the Disciples of Jesus first received the name of Christians; and
considering also that it was the constant practice of the Apostle to Ordain
Elders in all the Churches they planted, it is highly probable that he received
his Ordination immediately from their hands; and so S. Chrysostom Tom. 5. Edit.
Savil. p. 499. expressly tells us, that he did not so much admire Ignatius for
that he was accounted worthy of so great a Dignity, (...), i. e. but because he
obtained his dignity from those holy men, and the sacred hands of the blessed
Apostles had been laid upon his head. And the same may be said of Polycarp
Bishop of Smyrna, of whom Ignatius makes honorable mention; and indeed it is
not to be imagined that the Christian Churches would ever have so universally
admitted of Bishops as it is apparent they did in Ignatius's time, when the
Apostles were living, had not some of them at least derived their Authority
from the Apostles immediately; and considering how much S. John, who survived
the Apostles, was reverenced to the last through all the Christian Churches,
what likelihood is there that those very Churches should so far contemn both
him and them, even whilst they were living among them, as to admit of a new
order of men without their Authority, to Oversee and Govern them? but that de
facto the Apostles did with their own hands Ordain several Bishops to preside
over several Churches, is most certain, if any credit may be given to
Ecclesiastical History, which assures us, that they ordained Dionysius the
Areopagite Bishop of Athens, Caius of Thessalonica, Archyppus of Colosse,
Onesimus of Ephesus, Antipas of Pergamus, Euphroditus of Philippi, Crescens of
the Gauls, Erastus of Macedonia, Trophimus of Arles, Jason of Tarsus, Titus of
Corinth, Onisiphorus of Colophon, Quartus of Berytus, Paul the Proconsul of
Narbona. Vid. Bishop Tailor of Episcopacy, Sect. 18. But then thirdly and
lastly, from hence I also infer, That the Bishops of this Age were looked upon
as a Superior Order to all other Ecclesiastical Officers; for Ignatius not
only enjoins the Presbyters and Deacons to obey their Bishops, but also presses
them thereunto by the Command of Christ and if by Christ's Command they were to
obey their Bishops, then by Christ's Institution their Bishops were their
Superiors. Thus much therefore we are assured of by the Testimony of Ignatius,
that in the Apostolic Age Bishops were universally admitted in the Churches of
Christ, that they derived their Authority from the hands of the Apostles, and
that by virtue of that Authority they were Superior to all other
Ecclesiastical Officers; and this is all we contend for.

And now let us proceed to the Testimony of the Writers of the next Age, who
conversed with those that were Conversant with the Apostles, of which number
are Justin Martyr, Hegesippus, Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, Irenaeus, and
Clemens Alexandrinus. The first of which was converted to Christianity about
the year of our Lord 133. which is not above twenty five years after the death
of S. John. This Writer in his Apology for Christianity to the Emperor
Antoninus, giving an account of the manner of their Public Worship, makes
mention of a (...), i. e. a President, or presiding Ecclesiastic in the Mother
Church, who did there Consecrate the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, and give
it to the Deacons to distribute it to such as were present, and carry it to
such as were absent, and who did receive the Charities of the People, and
dispose and manage the Stock of the Church. Now that (...) was the Bishops
Title is evident, for so Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, who was Justin Martyrs
Cotemporary, uses the word (...) and (...), promiscuously stiling Publius
Bishop of Athens (...) or President, and Quadratus his Successor (...) or
Bishop, vid. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 23. Next after him we have the Testimony of
Hegesippus, who as S. Ierom de script. Eccles. tells us, lived very near to the
Apostolic Age, he wrote five Books of Commentaries, some fragments of which
are preserved in Eusebius his History, in which he not only makes mention of
several Bishops with whom he conversed in his Journey from Judea to Rome, and
of Primas Bishop of Corinth by name, and afterward of Anicetus, Soter, and
Elutherius Bishops of Rome successively, but also tells us, that after James
the Just, who was the first Bishop of Jerusalem, had suffered Martyrdom, Simeon
Cleophae was made Bishop of that Church, because he was of the Kindred of our
Lord, vid. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 22. Not long after him Dionysius, Bishop of
Corinth, makes mention in several Epistles of several Bishops by name, and
particularly of Publius, and Quadratus, successive Bishops of Athens, of
Dionysius the Areopagite the first Bishop of that Church, of Philip Bishop of
Gortyna in Crete, of Palma Bishop of Amastris in Pontus, of Pinytus Bishop of
the Gnossians, and of Soter Bishop of Rome, vid. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 23. About
the same time lived Irenaeus Bishop of Lions, who, as himself tells us in his
Epistle to Florinus, had often seen Polycarp the Disciple of S. John, and did
very well remember his person, and behavior when he discoursed to the
Multitude the intimate conversation he had with S. John, and the rest of the
Apostles who had seen our Lord. And from him we have this express Testimony
concerning the matter in debate, We can reckon up those who were Ordained
Bishops by the Apostles in the Churches, who they were that succeeded them even
down to our times -- for the Apostles would have them to be in all things
perfect and unreprovable whom they left to be their Successors, and to whom
they delivered their Apostolic Authority. And then he goes on, and gives us a
Catalogue of Eleven Bishops of Rome by name, beginning from Linus, to whom he
tells us S. Peter and S. Paul Episcopatum administrandae Ecclesiae tradiderunt,
i. e. delivered the Episcopal power of Governing that Church, and ending with
Elutherius who was the twelfth* and did then actually preside in the Episcopal
Chair, and that by Bishops in this Age was meant such as presided over
Presbyters as well as Laics is evident by the demonstration Clemens
Alexandrinus makes, who was Irenaeus his Cotemporary, between the (...), Strom.
6. i. e. the Processes of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons: and a little before,
speaking of the dignity of the Presbytery, he tells us, (...), -- i. e. that it
was not honored with the first Seat, or placed in the first Class of the
Ecclesiastic Orders; which plainly shows that then there was an Order above
the Presbytery, viz. the Bishops, whom presently after he mentions as the first
Order of Ecclesiastics. And that passage which Eusebius quotes from him out of
his Book, (...), lately published, is a plain Argument that in his time Bishops
were looked on as a distinct Order from the rest of the Clergy; for he tells
us, that when S. John returned from Patmos to Ephesus, he visited the
neighboring Provinces, (...), i. e. partly that he might ordain Bishops, and
partly that he might set apart such for the Clergy as were pointed out to him
by the Holy Spirit; by which it is evident that, in Clement's time at least,
and, if he be not mistaken, in S. John's too, the Bishops were a distinct Order
from the rest of the Clergy, viz. the Presbyters and Deacons. Thus both in the
Apostolic Age, and that succeeding it, we have abundant Testimony of the
derivation of the superiority of the Apostolic Order from the Apostles to the
Bishops of the Churches of Christ.

And then for the next Age we have the concurrent Testimonies of Tertullian,
Origin, and S. Cyprian, not only of the continuance of this Apostolic
superiority in the Church, but also of the derivation of it from the Apostles
themselves; but we need not cite their words, it being granted by the most
learned Advocates of the Presbyterian Government that for several years before
these Fathers, viz. about the year of our Lord 140. the Episcopacy was every
where received in the Church; for they tell us, that though the Apostles
exercised a superiority over the other Ecclesiastical Orders, yet they left
none behind to succeed them in that power; but the Church was every where
governed by a Common Council of Presbyters; but this Form of Government being
found inconvenient, as giving too much occasion for Schisms and Divisions, it
was at last universally agreed upon that one Presbyter should be chosen out to
preside over all the rest; and this, say they, was the beginning of the
Episcopacy; for which they cite that famous passage of S. Ierom, Antequam
Diaboli instinctu, etc. i. e. Before such time as through the instinct of the
Devil divisions in Religion began, and it was said among the People, I am of
Paul, I am of Apollo, and I of Cephas, the Churches were Governed by Common
Councils of Presbyters, but afterward every Presbyter reckoning such as he
baptized to be his and not Christ's, it was decreed over all the World, that one
from among the Presbyters should be chosen and set over all the rest, to whom
should belong all the care of the Churches, that so the seeds of Schisms might
be destroyed; which universal Decree, as they guess, was made about the year
140. Now not to dispute with them the sense of this passage, but allowing it to
bear their sense I shall only desire the Reader to consider,

First, That it is the Testimony of one who lived long after the afore-cited
Witnesses, and so far less capable of attesting so early a matter of fact; for
some of the Witnesses above cited were such as lived in the days of the
Apostles, others, such as lived in their days who lived in the days of the
Apostles, and certainly these were much more competent Witnesses of what was
done in the Apostles days than S. Ierom, who was not born till about the year
330. almost one hundred years after Origin the latest, and three hundred years
after Clemens the earliest of the above cited Witnesses; and certainly to
prefer the Authority of one single Witness, who lived so long after the matter
of fact, to the unanimous attestations of so many earlier Witnesses, is both
immodest and irrational.

II. It is also to be considered, that S. Ierom was a witness in his own cause,
in which case men of his warmth and passion are too too apt to exceed the
limits of truth; for the design of that passage was to curb the insolence of
some Pragmatical Deacons, who would needs advance themselves above the
Presbyters, which Saint Ierom, being a Presbyter himself, takes in high
disdain, and, as the best of men are too prone to do, when their own concerns
are at stake, bends the stick too much the other way, and depresses the Deacons
too low, and advances the Presbyters too high. For,

III. In other places, where he is not Biassed by partiality to his own Order,
he talks at a quite different rate; so in Dial. advers. Luciferian: do thou
ask why one that is not Baptized by the Bishop does not receive the Holy Ghost?
why it proceeds from hence that the Holy Ghost descended on the Apostles. Where
it is plain he places the Bishops in the same rank with the Apostles, so also
in Ep. 1. ad Heliodor. speaking of the Bishops of his time, they stand, says
he, in the place of S. Paul, and hold the place of S. Peter, and in Psalm.
45.16. Now because the Apostles are gone from the World thou have instead of
those their Sons the Bishops, and these are thy Fathers because thou art
Governed by 'em: and Ep. ad Nepot. What Aaron and his Sons were, that we know
the Bishops and the Presbyters are. And therefore as Aaron by Divine Right was
superior to his Sons the Priests, so is the Bishop above his Presbyters; all
which are as plain contradictions to that famous passage of his (understanding
it as the Presbyterians do) as one proposition can be to another: and whether
is a man more to be credited when he speaks without Bias or Partiality, or when
he speaks in his own cause and under the influence of his own Interest?

VI. It is further to be considered, that the Decree of which S. Ierom here
speaks, by which the Government of the Church was translated from a Common
Council of Presbyters to a single Bishop, must according to his own words be
Apostolic, and consequently much earlier than the Presbyterians will allow it;
for it was made at that time when it was said among the People, I am of Paul,
and I am of Apollos, and I of Cephas; and this as S. Paul tells us, was said in
his time, and therefore this Decree must be made in his time, and that S.
Jerome did mean so, we are elsewhere assured from his own words, for so in his
Book de Eccles. Script. he tells us, that immediately after the ascension of
our Lord S. James was Ordained by the Apostles to be Bishop of Jerusalem,
Timothy by S. Paul Bishop of Ephesus, Titus Bishop of Crete, and Polycarp by S.
John Bishop of Smyrna. So that either he must here expressly contradict himself,
or else the Decree of which he speaks must have been made immediately after the
Ascension of our Lord, and consequently be a Decree Apostolic.

V. It is yet farther to be considered that if any such Decree, of changing the
Church Government from Presbyterial to Episcopal, had been made by the
Apostles; it is strange we should not find the least mention of it in
Scripture, and if it had been made after the Apostles, about the year, 140. it
is as strange we should have no mention of it in Ecclesiastic Antiquity; for
an universal Change of the Government of the Church from one kind to another,
is a matter of such vast moment, that had the Apostles made a Decree concerning
it, they would doubtless have been very solicitous to publish it through all
the Churches, and to have transmitted down to Posterity some standing record of
it; which yet they were so far from doing, that they have not given us the
least intimation of it in all their Writings: And had it been made afterward
about the year 140. to be sure all Primitive Antiquity would have rung of such
a public and important alteration; but on the contrary you see both Clemens
and Ignatius, who lived before that period, testify that the Church was not
Governed in their time by a Common Council of Presbyters, but by Bishops;
Hegesyppus, Irenaeus, and Dionysius of Corinth, who lived in that period are so
far from taking notice of any such Decree of alteration, that they testify the
Government of the Church by an uninterrupted Succession of Bishops, even from
the Apostles themselves; and as for Irenaeus who gives us an account of the
Succession of the Roman Bishops from S. Peter down to the time when he himself
was at Rome, it was as easy for him to know who they were that succeeded from
S. Peter, as it is for us to know who succeeded from Archbishop Whitgift in
the Chair of Canterbury, he being no farther distant from the one than we are
from the other; and though through the Ambiguity or defect of the Records of
some Churches, this succession be not equally clear in all, yet in the most
eminent Churches, such as Jerusalem, Rome, Antioch, and Alexandria, the
successions are as clear as any thing in Ecclesiastical History; and is it not
much more reasonable to conclude what was the Government of those Churches that
are not known, from what we find was the Government of those that are, than to
question those Ecclesiastical Records that are preserved, because of the
uncertainty of those that are not? for though we do not find in all Churches an
exact Catalogue of all their Bishops; yet we cannot produce any one instance in
any one ancient Church of any other form of Government than the Episcopal, and
therefore we may as well question whether ever there was any such thing as an
ancient Monarchy in the World, because many of the Histories of the Monarchs
are defective as to their Names and the Order of their Succession, as whether
there was ever any such thing as a Primitive Episcopacy in the Church, because
the Records of several Churches are defective as to the Names and Successions
of their Bishops: Since therefore this Story of S. Ieroms universal Decree is
not only altogether unattested, but also directly contradictory to the
concurrent Testimony of all Antiquity, how can we reasonably look upon it
otherwise than as a mere figment of his own fancy? especially considering

VI. And lastly, How odiously this conceit of his reflects upon the Wisdom of
our Savior and his Apostles: for the Apostles, devolving the Government of the
Church upon Common Councils of Presbyters was, as he himself tells us, the
occasion of sundry Schisms and Divisions; for the removal of which, the Church
afterward found it necessary to dissolve those Presbyteries and introduce
Episcopacy in their Room; and this S. Ierom approves as a very wise and prudent
action, for says he, the safety of the Church depends upon the Authority of
the High Priest or Bishop, to whom if there were not given by all supreme
Authority, there would be as many Schisms in the Churches as there are Priests.
So that according to him, had the Church continued under that Government which
the Apostles left in it, it must unavoidably have been torn in pieces with
endless Schisms and Divisions; and if so, either the Apostles were very
imprudent in not foreseeing this, or very neglective in not preventing it; so
that had not the after-age taken care to supply the defect of their Conduct, by
erecting a wiser-form of Government than they left, the Church had infallibly
run to ruin. This is the unavoidable consequence of S. Ieroms Hypothesis; which
therefore I can look upon no otherwise than as a mere device of his own brain
snatched up in have to defend his Order against the Insolence of those Factious
Deacons, that flew in the face of the Presbytery.

This therefore being removed, which is the main, and indeed the only
considerable Objection against the universal conformity of the Primitive Church
to the Episcopal Government, it remains, that if any credit may be given either
to those Writers that lived in the Apostolic age, or to those who immediately
succeeded 'em, it is evident from their unanimous Testimonies, that the
Episcopacy is nothing else but only the Apostolic superiority derived from the
hands of the Apostles in a continued succession from one Generation to another;
and to reject their Testimony is not only very unreasonable (there being at
least as much reason why we should reject all ancient History) but also of very
dangerous consequence, since it is from thence that we derive the very Canon of
Scripture, and so we may as well reject it in this instance as in the other.

IV. And lastly, That the rightful Government of the Church of Christ is
Episcopal, is evident also from our Saviors declared allowance and approbation
of the Primitive practice in this matter, viz. in those seven Epistles which he
sent by S. John to the seven Churches of Asia, all which he directs
particularly to the seven Angels of those Churches, whom he not only styles the
seven Stars in his own right hand or the seven lights of those seven Churches,
Vid. Rev. 1.20. and Rev. 2.1. but in every Epistle particularly owns 'em for
his Angels or Messengers: if therefore we can prove that these seven Angels
were at that time the seven Bishops that presided over both the Clergy and
Laity of those seven Churches, they will be an unanswerable instance of our
Saviors allowance and approbation of the Episcopal Order. In order therefore
to the clearing this matter I shall show,

First, That they were single persons.

Secondly, That they were persons of great Authority in those Churches.

Thirdly, That they were the Presidents or Bish^ps of those Churches.

First, That they were single Persons, is evident because they are all along
mentioned as such; the Angel of the Church of Ephesus in the singular number,
the Angel of the Church of Smyrna, and so of all the rest; and so every where
in the Body of the Epistles they are all along addressed to in the singular
number; I know thy works and thy labor, nevertheless I have a few things
against thee, remember whence thou art fallen, repent, and do thy first works,
and the like; in all which our Savior plainly writes to 'em as to single
persons: It is true what he writes to them, he writes not only to them
personally, but also to the People under their Government and inspection; and
therefore sometimes he mentions the People Plurally; so Chap. 2. ver. 10. The
Devil shall cast some of you into Prison, and so ver. 13. and ver. 23. but this
is so far from arguing that these Angels were not single persons, that it
argues the quite contrary; since if they had not, what reason can there be
assigned why our Savior should not mention them plurally, as well as the
People? I know it is objected that the Angel of the Church of Thyatira is
mentioned Plurally. Chap. 2. ver. 24. but unto you I say, and unto the rest of
Thyatira, where by you, it is supposed must be meant the Angel, and by the rest
of Thyatira, the People. To which I answer, that in the ancient Greek
Manuscripts, and particularly in that at S. James's (...), or and is left out,
and so the words run thus, but unto you the rest of Thyatira, or to the rest of
you at Thyatira, which is set in opposition to those of Thyatira that had been
seduced into the Sect of Iezebel, and therefore cannot be understood of the
Angel who is all along mentioned in the singular number, wherefore had he not
been a single person, no account can be given why he should be mentioned
singly, and the rest of Thyatira Plurally. But then

Secondly, That these single persons were of great Authority in those Churches
is evident not only by that honorable title of Angel, that is given them,
which plainly shows them to be persons of Office and Eminence, and that not
only by our Saviors directing his Epistles to them, to be communicated by them
to their several Churches, but also from that authority which the Angel of
Ephesus exercised there, and which the Angels of Pergamus and Thyatira ought to
have exercised, but did not: For as for the Angel of Ephesus, he is commended
for trying them which said they were Apostles, and were not, and discovering
them to be liars, which words plainly denote a Iuridical Trial and Conviction
of some person or persons, who pretended to Apostolical Authority, but upon
examination were found to be Cheats and Impostors: and then as for the Angel of
the Church of Pergamus, he is blamed for having in his Church those that held
the Doctrine of Balaam, or of the Nicolaitans; which plainly shows that he had
power to remedy it by casting them out of the Church; for if he had not, how
could he have been justly blamed for suffering them? And the same may be said
of the Angel of the Church of Thyatira, who is also blamed for suffering the
woman Jezebel, which was not in his power to prevent, unless we suppose him to
have Authority to eject her and her Followers. But then

Thirdly and lastly, That these single persons were the Presidents or Bishops
of those Churches, is also evident from the most Primitive Antiquity; for so in
the Anonymus Tract of Timothy's Martyrdom recorded in Biblioth. Pat. n. 244. we
are told, that when S. John the Apostle returned from his Exile in Patmos,
which was two or three years after he wrote his Revelations, (...), i. e. that
being assisted with the presence of the seven Bishops of that Province he
assumed to himself the government of it. Now that these seven Bishops were the
same with those seven Angels he wrote to in his Revelations is evident, because
all those seven Churches in which those seven Angels presided, lay within the
Circuit of the Lydian or Proconsular Asia, of which Ephesus was the Metropolis;
and therefore who else can we so fairly suppose these seven Bishops to be, by
whom he governed the Province of Ephesus, as the seven Angels of those seven
Churches which were all of them within that Province? and S. Austin expressly
calls the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, the Proepositus Ecclesiae, i. e. the
Governor of the Church, Ep. 162. and speaking of those seven Angels, he styles
them Episcopi sive praepositi Ecclesiarum, the Bishops or Governors of the
Churches, Comment. in Revel. so also the Commentaries under the name of S.
Ambrose referring to these Angels in 1 Cor. c. 11. expressly tells us, that by
those Angels he means the Bishops, and that they were so, is most indubitably
evident of the Angel of the Church of Smyrna in particular, who could be no
other than S. Polycarp, who was most certainly made Bishop of Smyrna some years
before the writing these Epistles, and continued Bishop of it a great many
years after; for so Ignatius, who was his Cotemporary, in his Epistle to that
Church styles him Polycarp your Bishop, and earnestly exhorts his Presbyters
and Deacons as well as the Laity to be subject to him; and Irenaeus who
personally knew him has this passage concerning him: (...), etc. Polycarpus
was not only instructed by the Apostles, and did not only converse with many of
those who had seen our Lord, but by the Apostles who were in Asia, was made
Bishop of Smyrna, Eusebius. Hist. l. 4. c. 15. and in their Encyclical Epistle of
his Martyrdom the whole Church of Smyrna style him Bishop of the Catholic
Church of Smyrna, ibid. So also Polycrates, Bishop of Ephesus, who was thirty
eight years old when Polycarp suffered, tells us, that he was Bishop and Martyr
in Smyrna, Eusebius. Hist. l. 5. c. 24. And the same is attested by Tertullian,
Eusebius, and S. Ierom, and indeed by all Ecclesiastic antiquity: so that it
is a plain case, that one of these Angels, to whom S. John writes, was Bishop
of the Church whereof he styles him the Angel, and since one was so, to be sure
all were so; especially considering that very near, if not at the very time
when these Epistles were written, we have certain accounts that there were
Bishops actually presiding in these seven Churches. So within twelve years
after these Epistles were written, Ignatius, in his Epistle to the Ephesians,
makes mention of Onesimus their Bishop, whom he exhorts them all, as well
Presbyters and Deacons as Laity, to obey. That there was also at the same time
a Bishop in Philadelphia is abundantly evident from Ignatius his Epistle to
that Church though he does not name him; and about the same time Carpus was
Bishop of Thyatira as the ancient Roman Martyrology testifies, and Segasis of
Laodicea, Vid. Eusebius. Hist. lib. 4. c. 25. And Melito Bishop of Sardis, ibid.
And as for the Church of Pergamus Paraeus in his Commentary on Chap. 2. of the
Revelations proves out of Aretas Caesariensis that Antipas that faithful Martyr
mentioned, Rev. 2.13. was Bishop of it immediately before the Angel of that
Church to whom S. John wrote, and that that Angel was one Gaius, who as he
proves out of Clemens immediately succeeded Antipas in the Episcopal Chair.
Since therefore it is apparent that at the writing these Epistles to these
seven Churches there was a Bishop actually presiding in one of them, and that
about the same time there were Bishops presiding also in all the rest, there
can be no color of Reason to doubt, but that all those Churches had Bishops in
them when S. John wrote to them; and if so, to be sure those Bishops being the
Governors of those Churches, and having the charge of them committed to them,
were those very Angels whom S. John wrote to, because he all along writes to
them as to those who were the Overseers and Governors of their respective
Churches; and if those Angels were Bishops, then in them our Savior expressly
allows and approves of the Episcopal Order, since he not only dignifies them
with the name of Angels, but calls them stars in his own right hand.

The sum of all therefore is this, If our Saviors own institution, seconded by
the practice of his Apostles upon it, and succeeded by the Conformity of all
the Primitive Churches to it, and this Conformity of theirs authorized by the
express approbation of our Savior, be a sufficient argument of the Divine
Right of any form of Church Government, then must the Episcopal form, which
has all these things you see to plead for it self, be of Divine Right and
Ordination. Having thus shown at large what that Ecclesiastic or spiritual
Government is which Christ has established in his Church, I proceed

Thirdly and lastly, To show what are the proper Ministries of this Government
in the Kingdom of Christ; and these are of two sorts: First, such as are common
to the Bishops, or Governors of the Church with the inferior Officers; and
secondly, such as are peculiar to the Bishops or Governors. First, Such as are
common to the Bishops together with the inferior Officers of the Church; and
these are 1. To teach the Gospel: 2. To administer the Evangelical Sacraments:
3. To offer up the Public Prayers and Intercessions of Christian Assemblies.

I. To teach the Gospel, which is the first Ministerial Act mentioned by our
Savior in the Commission which he gave his Apostles, Go teach all Nations,
Mat. 28.19. and accordingly the Apostles declare, Acts 6.2.4. that preaching
the Word was one of the principal employments appertaining to their Office; but
yet it is evident that it never was restrained to their Office; for not only
the Apostles, but the seventy Disciples also were Commissioned to Preach the
Gospel by our Savior, Luke 10.9, 10, 11. and even in the Apostles days, not
only they, but Philip also, and Stephen, and Lucius of Cyrene, who were no
Apostles, did yet preach the Gospel to the World; and besides the Apostles
there were Prophets, Teachers, and Evangelists, that preached the Gospel as
well as they. But yet as for the Office of Preaching, it is plain that none
were ever admitted to it, but either by immediate Commission from our Savior,
or by Apostolic Ordination, or by an immediate Miraculous Unction of the Holy
Ghost, by which they were inspired with the gift of Preaching, and enabled
freely and readily, and without any study of their own to explain, and prove,
and apply the Doctrines of the Gospel to their Hearers; and that, either in
their own or other Languages, as occasion required; which gift was the same
with that which is called in Scripture, the gift of utterance; and it being
bestowed upon them for the public benefit and edification of the Church, the
very bestowing it, (without any other Ordination,) was an immediate Mission
from the Holy Ghost; only they who pretended to it, were to be tried by such as
had the gift of discerning of Spirits, vid. 1 Cor. 12.10. compared with 1 Cor.
14.29. and if upon that trial their pretense was found real, they were owned
and received without any more ado as authorized Preachers sent by the Holy
Ghost; and it was upon this extraordinary Mission, as it seems very probable,
that those extraordinary Offices of Prophets and Evangelists were founded, both
which included Authority to preach the Gospel; and therefore upon the Cessation
of this extraordinary Mission those Offices ceased immediately with it, as
depending wholly upon it, and from thenceforth none were ever admitted to the
Office of Preaching, but by ordinary Mission and Ordination from the Apostolate
derived to the Bishops and Governors of the Church. For though there are some
very early instances of learned Laymen that were admitted to preach upon some
emergent occasions, and upon special license from the Bishop, yet can there no
one instance be produced of any that were admitted to the Office of Preaching,
without Episcopal Ordination.

II. Another of the Ministries Common to the Bishops with the inferior Clergy,
is the administration of the Evangelical Sacraments; for it was to his
Apostles, and in them to their Successors, that our Savior gave the Commission
of Baptiz^ing all Nations, in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and
of doing this (i. e. of consecrating and administering the holy Eucharist) in
remembrance of me: but yet it is evident that this Ministry was not so confined
to the Apostolic Order, as that none but they were allowed to exercise it; for
even in the Apostles days Philip and Ananias, who were no Apostles, Baptized,
and S. Peter commanded the Brethren with him, (who were no Apostles neither,)
to Baptize those Gentile Converts, upon which the Holy Ghost descended, Acts
10.48. and there is no doubt, but when those three thousand Souls, Acts 2. were
all Baptized at one time, there were a great many other Baptizers besides the
Apostles; and that passage of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 1.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. where he
tells us, that he baptized none in the Church of Corinth, though it were of his
own planting, except Crispus, Gaius, and the Household of Stephanus, is a plain
Argument that when the Apostles had converted men to the Christian Faith, they
generally ordered them to be baptized by the inferior Ministers of the Church
that attended them; and then as for the Consecration of the holy Eucharist,
though when any of the Apostles were present, it was doubtless ordinarily
performed by them, yet considering how fast Christianity increased, and how
frequently Christians did then partake of this Sacrament, it is not to be
supposed that the Apostles could be present in all places where it was
administered, nor consequently that they could consecrate it in every particular
Congregation: For though it was a very early Custom for the Bishop to
consecrate the Elements in one Congregation, and then send them abroad to be
administered in several others; yet this was only upon special occasions: but
ordinarily they were consecrated in the same places where they were
administered; in all which places it was impossible either for the Apostles at
first, or after them for their Successors, the Bishops, to be present at the
same time; and therefore there can be no doubt but the Consecration as well as
the Administration was ordinarily performed by the inferior Presbyters, in the
absence of the Apostles and Bishops. But it is most certain, that none were
ever allowed in the Primitive Church to consecrate the Eucharist, but either a
Bishop or a Presbyter. And as for Baptism, because it is in some degree more
necessary than the Eucharist, as being the sign of admission into the New
Covenant, by which we are first entitled to it, not only Bishops and
Presbyters, but in their absence, or by their allowance, Deacons also were
Authorized to administer it; for so even in the Apostles days Philip the Deacon
baptized at Samaria, Acts 8.12. and afterward not only Deacons but Laymen too
were allowed to administer it in case of necessity, when neither a Deacon, nor
Presbyter, nor Bishop could be procured; that so none might be debarred of
admission into the New Covenant that were disposed and qualified to receive it;
but the Churches allowing this to Laymen only in cases of necessity, is a
plain Argument that none had a standing Authority to administer it, but only
persons in holy Orders. For that authority which a present necessity creates,
is only present, and ceases with the necessity that created it.

III. And lastly, Another of the Ministries common to the Bishops with the
inferior Clergy is to offer up the Public Prayers and intercessions of
Christian Assemblies: For to be sure none can be authorized to perform the
public Offices of the Church but only such as are set apart and ordained to be
the public Officers of it. Now Prayer is one of the most solemn Offices of
Christian Assemblies, and therefore as in the Jewish Church none but the High
Priest and Priests and Levites, who were the only public Ministers of
Religion, were authorized to offer up the public Prayers of the Congregation,
vid. 2 Chronicles. 39.27. so in the Christian none but Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, who alone are the public Ministers of Christianity are authorized to
offer up the public addresses of Christian Assemblies; it is their peculiar
(...), i. e. to perform the public Offices to the Lord, Acts 13.2. for so the
word (...) signifies Public Service, and is used to denote those public
services (of which one was offering up the Common Prayers of the People) which
the Priests in their turns performed in the Temple, Vid. Luke 1.23. and hence
it is, that the Ministers of Christian Religion are called (...), Romans 15.16.
because it is their proper business to officiate the public services of the
Christian Church, and accordingly in Rev. 5.10. the four and twenty Elders,
(that is the holy Bishops of the Church as appears by their having Crowns of
Gold or Mitres on their heads in allusion to the High Priests Mitre, Chap. 4.
ver. 4. are said to have every one of them Harps and golden Vials full of
Odours which are the Prayers of Saints, referring to the Incense which the
Priests were wont to offer in the Sanctuary, which Oblation was a mystical
offering up the Prayers of the People, vid. Luke 1.10. which plainly intimates,
that as it was one part of the Office of those Jewish Priests to offer the
Incense, and therewithal the Prayers of the People, so is it also of the
Public Ministers of Christianity, to offer up the Prayers of Christian
Assemblies. And as in the Jewish Church not only the Priests, but the Levites
also Communicated with the High Priest in this Ministry of offering up the
Prayers of the Congregation, so in the Christian Church not only the
Presbyters, but the Deacons also, always Communicated in it with their Bishop.
Having thus given an account of those Religious Ministries which are common to
the Bishops with the inferior Officers of the Church, I proceed in the next
place to show what those Ministries are which are peculiar to the Bishops or
Governors of the Church, all which are reducible to four particulars: 1. To
make Laws for the peace and good order of the Church. 2. To Ordain to
Ecclesiastical Offices. 3. To execute that spiritual Jurisdiction which Christ
has established in his Church. 4. To confirm such as have been instructed in
Christianity.

I. One peculiar Ministry of the Bishops and Governors of the Church is to
make Laws and Canons for the security and preservation of the Churches peace
and good order; and this is implied in the very Essence of Government, which
necessarily supposes a Legislative power within it self, to command and oblige
the Subject to do or forbear such things as it shall judge conducive to the
preservation or disturbance of their Commonweal, without which power no
Government can be enabled to obtain its end, which is the good of the Public.
Since therefore the Church, by Christ's own institution, is a governed Society
of men, we must either suppose its Government to be very lame and defective,
which would be to blaspheme the Wisdom of our Savior, or allow it to have a
Legislative Power inherent in it. But that de facto it has such a Power in it
is evident from the Practice of the Apostles; who, as all agree, had the Reins
of Church Government delivered into their hands by our Savior; for so in Acts
15.6. we are told, that upon occasion of that famous Controversy about
Circumcision, the Apostles and Elders came together to consider of this matter;
where by the Elders, by the consent of all Antiquity is meant the Bishops of
Judea, Vid. Dr. Hammond on Acts 11. Note B. And after mature debate and
deliberation this is the result of the Council, It seemed good to the Holy
Ghost and to us to lay upon you no greater burden than these necessary things,
ver. 28. so that those necessary things specified in the next verse were, it
seems, laid upon them as a burden, i. e. legally imposed on them as matter of
duty; for herein it is plain the Apostles exercised a Legislative Power over
those Christian Communities, they wrote to, viz. in requiring 'em to abstain
from some things which were never prohibited before by any standing Law of
Christanity: and as the Apostles and Primitive Bishops made Laws by common
consent for the Church in general, so did they also by their own single
authority for particular Churches, to which they were more peculiarly related.
Thus St. Paul after he had prescribed some Rules to the Corinthians for their
more decent communication of the Lords Supper, tells them, that other things he
would set in order when he came among them, 1 Cor. 11.34. but how could he
otherwise do this than by giving them certain Laws and Canons for the better
regulation of their Religious Offices: so also 1 Cor. 16.1. the same Apostle
makes mention of an Order or Canon, which he gave to the Churches of Galatia,
which he enjoins the Church of Corinth also to observe, and in 1 Timothy 5. he
gives Timothy several Ecclesiastical Rules to give in charge to his Church,
ver. 7. so also Tit. 1.5. he tells Titus, that for this cause he left him in
Crete with Apostolic or Episcopal power that he might set in order the things
that were wanting, i. e. that by wholesome Laws and Constitutions he might
redress those disorders, and supply those defects which the shortness of S.
Paul's stay there would not permit him to provide for. By all which instances it
is abundantly evident that the Governors of the Church have a Legislative
Power inherent in them both to make Laws by common consent for the Regulation
of the Church in general, and to prescribe the rules of Decency and Order in
their own particular Churches. For what the Apostles and Primitive Bishops did,
to be sure they had Authority to do, and whatsoever Authority they had, they
derived it down to their Successors. And accordingly we find this Ecclesiastic
Legislation was always administered by the Apostles Successors the Bishops, who
not only gave Laws both to the Clergy and Laity in their own particular
Churches, but also made Laws for the whole Church by common consent in their
holy Councils, wherein during the first four general Councils no Ecclesiastic
beneath a Bishop was ever allowed a Suffrage, unless it were by deputation from
his Bishop; and though in making Laws for their own Churches they generally
conducted themselves by the advice and counsel of their Presbyters, and
sometimes also admitted them into their debates both in their Provincial and
General Councils, yet this was only in preparing the matter of their Laws. But
that which gave them the form of Laws was purely the Episcopal Authority and
Suffrage; and whatsoever was decreed either by the Bishop in Council with his
Presbyters, or by the Bishops in Council among themselves, was always received
by the Churches of Christ as Authentic Law. It is true, this Legislative Power
of the Church (as was shown before,) extends not so far as to control the
Decrees of the Civil Sovereign, who is next to, and immediately under God in
all Causes, and over all Persons Supreme, and is no otherwise accountable by
the Laws of Christianity, than he was by the Laws of natural Religion; and
therefore as the Civil Sovereign cannot countermand Gods Laws, so neither can
the Church the Civil Sovereigns: but yet as next to the Laws of God the Laws of
the Civil Sovereign are to be obeyed, so next to the Laws of the Civil
Sovereign the Laws of the Church are to be obeyed.

II. Another peculiar Ministry of the Bishops and Governors of the Church is
to Consecrate and Ordain to Ecclesiastical Offices. For that those holy
Ministries which Christ himself performed while he was on Earth, such as
preaching the Gospel, administering the Evangelical Sacraments, etc. might be
continued in his Church throughout all Generations, he not only himself
ordained his twelve Apostles a little before he left the World, to perform
those Ministries in his absence, but in their Ordination transferred on them
his own mission from the Father, deriving upon them the same authority to
ordain others that he had to ordain them; that so they might derive their
Mission to others as he did his to them through all succeeding Generations; for
this is necessarily implied in the Commission he gave them, John 20.21. As my
Father has sent me, so send I you, that is, I do not only send you with full
authority to act for me in all things as my Father sent me to act for him; but
I also send you with the same authority to send others, that I now exercise in
sending you; for unless this be implied in their Mission, he did not send them
as his Father sent him, unless he gave them the same authority to propagate
their Mission to others, that his Father gave him to propagate his Mission to
them, how could he say that he sent them as his Father sent him? since he must
have sent them without that very authority from his Father, which he then
exercised in sending them. Now the Persons whom he sent were the Eleven
Apostles as you will see by comparing this of S. John with Luke 24.33.36. Mar.
16.14. Mat. 28.16. in all which places we are expressly told, that it was the
Eleven he appeared to when he gave this Commission, and consequently, it must
be the Eleven to whom he gave it. This Commission therefore of sending others
being originally transferred by our Savior upon the Apostolic Order, no
others could have right to transfer it to others, but only such as were
admitted of that Order; none could give it to others, but only those to whom
Christ gave it; and therefore since Christ himself gave it to none but
Apostles, none but Apostles could derive it: and accordingly we find in
Scripture that all Ecclesiastic Commissions were either given by the hands of
some of those first Apostles who received their Commission immediately from our
Savior, or else by some of those secondary Apostles, that were admitted into
Apostolic Orders by them; which secondary Apostles, as was shown before, were
the same with those whom we now call Bishops; for so in Acts 6.3.6. the seven
first Deacons we read of were Ordained by the Apostles, the whole number of the
Disciples being present, but the Apostles only appointing and laying their
hands on them, and in Acts 14.23. we are told, that Paul and Barnabas, two of
the Apostles, ordained Elders in every Church, that is, of Lystra, Iconium, and
Antioch; and though these two were Ordained Apostles of the Gentiles by certain
Prophets and Teachers in the Church of Antioch, Acts 13.1.3. yet there is no
doubt but those Prophets and Teachers where such as had received the Apostolic
Character, (being ordained by the Apostles Bishops of the Churches of Syria,)
for otherwise how could they have derived it? For so Judas and Silas are called
Prophets, Acts 15.32. and yet ver. 22. they are said to be (...), that is,
Rulers among the Brethren, or Bishops of Judea, and afterward we find that
Ordination was confined to such as had been admitted to the Apostolate; for so
the power of laying on of hands in the Church of Ephesus was committed by S.
Paul to Timothy, whom he himself by the laying on of hands had ordained the
Apostle or Bishop of that Church, 1 Timothy 5.22. 1 Timothy 1.6. so also the power of
Ordaining in the Church of Crete was by S. Paul committed to Titus, whom he had
also Ordained the Apostle or Bishop of that Church, Tit. 1.5. for this cause
left I thee in Crete to ordain Elders in every City. Thus all through the whole
Scripture History we find the power of Ordination administered by such, and none
but such as were of the Apostolic Order, viz. either by the Prime Apostles, or
by the secondary Apostles or Bishops. And if we consult the Primitive
Antiquities, which to be sure, in matters of fact at least, are the best
Interpreters of Scripture, we shall always find the power of giving Orders
confined and limited to Bishops, which is so undeniable that S. Ierom himself,
who endeavors his utmost to equalize Presbyters with Bishops, is yet fain to
do it with an excepta Ordinatione, Ep. ad Evagr. Quid facit excepta Ordinatione
Episcopus quod Presbyter non faciat? What can the Bishop do, except Ordaining,
that the Presbyter may not do also?

III. Another peculiar Ministry of the Bishops and Governors of the Church is
to execute that spiritual Jurisdiction which Christ has established in it, i.
e. to Cite such as are accused of scandalous offenses before their Tribunals,
to inspect and examine the Accusation, and upon sufficient evidence of the
truth of it, to admonish the offender of his fault, and in case he obstinately
persist in it, to exclude him from the Communion of the Church, and from all
the Benefits of Christianity, till such time as he gives sufficient evidence of
his Repentance and amendment, and then to receive him in again. For that Christ
has established such a jurisdiction in his Church is evident from that
passage, Mat. 18.16, 17, 18. Moreover, if thy Brother shall trespass against
thee, go tell him his fault between him and thee alone, if he shall hear thee,
thou have gained thy Brother, but if he will not hear thee, then take with thee
one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three Witnesses every word may be
established, i. e. that thou may be able, in case he does not then amend, to
produce sufficient testimony of his guilt before the Churches Tribunal, to
which thou art next to apply thy self; and if he shall neglect to hear them, i.
e. to promise amendment upon their admonition, take them along with thee and
tell it to the Church, that so she may examine the matter, and upon thy proving
his guilt by sufficient witness may Authoritatively admonish him to amend, but
if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen man and a
Publican, i. e. give him over for a desperate sinner, as one that is to be
ejected from the Communion of the Church, and no longer to enjoy the common
benefits of a Christian, for verily I say unto you, that it is to you of the
Church, before whom this obstinate Offender is cited and accused, (for now he
speaks no longer in the singular number) Whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth
shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on Earth shall be
loosed in Heaven, i. e. whomsoever ye shall for just cause eject from the
Communion of the Church into the state of a Heathen man and a Publican, I will
certainly exclude out of Heaven, unless he reconcile himself to you by
Confession, and promise of amendment, and if thereupon you pardon him, and
receive him into the Churches Communion, I will most certainly pardon him too
if he perform his promise; for that by binding and loosing upon Earth our
Savior means excluding out of the Church, and receiving in again, is evident
from that Parallel passage, Mat. 16.19. I will give unto thee the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth shall be bound in
Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose on Earth shall be loosed in Heaven;
where by the Keys of the kingdom of Heaven, is plainly meant the Authority of a
Steward to govern his Church or Family, for so Isa. 22.21, 22. God promises
Eliachim that he would cloth him with the Robe of Shebna who was over the
Household, ver. 15. i. e. Steward of the Kings Family, and that he would commit
Shebna 's Government into his hand, etc. and then it follows, And the Key of
the House of David will I lay upon his shoulders, so he shall open and none
shall shut, and he shall shut and none shall open, that is in short, I will
make him the Governor of the Family, and give him power to admit or exclude
what Servants he pleases, and accordingly by the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven
must be meant the Government of the Church, for so Keys denote Authority to
Govern, vid. Rev. 3.7. and by binding and loosing, the power of shutting out of
or readmitting into it, and therefore in John 20.23. this binding and loosing
is thus expressed, whose sins ye remit or loose shall be remitted or loosed,
whose sins ye retain or keep bound shall be retained or kept bound, for though
the words are different from those in S. Matthew, yet they are of the same
import and signification; and consequently our Saviors meaning must be the
same here as there, viz. whose sins you loose from the penalty of exclusion
from the Church I also will loose from the penalty of exclusion out of Heaven,
and whose sins you keep bound or obliged to that Penalty I also will keep bound
and obliged to this.

This is the Spirtual Jurisdiction which Christ has established in his Church,
to bind or loose, suspend or restore, excommunicate or absolve; and this he
has wholly deposited in the Episcopal Order: For in all the above cited places
it was only to his Apostles that he derived this Jurisdiction, they alone were
the Stewards to whom he committed the Keys and Government of his Family, and it
was to them alone that he promised that they should sit upon twelve Thrones,
judging the twelve Tribes of Israel, that is to Rule and Govern the spiritual
Israel, which is the Christian Church, even as the Phylarchae or Chiefs of the
Tribes governed the twelve Tribes of natural Israel, Mat. 19.28. and hence in
that Mystical representation of the Church by a City descending from Heaven,
Rev. 21. the Wall of it is said to have twelve foundations, and upon them
twelve names of the twelve Apostles, ver. 14. and those twelve foundations are
compared to twelve precious stones, to denote their power and dignity in the
Church, ver. 19, 20. and the Wall being exactly meted is found to be 144
Cubits, that is twelve times twelve, to denote that these twelve Apostles had
each of them an equal portion allotted him in the Government and administration
of the Church, ver. 17. This spiritual Jurisdiction therefore of governing the
Church, and administering the Censures of it, being by our Savior wholly lodged
in the Apostolate, none can justly claim or pretend to it but such as are of
the Apostolic Order, and accordingly in the Apostolic Age we find it was
always administered either immediately by the Apostles themselves, or by the
Bishops of the several Churches to whom they communicated their Order; for thus
in the Church of Corinth it was S. Paul who pronounced the Sentence of
Excommunication against the incestuous person; for I verily as absent in body,
but present in spirit have judged or pronounced Sentence already as though I
were present concerning him that has done this deed, 1 Cor. 5.3. and what he
orders them to do, ver. 4, 5. was only to declare and execute his Sentence, and
2 Cor. 13.2. he threatens them that heretofore had sinned that if he came again
he would not spare them, and that by his not sparing them he meant that he
would proceed against them with Ecclesiastical Censures is evident from ver. 1.
In the mouth of two or three Witnesses shall every word be established, which
are the very words of our Savior, Matt. 18.16. when he instituted the power of
Censuring; and then ver. 10. he tells them, that he wrote these things being
absent, lest being present he should use severity according to the power which
the Lord had given them to edification, and not to destruction, by which it is
plain he means the power of Excommunicating: and 1 Cor. 4.21. he threatens to
come to them with a Rod, that is to chastise them with the Censures of the
Church, and with this Rod, as he himself tells, he chastised Hymenoeus and
Alexander, two stickling Heretics in the Church of Ephesus whom he delivered
unto Satan that they might learn not to blaspheme, 1 Timothy 1.20. and as he
frequently executed the Censures of the Church in his own Person, so he derived
this spiritual Jurisdiction to Timothy and Titus, whom he Ordained Apostles or
Bishops of the Church of Ephesus and Crete, for so he orders Timothy, against
an Elder, Receive not an Accusation but before two or three Witnesses, which
plainly implies his Authority to examine and try the causes even of the Elders
themselves, when they were accused, and to punish them if he found them guilty,
for so it follows, Them that sin rebuke before all, that others also may fear,
1 Timothy 5.19, 20. so also he exhorts Titus to exercise this his spiritual
Jurisdiction; A man that is an Heretic, after the first and second admonition
reject, Tit. 3.10. which plainly implies, that he had an Authority inherent in
him, as he was the Apostle or Bishop of Crete, to Cite, Examine, Admonish, and
Censure persons of erroneous Principles; and the same Authority, it is evident,
was inherent in the Angels or Bishops of the seven Churches of Asia. Thus the
Bishop of Ephesus had Authority to try such as said they were Apostles and were
not, and to convict them for Liars, Rev. 2.2. and the Bishop of Pergamus is
blamed for tolerating the Sect of the Nicolaitans in his Church, ver. 14, 15.
and so also is the Bishop of Thyatira for suffering that woman Iezebel, ver.
20. which plainly implies, that the Authority of curbing and correcting those
profligate Sectaries, was inherent in them; else why should they be blamed any
more than others for not restraining them? From all which it is evident that
the power of Christian Jurisdiction was Originally seated in the Apostolate,
and that throughout the Apostolic Age it was always exercised by such, and
only such as were admitted into that sovereign Order, viz. either by the twelve
Prime Apostles, or by those secondary Apostles whom they ordained Bishops of
particular Churches; and accordingly we find in the Primitive Ages the Bishops
were the sole administrators of this spiritual Jurisdiction, and though
ordinarily they administered it with the advice and concurrence of their
Presbytery, yet this was more than they thought themselves obliged to; for thus
S. Cyprian in the time of his recess did by his own single Authority
Excommunicate Felicissimus, Augendus, and others of his Presbyters, Ep. 38, 39.
and when Rogatianus a Bishop of his Metropolitick Church complained to him in a
Synod of a disorderly Deacon, he tells him, that pro Episcopatus vigore and
Cathedrae authoritate, i. e. by his own Episcopal authority, without appealing
to the Synod, he might have chastised him. And the fifth Canon of the first
Nicene Council plainly shows, that it was then the judgment of the Catholic
Church that the power of spiritual Jurisdiction was wholly seated in the
Bishops: for it decrees that in every Province there should be twice a year a
Council of Bishops, to examine whether any person, Lay or Clergy, had been
unjustly excommunicated by his Bishop; which shows that then this Sentence was
inflicted by the Bishop only; though afterward to prevent abuses it was
decreed in the Council of Carthage, that the Bishop should hear no man's Cause
but in the presence of his Clergy, and that his Sentence should be void unless
it were confirmed by their presence; but yet still the Sentence was peculiarly
his and not his Clergies. In some Churches indeed the Bishops did many times
delegat^ power to their Presbyters, both to excommunicate and absolve (as
perhaps S. Paul himself did in the Church of Corinth) but in this case the
Presbyter was only the Bishops mouth, and his Sentence received all its force
from that Episcopal Authority he was armed with.

IV. Another peculiar Ministry of the Bishops and Governors of the Church, is
to Confirm such as have been Baptized and instructed in Christianity; which
Ministry was always performed by Prayer and laying on of hands, upon which the
Party so Confirmed received the gift of the Holy Ghost. It is true, upon the
first institution of this Imposition of hands the extraordinary gifts of the
Spirit, such as speaking with Tongues, etc. were many times consequent, but
from hence it does no more follow that it was intended only for an
extraordinary Ministry that was to cease with those extraordinary Gifts that
accompanied it, than that Preaching was so which at first was also attended
with miraculous operations. The great intendment of those extraordinary effects
was to attest the efficacy of the Function; and does it therefore follow that
the Function must cease, because those extraordinary effects did so, after they
had sufficiently attested its efficacy, and consequently were of no farther
use? If so, then all the other Ministries of Christianity must be expired as
well as this. And what though those extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit are
ceased? Yet since our Savior has promised a continual Communication of his
Spirit to his Church, is it not highly reasonable to believe, that he still
continues to communicate it by the very same Ministry of Prayer and Imposition
of hands, whereby he communicated it first; and that he now derives to us the
ordinary operations of it in the same way that he first derived the
extraordinary ones? Especially considering that this laying on of hands is
placed by the Apostle in the same Class with Baptism, and made one of the
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, Heb. 6.1, 2. and therefore must without
all doubt be intended for a standing Ministry in the Church, and as such the
Church of Christ in all Ages has thought her self obliged to receive and
practice it; but as for the administration of it, it was always appropriated to
the Apostles and Bishops. So in Acts 19.5, 6. it was S. Paul that laid his
hands on the Ephesians after they were Baptized in the name of Jesus, whereupon
it is said that the Holy Ghost came upon them; and in Acts 8. we read, that
when S. Philip by his Preaching and Miracles had converted the Samaritans, and
afterward Baptized them, S. Peter, and S. John, two of the Apostles, were sent
to lay hands on them, upon which it is said, that they received the Holy Ghost,
ver. 17. by which it appears that this Ministry of Confirmation appertained to
the Apostles; since S. Philip, though a worker of Miracles, a Preacher, a Prime
Deacon; and, if we may believe S. Cyprian, one of the seventy two Disciples,
would not presume to assume it, but left it to the Apostles as their peculiar
Province: And accordingly in the Primitive Church it was always performed by
the hands of the Bishops; for though from later Ages some probable instances
are produced of some Presbyters that Confirmed in the Bishops absence, or by
his delegation, yet in all Primitive Antiquity we have neither any one Canon,
nor example of it; from whence we may fairly conclude that this imposition of
hands for Confirmation was peculiar to the Apostles in the Original, and to
their Successors the Bishops in the continuation of it.

SECT. X. Of Christ's Regal Acts in his Kingdom.
HAving in the foregoing Section given an account of the several Ministers
which Christ imploys in the Administration of his Kingdom, we proceed in the
next place to inquire what those Acts of Royalty are, which he himself exerts
in his Kingdom, and by which he perpetually rules and governs it; and these may
be distributed into three Orders:

First, Such as he has performed once for all.

Secondly, Such as he has always performed, and will still continue to perform.

Thirdly, Such as are yet to be peformed by him before the surrender of his
Kingdom.

First, One sort of the Royal Acts of our Savior are those which he has
performed once for all; and these are reducible to three particulars:

1. His giving Laws to his Kingdom.

2. His Mission of the Holy Spirit to subdue men's minds to the obedience of
those Laws and to govern them by them.

3. His erecting an External Polity or Form of Government in his Kingdom.

I. One of those Regal Acts, which Christ has performed in his Kingdom once
for all, is giving Laws to it; and this he performed while he was upon Earth in
those excellent Sermons and Discourses which he then preached and delivered to
the World. For though he preached as a Prophet, yet it was as a Royal Prophet,
as one that had Regal authority to Enact what he delivered into Laws; for he
was a King while he was upon Earth, vid. p. 853, 854, etc. so that all his
Prophesies were enforced with his Regal Authority, and he commanded as he was a
King whatsoever he taught as he was a Prophet. Indeed, had he been a mere
Prophet, he could not have obliged men by any Legislative Authority of his own
to believe and obey him; his Declarations had had no farther Force in them than
as they expressed the Will and Command of the Almighty Sovereign of the World,
and if what he declared had not been Law before, it could not have been made
Law by his declaring it. But being a Royal Prophet, his words were Laws, and
all his Declarations carried a commanding power in them. And hence the Gospel
is called the Law of Christ, Gal. 6.2. and the Law of the Spirit of life in or
by Christ Jesus, Romans 8.2. and that command of loving our Neighbor as our self
is called the Royal Law, i. e. the Law of Christ our King, Iam. 2.8. for this
our Savior calls his Commandment, John 15.12. and his new Commandment, viz.
that ye love one another even as I have loved you, Joh. 13.34. and not only
this, but all other duties of the Gospel are called his Commandments, Ioh.
14.21. and Matt. 28.20. by all which it is evident, that in revealing his
Gospel to the World he did not only perform the part of a Prophet, but also of
a Legislator, and that by his own inherent Authority, as he was a King, he
stamped those Doctrines into Laws which he taught and delivered as a Prophet.
And such as his Kingly power is, such are his Laws and Commandments; he is a
spiritual King, a King of Souls, of Wills, and of Affections, and accordingly
his Laws are spiritual, and do extend their obligation to the Souls, and Wills,
and Affections of his Subjects. For they not only oblige our outward man, but
also the inmost motions of our heart, they lay their reins upon our thoughts
and desires, as well as upon our words and actions, and give directions to our
inward intentions, as well as to our outward actions: so that to satisfy their
demands, it is not sufficient that we do well, unless we also intend well, that
the matter of our actions be good, unless the aim and design of them be so
also: for according to the tenor of these spiritual Laws, a bad intention
unconsecrates the best actions, and converts even our Prayers and our Alms into
the most loathsome Cheats and Dissimulations, vid. Matt. 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.16,
17, 18. and as they oblige our inward intentions to good ends, so they also
restrain our inward concupiscence from evil objects, so far forth at least as
it falls under the command and disposal of our Wills. For they not only forbid
us the doing of evil actions, but also the consenting to them, and even the
taking pleasure in the contemplation of them, and the very affection to any bad
action if it be voluntary and consented to, is in the construction of these
Laws the same with the Commission of it; for so Hatred is construed Murder, 1
John 3.15. Covetousness, Theft or Robbery, Mark 7.22. inordinate lusting after
a woman Adultery, Mat. 5.28. and so in general the wicked Will is in the
construction of these Laws, the wicked action it chooses and consents to. Thus
the Laws of our Savior (to whose all-seeing eye our inmost motions are as
obvious as our most open practice) do as well take notice of our vicious
affections, those internal springs, and fountains of iniquity as of the vicious
actions which stream out from them, and we are as well accountable to them for
harboring the desire of sin, when we have not the convenience or opportunity
to act it, for consenting to it (though we never commit it) when ever
opportunity occurs* yea, and for indulging to our selves the Fantastic
pleasures of sinful Meditations, which are but the antepasts of the actions,
and as the Twilight to a dark night, but the first approaches toward the deeds
of darkness, as for the sinful actions themselves. This therefore is the common
nature of the Laws of our Savior, that they are all of them spiritual* and do
in the first place lay hold upon our Wills, and bind our inward-man, and from
thence extend their obligation to the outward actions. They begin with that
which is the Principle of all moral good and evil, and by rectifying the Spring
and Wheels of our Will and Affections within, communicate a regular motion to
the hand of our practice without.

But for our better understanding the nature of these Laws and the Obligations
they devolve upon us, it will be necessary to consider them more particularly,
they being all reducible under two Heads; First, The Law of Perfection: And
secondly, The Law of Sincerity. Both which require of us the same instances of
Piety and Virtue, though not in the same degree, nor under the same Penalty.

I. There is the Law of Perfection, which requires the utmost degrees of every
Christian Virtue, which in the several states and periods of our lives we are
capable of attaining to. For so we are enjoined not only to do, but to abound
in the work of the Lord; not only to have grace, but to grow in it, to perfect
holiness in the fear of the Lord, and to be perfect as our Father in Heaven is
perfect. For the nature of God is the Standard of that Perfection whereunto we
are obliged to aspire, and our growth in Piety and Virtue is never to come to a
period, till we are pure as he is pure, and holy as he is holy, i. e. till we
are arrived to infinite holiness; which because our finite nature can never do
in any period of Duration, therefore we are to be growing on to Eternity. So
that this Law by prescribing no limits to the degrees of our growth, has cut
out work enough for us to employ all our Faculties for ever. Not that it is a
sin against it for a man to be short or defective of the utmost degree of
perfection; for it requires no more of us than what is within our present
possibility, which always increases proportionably to our present improvements.
When we are arrived but to one degree of Virtue it is no sin against this Law
of Perfection that we do not thence immediately ascend to six or seven, because
it is not in our power, and no Law can oblige to an impossibility; but when we
have acquired one, that gives us power to acquire a second, and that a third,
and so on ad infinitum. Thus our Obligation to be more and more perfect
increases proportionably to the improvement of our power; for the end of all
power either to be good, or to do good, is to be good, and to do good; and
therefore the more power we have to be good the better we ought to be,
otherwise our power is in vain; while we are but Babes in Christ, or beginners
in Religion, we have not that strength and power as when we are men, and have
made a considerable progress; and therefore we are not then obliged to all
those degrees of growth and perfection, but whatsoever degree is within our
power in the different stages of our growth and progress, that we are actually
and immediately obliged to; and so long as we are defective in it, we are
offenders against the Law of Perfection. As for example, Mar. 12.13. our
Savior commands us to love the Lord our God with all our heart, with all our
soul, with all our mind, and with all our strength; that is, that we should
always love him as much as we can; but it is as much in our power to love him
still more when we love much, as when we love him little; and so we are equally
bound still to love him as much as we can, when we have ten degrees of power,
as we were when we had but one. So that by this command we are obliged always
to love God as much as we are able, and thereby to be always augmenting our
ability to love him, and as our ability increases, to be always loving him more
and more for ever. Now the Penalty by which this Law obliges us is not eternal
damnation, (and God forbid it should, for then I doubt no flesh would be saved)
but only the deprivation of some degrees of future happiness, which is no more
than what is the natural consequence of all defects of goodness: for so
essential is goodness to our future happiness, that proportionably as we fall
short of the one we must necessarily be defective of the other; and accordingly
the Scripture tells us, that proportionably to our non-improvements in this
life God will substract from our reward in the life to come. For he that sows
sparingly, says the Apostle, shall reap sparingly, and he that sows
abundantly shall reap abundantly, 2 Cor. 9.6. And our Savior by a Parable does
expressly teach us that our future reward shall be apportioned to the degrees of
our present improvements, Luke 19. where he represents himself as a Master
coming to take account of his Servants, among whom he had entrusted a stock of
ten pounds, delivering to every one an equal share. The first by an
extraordinary diligence had improved his Pound into ten, and he is rewarded
accordingly with the Government of ten Cities, ver. 16, 17. the other had been
faithful, though not altogether so diligent, and by his one pound had gained
five, and accordingly he is made Lord of five Cities, ver. 18, 19. By which he
plainly declares, that by so much as we fall short of those improvements we
might have made in Piety and Virtue, so much he will substract from our furure
reward. So that the sense of the Law of perfection is this, as you would not
incur the forfeiture of some degrees of your happiness in the other life, be
sure you employ your utmost diligence in this to improve your selves in every
grace and virtue of Religion.

II. There is the Law of sincerity, which requires the being and Reality of all
Christian Graces and virtues in us, together with the proper Acts and Exercises
of them, as we have opportunity, and does no farther forbid those gradual
defects of them which are within our possibility to supply, than as they are
the effects of our gross, continued, and wilful neglect, and so inconsistent
with sincerity. Now the Reality of these Christian Virtues in us consists in
the universal and prevailing consent and resolution of our Wills to regulate
our practice by them, so as not wilfully to admit of any thing that is contrary
to them upon any occasion or temptation whatsoever, and so long as this
resolution continues firm and prevails in our practice, we are just in the eye
and judgment of this Law of sincerity, though we do not always exert it to the
utmost of our possibility. He therefore who has so submitted his Will to God
as to be thoroughly resolved, without any reserve, to obey him, and not to do
any thing that is contrary to his Will, either against knowledge, or through
affected ignorance, or inconsideration, has in this resolution the real being
of all Christian virtues in him; and so long as this holds he stands
uncondemned in the judgment of the Law of sincerity. But though this resolution
includes in it the being and reality of all Christian virtue, yet does it not
include the utmost possibility of it; nor does it at all follow, that because I
am sincerely resolved to conduct my life by the Laws of Piety and Virtue,
therefore I must be in all respects as Pious and Virtuous as it is possible for
me to be, considering my present state and circumstances. I may be sincerely
resolved, and yet not be always equally diligent and active. I may now be
exceeding vigilant and watchful, and what I am now I may always be, if I always
exert the utmost of my possibility; yet it may so happen anon, that though I am
sincerely resolved still, I may be more remiss, supine, and inadvertent, and in
this posture a temptation may surprise me, before I am aware, and hurry me into
an action against which I am firmly resolved: And there is no doubt, but even
the best of men might have be^n much better than they are, had they always
(...) their possibilities, and applied themse^^^^ (...) their utmost skill and
diligence to the methods and Ministries of improvement. Now though not to exert
our utmost power in the avoidance of evil, and the improvement of our selves in
virtue and goodness, is doubtless a sin, yet it is only a sin against the Law
of perfection, the Penalty of which is only deprivation of some degree of our
future reward; but so long as we keep up a prevailing resolution in our Wills
to govern our (...) by the Laws of Piety and Virtue, we stand ^^ear in the eye
of the Law of sincerity, the Penalty of which is no less than everlasting Exile
from the presence of God into the dark and horrible Regions of endless misery
and despair; only this proviso it admits, that if after we have sinned against
it we reassume our good Resolution, and heartily repent and amend, we shall be
released from the obligation to this dreadful Penalty, and be restored to that
happy state of grace and favor, from whence we fell by our transgression. So
that the great difference between the Law of Perfection and the Law of
Sincerity is this, that the penalty of the later is much more severe: but the
duty of the former much more comprehensive. Having thus given this brief
account of our Saviors Legislation and Laws, I proceed to the

II. Of those Regal Acts which Christ has performed in his Kingdom once for
all, and that is his Mission of the Holy Spirit to subdue Men's minds to the
Obedience of his Laws, and to govern them by them. For so the Apostle makes the
Mission of the Spirit to succeed the Triumphal progress of our Savior to his
Coronation in Heaven, Ephesians. 4.8. He ascended up on high, he led captivity
captive, he gave gifts unto Men; where by the gifts which he gave, we are to
understand the Holy Spirit, and in him all those extraordinary Gifts which he
poured out upon his Church on the day of Pentecost, for so Acts 2.33. S. Peter
makes the effusion of the Spirit by Christ to be the consequence of his
advancement to his universal Royalty, therefore being by the right hand of God
exalted, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, he
has shed forth this which ye now see and hear. Now the end for which he sent
his Spirit, was to supply his room when he went from earth, and in his absence
to preside as his Vicegerent in his Kingdom below. Since therefore this blessed
Spirit acts as our Saviors Agent, whatsoever he does, that our Savior does by
him. So that all those operations he performs in order to the subduing us to
the obedience of Christ, and to the governing of us when we are subdued, are
truly the operations of Christ himself. It is he that conquers and governs us
by his Spirit, our hearts are the Territories which Christ invades by him, and
his inspirations are the victorious Arms by which Christ conquers and subdues
them. Our Wills are the Thrones on which Christ sits, and rules, and governs by
him, and his holy suggestions are the awful powers by which Christ himself
commands our obedience. But what it is that this blessed Spirit does, and has
done in order to the subduing Men to Christ's Laws, and governing them by them
has been already shown at large: and therefore of this I shall need say no
more at present.

III. And lastly, therefore, another of those Regal Acts which Christ has once
for all performed in his Heavenly Kingdom is, his erecting in it an external
Polity and Government. What this Polity is, and what are the functions of it
has been shown at large, and it is as well by this external Government, as by
the internal Ministry of his Spirit, that Christ now rules his Kingdom; for in
all just and lawful things the lawful Governors of his Church do act by his
Commission and Authority, as being substituted by him the visible
representatives of his Person, and the Executors and Administrators of his
Power and Dominion. Whilst therefore they act within the compass of their
Commission, they act in his stead, and as his Vicegerents; and whatsoever they
bind he binds, and whatsoever they loose he looses; their Commands are his,
their Decrees and Sentences are his, and all their authoritative Acts carry
with them the same force and obligagation as if they had been performed by him
in his own person. For it is he that wills, and speaks, and acts by them,
because they Will, and Speak, and Act by his Authority. For so he himself
declares to them, Luke 10.16. He that hears you hears me, i. e. because I
speak by you, and he that despises you despises me, and he that despises me
despises him that sent me; because my Authority is in you even as my Fathers
is in me; and therefore he who despises mine in you, despises my Fathers in me,
whence mine in you is derived. Your Authority is mine, and mine is my Fathers,
and therefore he who rejects yours does therein reject both my Fathers and
mine. And this authority is given them by Christ for the same end that his
Authority was given him by the Father; for he came into the World to seek and
to save lost souls, Luke 19.10. He came not to judge the world, but to save the
world, Joh. 12.47. And to call sinners to repentance, Mar. 2.17. And upon the
very same errand he sent all those whom he appointed to propagate and govern
his Kingdom in his absence; for he set them up as so many Lights to the
benighted World, to reduce Men from those dangerous paths in which they were
wandering to eternal misery, and show them the way to everlasting happiness:
and all the power he devolved upon them was for edification, and not for
destruction, 2 Cor. 13.10. and to them he has committed the care and charge of
Souls, whose blood he will one day require at their hands, if they miscarry
through their neglect or default, Heb. 13.17. and that he might the better
secure these precious beings for whom he shed his blood from miscarrying for
ever, he placed this spiritual Polity in a subordination of Officers, and made
the inferior accountable for their charge to the superior Officers, as well as
both accountable to himself. So that whereas had he placed it in coordinate
hands there had been only one soul accountable to him for each particular Cure
or Charge of Souls, because then each single Pastor would have been supreme in
his particular Cure, and consequently no other Pastor, or Pastors would have
been accountable for not calling him to account; now each particular Cure of
Souls is under the charge and inspection of several orders and degrees of
Pastors; who in their several stations are all accountable for it to the
Tribunal of Christ. For first the inferior Pastor, who has the immediate
Charge of it, and is obliged by his Office to teach and instruct it by good
Example and Doctrine, and to administer to it the holy Ordinances of
Christianity, stands accountable to Christ for every soul in it that miscarries
through his neglect or omission; next, the Bishop stands accountable for not
correcting the neglects and misdemeanors of the inferior Pastor, and then the
Metropolitan for not taking Cognizance of the default of the Bishop. Thus in
that excellent form of Government which Christ has established in his Kingdom
he has made all possible provision for the safety and welfare of Souls; for
according to this Economy he has taken no less than a threefold security,
every one of which is as much as a Soul amounts to, that every Soul within
every Cure shall be plentifully supplied with the means of Salvation, that so
none of them might miscarry, but such as are incorrigibly obstinate. So that
now if any Soul within the Dominions of our Savior perish for want of the
means of Salvation, there are no less than three Souls one after another
besides it self, accountable to him for its ruin. Having thus shown what these
Regal Acts are which Christ has once for all performed in his Kingdom, I
proceed

II. To declare what those Regal Acts are which he has always performed, and
does always continue to perform: and these are recucible to four particulars:

First, His pardoning penitent sinners.

Secondly, His punishing obstinate Offenders.

Thirdly, His protecting and defending his faithful Subjects in this life.

Fourthly, his blessing and rewarding them in the life to come.

I. One of the Regal Acts which our Savior always has, and always continues
to perform, is his pardoning and forgiving penitent sinners, which being one of
the Articles of our Creed, I shall endeavor to give an account of it more at
large; the Apostle defines sin to be a transgression of the Law, 1 John 3.4.
Now the Law obliges us under a certain stated Penalty to do and forbear what it
commands and forbids; whenever therefore we transgress the Law, we are thereby
obliged to undergo the Penalty it denounces; and this is that which we call the
guilt of sin, viz. its obligation to punishment, and it is this guilt which
pardon and forgiveness relates to. For to pardon is nothing else but only to
release the sinner from the obligation he lies under to suffer the penalty of
the Law. Now the penalty of the Law of God for every known and wilful sin is no
less than everlasting perdition; and therefore from this it is that we are
released by that pardon and indemnity which the Gospel proposes. So that the
pardon or remission of sins, whereof we are now treating, consists in the
loosing of sinful men from that obligation to eternal punishment, whereunto
they have rendered themselves liable by their wilful disobedience to the Law of
God. Since therefore this pardon consists in the release of offenders from the
penal Obligation of the Law it must be a Regal Act; because the Obligation of
the Law can be dispensed with by no other Authority but that which made it; and
therefore since to make the Obligation of the Law is an Act of Regal Authority,
to release or dispense with it must necessarily be so also; and accordingly
forgiveness of sin is in Scripture attributed to our Savior as one of his
Regal Rights, Acts 5.51. Him has God exalted with his right hand to be a
Prince and a Savior for to give repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sin.
So that now it is by Christ immediately that our sins are pardoned, and our
Souls released from those Obligations to eternal punishment in which they have
involved us: for the Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to
the Son, Joh. 5.22. So that now it is by him immediately that the Father
judges us, i. e. absolves and condemns us; for so Col. 3.13. the Apostle
exhorts them to forbear and forgive one another even as Christ forgave them:
and Col. 2.13. Christ is said to have forgiven them all trespasses. It is true,
forgiveness of sin is in Scripture frequently attributed to the Father as well
as to the Son: So 1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins he ( i. e. the Father) is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness; and Ephesians. 4.32. Forgiving one another even as God for Christ's
sake has forgiven you. From whence it is plain that forgiveness of sin
appertains to God as well as Christ, and that both have their appropriate
shares in it; and therefore since it is impossible that the same individual
action should proceed from two distinct Agents; in this Act of forgiveness the
Father must do something which the Son does not, and the Son must do something
which the Father does not. They must both of them act an appropriate part in
it, and each have a distinct agency from each other. For the fuller explication
therefore of this Article I shall endeavor to show, first, what it is which
the Father does in forgiving sins, and secondly, what the Son does.

I. What is it that the Father does in this Act of forgiveness of sin? To which
in short I answer, That the Fathers part herein is to make a general grant of
pardon to offenders, upon such a consideration as he shall think meet to
accept, and with such a limitation and restriction he shall think fit to make;
which general Grant is nothing else but those glad tidings of the Gospel, which
he proclaimed to the World by Jesus Christ; viz. that in consideration of
Christ's Death and Sacrifice he would freely forgive all penitent and believing
sinners their personal obligation to eternal punishment, and receive them into
grace and favor. So that in forgiving our sins there are these three things
peculiar to God the Father: First, His making a general Grant of Pardon to us.
Secondly, His making it in consideration of Christ's Death and Sacrifice.
Thirdly, His making it with those restrictions and limitations of Faith and
Repentance.

First, One thing peculiar to God the Father in forgiving sins is his making a
general Grant of pardon and forgiveness to sinners. For the Law against which
all men had sinned, and by which they were obliged to eternal punishment, was
strictly and properly the Law of God the Father, who being the first and
supreme person in the Godhead, was consequently always the first and supreme in
the divine Dominion. Now the divine Dominion consisting (even as all other
Dominions do) of a Legislative and executive power, the Father must be supreme
in both, and consequently the Laws of the divine Dominion must be more
especially and peculiarly his. And hence it is called, The Will of the Father,
Mat. 7.21. so in the Lords Prayer the Divine Law is in a peculiar manner styled
the Will of God the Father: Thy Will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven;
Matthew. 12.50. our Savior styles it, the Will of his Father which is in Heaven;
and elsewhere the Commandment of his Father, vid. Ioh. 12.5. Mat. 15.3.6. Mar.
7.8, 9. by all which it is evident that the Divine Law against which we have
all offended, and by which we are obliged to punishment is appropriately and
peculiarly the Will and Commandment of God the Father; and it being so, the
right of exacting or remitting the punishment of this Law must be peculiarly
and appropriately inherent in him. For the penalty of the Law is due to him
whose Law it is, and it is he alone can loose us from it who bound it upon us;
so that it was the Fathers peculiar, as to give the Law, so to indemnifie
offenders from the Penalty of it; and accordingly we find that public Grant of
pardon, which through Jesus Christ is made to sinners, is in Scripture every
were attributed to the Father; so we are told that it is God who for Christ's
sake has forgiven us, Ephesians. 4.32. and that it is God who has set forth Christ
to be a Propitiation though faith in his blood to declare his Righteousness for
the remission of sins that are past, that he might be just, and the justifier
of them that believe in Jesus, Romans 2.25, 26. that it was God who was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, 2
Cor. 5.19. And in a word, that it is God who is faithful and just to forgive us
our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness, 1 John 1.9. where his
being faithful and just, plainly refers to some public Grant and Promise by
which he has obliged himself to penitent offenders. And indeed the whole new
Covenant, in which this public Grant of remission of sins is contained ( vid.
Heb. 8.12.) is the act and deed of God the Father; It was he that in
consideration of Christ's Death and Sacrifice granted this grand Charter of
mercy to the World; for seeing it was to the Father that that Sacrifice was
offered, in consideration of which the new Covenant was granted ( vid. Ephesians.
4.2. compared with Col. 1.20.) the grant of it must necessarily be from the
Father. And as it was the Father that made this public grant of Remission to
sinners; so

II. It was he that made it in consideration of Christ's Death and Sacrifice,
for so Christ himself tells us, that it was by commandment which he received
from his Father that he laid down his life, John 10.17, 18. and when he was
going to offer up himself upon the Cross he tells his Disciples, As the Father
gave me Commandment even so do I, arise let us go hence, i. e. to execute that
Command which the Father has given me, to lay down my life for the sheep, Ioh.
10.15. from whence it is evident, that it was the Father who exacted the Death
and Sacrifice of Christ in consideration of that public Grant of forgiveness
which he made to the World; for it was through his blood that we have
redemption, the forgiveness of sins, according to the Riches of his (i. e. the
Fathers) grace, Ephesians. 1.7. and that blood of his was an offering and a sacrifice
to God for a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5.2. So that it was God the Father
that did both exact and accept the sacrifice of Christ* which as I have showed
at large Sect. 4. was in consideration of his pardoning and forgiving Sinners.

III. And lastly, It was God the Father also that made this Grant of
forgiveness to us with these restrictions and limitations of our believing and
repenting For as the promises of the Covenant were his, in which remission of
sin is proposed to us, so must the conditions of it be also, by which it is
limited and restrained. Because it can belong to none but the giver to limit
and conditionate his own Gifts and Grants: Now the Conditions of our
forgiveness are faith and repentance, o^ ^ather the condition of it is such a
Faith, such a lively and active belief in Jesus Christ as does beget in us
sincere repentance and renovation of life; for so S. Paul tells us again and
again, that it is by faith that we are justified or pardoned, Romans 3.28. c. 5.
v. 1. Gal. 2.16* Chap. 3.24. Where by faith its evident he does not mean any
one single act of Faith, of what kind or denomination soever, but faith as it
is the pregnant Root and active principle of repentance and newness of life.
For it is granted on all hands, that that faith which acquits and justifies us
before God must be lively and operative; and indeed unless it be so, it is not
distinguishable from persumption, which is only the Carcass or lifeless image
and Portraiture of Faith. So that if this be Justifying, it is all one whether
you call it justifying faith or justifying presumption; and he that can lay
hold on the Righteousness of Christ, though it be with profane and
sacrilegious hands, will be as certainly justified as the most humble and
penitent soul. At which rate a man may rest upon Christ without coming to him,
and lay hold upon him at the greatest distance from him; he may lean upon his
merits in open defiance to his Laws, and embrace and crucify him together. It
being granted therefore, that that Faith which justifies us must be lively and
operative; it is from hence most evident that the condition of our
Justification is no one single act of Faith, but comprehends in it all that
Repentance and new Obedience which is the effect of the life and operation of
Faith. For if to make it the condition of our Justification, it be necessary
that our faith should work by Love and be operative and obediential; then that
it should be lively and operative is as necessary to our justification as that
it should be faith; for where only an accident or mode of a thing is made a
conditition with the thing, it is equally a condition with the thing it self.
As for instance, if I promise one such a reward upon condition he presents me
with such a Book, so bound and of such an Edition, it is equally a condition
and as much influential on the man's right to my promise, that it should be so
bound and of such an Edition, as that it should be the Book for which I
conditioned. And so in any other instance you can bring, either in fact or
fiction, and the same reason holds good, whether we take Faith for a condition
or an instrument (as some improperly enough call it) for if to be lively and
operative is a necessary qualification to make Faith an instrument of our
justification, then its liveliness and operation is instrumental too: For that
mode of a thing which makes it instrumental is as really instrumental as the
thing it self. As for instance, a Knife is an instrument of cutting, but it is
its sharpness that makes it to be so, and therefore it is as instrumental to
cutting that it should be sharp, as that it should be a Knife. And indeed
whether we consider either the form or matter of our justification and pardon,
it will evidently appear that that faith which justifies us must be such as
includes in it Repentance and New Obedience. For as for the form of
Justification it is a juridical act founded upon a legal process, in which
there is always a Judge, a Criminal and a Law, and here the Judge is God, the
Criminal, man, the Law, the law of sincerity, or those affirmative and negative
commands of the Christian Religion that are established with the threats of
eternal condemnation; for so James 2.12. the Apostle tells us, that we must be
judged by the Law of liberty, i. e. the moral Law, as it is expounded and
perfected by our Savior: for so ver. 8. If ye fulfill the Royal law* Thou shall
love thy Neighbor as thy self, ye do well. So that that Law of liberty by
which we must be judged ^s this Royal Law, and this Royal Law is the moral Law
which requires us to love our Neighbor as our selves; now this moral Law is to
be considered under a twofold notion, as it is a Law of works, and as it is a
Law of grace. As it is a law of works, it exacts perfect and unsinning
obedience, and neither promises Grace to enable us to keep it, nor admits
repentance, when we have broken it. As it is a Law of grace it exacts only
sincere obedience, and both promises grace to enable us thereunto and admits
repentance, in case of wilful disobedience. Now considering it under the first
notion, it is the same with the law of Nature, and as such, it obliges all men
that are in the state of Nature or without the Pale of Christianity, who have
neither promise of grace to enable them to obey, nor yet of pardon upon
Repentance after they have once disobeyed it. In which forlorn condition they
remain till such time as they embrace Christianity and are by Baptism admitted
into the Kingdom of Christ, and from thenceforth the obligation of it, as it is
a law of works cease and it obliges them only as it is a Law of Grace, i. e.
as it is a Law which exacts of them only sincere obedience, and promises both
to assist them to obey, and upon their repentance to pardon their disobedience,
so that considering the moral Law, as it is a law of works, it neither
justifies nor accounts just any but the perfectly innocent, nor yet indulges
pardon to any that have offended upon any condition whatsoever; and therefore
the Infidel World who alone are under the obligation of it, are said to be
strangers from the Covenants of Promise having no hope, i. e. no hope founded
upon Promise, none but what an absolute and unpromised mercy affords them, Ephesians.
2.12. And then if we consider it, as it is a law of grace, it justifies or
accounts just none but the sincerely obedient, and indulges pardon to no
offenders whatsoever, but such as are sincerely penitent; so that we Christians
who alone are under the obligation of it can neither be justified by it but
upon our sincere obedience, nor when we fail of that be pardoned by it, but
upon our unfeigned repentance. Since therefore it is by the moral law,
considered as a Law of Grace, that God does judge us, he can acquit us by it
upon no other terms but only our performing of what it requires, i. e. our
hearty repentance for our past sins and sincere obedience for the future. For
seeing it requires this of us under the penalty of eternal condemnation, we are
obliged by it to this penalty, till we have performed what it requires, and to
be at the same time acquitted by a law and obliged to the Penalty of it is a
contradiction; did this law of grace require of us nothing but faith, and
threaten condemnation for nothing but infidelity, then indeed our bare
believing in Jesus were sufficient to discharge us from our obligation to its
penalty; but since it also requires of us repentance and sincere obedience
under the same Penalty that it requires faith, our faith cannot be sufficient
to discharge us from its penalty, unless it be such as includes in it
repentance and sincere obedience. In short, the law of grace condemns us as
well for impiety, injustice and uncharitableness, as for infidelity; and
therefore we cannot be acquitted by it upon forsaking our infidelity, unless we
also forsake our impiety, etc. and while we continue in any one wilful sin for
which it condemns, it is impossible that at the same time we should be
acquitted and pardoned by it; so that unless our faith be such as does include
in it a renuntiation of all wilful sin, or which is the same thing, repentance
and sincere obedience, we cannot be acquitted upon it by the Law of Grace.

And then if we consider the matter of our Pardon and Remission, which is
nothing but a releasing us from our obligation to punishment, it will from
thence also appear, that that faith upon which we obtain our pardon must be
such as works in us sincere repentance and obedience. For the punishment to
which we are obliged by the Law of grace, consists in the loss of Heaven, as
well as in the positive Torments of Hell; and therefore our pardon must include
a release from both: but to be released from our obligation of losing Heaven is
the same thing as to have a right of enjoying it conferred upon us: so that the
Faith upon which we are pardoned and forgiven is the Faith upon which we are
entitled to Heaven as all agree, includes in it repentance and sincere
obedience. For these two things are of undoubted certainty, that every man
shall go to Heaven that dies entitled to it, and that no man shall go to Heaven
that dies in impenitence and wilful disobedience. For it is our keeping the
Commandments of God that gives us a right to the Tree of life, Rev. 22.14. And
our keeping Gods Commandments is that Holiness without which no man shall see
God, Heb. 12.14. And accordingly in Scripture the Remission of our sins is
attributed to our repentance and obedience as well as to our faith: so Acts
3.19. Repent ye therefore and be converted that your sins may be blotted out
when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. And in
Ephesians. 1.7. If ye walk in the light as he is in the light you have communion with
him, and the blood of Christ cleanses you from all sin. So also Acts 10.34,
35. God is no respecter of persons, but in every Nation he that fear^th him and
works righteousness is accepted of him. From whence it is evident, that when
the Scripture makes mention of faith only in the matter of our Justification,
it is to be understood of faith in the greatest latitude, as comprehending
Repentance and sincere obedience, for how can we be justified by faith only and
yet be justified by obedience too, unless our obedience be included in our
faith: and indeed the Scripture plainly declares that faith it self is not at
all available with God, unless it be accompanied with sincere obedience. So
Gal. 5.6. In Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails, nor Uncircumcision,
but faith whick works by Love, and what he means by faith working by love, he
tells us, Gal. 6.16. Circumcision is nothing, and Uncircumcision is nothing,
but the new Creature, and what he means by the new Creature, he also tells us,
1 Cor. 7.19. Circumcision is nothing, and Uncircumcision is nothing, but
keeping the Commandments of God: so that the only thing which avails us with
God is faith working by love. Faith working by Love is the new Creature, the
new Creature is keeping the Commandments of God; and in James 2.26. we are
told, that as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith also is dead
without works, that is, it is altogether ineffectual. For so if you compare the
14. and 17. Verses of this Chapter, you will find that those two phrases, faith
cannot save, and faith is dead, do both signify the same thing. Since
therefore faith it self without obedience is unavailable, when the Scripture
makes mention of our being justified by faith, it must necessarily be
understood of faith, comprehending Obedience.

And thus you see what God the Fathers part is in remitting our sins, viz. that
it consists in granting to us an universal act of pardon, and Indemnity in
consideration of our Saviors Sacrifice, and upon Condition of our sincere
Repentance and future obedience. And this is the groundwork and foundation of
all remission of sins; without which our Savior himself has no right to
pardon and forgive us; for since the Law against which we have all sinned was
peculiarly from God the Father, as he is the fountain of Divinity, and
consequently the head of the divine Dominion, it was he peculiarly that was the
party offended, and consequently it was he to whom our obligation to punishment
was due, and by whom alone it can be released and remitted; and as the grant of
Remission was wholly in his will and pleasure; so was it also to accept the
consideration and appoint the Conditions of it. So that now as none can be
pardoned but upon his Grant, so neither can his grant be available to any, but
upon that consideration which he has accepted, viz. the precious sacrifice of
his own Son, and upon such conditions as he has appointed, viz. faith working
in us sincere repentance and obedience; and accordingly our Savior, in all
that he does in the part he acts in forgiving sins, proceeds upon, and
according to this Grant of his Father: for it is in the right and upon the
consideration and condition of this Grant that he forgives us, nor can he
forgive any by any other right than that which it gives him, or upon any other
consideration than that which it has admitted, or upon any other condition
than that which it has specified and determined. And this brings me to the
second Head I proposed, which was to show what it is that the Son does in
forgiving Sins.

In short therefore, the part which our Savior bears in it, considered as King
under God the Father, is to make an actual and particular application of this
general Grant of his Father to particular Sinners upon their faith and
repentance. For the Fathers grant is only a general promise that we shall be
pardoned for Christ's sake, whenever we sincerely believe and repent; but the
actual pardoning us consists in the application of this general Promise to us
in particular, by which the general promise of pardon is converted into a
particular sentence of pardon. For the promise says thus, Whosoever believes
and repents shall be pardoned; the particular application of the Promise says
thus, Thou do believe and repent, and therefore by virtue of that Promise I
pardon and forgive thee. And this is the proper part of our blessed Savior,
who having first obtained this Promise of his Father by his sacrifice upon
Earth, and then still continuing to obtain of him by his continual intercession
in Heaven, Royal Authority to dispense that Promise to us, does by virtue of
that Authority actually pardon us upon our actual repentance. So that as soon
as ever we perform the condition of Gods grant of pardon, our Savior (who
knows the inmost thoughts of our hearts and perfectly discerns our sincerity)
immediately pronounces our sentence of pardon, and by a particular application
of that general grant to us, absolves us from our obligation to eternal
punishment, and freely receives us into Grace and Favor. For though the
completion and publication of our pardon is reserved for the day of judgment,
when we shall be absolved from all punishment, ( i. e. not only of eternal
misery, but also of corporal death and temporal sufferings) in the public view
and audience of the World; yet it is certain that every penitent Believer in
Jesus is actually pardoned by him in Heaven, as soon as ever he believes and
repents; that is, he is, in foro Christi and before the Tribunal of his Royal
Judgment Absolved from the obligation to suffer eternal misery which he lay
under during his state of impenitence; and Christ in his own mind, judgment and
estimation has, Judicially thus pronounced concerning him, By virtue of my
Fathers grant to all penitent offenders and of that Royal Authority which he
has committed to me, I freely release thee from all that vast debt of
everlasting punishment which thou have too justly incurred by sinning against
him. Thus as the Father forgives us vertually by that public grant of mercy
which for Christ's sake he has made to all penitent offenders; so the Son
forgives us actually by that Royal Authority which the Father has given him to
make a particular application of that his general grant to us upon our actual
repentance; and as it is by the Fathers grant that the Son pardons us, so it is
by the Sons application of it that the Father pardons us; and therefore we are
said in or by Christ to have redemption through his blood even the forgiveness
of sin, Col. 1.14. i. e. to be forgiven for the sake of his blood, in
consideration whereof God the Father has given him power to forgive us; for so
he himself tells us, that all power in Heaven and Earth was given him, Matthew.
28.18. and there is no doubt but in all power, the power of forgiving sins was
included; for so S. Peter tells us, that through his Name, i. e. by his
Authority or judicial sentence, Whosoever believes in him shall receive
remission of sins, Acts 10.43.

And thus you see what the first Regal act is, which our Savior has always
performed and will always continue to perform, viz. forgiving of sins.

II. Another of his Regal acts of this kind is, punishing obstinate offenders:
For as he mediates for his Father in ruling and governing us, he must be the
Minister of his Fathers providence, and being so, whatsoever divine punishments
are inflicted upon offenders, are to be looked upon as the strokes of his hand
and the Ministries of his power, for he has the Keys of Death and Hell, i. e.
the power of punishing both here and hereafter, Rev. 1.18. and accordingly he
threatens the corrupt Churches of Asia, that he would remove their Candlestick,
and that he would fight against them with the sword of his mouth, that he would
come upon them as a Thief, and that he would spew them out of his mouth, Rev.
2.5.3.16. and Chap. 3. Verse. 16. all which is a sufficient proof that the
punishment of offenders both here and hereafter is committed to him as a branch
of that Royal Authority with which he is invested by the Father; in the
execution of which Commission he many times Chastens bad men in this life in
order to their reformation and amendment; for as many as I love says he, ( i.
e. wish well to) I rebuke and chasten, Heb. 3.19. and many times he persecutes
them with exterminating judgments, thereby hanging them up in Chains, as it
were, as public examples of his vengeance, to warn and deter the World from
treading in their impious footsteps. For so he threatens Iezebel and her
followers; I gave her space to repent of her fornications and she repented not;
behold, I will cast her into a bed, i. e. into a Bedridden and irrevocable
condition and them that commit Adultery with her into great tribulation, and I
will kill her Children with death, and all the Church shall know that I am he
which searches the reins and heart, and I will give unto every one of you
according to your works, Rev. 2.21, 22, 23. And though for wise and gracious
ends he oftentimes spares bad men in this life, and sometimes shines upon them
a continued day of prosperity, without any cloud or interruption; yet he always
overtakes them with the fearful storms of his vengeance in the life to come.
For no sooner do their souls depart from their bodies, but they are immediately
consigned by his warrant into the hands of evil Angels* those skilful spiteful,
and powerful executioners of his justice, under whose savage Tyranny they
endure all the tortures and Agonies that the wrath and power of Devils,
together with their own awakened consciences and furious and unsatisfied
affections are able to inflict. Of which see Part 1. Chapter 3. For that the souls
of bad men are transmitted into a state of wretchedness and misery immediately
upon their separation from their bodies is evident from the Parable of Dives
and Lazarus, wherein in the first place Dives immediately after his death is
said to be in great torment in Hell, and this while his body lay buried in the
grave, Luk* 16.22, 23. which is a plain argument that in all that interval
between death and the resurrection of the body, the souls of bad men abide in a
state of torment; for secondly, this torment of Dives's soul in hell was then
when his Brethren were living upon earth and under the teaching of Moses and
the Prophets ver. 27. and 28, 29, 30, 31. which shows that our Savior supposes
it to be at that very time when he delivered this Parable, and consequently he
supposes all bad men who were then dead and whose condition he represents by
that of Dives to be then in Hell, and there suffering unspeakable Agonies and
Torments: and if so, then it is plain, that when ever impenitent souls leave
their bodies they are carried by Devils into some dismal abode and there kept
under a perpetual discipline of torment; and in this deplorable state they
remain expecting that fearful day of accounts, when their condition, through
their reunion to their bodies and that dread bodily Torment, they must then be
condemned to, will be rendered yet far more intolerable.

III. Another of those Regal Acts which our Savior has always, and always
will continue to perform, is his protecting and defending his Kingdom in this
World. For thus he promises his faithful Church of Philadelphia, Because thou
have kept the word of my Patience, I also will keep thee from the hour of
temptation which shall come upon all the World to try them that dwell upon the
Earth, Rev. 3.10. By which it is plain, that the power of protecting and
defending his Subjects is inherent in Christ as an essential part of his Regal
Authority; and this power he continually exercises now he is is heaven; for it
was for this end among others that he promises to be with his Church to the end
of the World, Mat. 28.20. namely to guard and defend it by his Providence
against the outrageous attempts of its numerous enemies. For it is for this end
that the Father has put all things in subjection under him, and that he has
left nothing that is not put under him, Heb. 2.7, 8. that so having the
Universal Government of all things in his hand he might by his overruling
Providence render them all subservient to the interest of his Church. For so
Ephesians. 1.21. we are assured that the Father has put all things under his feet,
and given him to be head over all things to his Church, i. e. has vested him
with an universal power over all things, that so he might order and direct them
all to the interest and advantage of his Church. And accordingly now he is in
heaven, the defense and preservation of his Church is the great business which
he intends upon earth: there he now sits looking down from his Throne with a
watchful eye to observe all the motions, and trace out all the dark designs of
her enemies, and from thence he stretches forth his Almighty hand to guard and
defend her against them, to repel or overruled their malice, to drive back
their venomous Darts upon themselves, or to temper their Poison into Physic,
and extract a healing Balm out of the Stings of those Scorpions. In which how
careful and diligent he has been is abundantly manifest from the glorious
success: for considering the vast opposition that has been made against it
even from its infancy, how is it possible it could ever have subsisted had it
not been guarded by an invisible hand? No sooner did this light upon a Hill
appear in the World but all the four Winds immediately conspired to blow it
out, yet, (which is miraculous to consider,) still the harder they blew the
brighter it flamed; and though for the first 300 years it was the main and
almost constant exercise of the Power and Policy, the Wit and Cruelty both of
Devils and Men to suppress and ruin it, yet still it thrived and increased
under the most powerful means of its extirpation. It conquered by suffering,
gathered strength by bleeding, and, like a headstrong Flood, still the more it
was checked the more it swelled and over-flowed, till at length it filled the
Earth as the Waters cover the Sea. Which, if well considered, is an amazing
instance of the vigilant and powerful Providence of our Savior, which has not
only preserved this burning Bush from consuming, but made it spring and
flourish in the flames. And though since those Primitive Persecutions he has
many times for wise and gracious ends let loose the Wolves upon his Flock, and
permitted them to worry, and sometimes almost to devour it, yet still he has
kept a strict and steady Reign upon their Power and Malice, and when they have
served his ends, has checked and stopped them in their savage career, and when
they have thought the trembling Prey their own, has stretched out his own
Almighty Arm, and snatched it from their devouring jaws. So that while they are
clubbing all their Power and Policy against it, he that sits in the Heavens
laughs them to scorn, the Lord has them in derision, and does contemn their
impotent malice, which he can manage as he pleases; he can either prevent the
mischievous effects of it, or cause them to recoile upon themselves, or make
those very persecutions, with which they design to destroy his Church, the
means of its enlargement and propagation; and what in his own infallible Wisdom
he thinks best, that he has always done, and will always do for his Church and
People: For many a time have they afflicted me from my youth may Israel, or the
Church of Christ, now say, many a time have they afflicted me from my youth,
yet have they not prevailed against me, the Plowers have plowed upon my back,
they have made long furrows, but the Lord is righteous, he has cut asunder the
Cords of the wicked, and in his own due time will confound and turn back those
that hate Sion.

And as he exercises a most vigilant Providence over his Church in general, so
does he also over all the faithful and obedient Subjects of it, whose interest
is as dear and precious to him as his own blood; for they are not only the
purchase of his blood, but also the Trophies and Conquests of his Spirit, which
makes them his by a double Propriety, and more peculiarly entitles them to his
care and protection; they are living Members of his own Body, and as such he
feels their pains by a most tender sympathy, and therefore his Providence is as
much concerned for their defense, as his Eyelid is to defend the Apple of his
own Eye, Zech. 2.8. and therefore though he exercises a merciful Providence
over all men, yet these he incloses out of the Common of the World, and fences
about with a peculiar care. These are his Jewels, and he keeps them in his
Treasury under the strongest and most inviolable security. He is always
watching over them for good, and it is his peculiar and continual concern to
protect and defend them, to keep off Temptation from their Souls, and
Calamities from their Bodies, and so to overruled and direct the course of
things, as that whatever befalls them may concenter in their happiness. For
though he many times corrects them with his own hand, and permits them to be
oppressed and afflicted by others, yet still he does it with a most gracious
intention, either to cure or prevent some disease in their minds, or to excite
and exercise their graces, or to wean them from the love of this vain World,
and discipline them for a blessed Eternity; and whatsoever evils happen to them
in the course of his Providence, still he takes care to extract good out of
them, and so to contrive and order the whole Scene of Affairs, as that in the
issue all things may still work together for good to them that love God, and
are called according to his purpose, Romans 8.28.

IV. And lastly, Another of those Regal Acts which our Savior has always, and
does always continue to perform, in his blessing and rewarding all his faithful
Subjects in the Life to come; for this, as he himself declares, he has power
to do, so Rev. 2.7. To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the tree of
life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God, i. e. I will admit him in a
participation of the blessed immortality of Heaven; so also Rev. 3.21. To him
that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me on my Throne, even as I have
overcome, and am sat down with my Father on his Throne; And he promises the
Bishop of the Church of Smyrna in particular, Be thou faithful to the death,
and I will give thee a crown of life, Rev. 2.10. In all which places he
expressly declares his Royal Authority to reward his faithful Subjects, when
they leave this World with the joys and felicities of the World to come; and
this Authority he is continually exercising in his heavenly Kingdom. For when
ever any faithful and obedient Souls depart from their bodies, he presently
sends forth his Angelick Messengers to conduct them safe to the immortal
Regions, and there to lodge them in some one of those blissful Mansions in his
Fathers House which he went before to prepare for them; where free from all the
disturbances of flesh and blood, and of a vexatious and tumultuous World, they
live in continued ease, content, and joy, wrapped up with the ever-growing
delights of contemplating, loving, and imitating God, and of the most wise and
amicable Society and Communication with each other, in the enjoyment of an
endless bliss and pleasure; for so we are assured from Scripture that the
happiness of the righteous does commence from the moment of their departure
hence. So Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, from
henceforth, yea, says the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and
their works do follow them; and with St. Paul it was the same thing to depart
from hence and to be with Christ, Phil. 1.23. which necessarily implies, that
upon his departure he expected to be immediately with Christ; and elsewhere he
teaches, that to be at home in the body was to be absent from the Lord, and to
be absent from the body to be present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.6, 8. neither of
which can be true if the Souls of good men go not to Heaven immediately when
they go from hence: but that they do so is as plain as words can express it, in
that promise of our Savior to the Penitent Thief, Verily verily I say unto
thee this day shall thou be with me in Paradise, Luke 23.43. From whence it
evidently follows, that even in the very Article of a true Penitents death,
Heavens joys do attend his departing Soul to receive it immediately when it is
dislodged from the body. Thus in the very moment of its departure hence the
Pious Soul is transported to those blessed abodes beyond the Stars, which are
the proper seat and pure Element of Happiness, where the blessed inhabitants
live in a continued fruition of their utmost wishes, being every moment
entertained with fresh and enravishing Scenes of pleasure, where all their
happiness is eternal, and all their eternity nothing else but only one
continued Act of Love, and Praise, and Joy, and Triumph, where there are no
sighs or tears, no intermixtures of sorrow or misery, but every heart is full
of joy, and every joy is Quintessence, and every happy moment is crowned with
some fresh and new enjoyment. But of this blessed state I have given an account
at large, Part. 1. Chap. 1. and 3. And this is that blessed reward with which
our Savior crowns his faithful Subjects immediately upon their departure
hence; so that he does not permit them to lie sleeping in the dust unrewarded,
till the end of the World, but as soon as they have finished their work upon
Earth, admits them to the joy of their Master, to all the felicities that their
separated spirits are capable of in those several degrees and measures of
perfection which they there arrive to; in which happy state they remain during
their separation from the body, expecting the farther completion of their
happiness in a glorious Resurrection, by which their Bodies and Souls being
reunited, their whole Humane Nature shall be filled with bliss to the utmost
stretch of its Capacity.

And now having shown what those Regal Acts are which Christ has always
performed, and does always continue to perform, I proceed in the

III. And last place, To show what those Regal Acts are which are yet to be
performed by him, before he surrenders up his Kingdom; and these are reducible
to three Heads:

First, He is yet farther to extend and enlarge his Kingdom by the Conquest of
its enemies.

Secondly, He is yet to destroy Death, the last Enemy, by giving a general
Resurrection.

Thirdly, He is yet to judge the World.

I. He is yet farther to extend and enlarge his Kingdom by a more universal
conquest of its Enemies. For if we consult the ancient Prophesies concerning
the vast extent of our Saviors Kingdom, we shall find that there are a great
many of them which as yet were never accomplished. So Psalm. 2.8, 9. Ask of me
and I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts
of the Earth for thy possession, thou shall break them with a Rod of Iron, thou
shall dash them in pieces like a Potters Vessel, whereas hitherto it is certain
Christ was never possessed of the uttermost parts of the earth; nor did he ever
yet break his incorrigible opposers with a Rod of Iron, or dash them in pieces
like a Potters Vessel; so also Dan. 7.4. it is foretold of Christ, that there
should be given him Dominion, and Glory, and Kingdom, that all People, Nations,
and Languages should serve him, and that all Dominion^ should serve and obey
him, ibid. ver. 27. so also Dan 2.34, 35 44, 45. that the stone cut out without
hands, by which all agree is meant the Kingdom of Christ, should become a great
Mountain, and fill the whole earth, and that it should break in pieces, and
consume all those other Kingdoms. Thus also it is foretold, that the Lord
should be King over all the Earth, Mich. 5.4. and that there should be but one
Lord, and his name one, Zech. 14.9. and that he should have Dominion from Sea
to Sea, and from the Riv^r to the (...) of the Earth, Psalm. 72.8. and that all
Kings should fall down before him, and all Nations serve him, ibid. ver. 11.
and that all the ends of the earth should remember and turn to the Lord, and
all the kindreds of the Nations worship before him, because the Kingdom shall
be the Lords, and he shall govern among the Nations. These, and sundry other
such like Prophesies there are which as yet it is certain, were never
accomplished according to the full import and intent of them. Wherefore we may
certainly conclude that there is a time yet to come before the consummation of
all things, wherein our Savior will yet once more display the victorious
Banner of his Cross, and like a mighty man of War march on conquering and to
conquer, till he has confounded or converted his Enemies, and finally
consummated his victories in a glorious Triumph over all the Powers of the
Earth. For the Scripture not only foretells this universal conquest of his, but
also describes and delineates the whole method and progress of it, which upon
laying the Scripture Prophesies together in their proper Train and Series seems
to me to be this, that the opening of this great Scene of Providence will be
the conversion of the Jewish Nation, those obstinate and hitherto implacable
Enemies of our Savior, whom notwithstanding they have been a thousand times
over conquered, slaughtered, and oppressed, and do to this day continue
scattered over the face of the whole Earth, he has preserved by a strange and
unparalleled Providence for above sixteen hundred years together a distinct and
separate people from all the Nations of the Earth, to show his mighty power in
them, and once more render them, what they have always been, the Subjects of
his miraculous conduct. For by a wonderful effusion of his Holy Spirit upon
them, such as that was on the day of Pentecost, though far more extensive,
Ezekiel. 39.28, 29. Isa. 32.13, 14, 15. Isa. 59.20, 21. compared with Romans 11, 26,
27.
he will all of a sudden, and in a most surprising manner, Isa. 66.8. Zach. 3.9.
open the eyes of this blinded Nation, and powerfully convince them of the
error and wickedness of their infidelity and malice against him, whereupon with
one heart and one mind they shall return to the Lord, and with penitent tears
wash off the guilt of the blood of their Savior Zach. 12.10.
which like an Heir-loom, has hitherto descended upon them from one Generation
to another, for thus, Romans 11.25, 26. I would not brethren that ye should be
ignorant of this mystery that blindness in part is happened to Israel, (...),
till when the fullness of the Gentiles be come in, and so all Israel shall be
saved, as it is written, there shall come out of Zion the deliverer, etc. From
whence it is plain, that that blindness which then happened to Israel, and which
continues on them to this day, shall one day be removed, viz. about that time
when the Conversion of the Gentiles shall be completed, and that then all
Israel, (and not a small remnant of them as at first) shall be saved, so also,
2 Cor. 3.14, 16. But their minds are blinded, (meaning the People of Israel)
for until this day remains the same vail untaken away in the reading of the
Old Testament, nevertheless when it shall turn to the Lord the vail shall be
taken away; where he first supposes that Israel that till then was blinded, and
that till now remains so, should turn unto the Lord, and then asserts, that
then the vail of ignorance, which hindered 'em from discerning Christ in the
Figures and Prophesies of the Old Testament should be removed from before their
eyes.

And now the Jews being thus converted by the power of our Savior shall under
his victorious Banners be conducted into the Holy Land, and repossessed of
their ancient native Country, Jer. 32, 37, to 41. Ezekiel. 36.24, 25. Chap. 37.21,
22.25. Amos 9.14, 15. Isa. 11.11, 12.
whither they shall be close pursued with mighty Hosts of the Eastern Infidels,
and be reduced by them into imminent danger of utter desolation, in which
extremity of theirs our blessed Savior will make bare his Almighty Arm, and in
a most miraculous manner confound and scatter those mighty swarms of Infidels,
and crown his Israel with Victory and Triumph Joel 3.1, 2.9.14. Mich. 4.11, 12.
Isa. 24.21, 22. Zeph. 3.8. Isa. 63.1.6. Isa. 34.1. Isa. 59.16, 17. Zech. 14.13.
Hag. 2.22. Zech. 12.2, 3, 4.
. The fame of which miraculous events, spreading far and wide, even to the
utmost ends of the Earth, shall in a little time convince all the Heathen World
of the truth of Christianity, and prevail with the Kingdoms of the earth to
become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ Isa. 66.16.18, 19, 20. Isa.
60.1.6. Jer. 14.33. Isa. 7.61. Ezekiel* 38.16.21, 22, 23. Romans 11.12.
. And now the Kingdom of Christ in this World being arrived to its full extent
and growth, Truth and Peace, Charity and Justice shall reign and flourish over
all the Earth. Now all the World shall be Christendom, and Christendom shall be
restored to its ancient Purity. For now he who is to come with the Fan in his
hand will thoroughly purge the Floor of his Church from all that Chaff of
Superstition and Idolatry, Schism and Heresy, Irreligion and Immorality with
which it is almost totally covered, and the true Faith, the sincere Piety, the
generous and unaffected Virtue which Christianity teaches and prescribes shall
be the universal livery and cognizance of the Christian World Psalm. 72.7. Isa.
66.12. and Chap. 23.4. Mich* 4.3 Jer. 32.39. Zeph 3.8, 9. Ezekiel. 19.21, 22. Isa.
9.7. and Chap. 2.20. Hab. 2.14.
. For much about the time of this Conversion of the Jews, and that glorious
Call of the Gentiles thence ensuing, that corrupt and degenerate Faction of
Christians whom the Scripture calls the mystical Babylon, and the Antichrist,
and which for several Ages has been the great Nuisance of Christendom, will in
these Western parts of the World muster up all its Forces to destroy and
extirpate the purer Professors of Christianity by a general persecution Rev.
13.7.
, in which attempt for some time this Faction will be very prevalent and
successful, Dan. 7.21, 22.
when all of a sudden the Kings and Princes of the Earth, who have thitherto
been partakers with it in its foul Impostures and corruptions (being either
awakened by those miraculous Conversions of the Jews and Eastern Gentiles, or
convinced of their errors by the powerful impressions of his Spirit in whose
hands the hearts of Kings are) will turn their Swords upon this Antichristian
Faction, whose Cause they have hitherto espoused, and conspire to root it out
from off the face of the Earth Rev. 17.16, 17.
, which being effected, the Western Church will universally reform it self
according to the Standard of the Church of Jerusalem, which will then be in a
literal sense the Mother of us all Isai 60.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
, Thus partly by destroying, and partly by converting its Enemies, our Savior
will yet mightily enlarge the borders of his Kingdom, and advance it to the
utmost pitch of purity and splendor that this state of mortality will admit,
and in this happy state he will preserve and continue it for several Ages, Rev.
20.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
till a little before the commencement of the General Judgment, at which time
the Devil, who had been hitherto chained up, will be loosed again to work in
the Children of disobedience to excite them to delude and deceive the World
again, and to persecute the sincere Professors of Christianity with incessant
cruelties Rev. 20.7, 8, 9*
, when all of a sudden, and while they are securely triumphing in the success
of their Villainies they shall be surprised with the Day of Judgment Rev. 20.10,
11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
, which like a Thief in the night shall come upon them, and put an end to all
their mischiefs for ever.

II. Another of those Regal Acts which he is yet to perform is to destroy
Death, the last Enemy, by causing a general Resurrection of the Dead, which
being one of the great Articles of our Creed, I shall insist more largely upon
it, and endeavor,

First, To prove the certainty of the Fact; and

Secondly, To explain the manner how it will be performed.

I. I shall endeavor to prove the certainty of the Fact, viz. that our Savior
shall raise the dead; which is as plainly and frequently asserted in holy
Scripture as any Proposition contained in it; for so 2 Cor. 4.14. we are
assured that God will raise us up by Jesus Christ, i. e. by his personal Power
and Agency, and accordingly, John 6. 39, 40.44.54. Christ promises us over and
over again, that he will raise us up at the last day; and John 11.25* he thus
declares himself to Martha, I am the Resurrection and the Life, he that
believes in me though he were dead yet shall he live; and John 5.28. he tells
us, that the hour is coming in which all that are in the Grave should hear his
voice. And of the truth of this he has given a most sure and certain pledge by
his own Resurrection, which not only demonstrates the possibility of the thing,
that the dead may rise, but also gives ample assurance that they shall. For
that he has in him a power to raise the dead is evident by his raising
himself; and to be sure that Power and Spirit that was in him when he raised
himself, is able to raise all those in whom it resides. Whoever therefore has
the Spirit of Christ, that Spirit by which he rose from the dead, has the
power of the Resurrection in him, which power to be sure will not be always in
vain, but one time or other will most certainly be reduced into Act: For so the
Apostle assures us, Romans 8.11. If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from
the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also
quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwells in us. And indeed
considering that Christ in dying and rising from the dead acted as our Head and
Representative, we may justly conclude, that as when he laid down his life, he
laid it down for ours; so when he took it up again, he took up ours with it;
and consequently that he vertually raised us by the same Spirit whereby he
actually raised himself: because he has not only Power, but also Will, as he
is our Head and Representative, to raise us even as he raised himself. So that
we are already risen in our causes since our Head and Representative is risen,
and has the same power to raise us as he had to raise himself; and hence he is
called, the firstborn from the dead; and we the Sons of the Resurrection, Col.
1.18. because our Resurrection is now in the same causes (that is, in the same
Will and Power) as his was before he arose. And therefore also he is called the
first fruits of them that rise, that is, the pledge and handsel of the general
Resurrection; because he is risen with the same Will and Power to raise us,
that he had when he arose, to raise himself; and hence we find the Apostle
argues from the Resurrection of Christ to the general Resurrection, 1 Cor.
15.12. Now if Christ be preached that he rose from the dead, how say some among
you, that there is no resurrection of the dead? If we are all agreed that
Christ is risen, what reason can any man have to doubt of the general
Resurrection? But if there be no resurrection from the dead, then is Christ not
risen, ver. 13. To say that we shall not rise, is by consequence to deny the
resurrection of Christ, because that very same will and power which must have
been the cause of Christ's resurrection; if he be risen, must be the cause of
ours, if ever we rise; and therefore if it be insufficient to raise us, it
could never have been sufficient to raise him, and consequently he cannot be
risen. If it be objected against this reasoning of the Apostle, that our
resurrection will be far more difficult to accomplish than Christ's was, because
his body was never corrupted, nor were the parts of it ever dispersed, as ours
will be, long before the resurrection; and therefore that cause which was
sufficient to raise Christ, may not be sufficient to raise us: It may easily be
answered, that to the infinite power by which Christ was raised, all possible
things are equally easy; and therefore allowing our resurrection to be but
possible, it must be every whit as easy to that infinite power by which Christ
was raised, to reduce all our scattered atoms into one mass again, and to
reorganize them into a humane body and reunite it to its ancient soul, as it
was to quicken the yet uncorrupted body of our Savior. So that all the
question is whether the thing be possible, for if it be, it will be every whit
as easy to the omnipotent cause of our Saviors resurrection, to raise our
bodies as it was to raise his. But, I beseech you, why should it be thought
more impossible for God to raise a dead corrupted body, whose parts are all
dispersed and scattered throughout the vast wilderness of matter, and reunite
it to its primitive soul, than it was at first to create the matter of it, and
then form it into a humane body and animate it with a humane soul? He who at
the first creation could separate the confused mass of matter into so many
distinct kinds and species of Beings, can doubtless at the general resurrection
as easily separate the same matter into its distinct and several individuals.
For, what should hinder him who numbers the stars of the Heavens, the sands of
the Sea and the hairs of our heads, from keeping an exact account of all our
scattered particles, and from knowing what dust belongs to every body, and what
body to every soul? Or how can it be difficult to him, whose power is as
immense as his knowledge, to recollect all the parts of this curious piece of
Clockwork which he both made and took in sunder, and to restore every pin into
its proper place, every spring to its due vigor and activity, and every wheel
to its primitive figure and motion? If it be farther objected that there is an
impossibility in the nature of the thing, for the same dead body after it is
corrupted and its parts all dispersed, to be reunited and raised to life again;
I answer, that since these dispersed parts of our bodies do not perish, but are
safely laid up in the Chambers of Nature, however they are scattered or
wherever lodged, they are all within the ken of Gods knowledge and within the
reach of his power; and so long as they are so, why should their separation
render it impossible for them to be reunited how and when he pleases? If you
say, that in that perpetual course of transmutation which the matter of humane
bodies runs, it may happen, and sometimes doubtless it does, that the same
particles at several times are incorporated into several bodies; As for
instance, when one man eats either the flesh or that which has the flesh or
substance of another in it, and digests it into a part of his own body and
substance, in which case how is it possible at the resurrection that the
substance or matter of this part should be reunited to them both? To this I
answer, that considering that scarce the hundredth part of what we eat is
digested into the substance of our bodies, and that all the rest we render back
again into the common mass of matter by sensible or insensible evacuations;
though we should suppose one man to have eaten up the whole substance of
another body, yet he retains but one part of an hundred, and what should
hinder an omnipotent power from raising the body he has devoured out of the
ninety nine parts which he lets go again? And then considering that in seven
years time the whole substance of our body Changes, he must if he live so long
evacuate that one part which he retained, and so the whole will be at last worn
off from the matter and substance of his body. Nay, suppose this Devourer to
feed altogether upon man's flesh, as some affirm the Canibals do, and that in
the last seven years before his death, he devours one hundred humane bodies
weighing two hundred pound a piece; according to this computation the utmost he
can be supposed to digest of the flesh of these hundred bodies into the
substance of his own, amounts not to above two pound of each, so that of the
two hundred weight of bodily substance whereof these devoured bodies did
consist, there will still remain one hundred ninety eight undigested into the
substance of the Devourer; which we may easily conceive is sufficient matter
out of which to re-produce the same bodies: For we many times lose as much of
our substance in a sweat, and a great deal more in a consumption as these
devoured bodies do in their being eaten and digested; notwithstanding which our
bodies continue numerically the same; But as for the bodies of these Man-eaters
there is no doubt but they carry with them a great deal of other substance to
their graves besides that of man's flesh; for the liquor which they drink with
it, and the bread which they eat with it, and the other accidental nourishments
which they receive with it, goes into the substance of their bodies as well as
that; and these being at least one half of their nourishment, must constitute
at least one half of their bodies. What then should hinder but that at the
resurrection the other half of them which consists of man's flesh may be
separated from them and restored to those humane bodies they devoured; and if
so, then each of them shall recover its whole substance again, and not want so
much as one particle of all that matter whereof they were composed when they
were eaten; for it is but just that they should be made to refund those
unnatural spoils which they barbarously ravished from the bodies of other men.
But then you will say, How shall the body of the Cannibal that eat them be
raised, when according to this account it be must deprived of one half of the
substance it died withal? I answer, that to this remaining half of his bodily
substance there may, without any repugnance to its being raised the same body,
be added out of the common mass of matter as much new bodily substance as is
sufficient to redintegrate it in all its parts; for the resurrection of the
same body, does not necessarily imply that all the same matter shall be raised,
and no other, and no more. For if all shall be raised in the most perfect
stature and proportion of humane bodies, as there is no doubt but they shall,
then Infants and Dwarfs, and such as die of Consumptions must have new matter
added to that which they die withal; and therefore the resurrection of the same
body can imply no more than this, that every body shall be raised out of the
same matter, so far as it will go; and therefore if this remaining half of the
substance of the Canibals body will not go far enough to redintegrate his whole
body at the resurrection, there is no doubt but God will add new substance to
it, which will no more hinder it from being the same numerical Body, than the
reparation of an house with new stones and Timber hinders it from being the
same numerical house. For suppose that God by a Miracle should in an instant
restore a man to his full Bulk, the substance of whose body is half pined away
by a lingering Consumption, this would not at all hinder but that still it would
be the same numerical Body. Why then should the Addition of new bodily
substance to the remaining half of the matter of the Canibals body at the
resurrection, hinder it from being raised numerically the same.

And this I conceive is sufficient to clear the doctrine of the general
Resurrection from all pretense of Repugnancy and Contradiction. But suppose
after all that there should be some rare and singular instances wherein it will
be impossible in the nature of the thing for the same numerical Body to be
raised again; this would no more impeach the truth of a general resurrection of
the same bodies; than Enoch's and Elias's not dying, do the truth of the Maxim
of the Author to the Hebrews, It is appointed for all men once to die. If
therefore in any instance it should be impossible in the nature of the thing
for God to raise the same body, it will be sufficient to serve the purpose of
rewards and punishments, for God to cloth the same soul in a new body. For it
is the soul that individuates the man, and makes him to be the same person
though he has not the same body. We have not the same matter about us when we
are ten years old, that we were first clothed with when we were born, and as
he who shall be rewarded or punished ten years hence for a Virtue or a Crime
which he acts now will be rewarded or punished in the same body, though not in
the same matter; so he who shall be rewarded or punished at the resurrection
for the good or evil which he does in this life, will be rewarded or punished
in the same person, though it should not be in the same body. But it being more
congruous to the accuracy and exactness of the divine justice that it should be
in the same body as well as in the same person, and it being every whit as
easy to an infinite power to restore to our souls the same bodies as to cloth
them in new ones (for within the compass of posssibilities all things are
equally within the reach of Omnipotence) men's bodies shall be universally
rebuilt at the Resurrection out of those old Ruins and Materials, in which they
did good or evil in this life; and if there should happen some particular
instances wherein such a numerical resurrection should be in it self
impossible, these will be only a few exceptions from that general rule, which
rather confirm than destroy it. For thus from Scripture we are assured that
they who sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, Dan. 12.2. and that all
that are in the grave shall hear Christ's voice and come forth. John 5.28, 29.
that the Sea shall give up the dead which are in it, and that death and Hell,
i. e. the grave shall deliver up the dead which are in them, Rev. 20.13. All
which expressions according to the literal sense of them (from which without
necessary reasons we ought not to depart) do plainly import a resurrection of
the same numerical bodies. Our Resurrection therefore being a possible thing,
is as easy to an omnipotent Power, as Christ's was, and therefore his
resurrection is a most certain pledge of ours; since he rose as our common Head
and Representative, and consequently rose with the very same Will and Power to
raise us which he had to raise himself.

Having thus proved the Truth of the matter of Fact, viz. that Christ will
raise us at the last day; I proceed in the next place to the manner of the
Fact, how it is that he will raise us. In treating of which, I shall regulate
my self by that account which the Apostle gives of it, 1 Cor. 1.5. in which he
having proved at large the truth of the Resurrection from ver. 12. to the 35th.
he comes to answer an Objection concerning the manner of it; but some man will
say, how are the dead raised up and with what body do they come? In answer to
which he gives a large description of it, and by the similitude of seed,
explicates the manner how it shall be performed, till he comes to ver. 42.
where he applies the similitude to the matter in hand; so also is the
Resurrection of the Dead; and then goes on with a farther enlargement on it to
the end of the Chapter. So that this so also refers both to what went before,
and to what follows. So also, i. e. so as I have already in part described and
shall farther explain in my ensuing Discourse; This so therefore referring to
the whole description, implies these five particulars of which the whole
consists.

First, So is this mortal body to be the seed and material Principle of our
Resurrection.

Secondly, So must this Seed die and be corrupted, before it be quickened and
revived.

Thirdly, So is this dead corrupted body to be raised and quickened by the power
of God.

Fourthly, So is it to be raised by the Divine Power into the proper and
natural form of an humane body.

Fifthly, So is this humane body to be changed and altered in its Resurrection.

I. So is the Resurrection of the dead, i. e. so is this mortal body to be the
seed and material principle of the Resurrection. For this is plainly implied,
ver. 36. Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened except it die.
Intimating, that as the Seed is the material cause of the Ear of Corn which
afterward springs up, so are these mortal bodies which we sow in the Earth, at
least the main materials of those immortal ones into which we shall be quickened
at the Resurrection. Perhaps as the Seed digests and incorporates into it self
the juyces of the Earth, and shoots them up together with its own substance
into the Stalk and Ear; so in some particular instances at least, there may be
other matter at our Resurrection interwoven with the appropriate substance of
our mortal bodies, and together with it spring up into immortal ones. Yet from
the Apostles comparison it is apparent that this very mortal body which we sow
in the Grave shall be at least the Seed and Embryo which shall receive our Soul
at the Resurrection, and by that (supposing other matter be added to it)
assimilate and digest it into its own substance. Now though to reproduce the
scattered particles of our dissolved flesh, and extricate them out of all those
other substances whereinto they have been woven and entangled, may seem to us
at first view an impossible performance; yet that it is not so, I have already
demonstrated; and if a parcel of Quicksilver after it has run a tedious course
of alteration, shifted it self out of its natural form into that of a vapor,
out of a vapor into an insipid water, out of water into a white or red or
yellow powder, out of that into a salt, and thence into a malleable Metal, may
by a skilful Artist be reduced out of all these various contextures into its
natural form of plain and running Mercury, why should we think it either
impossible or difficult for a Being of immense knowledge and power to watch the
wandering particles of our corrupted bodies through all their successive
alterations, and to retrieve them out of all those substances into which they
shall be finally resolved; to take out of one body what belongs to another, and
restore to each its own; and finally to incorporate them all together into
their natural forms and figures?

II. So is the Resurrection of the dead, i. e. so is this Seed of our mortal
body to die and be corrupted, before it shall be raised again. That which thou
sowest is not quickened unless it die; intimating, that as the parts of the
Seed are separated in the ground, and dissolved into a liquid Jelly before it
springs up into a Stalk and Ear; so this mortal body of ours must be corrupted,
its parts must be dispersed and dissipated from one another, before it quickens
and springs up again at the general Resurrection; and indeed the body must
naturally corrupt, when once it is separated from the Soul that enlivens it;
and that before it is raised and glorified the Soul should remain for some
space separated from it, seems highly necessary. For the nature of Souls is
such as requires a gradual and leisurely progression out of one state into
another; their faculties are such as cannot in a natural way be improved but by
degrees, or qualified in an instant for two extreme conditions, without a
miracle. But as for this mortal State and that of the Resurrection, they are
two such remote and distant extremes, as that our slow paced natures cannot
travel from one to the other under a long space of time; and for a Soul to pass
in one instant out of an Earthly into an Heavenly, out of a fleshly into a
spiritual, out of a mortal into an immortal body, seems too great a leap for a
Being whose nature confines it to a gradual improvement. For how should a Soul
which has been so long immured in mortal flesh, so long accustomed to its
sensual pleasures, so cloged and incumbered with its unwieldly organs, so
pinioned and hampered by its brutish appetites; How, I say, is it possible in a
natural way for such a Soul to be immediately disposed to act and animate an
Heavenly Body? And therefore it is requisite that for some time at least it
should continue in a separate state, there to inure it self to a heavenly life,
and by a continued contemplation, and love, and imitation of God to ripen
gradually into the state of the Resurrection, and to contract a perfect
aptitude to animate an heavenly body, that so its powers being enlarged and
improved by exercise, it may be able to manage that active fiery Chariot, and
be prepared to operate by its nimble and vigorous Organs, which till the Soul
is rendered more sprightly and active by long and continual exercise, will be
perhaps two swift for it to keep pace withal. It is true, the Apostle tells us
of some Souls that in an instant shall be fitted for and with these heavenly
bodies, 1 Cor. 15.51, 52. Behold I show you a mystery, we shall not all sleep,
but we shall all be changed in a moment, i. e. those good men who are living
just before the Resurrection shall suffer no separation of their Souls from
their Bodies; but the beggarly vestment of their flesh, while it is upon them,
shall in an instant be transformed into a glorious and immortal Robe; which to
be sure it would not be, unless in the same instant also their Souls were made
fit to wear it. But then it is to be considered that both will be miraculous*
And, for ought I know, it will be as great a Miracle immediately to fit an
imperfect Soul for a glorified body, as immediately to change a gross and
corruptible body into a glorious and immortal one. And therefore though some
Souls shall be immediately qualified to operate by glorified bodies, without
any intermediate space of separation; yet this being extraordinary and
miraculous, is only an exception from the general rule of Providence, which is
to leave things to proceed and act according to the regular course of their
Natures; and if Souls are so left, as ordinarily to be sure they are, it is
highly requisite that they should be allowed some space of separation from
their mortal bodies before they are clothed with their immortal ones; and
consequently, that this mortal body should be corrupted and dissolved before it
is quickened and glorified.

III. So is the Resurrection of the Dead, that is, so is this dead corrupted
body to be raised and quickened by the power of God; so Ver. 37, 38. That which
thou sowest thou sowest not that body that shall be, but bare grain, perhaps of
Wheat, or of some other grain, but God gives it a body as it pleases him; in
which he plainly intimates, that as a grain of Wheat sown in the ground is only
the Seed or material Principle of the Stalk and Ear that spring up from it, but
God is the principal efficient cause that forms the matter, and enlivens it,
and causes it to spring up and ripen; so though these mortal bodies which we
sow in the Grave are the Seed and matter out of which our immortal one shall
spring, yet it is God that must recollect this matter, reduce it into a body
again, and reunite it to its ancient Soul. For this is such a performance as
does require an Almighty Agent; it is he alone can trace our scattered Atoms
through all those Generations and Corruptions wherein they have wandered, and
retrieve them out of all those other bodies whereinto they have been finally
resolved. It is he alone can separate them into the several Masses whereunto
they originally appertained, and order, distinguish, and distribute those rude
Masses into their various parts, and connect and join one part to another. It
is he alone that can reorganize those undistinguished heaps into humane bodies,
and reunite them to their Primitive Souls. And accordingly we find that this
great Article of the Resurrection is in Scripture resolved into the power of
God: for so our Savior attributes the Sadduces denial of the Resurrection to
their not knowing the Scripture and the power of God, Mat. 22.29. which plainly
implies, that the power of God must be the cause of the Resurrection. So 2 Cor.
1.9. S. Paul tells us, that he was brought into a great extremity, that so he
might not trust in himself, but in God that raises up the dead; and 1 Timothy
6.13. I charge thee, says he, before God that quickens all things. And
indeed to quicken our bodies when they are dead, requires the same power as it
did at first to create and form them. For as at their first Creation they were
formed out of the pre-existing matter of the Earth, so at the Resurrection they
must be reproduced out of the same matter again; and as at the Creation all
those distinct kinds of Beings we behold lay shuffled together in one common
Mass, till the fruitful voice of God separated this united Multitude into their
distinct Species; so at the Resurrection, after these mortal bodies are
crumbled into dust, and that dust is scattered through all that confused Mass
again, it is God alone whose powerful voice can command them back again in
their proper shapes, and call them out again by their single individuals: so
that as our first existence was only a real Echo to Gods omnipotent Fiat, so
will our return into existence be to his Almighty Surge. The Scripture indeed
seems to affirm, that the holy Angels will be employed in this great
transaction, though what they are to do in it is not expressly related; only 1
These. 4.16. the Apostle seems to intimate that their Office will be to collect
the scattered relics of our mortality; for there he tells us, that the Lord
himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the
Archangel, and the Trump of God, upon which the dead in Christ shall rise
first. Which popular description seems to import, that as by a loud voice or a
Trumpet it was anciently the custom of the Jews, and other Nations, to summon
Assemblies, and particularly by a Trumpet to collect and rally their Armies; so
at the Resurrection our Savior by the Ministry of his Angels, under the
conduct of their Archangel, will assemble and rally our scattered Atoms, and
then by his divine power Organize them into humane bodies again, and reunite
them to their proper Souls. For so Mat. 24.31. Christ tells us, that his Angels
shall with the sound of the Trumpet gather together his Elect from the four
Winds. Which if you compare with the above cited Text, you will find that this
sound of the Trumpet by which the Elect are to be gathered is to precede their
Resurrection, and consequently, that it is not to gather them when they are
raised, but to gather them to be raised; that is, to collect their dispersed
dust which has been blown about upon the Wings of the Wind, in order to their
being redintegrated into humane bodies, and reinformed with their Primitive
Souls.

IV. So is the Resurrection of the dead, i. e. so are our dead bodies to be
raised again into the proper form and kind of humane bodies; and this is
implied in ver. 38. but God gives it a body as it pleases him, and unto every
Seed his own body, i. e. as to the seed of Wheat which dies in the Winter, God
gives in the Spring the Body, or Stalk, and Ear of Wheat; so to this mortal
body which we sow in the Grave, God will give at the Resurrection its own
proper and specific form. For the Soul will have the same faculties at the
Resurrection that it has now in this mortal state, and the Body is only in
order to the Soul, its parts and members being all purposely contrived into fit
instruments for the Soul to work withal. These inward faculties therefore
continuing still and for ever the same, it is highly requisite that at the
Resurrection they should be refitted with the same corporeal instruments of
action: for the Soul is to the Body what the art is to the thing that is formed
by the Art; and therefore as the thing formed is not perfect so long as it is
any way disproportionable to the Art which formed it; so neither can the Body
be perfect till in all its parts it is every way apportioned unto the faculties
of the Soul, and how can the matter of this corrupted body be readapted to the
natural faculties of a humane Soul, unless it be raised again into an humane
body, and restored to its Primitive figure and proportion? For should it be
raised with more or fewer parts than those it now consists of, it must either
be defective or superfluous in its parts, or the Soul must have more or fewer
faculties to employ them. It is true, after the Resurrection the Scripture
plainly tells us, that our Souls shall no longer exercise those their Animal
faculties of nourishing and propagation; that the Sons of the Resurrection
shall neither marry, nor be given in marriage, but that they shall be equal to
the Angels of God, Mat. 22.30. and indeed since every individual man will then
be raised into an immortal state, there will be no need either that they should
be nourished themselves, or that they should propagate any more individuals to
preserve their kind. But it does not hence follow, either that the Soul shall
be deprived of those Animal faculties, or consequently that the Body shall be
raised without the Organs by which those Animal operations are performed: for
though our Saviors Body after the Resurrection had no need of nourishment, yet
it is plain it was raised again with its natural instruments of eating and
drinking, which he once actually used to assure his Disciples of the reality of
his Resurrection; and though now those parts are useless to him, as to that
particular animal operation, yet there is no doubt but his Soul still uses them
for other unknown purposes peculiar to his glorified state; or if he do not,
yet since those parts were necessary to the perfection of a humane body, and
consequently, to the redintegration of his humane nature, it was requisite he
should be raised with them, that so he might have corporeal Organs adapted to
his animal faculties, which it is plain were not extinguished by his
Resurrection; and since the Resurrection of our Saviors body is in Scripture
represented as the pattern of ours (for he shall change our vile body that it
may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, Philip. 3. Verse. 21.) we may
hence warrantably conclude that ours shall be raised as his was, complete in
all the parts of an humane Body.

V. And lastly, So is the resurrection of the dead, i. e. so are these humane
bodies to be changed and altered by the resurrection. So ver. 37. That which
thou sowest thou sowest not that body that shall be but bare grain; intimating,
that as the seed when it is sown is nothing but bare seed, though when it is
quickened it springs up into a long stalk and ear, which many times contains in
it an hundred grains; even so this mortal Body which is only the naked seed of
our Resurrection, shall be very much altered from what it is, and changed into
a more complete and perfect substance. For the more clear and distinct
explication of which, we will first consider the Change that will then be made
in the bodies of good men; and secondly, the change that will be made in the
bodies of the wicked.

First, We will consider the Change that will then be made in the bodies of
good men; which consists of four particulars.

First, They will be changed from base and humble into glorious Bodies.

Secondly, From earthly and fleshly into spiritual and heavenly Bodies.

Thirdly, From weak and passive into active and powerful Bodies.

Fourthly, From mortal and corruptible into immortal and incorruptible Bodies.

I. The Bodies of good Men will be changed from base and humble into bright and
glorious ones; so ver. 43. It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory, that
is, when it is sown in the grave, it is a base and abject thing, not to be
endured above ground for its ghastly looks, and nauseous stink and putrefaction;
but at its resurrection it shall come forth in a bright, and beautiful and
venerable form; for so our Savior assures us, that after their resurrection
the righteous shall shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, Mat.
13.43. that is, the matter of their bodies shall be refined and exalted into a
bright and lucid substance, which shall glitter like the Sun and cast forth
rays of glory round about them; and this perhaps is that inheritance of the
Saints in light, that is, embodied in light, which the Apostle speaks of Col.
1.12. for when this dull matter comes to be reanimated with a blessed and
glorified Soul, it will doubtless derive from it a great deal of beauty and
luster. For if now our Soul when it is overjoyed can so transfigure our Bodies,
fill our eyes with such sprightly flames, overspread our countenances with such
an amiable air, and paint our faces with such a serene and florid aspect, what
a change will it make in our Resurrection-body, which being incomparably more
fine and subtle than this, will be far more pliable to the motions of the Soul?
When therefore the happy Soul shall re-enter this softened and liquified matter,
ravished with unspeakable joy and content; how will its delightsom emotions
change and transfigure it, how will its active joys shine through and
overspread it with an amiable Glory? especially when with this natural energy
of its glorified Soul, our Savior himself shall cooperate to change this vile
body that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the
mighty working whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself. Though now
therefore the matter of our bodies is vile and sordid, and such as seems
altogether incapable of such a glorious change; yet according to the best
Philosophy there is no specific difference in matter, and if the vilest and
most ignoble matter may by mere motion, not only be Crystallized but
transformed into a flaming brightness, as we are sure it may; if in lighting of
a Candle that is newly blown out, by applying another to the ascending smoke,
this dark and stinking substance may in the twinkling of an eye be changed into
a bright and glorious flame, into what a refulgent substance may the matter of
this mortal body be changed by the concurrence of an infinite power with the
vigorous activity of a glorified Soul?

II. The Bodies of good Men will be changed from earthly and fleshly into
spiritual and heavenly. So ver. 44. It is sown, says he, a natural body, it is
raised a spiritual body, where those words (...), which we render a natural
body may perhaps be better translated an animal Body, i. e. a body suited and
adapted to this animal life which the beasts that perish enjoy in common with
us; a body that is sustained by animal operations and recreated with animal
pleasures, and which by reason of its gross substance does continually crave to
be supplied with suitable nourishment, and treated with gross and carnal
pleasures, which is the very thing that renders it so great a Cumber to the
immortal Spirit that animates it. But at the Resurrection it will be improved
into a spiritual body, not that it will be converted into a spiritual
substance; for the Apostle's own words do assure us that it will still remain a
body, but the spirituality of it will consist in this, that being wrought into
a purer and finer substance, it will no longer need or crave these animal
nourishments and pleasures, but be perectly fitted for and contemper'd to the
soul and entirely resigned to its use and service; for it will then be refined
from all those animal appetites of eating, drinking and carnality, which do now
too often not only render it unserviceable to the soul, but also hurtful and
injurious: so that then it will be in entire subjection to the mind, and all
its members will be devoted Instruments to the service of Righteousness; so
that now there will be no longer any Law in its members to wage war against the
Law in the mind, but the mind will govern, and the body obey without any
contest or reluctance; and as the body will be wholly obedient to the mind, so
it will be perfectly adapted to its service; for whereas now by reason of its
gross consistency, it is an unwieldy Luggage to the Soul, and does very much
clog and incumber her in her operations; it will then be wrought into so fine
and tenuious a substance, as that instead of a clog it will be a wing to the
Soul: for its consistence will be subtle as the finest Ether, and active as
the purest flame; it will have nothing that is gross or burdensome in it to
retard or weary it in its flights, to rebate its vigor or slacken its motion,
but it will be all life and spirit and wing, and like a perpetual motion be
carried on with unwearied swiftness by its own internal springs, and being
freed from all that weight which now renders it so slow and heavy, it will be
able to move like a thought, and to keep pace with the most nimble wishes of
the Soul; so that what Hierocles says of his spiritual Body, (...), i. e. that
it is such a body as is every way fitted to the intellectual perfections of the
Soul, will be true of this resurrection body, which will be perfectly
attempered to a perfect mind, and fashioned into a most convenient Organ for it
whereby to exert its purest and most spiritual operations.

III. The Bodies of good Men will be changed from weak and passive into active
and powerful Bodies; so ver. 43. It is sown in weakness, it is raised in power;
that is, whereas the body which we sow in the grave is exceeding weak and
infirm, liable to infinite passions and diseases, and can do but little, but
suffers much; it shall be raised with a temperament so pure and just, so hail
and vigorous that no disease or infirmity shall ever find any place in it, or
be able to cramp it in its operations; For besides that, its elementary
qualities (if any such remain in it) shall be turned into such an exquisit
temper that they shall never jar or disagree with each other, it shall be so
spirited and invigorated by the blessed Soul that animates it, that nothing
shall be able to impair its health or discompose its Harmony. So that it shall
live for ever without decay, move for ever without weariness, fast for ever
without hunger, and wake for ever without either need or desire of refreshment.
And indeed, considering for what purpose our Bodies shall be raised, they have
need to be very strong and vigorous; for they shall be raised on purpose to be
the Organs and Instruments of the operations of our glorified Souls, which
being exceeding active, as they are spirits, but exceedingly more active as
they are glorified spirits will require bodies suitably strong and vigorous,
such as can support their joys, express their activities, and keep pace with
their raptutous emotions; to do which will require a mighty firmness and vigor
of temper. Since therefore at the Resurrection God will fit and adapt our
bodies to the utmost activity of our glorified spirits, they must necessarily
be supposed to be endued with unspeakable strength and agility, upon which
account they are called by the ancient Hebrews, Eagles wings, upon which they
suppose our glorified Souls shall be able to fly as fast and as far as they
please, and this I am apt to think is intimated in that passage of S. Paul, 1
These. 4.17. And they that are alive, and whose bodies are changed in the state
of the resurrection shall be caught up in the clouds to meet the Lord in the
air, the meaning of which is, not that they shall be snatched up from the Earth
by any external cause of Agent, but that their Bodies being changed into pure
aetherial flame, they shall of their own accords ascend in them as in so many
fiery Chariots to the Throne of their Redeemer in the Clouds: and from thence
when the judgment is concluded, shall as nimbly ascend with him through all
those spacious Fields of Air and Ether, that lie between that and the eternal
Paradise of Blessedness. For that they shall be caught up by Angels, as some
imagine, I see no reason to think, since our Savior himself assures us, that at
the Resurrection they shall be (...), and therefore shall not need their help
in this angelified state, either to waft them up into the Air, or from thence
into the Heaven of Heavens; and if by their own activity they shall be able to
perform so vast a flight as it is from the earth into the uppermost Region of
the Air, and from thence into the supreme Region of everlasting glory, we may
from thence collect what a vast power they will be endued with at their
Resurrection. But this is most certain that then they shall be perfectly
released from all dolorous passion, and continue in perfect strength and health
and vigor for ever. So that whereas now our Bodies are exceeding weak and
passive, a kind of walking Hospitals of pains, infirmities and diseases; the
time will come when our soul shall be accommodated with a much more easy and
convenient, as well as glorious habitation, wherein it shall for ever forget
those dismal Cries, O my Head, my Heart, my Bowels, and enjoy everlasting rest
and freedom. Now she is in a traveling condition, and the Inn she lodges at is
mean and inconvenient, her Provision is course, her Bed hard, and her Rest
continually interrupted with noise and tumult, but when she is once got home to
her own House, her house not made with hands eternal in the Heavens she shall
there live in perfect ease and pleasure, free from all the annoyances of flesh
and blood, from all the disturbances of pain and sickness, and from all the
toil and fatigue* the noise and hurry of this mortal condition, and with
splendid State, delicious fare, soft and quiet repose recompense her self a
thousand fold for all her present travel and weariness.

IV. And lastly, The Bodies of good men will be changed from corruptible and
mortal into incorruptible and immortal. So ver. 42.53. it is sown in
corruption, it is raised in incorruption, and this corruptible must put on
incorruption, this mortal must put on immortality, i. e. Whereas this body
which we lay down has in the very constitution of it the seeds of mortality
and corruption, at the Resurrection it shall spring up into an incorruptible
and immortal substance, perfectly refined from all mortal and corruptible
principles; for so our Savior pronounces of those who shall be accounted
worthy to attain to this blessed Resurrection, that they cannot die any more,
Luke 20.36. which is a plain argument that our mortal body shall not be merely
varnished and gilded over with an external glory and beauty, but that all
inward principles of corruption shall be utterly purged out of its nature, so
that it shall not be preserved immortal merely by the force of an external
cause, but be so far immortal in it self, as not to have any tendency to death
in its nature and constitution: For either it will be so liquid, that should
its parts be separated by any external violence, like the divided Ether they
will immediately close again, or else so firm and compact that no external
violence will be able to divide them; and thus having no alloy of corrupt
principles in its nature, no quarrels or discords between contrary qualities,
and being perpetually acted by a most happy, sprightly and vivacious soul,
which will every moment diffuse a vast plenty of life and vigor throughout all
its parts, it will be also secure from all inward tendencies to mortality, and
being thus fortified both within and without against all attempts toward a
dissolution, what should hinder it from living for ever and flourishing in
immortal youth? And thus I have endeavored to give an account of the happy
Changes which good men's Bodies will undergo in the general Resurrection.

But though they shall all of them be raised with unspeakable advantages and
improvements, yet it is apparent from this, 1 Cor. 15. that they shall vastly
differ in the degrees of their glory; so ver. 41. There is one glory of the
Sun, and another glory of the Moon, and another glory of the stars, for one
star differs from another star in glory, so also is the resurrection of the
dead, i. e. As the Sun is more glorious than the Moon, the Moon than the stars,
and one star than another, so shall our bodies at the Resurrection be arrayed
with different degrees of glory; and doubtless these differences of Glory in
our raised bodies will arise from those different degrees of perfection to
which their respective Souls have arrived; for the more perfect those souls
are, the more improved and accomplished bodies they will require, because
according as they rise in degrees of perfection, their powers will be enlarged
and their faculties rendered more active, and consequently will require bodies
more active and powerful. And therefore since at the Resurrection God will
accommodate every soul with a body suitable to it in its utmost exaltations and
improvements, we may reasonably conclude that the several bodies that are
raised shall be more or less glorious, as the several souls to which they
appertain are more or less advanced in degrees of perfection. For the fitness
and congruity of souls to glorified bodies consists in their moral perfection;
and if upon an impossible supposition, a wicked soul should be mistaken for a
pious one and thrust into a glorified body, it would not know what to do with,
or how to behave it self in it, but like a Swine in a Palace would soon be
weary of its habitation and impatiently long to be restored to its beloved stye
and mire. For a glorified body is an Instrument proper only for a glorified
soul to act and work with; It is purposely framed and composed for
contemplation and love for joy and praise and Adoration, and, what should a
vicious soul do with such a body to whom those heavenly exercises it was
designed for are unnatural? It Is piety and virtue that fits and disposes a
Soul to animate and act in a glorified body; and therefore I am apt to think,
that as the animal disposition of our soul does now cooperate with the divine
Providence in the forming its animal body in the womb, so that divine and
spiritual disposition which the Soul does contract before, and improve after
its separation from the body will cooperate with the Almighty Power of our
Savior in the forming its new body at the Resurrection; and that as by the
Animal Plastic power of our souls, God did first form our Animal bodies, so by
this spiritual Plastic power of it which is nothing but its moral perfection,
he will hereafter form our spiritual bodies; and if so, then the more of that
perfection the Soul arrives to at the Resurrection, the more it will
spiritualize and glorify its body; and so still the more perfect it grows, the
more it will improve its glorified body in beauty, luster and activity, so that
as through a transparent Glass we plainly discern the size and color of the
substance contained in it, so perhaps through the still increasing degrees of
the bodies glory, the degree and size of the Souls perfection will appear. But
whether this be true or no, which I confess is only my conjecture, thus much is
certain, that the bodies of men will be raised with different degrees of glory;
and therefore since we are assured that the great end of the last judgment will
be to distribute to every one according to his Works, we have sufficient reason
to conclude that the bodies will be glorified more or less in proportion to the
perfection of their Souls.

And thus I have endeavored to give a brief account of those happy changes
which good men's bodies must undergo at the Resurrection; I proceed therefore in
the next place to show the woeful change that will then also be made in the
bodies of wicked men: In which I shall be very brief, because we have but a
very short and general account of it in Scripture, where we are only told that
they shall awake to everlasting shame and contempt, Dan. 12.2. and that they
shall come forth to the Resurrection of Damnation, John 5.28. and that upon
their Resurrection they shall be judged according to their works, and cast into
the Lake of fire, Rev. 20.13.15. from whence it is apparent that they shall be
raised for no other end, but to be punished, to endure that vengeance which
shall then be rendered to them, even the vengeance of eternal fire; for that
will be their doom, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels. Since therefore their Resurrection will be only in order
to their being fetched from Prison to Judgment, and sent from Judgment to
Execution; to be sure their bodies will be raised in full capacity to suffer
the fearful execution of their doom; that is, with an exquisite sense to feel,
and an invincible strength to sustain the torment of eternal fire. For since
they must suffer for ever, they must be raised both passive and immortal, with
a sense as quick as lightening to perceive their misery, and yet as durable as
Anvil to undergo the strokes of it, which to all eternity will be repeated upon
them without any pause or intermission. Thus shall they be raised with a most
vivacious and everlasting sense of pain, that so they may ever feel the pangs
of death without ever dying; so St. Cyril Catech. illum. 4. p. 26. (...), i. e.
wicked men shall be clothed with eternal bodies that in them they may suffer
the eternal punishment of their sins; and so they shall have strength to suffer
as long as vengeance has will to inflict: and therefore since it is the will
of divine vengeance that they should suffer eternal fire, the divine power will
furnish them with such bodies as shall be able to endure everlasting scorching
in that fire, without being ever consumed by it, for at their Resurrection
their wretched Ghosts shall be fetched out of those invisible Prisons wherein
they are now reserved in chains against the Judgment of the great Day, to
suffer in that body wherein they sinned, and that therein they may be capable
of lingering out an eternity of torment, they shall be reunited to it in such a
fatal and indissoluble bond as neither Death nor Hell shall ever be able to
unloose. And this is all the account we have from Scripture concerning the
change that shall be made by the Resurrection in the bodies of wicked men, viz.
that from weak and corruptible bodies they shall be changed into vigorous and
incorruptible ones, and be endued with a quick and everlasting sense of all
that everlasting punishment which they are raised to endure.

Thus having given an account at large of this second Regal Act which our
blessed Savior is yet to perform, viz. Raising the dead, I proceed to the

III. And last, viz. his judging the World. In treating of which great and
fundamental Article of our Faith, I shall endeavor

First, To prove the truth of the thing that our blessed Savior shall judge
the World.

Secondly, To give an account of the signs and forerunners of his coming to
judge it.

Thirdly, To show the manner of his coming.

Fourthly, To explain the whole process of his judgment.

I. I shall endeavor to prove the truth of the thing, viz. that our Savior
shall judge the World, than which there is no one Proposition more frequently
and plainly asserted in holy Scripture. Thus Acts 17.31. we are told, that God
has appointed a day in which he will judge the World in righteousness by the
man whom he has ordained, and that this man is Jesus Christ we are assured,
Acts 10.42. And he commanded us to preach unto the People, and to testify that
it is he which was ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and dead; So also 2 Timothy 4.1. I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge
the quick and the dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom. And accordingly we
are told, that we shall all stand before the Judgment seat of Christ, Romans
14.10. And all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in his body according to that he has done whether it
be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5.10. And to the same purpose our Savior himself tells
us, that the Father judges no man, that is immediately, but has given all
judgment to his Son; and afterward he gives the reason of it, because he is the
Son of man, John 5.22.27. that is, because he dutifully complied with his
Fathers Will in cheerfully condescending to cloth himself in Humane Nature,
and therein to offer up himself a willing Victim for the sins of the World; for
so Rev. 5.9.12. Worthy is he alone to receive the Book, (of judgment) and to
open the Seals thereof, because he was slain, and has redeemed us to God by
his blood, worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive the power and honor,
the glory and blessing appendent to his high Office of judging the World. From
all which it abundantly appears that this great action of judging the World is
to be performed by Christ. I proceed therefore to the

Second general Head I proposed to treat of, which was to give an account of
the signs and forerunners of his coming to judgment. For before he actually
appears he will give the secure World a fearful warning of his coming by
hanging out to its public view a great many horrible signs and spectacles, for
thus the Prophet Joel, Joel 1.30, 31. I will show wonders in the Heavens, and
in the Earth blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke, the Sun shall be turned
into darkness, and the Moon into blood before the great and terrible day of the
Lord, which Prophecy of his is particularly exemplified by our Savior,
Immediately after the tribulation of those days shall the Sun be darkened, and
the Moon shall not give her light, and the Stars of Heaven shall fall, and the
Powers of the Heavens shall be shaken, and then shall appear the sign of the
Son of man in heaven, Matt. 24* 29, 30. and more particularly, Luke 21.11.25.
Great Earthquakes shall be in diverse places, and Famines, and Pestilences, and
fearful sights, and great signs shall there be from Heaven, and there shall be
signs in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars, and upon the Earth
distress of Nations with great perplexity, the Sea and the Waves roaring, and
then it follows, then shall they see the Son of man coming. It is true, this
Prophecy of our Savior immediately respects the destruction of Jerusalem, and
was in part accomplished in it; several of these very signs being a little
before the Calamity of that City actually exhibited to the public view of the
World, as both Josephus and Tacitus assure us; and several others of them were
exhibited immediately after the Tribulation of those days in that prodigious
irruption of Vesuvius in Campania, the woeful effects whereof were felt not only
in Rome and Italy, but in a great part of Africa, in Syria, Constantinople, and
in all the adjoining Countries, Vid. Dion. Cass. lib. 66.68. but it is apparent
that our Savior here prophesies of the Judgment of Jerusalem, as it was a Type
and Representation of the general Judgment; so that though his Prophecy
respects Ierusalems doom immediately, yet through this it looks forward to the
final Doom of the World, and therefore as in foretelling the former he
prefigures the later, so in foretelling the foregoing signs of the former he
prefigures the foregoing signs of the later. And since he here intended the
signs of Ierusalems doomsday, only for Types and Figures of those signs which
shall forerun the doomsday of the World, and seeing that Types have always
less in them than are in the things which they typifie and prefigure, there is
no doubt but those signs which shall forerun the last judgment will be much
more eminent and illustrious, than those of Ierusalems judgment, which were
intended only to Typifie and prefigure them, and accordingly St. Ierom tells us
of an ancient Tradition of the Jewish Doctors (to which our Savior in this
Prediction seems plainly to refer) that for fifteen days together before the
general judgment there shall be transacted upon the Stage of Nature a continued
Scene of fearful Signs and Wonders, the Sea shall swell to a prodigious height,
and make a fearful noise with its tumbling Waves, the Heavens shall crack day
and night with loud and roaring Thunders, the Earth shall groan under hideous
Convulsions, and be shaken with quotidian Earthquakes, the Moon shall shed
forth purple streams of discolored light, the Sun shall be clothed in a
dismal darkness, and the Stars shall shrink in their light, and twinkle like
expiring Candles in the Socket, the Air shall blaze with Portentous Comets, and
the whole frame of nature like a funeral Room shall be all hung round with
mourning and with Ensigns of horror, and when these fatal symptoms appear upon
the face of the Universe, then shall the Inhabitants of the earth mourn, and
the Sinners in Sion shall be horribly afraid being loudly forewarned by these
astonishing Portents of the near approach of their everlasting Doom. Having
thus briefly shown what shall be the Signs of our Saviors coming to Judgment,
I proceed to the

III. The Third general, which was to show the manner and circumstances of his
coming; and here we will first consider the place from whence he is to come;
Secondly, the State in which he is to come; Thirdly, the Carriage on which he
is to come; Fourthly, the Equipage with which he is to come; Fifthly, the place
to which he is to come.

I. The place from which he is to come, which is no other than the Highest
Heavens, where he now lives and reigns in his exalted and glorified Humanity;
for him must the Heavens receive till the time of the Restitution of all
things, Acts 3.21. in that bright Region of eternal day, that Kingdom of Angels
and of spirits of just men made perfect, he is to reign in Person till the last
and terrible day, and from thence he is to begin his Circuit when he comes to
keep his general Assizes upon earth, for he is to be revealed from Heaven with
his mighty Angels, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. and to descend from Heaven with a shout, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. so that in the close of those dreadful Alarms which he will give
the World by the preceding signs of his coming he will arise from his imperial
Seat at his Fathers right hand, and descend in person from those high
habitations of inaccessible light, and every eye shall see him as he comes
shooting like a Star from his Orb, and the sight of him shall affect the whole
World with unspeakable joy or consternation; the righteous when they see him
shall lift up their heads and rejoice, because they know he is their Friend and
brings the day of their redemption with him, they shall congratulate his
Arrival and welcome him from Heaven with Songs of Triumph and deliverance: but
as for the wicked, they shall shreik and lament at the sight of him, as being
conscious to themselves that by a thousand provocations they have rendered him
their implacable Enemy; the sense of which will cause them to exclaim in the
bitter Agonies of their souls; O yonder comes he whose mercies we have spurned,
whose Authority we have despised, whose Laws we have trampled on, and all the
methods of whose love we have utterly baffled and defeated; and now forlorn and
miserable that we are, how shall we abide his appearance, or whither shall we
flee from his presence. O that some Rock would fall upon us, or that some
Mountain would be so pitiful as to swallow us up and bury us from his sight for
ever. But woe are we! within these few moments the Rocks and Mountains will be
gone, the Heavens and Earth will melt away, and nothing will be left besides
our selves for his fiery indignation to prey on. Thus shall the sight of the
son of man descending from his Throne in the Heavens to judge the World,
inspire his friends with unspeakable joy, and strike his enemies with terror
and confusion.

II. We will consider the State in which he is to come, which shall be far
different from that in which he came sixteen hundred years ago. Then he came in
an humble and despicable condition, clouded with poverty and grief, and
oppressed with all the innocent infirmities of humane nature; but at the last
day he shall come in his glorified state, clothed in that Celestial Body which
he now wears at the Right hand of God. For so, Acts 1.11. the Angel assures his
Disciples, This same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so
come in like manner as you have seen him go into heaven, that is, he shall
return to Judgment in that self-same glorified Body wherein you now see him
ascend; and what a glorious one that is we may partly learn from that majestic
description of it, Rev. 1.13, 14, 15, 16. In the midst of the seven
Candlesticks was one like the Son of man, his head and his hair were white as
wool as white as snow, his eyes were as a flame of fire, and his countenance
was as the Sun shining in its strength. And partly from his transfiguration on
the Mount, which was but a short essay and specimen of his Glorification; for
it is said, that his face did shine as the Sun, and that his Raiment was white
as the light, white with those beams of Glory which from his transfigured Body
shone through all his Apparel, Mat. 17.2. When therefore he descends from
Heaven to judge the World, it shall be with this glorified Body, this Body of
pure and immaculate splendour, with its hair shining like threads of light, its
eyes sparkling with beams of Majesty, and its face displaying a most beautiful
luster, and its whole substance shedding forth from every part a dazzling glory
round about it; and this I conceive is that which he himself calls his own
glory, Luke 9.26. When he (i. e. the Son of man) shall come in his own glory,
that is, the glory of that illustrious heavenly Body wherein he is now arrayed;
besides which bright and luminous Robe, in which like a meridian Sun he shall
visibly shine over all the World; the aforecited Text tells us, that he shall
also come in the glory of his Father, by which I conceive is meant that which
the Hebrews call the Shechinah, and the Scripture the glory of the Lord, viz. a
body of bright shining fire in which the Lord was especially present, and with
which as the Psalmist expresses it, he covered himself as with a Garment,
Psalm 104.2. for in 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. we are told, that he shall be revealed from
heaven with flaming fire; and so he descended on the Mount in fire; Exodus
19.18. and that fire is called the Glory of the Lord, Exodus 24.17. That fire
therefore in which our Savior shall be revealed from Heaven, seems to be of
the same nature with that fiery Shechinah or visible glory of the Lord in which
he descended on Mount Sinai, though doubtless it will be far more glorious, as
being designed to adorn a far more glorious solemnity. And this Glory being
added to the natural brightness and splendour of his glorified Body will cause
him to outshine the Sun, and drown all the lights of heaven in the conquering
brightness of his appearance. So that when he comes forth from his aetherial
Palace, and appears upon the Eastern heaven, that immense Sphere of visible
glory which will then surround him, will in the twinkling of an eye spread and
diffuse it self over all the Creation, and cause both the Heavens and the Earth
to glitter like a flaming fire.

III. Thirdly, We will consider the Carriage on which he is to come, which as
the Scripture tells us shall be a Cloud; so Acts 1.11. the Angels tell his
Disciples who stood gazing after him as he was ascending into Heaven, the same
Jesus which is taken from you into Heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye
have seen him go into Heaven. Now, if you would know how that was, the 9th
Verse will inform you, where it is said, that he was taken up, and a Cloud
received him out of sight, and therefore as he ascended into Heaven on a Cloud,
so in like manner he shall from thence descend upon a Cloud also; and
accordingly our Savior himself declares, that we shall see the Son of man
coming on the Clouds of Heaven in power and great glory, Mat. 24.30. So also
Mat. 26.64. Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of
Power and coming in the Clouds of Heaven; and in this very manner do the Jews
expect the coming of their Messiah, as appears by that gloss of one of their
ancient Masters on Dan. 7.10. si meruerint Iudaei veniet in nubibus Coeli,
which Raimund. Pug. fid. thus explains, If ever the Jews deserve that the
Messiah should come, he shall come gloriously according to the Prophet Daniel,
that is, in the Clouds of Heaven. And then he tells us farther, ideo moderni
Iudaei dicunt Messiam non venisse quia non viderunt eum venire in nubibus
coeli, therefore do the modern Jews say, that the Messiah is not yet come
because they never saw him coming in the clouds of Heaven; and it seems very
probable that the great offense which the high Priest took at our Saviors
saying, that they should hereafter see him coming in the clouds of Heaven, Mat.
26.64, 65. was this, that it was a tradition among them that the Messiah should
so come, and that therefore he looked upon that saying of our Savior as a
blasphemous pretense to his being the Messiah; as much as if he should have
said, though I have done enough already to convince you that I am the Messiah,
yet you shall hereafter see that very sign of my being the Messiah upon which
you so much depend, and without which you will not believe, viz. my coming in
the clouds of Heaven; which therefore I am apt to think is the sign of the Son
of man in Heaven, of which our Savior speaks, Mat. 24.30. For so not only the
Jews do Character their Messiah, but also the Heathen their Gods clothed in a
Cloud. Thus Homer. Iliad. lib. 5. represents God coming to Diomedes (...), with
his shoulders wrapped in a Cloud; and so also Virgil represents Jupiter coming
to assist Aeneas, Aen. 7 -- Radiis ardentem lucis and auro -- ipse manu
quatiens ostendit ab aethere nubem, i. e. showing him a Cloud from Heaven,
flaming with rays of light and Gold. So that to appear in Clouds, it seems, was
looked upon both by Jews and Gentiles as a divine sign and Character, and
accordingly this sign was given by our Savior to the Jews in that glorious
representation of a Captain with his Legions issuing out of the Clouds a little
before the destruction of Jerusalem, recorded at large both in Josephus and
Tacitus, and will hereafter be given to the whole World in a far more glorious
manner at the opening of the day of Judgment; for then, as the Psalmist
expresses it, he will make the Clouds his Chariots and ride down from the
Heavens on them in a triumphal procession, shining with unspeakable Glory and
Majesty: So that as when he ascended a bright and Radiant Cloud was prepared to
receive and carry him up to the Seat of the blessed; so when he descends there
will be a vast sheet of condensed aeth^r in the form of a radiant Cloud (and
such it is probable was that on which he ascended) prepared to receive him, and
to waft him down from above to the place appointed for the general As^izes, and
this very Cloud or bright aetherial substance, on which he shall come will
perhaps be that Throne of Glory in Matthew. 25.31. on which he shall sit whilst
he is administering judgment to the World; for this substance being not only
naturally luminous, but also accidentally illuminated from the Sun of
Righteousness whom it bears; will to be sure be sufficiently Glorious to
deserve the name of A Throne of Glory.

IV. Fourthly, We will consider the Retinue and Equipage with which he shall
come, which as the Scripture tells us will consist of innumerable myriads of
Saints and Angels; for immediately upon the notice that he is going down to
solemnize the general Judgment, all those blessed spirits of just men made
perfect, whom he has redeemed and glorified from the beginning of the World,
shall forsake their mansions of glory to attend him in his progress; for so
Enoch prophesied of old, behold the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints
to execute judgment on the ungodly, Jude 14.15. and that by these ten Thousand,
he means the whole body of the Church Triumphant, is evident by that passage of
S. Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 3.13. where he prays that they might be established in their
Christian course till the coming of the Lord Jesus with all his Saints, and
indeed, since they are all to reassume their bodies and to be made partakers
of the Glorious Resurrection, it is necessary that they should all come down
along with him and return to this earth, where the old matter of those bodies
lies, wherein they are to be reinvested; and to this illustrious retinue of
glorified Saints shall be joined the heavenly hosts of the holy Angels; for so
Christ himself tells us, that he shall come in his own glory, and in his
Fathers, and of his holy Angels, Luke 9.26. and that he shall come in his glory
and all his holy Angels with him, Mat. 25.31. And S. Paul tells us, that he
shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels, 2 Thessalonians. 1.2. And as the
Angels shall come down along with him, so in all probability they shall come in
a glorious appearance, clothed in bright aetherial bodies, in which to adorn
the triumphs of that glorious day, they shall be conspicuous to all the
Inhabitants of the Earth. Neither shall their coming with him be only for show
and pomp* but the Scripture plainly tells us that they shall minister to him in
that great transaction. For at his issuing forth from the heaven of heavens,
these mighty hosts of Angels shall march before him with the Archangel in the
head of them, who with a mighty voice or sound like that of a Trumpet, shall
send forth an awakening summons to all the Inhabitants of the grave to come
forth and appear before the Judgment Seat; at which Tremendous voice, which
with an all-enlivening power shall be reverberated through all the vault of
heaven, and penetrate the most secret repositories of the Earth, the dead shall
rise and the living shall be changed and transfigured, and all shall be set
before the dread Tribunal to undergo their Trial and receive their doom: For so
1 Thessalonians. 4.16. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout,
with the voice of the Archangel, and the trump of God, and the dead in Christ
shall rise first; and in 1 Cor. 15.52. the resurrection of the dead is made the
consequence of the sounding this Trumpet, for the Trumpet shall sound and the
dead shall be raised incorruptible; And so also Mat. 24.31. our Savior tells
us, that at his coming on the clouds of Heaven, he will send his Angels with a
great sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather together his elect from the
four winds; from whence it is evident that the Angels then minister to him to
raising the dead, and assembling them to Judgment; and hence that which is
called the voice of the Archangel in the above cited 1 Thessalonians. 4.10. is
elsewhere called the voice of the Son of God, John 5.25. because as it will be
animated by his power, so it will be pronounced by his authority; and as they
shall minister to him in raising the dead to be judged, so shall they also in
executing his Sentence and Judgment; for so Mat. 13.41, 42. He tells us, the
Son of man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his
Kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity, and shall cast them
into a furnace of fire, there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. From
whence it is evident that when he has pronounced sentence on the workers of
iniquity, he will by the ministry of his Angels chase them into that
everlasting fire, whereunto he has doomed and devoted them. Thus when he comes
to judge the World all his holy Angels shall come with him, and that not only to
contribute to the glory and splendour of his Circuit, but also to minister to
him in his Judgment; so that his retinue shall consist of all the Inhabitants
of heaven, who shall all come forth together with him and bear him company in
this his Triumphant progress through the skies: by which we may easily imagine
what an amazing spectacle his coming down from heaven will be to the
Inhabitants of the earth, when they shall see him descend from his Imperial
Seat far above the starry Skies with all the Train-bands of heaven about him,
the Captain of the Angelical Host in the front of innumerable Angels marching
before him, and with his mighty Trump ringing a peal of Thunder through the
Universe, and with ten thousand thousands of the Spirits of just men made
perfect, following after him with Crowns of glory on their heads, and Songs and
Halelujahs in their mo^ths; O blessed Jesus! how will this glorious and
dreadful sight confound thy Enemies, and ravish thy Friends, make those that
hate thee tremble and gnash their teeth, and those that love thee lift up their
heads and shout for joy!

V. And lastly, We will consider the place to which he is to come, concerning
which all that is certain from Scripture is this, that when he comes down from
He^ven he will fix his Throne or Judgment Seat in the Air at such a convenient
distance from the Earth as shall render him visible to all its Inhabitants. For
so 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. it is said of the righteous, that after their being raised or
changed they shall be caught up in the Clouds to meet the Lord in the Air,
which is a plain argument that the Lord will sit in judgment on them in the
Air, since thither they will be caught up to him after they are raised and
judged. Thus in that very Air, which is now the seat of the Devils Empire,
shall Christ fix his Throne to manifest to all the World the consummation of
his Victory over the Powers of darkness. There shall he sit in Majesty and
Glory where now the Devil and his Angels reign, and in the public view of the
World shall even in their own dominion spoil those Hellish Principalities and
Powers, and having chained them at his Chariot Wheels, make a show of them
openly, triumphing over them; there where they now domineer and tyrannize over
this wretched World shall he set his foot upon their necks, and from thence
shall he tread them down into everlasting darkness and despair. Thus that he
may expose himself to the more public view, and the Devil to the more public
shame and confusion he will choose to keep his general Assizes in the Air.
Being therefore arrived into the airy Regions, after a long and glorious
progress from the highest heaven, there he shall sit down upon the Throne of
his glory (as some think) over against Mount Olivet, the place from whence he
ascended, whither all People, Nations and Languages shall be gathered before
him to receive their everlasting Doom. And now let us imagine with our selves
in what a glorious and tremendous Majesty he will appear to the World from his
judgment seat, whence every Eye shall see him shine in his own, his Fathers,
and his Angels glory, who in a bright Corona shall sit round about him like so
many Stars about a Sun, and where as the Prophet Daniel describes him, Chap. 7.
ver. 9, 10. he shall exhibit himself to public view, clothed in garments as
white as snow, with the hair of his head like the pure wool, sitting on a
Throne like the fiery flame, and its Wheels as burning fire, with a fiery
stream issuing out from before him, and a thousand thousands ministering unto
him, and ten thousand times ten thousand standing before him, whilst the
Judgment is set, and the Books are opened. And thus I have given a brief
account from Scripture of the manner and circumstances of his coming: from
whence I proceed to the

IV. And last general I proposed to treat of, viz. to explain the whole Process
of this Judgment. And that we may proceed herein the more distinctly we will
consider it with respect to those twofold objects; viz. the Righteous and the
Wicked, about which it is to be exercised, for it is plain from Scripture that
they are not to be judged promiscuously one among another as they come, but the
Sheep are to be separated from the Goats, the Good from the Bad, and to be
tried and sentenced apart from one another, Mat. 25.32, 33. And he, i. e. the
Son of Man, shall separate them from one another as a Shepherd divides his
Sheep from the Goats, and he shall set the Sheep on his Right hand, and the
Goats on the left; in which separation the precedence will be given to the
Sheep or Righteous, who are to be judged first; for so the Scripture assures
us, that the dead in Christ are to rise first; and that after they have
undergone their Judgment, they are immediately to be wasted up into the Air,
there to meet the Lord, and to sit as Assessors with him in that Judgment which
he shall afterward pass upon the wicked, vid. 1 These. 4.15, 16, 17. compared
with 1 Cor. 6.2. In explaining therefore the Process of this Judgment, we will
treat of it in the same order wherein it will be transacted, beginning first
with the Judgment of the Righteous; in which according to the Scripture-account
of it there are these five things implied, 1. Their Citation or Summons. 2.
Their personal Appearance before the Judgment Seat. 3. Their Trial. 4. Their
Sentence. 5. Their Assumption into the clouds of heaven.

I. This Judgment of the Righteous includes their Citation or Summons, which,
as was observed before, is to be performed by the Voice or Trump of the
Archangel, i. e. by an Audible shout or noise made by the Prince of Angels, and
sounding throughout the Universe like the mighty blast of a Trumpet. For as it
was anciently the manner of Nations to gather their Assemblies by the sound of
a Trumpet; so by the same sound the Scripture tells us, God will assemble the
world of men to judgment, and that this shall be a real Audible sound like that
of a Trumpet, though proceeding from no other instrument than that of the
Archangels mouth, I see no reason to doubt; because with such a noise we read
God did descend upon Mount Sinai, Exodus 19.16. and why may we not as well
understand the one in a literal sense as the other, it being no more improper
in the nature of the thing for God to proclaim by such a sound his coming to
judge the World, than it was, his coming to give Laws to Israel. But then
together with this mighty Voice or Trump of the Archangel there shall proceed
from Christ a divine power, even his holy Spirit, by which he raised himself
from the dead, by whose omnipotent Agency all those holy Relics of the bodies
of his Saints which are now scattered about the world shall be gathered up,
reunited and reorganized into glorious bodies; for so the Apostle attributes
the Resurrection of our bodies to the Holy Ghost, Romans 8.11. For if the Spirit
of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in us, he that raised up Christ
from the dead shall also quicken our mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwells
in us, and the old materials of their bodies being thus reunited and reformed
by the powerful energy of the Holy Ghost accompanying the sound of the
Archangels Trump, those Saintly Spirits which anciently inhabited them, and
which are now come down from heaven with their Savior shall every one re-enter
its own proper body, and animate it with immortal vigor and activity, and
whilst the dead Saints are thus arising, those who shall then be living, and
have not tasted death, shall by the same Almighty Power be changed,
transformed, and glorified in the twinkling of an eye, 1 Cor. 15.51, 52. which
being transacted they shall all be gathered together by the Ministry of the
holy Angels from all parts of the Earth before the judgment Seat of Christ,
Mat. 13.27. For

II. This Judgment of the Righteous does also include their personal Appearance
before the Judgment Seat. What this Judgment Seat will be has been briefly
hinted before, viz. a vast body of luminous ether condensed into the form of a
bright and radiant Cloud, and placed in the Region of the Air, at a convenient
distance from the Earth, streaming with light from every part, and casting
forth an unspeakable glory, for which cause it is called the Throne of his
glory, and is described by S* John to be a great white or refulgent Throne,
Rev. 20.11. out of which Lightnings and Thunders are said to proceed, Rev. 4.5.
which implies, that it will be a Cloud, it being from Clouds that Thunders and
Lightnings do proceed. And before this glorious Tribunal or bright
Iudgment-Seat shall all the Assembly of the Righteous appear to undergo a
merciful Trial, and receive a happy Doom. Here shall the glorious company of
the Apostles, the goodly fellowship of the Prophets, the noble Army of Martyrs,
the holy Church throughout all the World, both Militant and Triumphant, meet,
and in one entire body present themselves before their blessed Redeemer; who
looking down from his exalted Throne shall at one view see all the Congregation
of his Saints before him, and with infinite complacency surveigh the fruit of
the travel of his Soul, and the mighty purchase of his precious blood; for so
the Apostle tells us that we must all stand before his Judgment Seat. Romans
14.10.

III. This Judgment of the Righteous does also include their Trial; for so the
Apostle assures us, We must all appear (i. e. we Righteous as well as others)
before the Iudgment-Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done
in his body, 2 Cor. 5.10. which plainly implies, that even the Righteous shall
undergo an impartial trial of their deeds; that so they may receive a reward
proportionable to them; and more expressly, Romans 14.12. he tells us, that we
must every one of us give an account of himself to God, and if every one, then
to be sure the Righteous must as well as the wicked: not that there will be any
doubt of the righteousness of the Righteous in the breast of the Judge, to
whose all-seeing Eye the darkest secrets of all hearts lie open; but yet for
other ^^asons it is highly convenient they should undergo a trial as well as
others: As first, for the more solemn and public vindication of their wronged
innocence, that all that infamy and scandal with which their malicious Enemies
have bespattered them may be wiped off before men and Angels, and that being
assoiled before all the World they may triumph for ever in a bright and
glorious reputation. And secondly, That all those brave and unaffected acts of
secret Piety and Charity, to which none but God and themselves were conscious,
may be brought into the open light, and to their everlasting renown proclaimed
throughout all the vast Assembly of Spirits: for now we shall see all those
modest souls unmasked, whose silent and retired graces do make so little show
and noise in the world, and all their humble pieties and bashful beauties which
scarce any Eye ever saw, but Gods, shall be exposed to the public view and
general applause of Saints and Angels. Thirdly, They shall be tried also for
the vindication of Gods impartial procedure in proportioning their reward to
their virtue; that so the degrees of each man's proficiency in piety and virtue
being exposed to the view of the world by an impartial trial, Angels and Men
may be convinced that in distributing the different degrees of happiness the
Almighty Judge is no way biassed by a fond partiality or respect of persons,
but that he proceeds upon immutable Principles of Justice, and does exactly
adjust and balance his rewards with the degrees and numbers of our deserts and
improvements; that so even those that are set lowest in those blessed Forms and
Classes of glorified Spirits may not envy those that are above them, or
complain that they are advanced no higher; but every one may cheerfully
acknowledge himself to be placed where he ought to be, as being fully convinced
that he is only so many degrees inferior to others in glory, as they are
superior to him in divine graces and perfections. Fourthly and lastly, The
Righteous shall undergo this Trial for the more glorious manifestation of the
divine mercy and goodness. For which reason I am apt to think that even their
sins of which they have dearly and heartily repented shall in this their trial
be exposed and brought upon the Stage, that so in the free pardon of such an
infinite number of them the whole Congregation of the blessed may behold and
admire the infinite extent of the divine mercies, and be thereby the deeper
affected with, and more vigorously excited to celebrate with Songs of praise
the goodness of their merciful Judge. For these reasons the Wise man tells us,
Eccles. 12.14. that God shall bring every secret thing to judgment whether it
be good, or whether it be evil; which Proposition being universal, must extend
to the Righteous as well as to the Wicked. But yet though their sores shall be
then laid open, it shall be done by a soft and gentle hand, by a serene
Conscience, and a smiling Judge, who without any angry look, or severe
reflection, or any other circumstance, but what shall contribute to the joys
and triumphs of that day, shall read over all the Items of their guilt, and
then cancel them for ever. For

IV. This Judgment of the Righteous does also include their Sentence. Although
to us whose operations are so slow and leisurely by reason of the unwieldiness
of these fleshly Organs with which we act, such a particular trial as has been
before described of such an infinite number of men and women may seem to
require an unreasonable length of time, yet if we consider that then both the
Judge, and those who are to be judged shall be arrayed in spiritual bodies, in
which they will be able to act with unspeakable nimbleness and dispatch, we
shall find that a little time comparatively may very well suffice for so great
a transaction; for the Judge being one that can attend to infinite causes at
once without any distraction, and they who are to be judged, being by reason of
their spirituality in a condition to attend to every ones trial, while they are
undergoing their own, I see no reason we have to imagine that they shall be
tried successively one after another, and if not, why may we not suppose that
we shall all be tried together at the same time, and consequently that the
trial of all may be transacted in as short a time as the trial of one. And that
they shall all be tried together is very probable, since it is apparent from
Scripture that they shall all be sentenced together, for thus Mat. 25.34. Then
shall the King say to those on his right hand, i. e. to them all together, Come
ye blessed, etc. Having first by an accurate and impartial Trial manifested
their integrity to all the world, he shall arise out of his flaming Throne, and
with an audible voice, and smiling Majesty, pronounce their Sentence all
together in these, or such like words, Come ye blessed Children of my Father
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world, to which
welcome Sentence they will doubtless all immediately resound a joyful Choir of
Halelujahs through Heaven and Earth, Allelujah, Salvation, and Glory, and Power
be to the Lord our God, for true and righteous are his Iudgments' Salvation be
unto our Lord that sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb; for wonderful are
thy works, O Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy ways, O thou King of
Saints. And now all their business being finished here below, they shall from
henceforth be no longer detained in this Vale of tears and misery, but with
overjoyed hearts shall take their leave of it for ever. For

V. And lastly, Another thing employed in this their Judgment is their
Assumption into the Clouds of heaven. For their blessed Lord having thus
publicly acquitted and pronounced them blessed, they shall immediately feel
the happy effect of it* for now he will no longer suffer them to stand below at
the Bar, but from thence will call them up to his Tribunal, there to give them
a nearer access to his beloved person and more intimate participation of his
glory. At which powerful call and invitation of his, they shall in an instant
all take wing together like a mighty flock of pure and innocent Doves, and fly
aloft into the air, singing and warbling as they go to meet their Redeemer in
the Clouds of Heaven. For so the Apostle in 1 These. 4.17. Then (that is, after
their Resurrection and Judgment) we which are alive and remain, who never died,
but only have been changed and glorified, shall be caught up together with them
who shall be raised from the dead into the clouds to meet the Lord in the air,
and so we shall be ever with the Lord. For to be sure that rapturous love which
the sight and sentence of their Savior has by this time kindled in their
pious breasts, will wing their souls with vehement desire to be with him, and
then being clothed with glorified bodies that are as vigorous and active as
their Souls; as nimble and expedite as their thoughts and wishes, it will be in
their power soon to accomplish their desire, and fly from hence up to the
Throne of their Lord.

And now this being the first general meeting of the blessed Jesus and his
Church; the first Interview that ever was between the heavenly Bridegroom and
his holy Bride, O the dear welcomes, the infinite mutual congratulations that
will pass between them! How will they now melt in love and dissolve in mutual
flames! now when like long absent Lovers they are safe arrived into each others
Arms, never, never to be parted more.

And now this joyful meeting being consummated, they begin to prepare for a
most dreadful solemnity, and that is the Judgment of the Wicked. In order to
which the Judge will reassume his Throne, and place his Saints all round about
in shining Circles ten thousand thousand together, that so as his Assessors
they may bear a part in the ensuing Judgment; for this the Apostle asserts as a
notorious principle of our Christian faith; Know ye not that the Saints shall
judge the World, 1 Cor. 6.2. that is, that they shall not only accuse and
condemn the wicked World by the holy example of their lives, but also that they
shall give their votes and suffrages to that dreadful sentence which Christ
shall pass upon them. And now the Judge and his Assessors being set, proceed we
to the

II. Second Judgment, which is, that of the wicked, in which there are also
five particulars included: First, their Citation; Secondly, their personal
Appearance; Thirdly, their Trial; Fourthly, their Sentence; Fifthly, their
Execution.

I. Their Citation: For the first Judgment being finished, it is probable a new
summons will be given by the Voice or Trump of the Archangel to assemble the
wicked World to their Judgment, upon hearing of which all those wicked souls
that have left their bodies and been hitherto confined in some dark prison of
the Creation shall be forced to leave their dismal habitations, in which they
would a thousand times rather choose to continue for ever, if they might have
their own option, than to undergo that fearful Judgment whereunto they are
cited; but being dragged into the open light again by those Devils who have
been hitherto their Jailors, they shall every one be forced to put on those old
accursed bodies of theirs in which they contracted those crimson guilts which
now they must expiate in eternal flames; and now the souls of the dead being
shut up in their bodies again like prisoners in a sure Hold, and there secured
by an immortal tie from ever making another escape, the bodies of the living
shall by a miraculous change be rendered at once so tender and sensible, that
the least touch of misery shall pain them, and yet so strong and durable, that
the greatest loads of misery shall never be able to sink them; and thus being
all of them put into an immortal capacity of suffering, and thereby prepared to
undergo the fearful doom which awaits them, they shall from all parts of the
World be driven before the Judgment Seat of Christ. For.

II. This Judgment of the wicked implies also their personal Appearance at our
Saviors Tribunal: for so S. John in his prophetique Vision of the day of
Judgment, saw the dead both small and great standing before God, Rev. 20.12.
and in Mat. 25.31, 32. we are told, that when the Son of man sits down upon the
Throne of his Glory all Nations shall be gathered before him, that is, the
impure Goats as well as the innocent Sheep, as he afterward explains himself.
And now good Lord, what a Tragical spectacle will here be! An innumerable
number of self-condemned wretches assemble together before the Tribunal of an
Almighty and implacable Judge, quaking and trembling under the dire
expectations of a fearful and irrevocable doom, and with weeping eyes, pale
looks and ghastly countenances aboding the miserable fate that attends them. For
thus it is represented, Rev. 1.7. Behold he comes with clouds, and every eye
shall see him, they also which pierced him, and all kindreds of the earth shall
wail because of him; and well they may, considering how they treated him, and
what little reason they have upon that account to expect any favor at his
hands; for to be sure the sight of him must give a dreadful Alarm to their
consciences, and suggest to them the sad remembrance of the innumerable
provocations they have given him. Look up O ye miserable creatures, see yonder
is that glorious person whose Authority you have so insolently affronted, whose
Name you have so impiously blasphemed, whose Mercies you have so obstinately
rejected, behold with what a stern and terrible Majesty he sits upon yonder
flaming Throne, from whence he is now just ready to exact of ye a dreadful
account for all your past rebellions against him; but O unhappy and furlorn!
see how they droop, and hang their heads, as being both ashamed and afraid to
look their terrible Judge in the face, whose incensed eye sparkles upon them
with such an insufferable terror and indignation as they are no longer able to
endure, but are forced in the bitterness, anguish and despair that ever humane
souls were seized with, to cry out to the Rocks and Mountains to fall upon
them, and to hide them from the face of him that sits upon the Throne, and from
the wrath of the Lamb.

III. Another particular implied in this judgment of the wicked is their Trial;
for so 1 Cor. 4.5. we are told, that in this fearful day of reckoning God will
bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and make manifest the very
counsels of the heart; and this will be no hard matter to effect, considering
that he who is to be the Judge of these guilty Criminals, has been a constant
witness to all their actions, that his All-seeing Eye has traced them all
along through all their secret mysteries and dark Intrigues of Iniquity, and
has kept an exact record of them in the book of his remembrance; so that to
convict them of their guilts he will need do no more but only produce his own
registers, and expose what he has there recorded to the view of the World; and
there the wretches will see themselves transcribed, and all their abominable
actions exactly copied from their first Originals; there they will find all
their secret machinations; their dark cheats, their lewd imaginations and
hypocritical intentions recorded in the most legible Characters, and perceiving
themselves thus shamefully unstript and uncased before the World, their very
inwards dissected, and the smallest threads and fibers of their hearts laid open
and exposed to the view of men and Angels, their own shame and the intolerable
rack of their consciences will force them to confess their Charge, and proclaim
themselves guilty before all that vast Congregation of Spirits. But, O the
inexpressible horror and confusion these wretched Souls will then be seized
with when they shall see themselves thus publicly unmasked and turned inside
outward, and be forced to stand forth like so many loathsome spectacles before
God and his Angels without any excuse or retreat for their shame, without any
vail to hide their infamy and blushes! when their filthy practices shall be no
longer confined to the talk of a Town or a Village, but be proclaimed in the
hearing of all the rational World: O now it would be happy for them if as
formerly, they could drown the retorts of their conscience in noise and
laughter, and forget its cutting repartees which were always uneasy to bear,
but impossible to Answer. But alas those jolly days are gone, and now in
despite of themselves they must listen with horror and confusion of face, to
what those two great Judges, Jesus and their own Consciences unanimously give
in charge against them. Thus he whose piercing Eye does now penetrate their
hearts and ransack every corner of their souls, will in that great day of
discoveries bring forth all that secret filth that is there reposited, and
expose it for an infamous spectacle to the public view of men and Angels.

IV. Another particular implied in this judgment of wicked men is their
Sentence. Their Trial being now over, in which their guilt has been
sufficiently evinced and detected to their everlasting infamy and reproach,
they will by this time have received the sentence of death within themselves,
and stand condemned in the judgment of all the World; the Righteous Judge, who
is too great to be overawed, too just to be bribed, and too much provoked to be
entreated, whose Ears are now for ever stopped, and whose Bowels are
impenitrably hardened against all further Overtures of mercy, will with a stern
look and terrible voice pronounce that dreadful doom upon them, Go ye cursed
into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his angels, which though it be
of a horrible import, will appear so just, considering the horrible things
which have been charged and proved against them, that it will be immediately
seconded with the unanimous suffrage of all that bright Corona of glorified
Saints that sit as Assessors round the Throne, who with one consent will all
cry out together, Just and righteous art thou O Judge of the World in all thy
ways: But, O the fearful shrieks and lamentations that will then be heard from
those poor condemned Creatures! For if A Lord have mercy upon thee, A take him
Iailor from an earthly Judge be able to extort so many sighs and tears from a
hardened Malefactor, what will A go ye cursed do from the mouth of the
Righteous Judge of the World, and when so many millions of men and women shall
be all involved together in the same doom, and all at once lamenting their
dismal fate, Lord, what a horrible outcry will they make! Now in the bitter
Agonies of their souls they will cry to heaven for mercy, mercy, but alas poor
souls they cry too late; their Judge was once as importunate with them to have
mercy upon themselves, but because when he called they refused, when he
stretched forth his hands they regarded not, now when they call he will not
answer, when they cry he will not hear, but will laugh at their calamity, as
they did at his counsel, and mock when their fear and destruction is come upon
them.

V. And lastly, Another particular implied in this Judgment of the wicked, is
the execution of their Sentence. For immediately after their sentence is past
by which they stand doomed to everlasting fire, an everlasting fire shall be
kindled round about them, a fire which within a few moments shall spread it
self over all this lower World, and convert the whole Almosphere about us into
a furnace of inquenchable flames; For then all those fiery particles which are
every where intermingled with these terrestial Bodies, and have hitherto been
kept within their proper limits, shall be disintangled and set free from those
more gross and sluggish ones that now bind and fix them, and swarm together
like so many sparks into one huge globe of Fire, which from the lower-most
center of the Earth shall spire up and kindle upon all that Airy Heaven above,
and with one continued flame fill all the vast expansum; all that fiery matter
which is now dispersed up and down within the entrails of the Earth, shall by
degrees gather together into Rivers of Fire, which rolling to and fro within,
to force their way into the open Air, will perhaps produce those prodigious
Earthquakes, of which our Savior speaks, by which at length the Earth being
cleft and torn, it shall every where vomit out Torrents of Fire from its
flaming bowels; and at the same time the Sea shall boil and swell, and roar
like water in a seething Pot, till it is all evaporated by the struggling flames
from below, which having rarefied its waters into vapors shall kindle those
vapors into flames; and at the same time also the Heavens above shall groan
and crack with incessant Thunder, accompanied with thick and fearful flashes of
Lightning, which joining with those vast streams of Fire that will be
continually issuing out of the Earth and Sea, will make such a prodigious
deluge of flames as will quickly overflow the whole World. For thus we are
assured from Scripture, that the Element shall melt with fervent heat, and the
earth and the works that are therein shall be burnt up, 2 Pet. 3.10. So also
St. John in his Vision of the day of Judgment, Rev. 20.11. I saw a great white
Throne and him that sat on it, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled
away, and there was found no place for them: not that the matter of them shall
be annihilated, but the form of them shall be destroyed by their being
converted into an everlasting Fire; and in this Fire shall those condemned
wretches live and suffer to eternal Ages. Hence it is called the vengeance of
eternal fire; and we are told that it will be in flaming fire, that the Lord
Jesus will render vengeance to all that know not God and obey not his Gospel, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. And that this flaming fire shall be the conflagration of the World,
that of St. Peter seems plainly to imply, 2 Pet. 3.7. But the heavens and the
earth which are now -- are kept in store reserved unto fire against the day of
judgment and perdition of ungodly men; and being reserved unto fire against the
day of perdition of ungodly men, we may justly conclude that the fire it is
reserved to, will be the Perdition of ungodly men. Thus upon our Saviors
pronouncing those dreadful words, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, the
persons concerned will immediately perceive the dire effects; for all on a
sudden they will see the Clouds from above, and the Earth from beneath casting
forth Torrents of fire upon them, which in an instant will set all the World in
a Blaze about their ears; At the sight of which all this wretched World will be
turned into a mournful Stage of Horrors, in which the miserable actors being
seized with inexpressible amazement to see themselves all on a sudden
encompassed on every side with flames, will raise a hideous Roar and outcry,
millions of burning men and women shrieking together, and their noise shall
mingle with the Archangels Trumpet, with the Thunders of the dying and groaning
Heaven, and the crack of the dissolving World that is sinking into eternal
ruins. In which miserable state of things whither can the poor Creatures fly,
or where can they hope to find a Sanctuary? If they go up to the tops of the
Mountains; there they are but more openly exposed to the dreadful lightnings of
Heaven; if they go down into the holes and caverns of the Rocks; there they
will be swallowed up in the burning furnaces of the Earth; if they descend into
the deep; there they will soon be overtaken with a storm of fire and brimstone;
and wherever they go the vengeance of God will still pursue them with its
everlasting burnings. And thus having no retreat left them, no avenue to escape
out of this burning World, here they must remain for ever surrounded with
smoke, and fire, and darkness, and wrapped in fierce and merciless flames, which
like a shirt of burning pitch will stick close to, and pierce through and
through their passive bodies, and for ever prey upon, but never consume them.

And now the Almighty Judge having seen his dread sentence executed, will arise
from his Throne, and from thence return to the Seat of the blessed in a solemn
and Glorious Triumph with all his holy myriads of Angels and Saints, who as
they follow him through the Air and ether, will with loud Hosanna's and
triumphant acclamations celebrate the praises of their Redeemer. Thus shall the
Ransomed of the Lord return with him, with Songs to the heavenly Zion, and
everlasting joy shall be upon their heads, and everlasting praises in their
mouths. For being arrived into those blissful Regions; there in those glorified
Bodies which they put on at their Resurrection, they shall live for ever in
unspeakable pleasures and delights, and be entertained not only with all that
happiness which they enjoyed in the state of their separation when they were
only blessed Spirits; but also with all the satisfactions and delights that
their glorified Bodies can require and enjoy. So that now their blessedness
shall be consummate, and all the capacities of their humane nature compounded
of body and soul shall be fulfilled with bliss, till they overflow and can
contain no more. But wherein the happiness of their glorified Bodies shall
consist, I shall not presume to inquire, the Scripture being silent concerning
it. And what the happiness of their souls shall be, has been shown at large
before, Part 1. c. 3, 4. So that as to that state of eternal life, in which our
Savior shall place his faithful servants in the conclusion of this great
Judgment, I need say no more of it in this place.

SECT. XI. Concerning the conclusion and surrender of the Kingdom of Christ.
WHen our Savior has finished that last and most glorious act of Royalty,
viz. Judging the World, and has finally condemned to everlasting fire the
irreclaimable enemies of God, and crowned all his faithful subjects with
eternal Glory and Beatitude; the Apostle tells us, He shall deliver up the
Kingdom to God even the Father, 1 Cor. 15.24. For our better understanding of
which, we are to consider that the Kingdom of Christ is twofold: First,
Essential, as he is God Essential, and does subsist in the divine Essence; by
the supereminent perfections of which he being exalted above all things, has
an essential Right of Dominion over all things; and this is Coeternal with
himself, and is as inseparable to him as his Being; this he can no more deliver
up than he can his Godhead, which without ceasing to be can never cease to be
supreme over all things. But then in the second place, there is his Mediatorial
Kingdom, which is that of which we have hitherto been treating, and this, as
has been shown before, was by solemn compact and agreement conf^r'd upon him
by the Father, upon condition that he should assume our Nature, and therein
make expiation for our sins, in consideration whereof the Father obliged
himself to grant a Covenant of Grace to the sinful World, and to constitute him
the Mediator of it; by which Mediatorial Office he is authorized to rule for
God according to the tenor of that gracious Covenant, as well as to intercede
for us; and in ruling for God according to that Covenant, he is to crown and
reward all such as return to, and persevere in their duty, with everlasting
happiness, and to render eternal vengeance to all such as obstinately persist
in their rebellion. So that when this is done (as it will be in the conclusion
of the day of Judgment) the whole business of his Mediatorial Kingdom is at an
end; then the Covenant of which he is now Mediator will be completely executed,
and consequently his Mediation will cease, as being of no farther use, and
having no farther part to act. For now God and Man being made completely one,
the Office of a Mediator ceases of its own accord; for a Mediator is not a
Mediator of one, Gal. 3.20. and therefore the two parties being perfectly
united, there is no farther use of a Mediator between them. Wherefore as our
beatifical Vision will supercede the necessity of his prophetic Office, to
teach and instruct us; as our perfection and entire fruition will supercede the
necessity of his Priestly Office to offer and intercede for us; so the security
of our possession of both will supercede the necessity of his Kingly Office to
protect and defend us; and therefore when our Affairs are once reduced to this
happy issue, his Kingly Office as well as all other parts of his Mediatorship
will for ever cease. But since this great Mystery is no where expressly
delivered in Scripture, but only in that forecited, 1 Cor. 15. I shall
endeavor to give a brief account of the whole passage, which lies in verse. 24,
25, 26, 27, 28. Then comes the end when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom
to God even the Father, when he shall put down all Rule and all Authority, and
all Power, for he must reign till he has put all Enemies under his feet; the
last Enemy that shall be destroyed is Death; for he has put all things under
his feet: but when he says all things are put under him, it is manifest that
he is excepted which did put all things under him, and when all things shall be
subdued unto him, then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him which did
put all things under him, that God may be all in all; the whole sense and
meaning of which passage, I shall cast into these Propositions:

First, That the Kingdom or Dominion here spoken of, was committed to him by
God the Father.

Secondly, That he is to possess this Kingdom and Dominion so long and no
longer, as till all things are actually subdued to him.

Thirdly, That during his possession of it, he is subject to the Father.

Fourthly, That after his delivering it up to the Father, he will be otherwise
subject to him than he is now.

Fifthly, That he being thus subjected to the Father, all Power and Dominion
shall from thenceforth be immediately exercised by the Deity.

I. That the Kingdom or Dominion here spoken of, was committed to him by God
the Father; and this is expressly affirmed, verse. 27. For he (i. e. the Father)
has put all things under his feet, which words are a quotation of Psalm. 8.
ver. 6. Thou made him to have Dominion over the works of thy hands; thou have
put all things under his feet; which words are to be understood literally of
the first Adam, but mystically of the second; as is evident not only because
it is here applied to Christ by S. Paul, but also by the Author to the Hebrews,
Heb. 2.7, 8. where he expressly tells us, that it was God the Father that
crowned Christ with Glory and Honor, and that did set him over the works of
his hands, and put all things in subjection under his feet; and accordingly our
Savior himself declares, that all Power in Heaven and Earth was given him, i.
e. by the Father, and that it was the Father that committed all judgment to
him; and the Apostle expressly tells us, that it was God that exalted him with
his own right hand to be a Prince and a Savior, Acts 5.31. From all which it
is evident that the Dominion which the Apostle here treats of, is not the
Essential Dominion of Christ, which as he is God Essential, is Coeternal with
him; but that Mediatorial Dominion which was committed to him by the voluntary
disposal of his Father, and which once he had not, and will hereafter cease to
have.

II. That he is to possess this Kingdom or Dominion so long as, and no longer
than till all things are actually subdued unto him. So verse. 24. you see the
time of his delivering up this Kingdom, is then, when he shall have put down
all Rule, and all Authority and Power, i. e. till he shall have converted or
destroyed all those Powers of the Earth that oppose themselves against him; for
so verse. 25, 26. For he must reign till he has put all Enemies under his feet,
the last Enemy that shall be destroyed is Death; which plainly implies, that
when he has conquered all Enemies, and destroyed Death, which is the last
Enemy, by giving a glorious Resurrection to his faithful Subjects, then, and
not till then his Mediatorial Reign is to conclude: For so, Psalm. 110.1. to
which the Apostle here refers; the Psalmist brings in Jehovah the Father, thus
bespeaking Jehovah the Son, The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right
hand until I make thine Enemies thy footstool; now to sit at the Right Hand of
God, when ever it is applied to our Savior, does in Scripture always denote his
possessing and exercising this his Mediatorial Kingdom; so that the meaning of
the Psalmist is this; the Father has Commissioned his Son to continue the
exercise of his Mediatorial Dominion, till such time as either by the dint of
his Almighty Vengeance he has trampled all his Enemies under foot, or by the
power of his Grace reduced them voluntarily to prostrate themselves before him:
and indeed, the end for which this Kingdom of our Savior was erected was to
subdue the Rebellious World to God, and either to captivate men into a free
submission to h^s Heavenly Will, which is its first intention; or if they will
not yield, to make them the Triumph of his everlasting vengeance; which end at
the day of Judgment will be fully accomplished; for then the fate of all the
rational World will be fixed and determined; then the faithful Subjects will be
crowned, and the incorrigible Rebels condemned and executed; and so, one way or
the other all things will be subdued unto him. So that from henceforth the end
and reason of this his Mediatorial Dominion will cease, and when the end of it
cease, he who never does any thing in vain, will immediately deliver it up
into those hands from whence he received it. For when he shall have put down
all Rule, and all Authority and Power, i. e. conquered and subdued all that
resisted and opposed him, then comes the end when he shall have delivered up
the Kingdom to God even the Father.

III. That during his possession of this Kingdom, he is subject to the Father.
So Ver. 27. But when he says all things are put under him, it is manifest that
he (i. e. the Father) is excepted which did put all things under him. As if he
should say; Do not mistake me, for when I say all things are put under him, my
meaning is, all things except God the Father, for it was he that did put all
things under him; and it is manifest that he who gave him this superiority over
all things, must himself be superior to him; and indeed, considering Christ as
Mediatorial King, he is no more than his Fathers Viceroy, and does only act by
deputation from him, and rule and Govern for him; and hence the Father styles
him his King, Psalm. 2.6. Yet have I set my King upon my holy Hill of Zion. So
that now he is subject to the Father in the capacity of a Vice-King to a
supreme Sovereign, and whatsoever he does in this capacity he does in his
Fathers Name and by his Authority; for he Mediates as for men with God, in
doing which he is our Advocate; so for God with men, in doing which he is our
King. Gods part is to Govern us, and our part is to sue to him for favor and
protection, and both these parts our Savior acts as Mediator between God and
us: He acts our part for us in being Advocate, and Gods part for him in being
King. So that in that Rule and Government which he now exercises over us, he is
only the supreme Minister of his Fathers Power and Dominion, and as the Father
reigns by his Ministry, so he reigns by the Fathers Authority. But tho now
while his Mediatorial Kingdom does continue, he is subject to the Father in the
Admistration of it, yet from this passage of S. Paul it is evident

IV. That when he has delivered it up to the Father, he will be otherwise
subject to him than he is now; for so ver. 28. and when all things shall be
subdued unto him, that is, actually, and as they will be at the day of
Judgment, when the good are Crowned, and the wicked consigned to that fearful
Execution, Then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that did put all
things under him, which necessarily implies that then he should enter into a
different state of subjection to the Father, from that wherein he was before.
Why Then shall the Son himself be subject to him? Was he not subject to him
before? Yes, doubtless he was, and therefore either this then must be
impertinent, or then he shall be so subject to him as he was not before; before
he was subject to him as he was his Mediatorial King or Viceroy, as he reigned
under him and by his Authority, but then he is to be subject to him after a
different manner. For the explication of which it is to be considered, that now
the Son considered as Mediator, reigns under God in the right of what he did
and suffered in his human Nature Hypostatically united to his Godhead; for it
was because he humbled himself and became obedient to the death, even the Death
of the Cross that God highly exalted him, Phil. 2.8.9. Now 'twas as he was Man,
that he became obedient to death, and 'twas in the right of that obedience that
God exalted him to his Mediatorial Kingdom; so that now as Mediator he not only
reigns in his human Nature, but in right of the passion of his human Nature;
his Mediatorial Kingdom is the purchase of his Blood, by which he both obtained
the new Covenant for us, and Regal Power to execute it upon us. When therefore
he has executed it to the full (as we are sure he will do at the day of
Judgment) this Regal Power of his which he purchased with his Blood, will
cease, as having fully accomplished that for which it was given and intended.
And now he being to Reign no longer in right of the sufferings of his human
Nature, his human Nature will be subject to the Father in a more different
manner than it was before: Before it was subject to him as Authorized in
consideration of its passion to reign and govern under him, but then having
delivered up its Reign and Government, it will be subject to him in a more
private capacity, as the Presidents of the Roman Empire were subject to Caesar
while they governed under him, but when they rendered back their Character,
they became his Subjects in a more private station. Not that the humanity of
Christ shall be any way depressed, or degraded by his delivering up his
Mediatorial Kingdom; but as an Ambassador after he is discharged of the burden
of his Embassy does still retain the honor and dignity of it, so the Human
Nature of Christ after he has surrendered up its Mediatorial Dominion, shall
still remain as highly exalted in Honor, Dignity, and Beatitude as ever; and
Angels and Saints shall for ever render to it the same religious respect and
veneration as they did before he surrendered it; for it shall still remain
Hypostatically united to his Godhead, and so God shall for ever reign in it,
tho it shall not for ever reign with God: so that it being still the Temple of
the Deity, and all the glorious achievements it made during its Humiliation
and Mediatorial Reign, reflecting still the same honor and praise and glory
upon it, it will to eternity be as great and glorious throughout all the
Heavenly World as ever it was in the full splendour of its Kingdom; so that in
this respect what the ancient Fathers added to the Nicene Creed is most true,
his Kingdom shall have no end, because, without possessing it, he shall for
ever enjoy the Glory and Honor and Beatitude of it.

5. And lastly, That the Son being thus subjected to the Father, all Power and
Dominion shall from thenceforth be immediately exercised by the Deity, that is
to say, by God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost; for so ver. 18.
Then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that did put all things
under him, that God may be all in all. Where the variation of the Person is
very observable, for it is not said, that the Son shall be subject to him that
did put all things under him ( i. e. the Father) that he may be all in all, but
that God may be all in all, that is, the Triune Godhead subsisting in three
Persons, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for had he meant the Father only, he
ought according to the common rules of speech to have said he, or the Father,
of whom he had been before speaking, instead of God, nor can it be reasonably
supposed that after the resignation of the Mediatorial Kingdom the Father only
shall act and reign, and the Son and Holy Ghost sit still for ever and do
nothing, but the meaning is, that this Mediatorial Kingdom ceasing, in which
the Son as Man as well as God now reigns, there shall from thenceforth be no
other Kingdom or Dominion exercised in that Celestial State, but what is
essential to the Godhead, in which the Son and Holy Ghost subsisting together
with the Father shall for ever reign together with him: for this I take to be
the meaning of that phrase, that God may be all in all, that is, that he may
rule and govern all things immediately by himself, that his immediate Will may
reign alone in all, and be the proximate guide of all that blessed world, that
there may be no mediate or Mediatorial Governor between him and us to exact
our obedience, and convey to us his favors and rewards, but that we may render
all our duty immediately to him, and derive all our happiness immediately from
him; so that as now Christ the Theantropos or God-man is all in all, Col. 3.11.
because the Father does all things, and governs all things by him, having given
him all power in heaven and earth; so when this Economy ceases, God alone, or
the Triune Godhead shall be all in all, because he shall do all things, and
govern all things by himself immediately. Thus when the Son of Man is subjected
to him that did put all things under him, that one divine Essence whence all
things did proceed, and in which the Father, Son and Holy Ghost subsist, shall
from thenceforth resume all Rule and Dominion to it self, and only the Son of
God together with the Father and the Holy Ghost shall reign. But yet in this
purely divine Government there is no doubt but those divine persons will still
continue to act in subordination to each other, according to that natural
subordination in which they are placed by their personal properties. For the
Godhead being communicated from the Father to the Son, the Father in the order
of nature must necessarily be Prior to the Son, and the same Godhead being
communicated to the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son, both Father and Son
must also in order of nature be Prior to the Holy Ghost. So that between these
Sacred Three there is an internal necessary subordination that can never be
altered or inverted; and therefore there is no doubt but that as they will
always be subordinate, so they will always act subordinately. The Father as the
first, the Begetter and the Fountain of Divinity will be always first and
supreme in the divine Monarchy; the Son, as begotten by him, will still reign
in subordination to him, and the Holy Ghost, as proceeding from both, will
continue to reign in subordination to both. Thus to everlasting Ages only the
Trinity in Unity shall reign, and by its own immediate Will and Influence rule
and bless all that Heavenly World over which it spreads its Almighty Wings, and
so it shall be all in all.

SECT. XII. Of the Reason and Wisdom of this Method of Gods Governing sinful
Men by his own Eternal Son in our Natures.
THough we are not able either by our natural Reason or Revelation to fathom
the depth of the Divine Wisdom, or to trace out all the reasons of its Methods
and Conduct, yet upon diligent inquiry we can plainly discern the Tracts of an
admirable Wisdom in all the stated Methods of Providence; and though we cannot
say that this or that is the main or only reason why God does so or so, (for
infinite wisdom may have infinitely greater and infinitely more reasons of its
actions than our short-sighted Reason can at present discover) yet by comparing
one action of his with another, and diligently observing the drift and tendency
of them all, how they concur to one common end, and subserve each other to
promote and accomplish it, we cannot avoid discovering reason enough in them to
convince and satisfy us that they all proceed from a most wise and intelligent
Agent, and this more especially in the admirable Economy of the Mediation,
viz. the eternal Son of God's assuming our Nature, and therein becoming our
Prophet, Priest, and King: for what ^easons there are why he should assume our
nature therein to be our Prophet and our Priest has been shown before. And now
we shall proceed so far as our short Inquiries will reach to show what
admirable reason there is why he should be our King also, to rule and govern us
in the same assumed nature wherein he is our Prophet and our Priest; of which
according to the best ^ight that Revelation affords us there are these five
Reasons assignable.

First, That he might govern us in a way more accommodated to this degenerate
state of our Natures.

Secondly, That he might the more effectually cure and prevent the spreading
contagion of Idolatry.

Thirdly, That he might the more powerfully encourage our obedience.

Fourthly, That he might oblige us to himself with a stronger tie of Gratitude
and Ingenuity.

Fifthly, That he might give us the more ample assurance of our future Reward.

I. God governs us by his own eternal Son in our natures the better to
accommodate his Government to this our degenerate state, which renders us
extremely unfit to be governed immediately by God. It is true, whilst man
continued in his Primitive Innocence and Perfection, he was in a condition fit
to converse with God face to face, and to live under his immediate Dominion,
for then his Sense being under the conduct of his Reason, and all his brutal
affections entirely subjected to the government and directions of his superior
faculties, he was as much ruled and influenced by the objects of his Reason, as
he is now by those of his Sense, and was as powerfully moved and affected by
what he only knew and believed, as he is now by what he sees and feels; so that
then God, that great invisible Spirit, who is removed from all the perceptions
of bodily sense, and is only perceivable by our Reason and Faith, did as
powerfully impress man's hopes and fears, and all the other principles of action
in him as he could have done had he appeared as amiable and dreadful to the
man's sight and feeling as he then did to his faith and reason. In this state
and condition therefore man was duly qualified to be governed immediately by
God, to receive his impressions, and to be moved and acted by the overruling
influence of his immense perfections. But when once he had degenerated from
this pure and blessed State of his nature, and had thrown off the Government of
his reason, and subjected himself to the tyrannick sway of his brutal
appetites, he thereby unqualified himself to live under Gods immediate
Dominion. For now he being governed by his sensual appetites, and they by the
sensual Objects that surround him, scarce any thing else can strike upon his
hopes and fears, but what is carnal and sensual, or if any thing else does, to
be sure some carnal object immediately interposes and breaks the stroke, and
renders it faint and ineffectual; so that now God who is solely the object of
our faith and reason, can scarce be admitted to speak with our hopes and fears,
by which we are made to be governed, or if he be, his soft still voice is
immediately drowned in the perpetual clamor which these sensitive goods and
evils raise about us. Wherefore having thus unqualified our selves by our
Apostasy from the primitive state of our nature to live under the immediate
Wing and Government of God, and he being resolved in tender commiseration to
us, not to abandon us for ever, did in his infinite wisdom project a new Method
of governing us more accommodated to this our degenerate state, viz. by uniting
himself to sensible matter, and therein addressing to our bodily senses in
audible voices, visible appearances, and finally in our own form and nature,
which of all other sensible things we are most apt to be affected with, to
love, and honor, and reverence, and obey. For so immediately after his Fall
God appeared to Adam, probably in a glorious human form, and spoke to him in an
audible voice, and afterward he did the same to the Patriarchs, and to the
whole Nation of the Jews from Mount Sinai, among whom he also dwelt in a
visible glory; by which means he acquired to himself the same advantage of
governing those sensual men that sensible objects had, which by striking on
their bodily sense did more powerfully insinuate themselves into their Wills
and Affections. But all these sensible appearances of God were only as so many
preludia to his assuming our nature into personal union with his Godhead, and
therein exhibiting himself familiarly to the bodily senses of mankind, which
tho he now ceases to do, as being exalted far above our sight on the right hand
of God the Father, there to reign till the consummation of all things, yet
seeing we believe he is there visible in himself, clothed in a most glorious
human form, we can by imagination supply the want of our sight of him, and
reach him by our inward sense, tho we cannot come at him by our outward; and
whereas were he a mere Spirit, we could have no imagination of him, because
imaginations are nothing but the Images of sensible things, we can now by the
strength of our Imagination fetch him down from the Heavens when we please, and
set him before our minds in all that venerable Majesty wherein he sits at the
right hand of his Father. So that tho he be never present to our outward sense,
yet, which is almost equivalent, when ever we have occasion to converse with
him, we can make him present to our inward, viz. our fancy and imagination;
into this spacious Gallery of the Pictures of sensible things our mind can walk
when it pleases, and there behold him in Effigy, tho it cannot see him face to
face; and considering how much we are governed in this degenerate state of our
nature by fancy and imagination, as well as by sight and feeling, it is
doubtless a most advantageous circumstance of Gods Government of the World,
that he governs us by one whom we can fancy and imagine, when we cannot see or
feel him. There are a great many men that never saw the King, who yet are
overawed by the imagination they have of his Majesty and greatness, whereas
were not the King a man, but a pure invisible Spirit, they could form no
imagination of him, the want of which would very much abate, if not utterly
extinguish, their aw and reverence of his Person.

Considering therefore how much we are governed by our sense in this state of
our Apostasy, it was doubtless a wonderful wise contrivance of God, who is a
pure Spirit, to assume to himself some sensible matter, that therein by
presenting himself to our outward or inward sense, he might strike the deeper
aw on us, and thereby the more effectually rule and govern us. But of all
sensible matter none could be so proper to this purpose as a human form, in
which we are inured and accustomed to be governed, and of which, as was hinted
before, we have of all sensible things the greatest love and veneration, during
this our Degeneracy; therefore by which we are so unqualified to be governed by
God immediately, God the Father has most wisely contrived to govern us by
God-man, i. e. by his own eternal Son Hypostatically united to our natures. But
when once mankind is recovered out of this lapsed condition, when our sense is
perfectly subdued to our reason, and all our faculties are reduced into their
Primitive Order,, then we shall return under Gods immediate Dominion, for then
God-man shall deliver up the Kingdom, and God shall be all in all.

II. God now governs us by his own eternal Son in our natures, to cure and
prevent the spreading contagion of Idolatry. There is no one Vice to which our
corrupt nature is more propense, and of which it has been more universally
tardy, than that of Idolatry; for as for other Vices they have their peculiar
Provinces, and such a Vice is more predominant in such a Clime and Temperament
of Air: In one Nation Pride reigns, in another Intemperance, in another
Treachery, and in a fourth Malice and Revenge; as for Idolatry it is an
universal Monarch, to whose Empire all the World has been enslaved and
subjected, and notwithstanding all the care which God has taken to prevent it,
it has spread like the Plague, till it became the Epidemical Disease of human
Nature. Now to be sure such an universal effect must necessarily be owing to
some universal cause; and what other can that be than the universal degeneracy
of human Nature from its primitive life of Reason into a life of Sense? For
while Man was under the Government of his Reason, he was as much influenced by
dry arguments as he is now by his Sense, and the full reason he had to believe
that there is an invisible divine Being presiding over all things, did as
vigorously excite him to adore and worship him as the sight of him could have
done, had he appeared to his bodily eyes in a Glory proportionable to the
immense perfections of his Nature. But when once his sense had usurped the
Throne of his reason, and enslaved him to its Empire, the case was quite
altered, now Reason and Argument have very little influence on him unless it be
backed with some impressions on his sense, and his predominant affections are
those that are raised by the strokes of sensible objects upon the sensories of
his Sight, and Taste, and Feeling, which the divine substance and perfections
can never touch, they being purely spiritual; by which means that communication
and intercourse which was between God and man, whilst man was governed by
reason, is mightily disturbed and interrupted, tho it be not altogether stopped
and intercepted; for still our reason (which was not extinguished by the
degeneracy of our natures) suggests to us that there is a God, and inspires us
with an awful sense of his divine perfections, which still maintains in us
Religious Inclinations and Affections, whereby we are importuned and solicited
to adore and worship; but we being under the Government of Sense, are thereby
naturally inclined either to look upon God who is in himself a pure invisible
Spirit under the notion of a sensible Being, and as such to worship him, (for
so anciently some adored the Sun for God, others the universal material Nature,
others such particular parts of it) and in this consists that gross Idolatry of
worshipping false Gods, or at least to blend our conceptions of him with
corporeal Phantasms; and then to express those Phantasms in outward visible
Images, by them to excite and direct our Worship to him (for so in most Nations
the supreme Numen was heretofore adored in Statues and Images of several shapes
and figures copied from the several Images by which they represented him to
themselves in their own vain and roving imaginations) and herein consists that
more refined Idolatry of worshipping the true God in a false manner. Thus the
general cause of all Idolatry is nothing but the general Apostasy of human
nature from the life of reason to the life of sense, by which we are naturally
inclined either to transform God into a gross and sensible nature, or at least
to assist our selves in conceiving of, and adoring and worshipping him by
sensible and visible Objects. To prevent which God has been graciously pleased
to assume some material substance, and therein from time to time to exhibit to
men's eyes a visible presence of himself, which in Scripture is frequently
called the Glory of the Lord, and by the ancient Jews the Shechinah or
habitation of God, and consisted of a shining luminous matter, which exhibited
a glorious luster of flame or light set off with thick and solemn clouds;
whence it is probable he is said to cover himself with light as with a garment,
Psalm. 104.2. and in this glorious appearance he conducted Israel through the
Red Sea and Wilderness, came down upon Mount Sinai, and was seen by Moses and
the Elders of Israel, and from thence removed into the Tabernacle, where he
fixed his abode between the Cherubins, and from whence he frequently displayed
himself before the whole Congregation in the beams of that visible Glory which
he there assumed, as the Symbol of his special presence; and by thus doing he
took a most wise and effectual course not only to raise and excite their
devotion, but also to restrain and confine it within its proper bounds and
limits; for while men are under the government of sense, there is nothing has
that prevalence with them to excite their affections, and fix their thoughts as
material Phantasms; so that God by exhibiting to them a visible presence of
himself, and thereby impressing their imaginations with a material Phantasm of
his presence and Glory, did at once both spur their affections, and bridle
their fancies from roving into wild similitudes of him, and thereby take an
effectual course to prevent the worshipping him by those outward Images which
they exemplified from the similitudes which they framed of him in their own
fancies, and having this visible glory to entertain their fancies, they had the
less temptation from their sense to hunt after sensible similitudes and
representations of him, that outward Shechinah which they sometimes saw, being
a sufficient help to raise up their grovelling minds and carnal affections to
the contemplation and worship of his invisible glory; and that that outward
visible glory in which he appeared to them was intended for this purpose seems
plainly implied in Deuteronomy. 4.12. where Moses tells them, that when God spoke to
them out of the midst of the fire they heard the voice of the words, but saw no
similitude; and so again, ver. 15. from whence he infers, Take ye therefore
good heed unto your selves left ye corrupt your selves, and make ye a graven
Image, the similitude of any figure, the likeness of Male or Female, etc. ver.
16.17. where by their seeing no similitude is not meant that they saw nothing;
for God himself had promised Moses that the third day he would come down in the
sight of all the people on Mount Sinai, Exodus 19.11. and therefore in all
probability they saw the fire or visible glory in which he descended, for it is
expressly said they saw it afterward, Exodus 24.17. but this fire shining
without any determinate form or shape, they might very well be said to see no
similitude, for by similitude it is evident he means a determinate shape, ver.
16. where he bids them beware of making the similitude of any figure, so that
the People saw God only in an unfigured flame, or visible glory that was cast
into no determinate shape, (though within that it is probable, as was shown
before, God appeared to Moses and the seventy Elders in a glorious humane
shape.) And this it seems God deemed a sufficient help to enable them to fix
their thoughts on, and determine their worship to himself; and therefore he
strictly charges them to content themselves with this, and not let their
fancies rove, as they were too prone to do, after formed similitudes and Images
of him, lest those Images should create in their minds false and opprobrious
notions of him, and cause them to imagine the immense Godhead as the Heathen
did, to be like unto Gold or Silver, or Stone graven by Art and man's device,
Acts 17.29. Thus men being degenerated into a life of sense, and thereby
rendered extremely propence to Idolatry, to worship God by Images, and
thereupon to form blasphemous notions of him, as if he were such a one in
himself as those Images represented him, God was pleased to exhibit to them a
sensible presence of himself, that thereby he might the more effectually excite
their awe and reverence, and at the same time restrain their imaginations from
debauching their minds with unbecoming similitudes of his infinite Being and
Perfections.

And for the same reason that God under the Old Law appeared to the Jews in a
visible glory, he afterward appeared to this lower World, and does still
continue to appear to the upper, personally united to a humane body and soul;
for so S. John represents Christ's assuming of humane nature (who before he
assumed it, was that God who appeared to the Jews from their Tabernacle in that
Shechinah of visible Glory) to be only a removing out of one Tabernacle into
another, out of the Tabernacle of the Law into the Tabernacle of humane nature,
John 1.14. The word was made flesh and dwelt among us, and we beheld his Glory,
the Glory as of the only begotten of the Father full of Grace and truth, where
instead of he dwelt among us, in the Greek it is (...), i. e. he Tabernacled,
or dwelt as in the Tabernacle among us, he removed his abode out of the old
Tabernacle, and took a new Habitation in humane nature: for that this is the
Apostles meaning is evident from what follows, and we beheld his Glory, which
plainly refers to that Glorious Light or flaming substance, called the Glory of
the Lord, in which of old he was wont to display himself before the
Congregation of Israel from between the Cherubins; and in this very Glory S.
John says he beheld him, viz. at his Baptism and Transfiguration, at both which
times he was seen by them shining in the very same Glory, wherein of old he was
wont to shine out of the Old Tabernacle; and therefore it is added, that this
Glory wherein S. John beheld him was the Glory as of the only begotten of the
Father, i. e. it was the very same Glory with that wherein the only begotten
was heretofore wont to display himself from the Tabernacle of Moses; so that
the meaning of the words seems at least to be this, He dwelt among us in our
nature just as heretofore he did in the Mosaic Tabernacle, and in this
Tabernacle of our Nature we Twice beheld him shining forth with the same Glory
wherein he was wont to shine out of that Old Tabernacle from between the
Cherubins. Since therefore Christ dwelt in our nature in the same manner, and
therein appeared in the same visible Glory, that he formerly did in the Old
Tabernacle, there is no doubt but he did it for the same ends and purposes; and
therefore since one of the ends of his dwelling in that Tabernacle was to
restrain men from running into Idolatry, there is no doubt but among others he
intended this end also in assuming our natures, than which there can be no
visible appearance in nature more proper to excite our sluggish and to
determine our roving devotions upon him; for since in this life of sense which
we now lead, we need a sensible presence of God to raise up our minds and
affections to him, in what presence could he have appeared to us more proper
for this end than that of our own nature? a presence which is not confused like
that of the Old Tabernacle, which was only a mixture of shapeless lights and
shadows; but distinct and determinate and of our own form and shape, which of
all others is most familiar to and most beloved and reverenced by us, and
consequently of all others is most familiar to and most beloved and reverenced
by us, and consequently of all others is most apt to encourage our prayers, and
inflame our zeal, and raise our admiration. For in what sensible appearance
could God have more powerfully affected our sense, than in that which we are
most inclined to love, most prone to trust to, and most accustomed to reverence
and obey; and than that in which alone we discern the Image of God, and the
reflections of those divine Attributes of Wisdom and Goodness, and Truth and
Justice, for which we reverence and adore him? There being therefore no visible
substance in which God could more advantageously exhibit himself to us in order
to the exciting our worship to him, and determining it upon him than that of a
humane form, he thought meet to assume our natures into a personal union with
his Divinity, and therein to rule and govern us. So that now the Humanity of
our Savior is the Tabernacle and Shechinah of God, wherein the fullness of the
Godhead dwells bodily, and these two natures united in Person and Glory are
the immediate object of our worship; wherefore as the ancient Jews fell upon
their faces and worshipped when they beheld the Shechinah or glory of the Lord,
their imagination being thereby assisted and their affections excited, Levit.
9.24. So when we by our internal sense or imagination look up to the Glorified
Humanity of our Savior in Heaven, it is our duty to raise up our affections to
Heaven by that sensible Shechinah of God, and thereupon to fall down and
worship. But as the Jews when they fell down before their Shechinah, did not
worship the visible light or glory separately from God, but as it was united to
and assumed into conjunction with him, so neither ought we to worship our
Shechinah, viz. the humanity of our Savior separately from his Divinity, but
in Union and Conjunction with it; and in short, as it was utterly unlawful for
the Jews to worship God in any other Shechinah or sensible appearance either
unshapen or shaped than in that Glorious one which he himself vouchsafed to
them, that being sufficient to affect their sense, and thereby to raise up
their minds and affections to him; so is it utterly unlawful for us Christians
to worship God in any other Shechinah, Image, similitude or visible appearance,
than that of the glorified humanity of our Savior, that being sufficient to
assist our imaginations and elevate our hearts and devotions to him. For though
we cannot behold his glorified Humanity with our bodily Eyes now he is removed
into Heaven, yet so neither did the Jews the Glory of the Lord (at least but
very rarely) after the Ark whereupon it sat, was removed into the Holy of
Holies, which was a figure of Heaven, yet as they being assured it was there,
could easily view it in their imaginations, and thereby assist their devotion;
so we being assured from Scripture that Christ's humanity is in Heaven, can look
up thither in our imagination, and by beholding its glory there, lift up our
heavy minds and affections to the eternal Divinity that inhabits it; so that if
we Christians make any other Shechinah or Image to worship God in, besides his
own humanity, which he himself made, and wherein he now dwells above in the
Heavens, we are of all false worshippers the most inexcusable, because by
assuming our humanity God has vouchsafed to us such an Image and Shechinah of
himself as is of all others the most proper and effectual to excite and
determine our Devotions.

III. God has chosen to Govern us by his own eternal Son in our natures, that
he might thereby the more powerfully encourage us to obedience, for now we have
all the assurance in the World that the great design of his Government is to do
us good, and to advance our happiness, and that under his blessed Empire we
shall be sure to enjoy all the graces and favors that can be wisely indulged
on his part, or modestly expected on ours. Had he Governed us immediately by
himself, we could not have been so secure of our interest in him, as we have
reason to be of our interest in his Son hypostatically united to our nature,
because the divine Nature considered purely as such, is infinitely distant from
ours and has no other relation to it than as it is the common cause of all
things; and being so distant in nature from us, it would have been hard for us
to imagine how he could be touched with the same tender and compassionate
regard for us as he would be, if he were nearer allied to us, especially when
we reflected upon our own demerit, and considered that by our sins we had set
our selves at a wider distance from him than we were by our natures; this
together with that anxiety which naturally arises in guilty minds, could not
but have rendered us very suspicious of Gods intentions toward us, had he
governed us immediately by himself; but now that he governs us by his own Son
clothed in our own nature, at his hands we may with full confidence expect a
most gracious and merciful treatment. For now we are assured we have a close
and most intimate interest in him by reason of his kindred and Alliance to us
in the same common nature, which makes him every man's another self under
different accidents and circumstances; and his nature being perfectly happy and
perfectly pure from all irregular passions and appetites, cannot but be
affected with a most tender regard to all the individuals of its own kind,
because being completely happy himself he can have nothing farther to desire
for himself, but that his kindred by nature, who are all his own substance
dilated and multiplied, may be happy too; and being entirely good, he can have
nothing of that sordid selfishness in him which does too often contract and
narrow our benevolence, and cause us like Serpents to infold our selves within
our selves, and to turn out our stings to all the World besides: Upon both
these accounts therefore as he is a perfectly happy and perfectly good man, he
cannot but bear a hearty and universal good will to mankind, and that he does
so, he has given us too many dear experiments to make the least doubt of it;
for while he was among us, he all along preferred our interest before his own,
he made himself poor to enrich us, exposed himself to contempt to raise us to
glory, took upon him our guilt to release us from punishment, and willingly
underwent a most miserable death that we might live happily for ever. In all
which he gave us the most Glorious demonstrations how infinitely dear the
humane nature, of which he participated, was to him in all those numberless
individuals into which it has been multiplied. The consideration of which is
exceedingly pregnant with encouragement to obedience: For seeing God governs us
by one who is as well our Brother by nature, as our King by Office, seeing he
carries our kind in his own person, and is flesh of our flesh and bone of our
bone, we may certainly depend upon it, that he will be as kind and as gracious
to us as his Government and our happiness, which is involved in it, will permit
him; that so long as we are sincere to him he will compassionate our weakness,
and that when we have gone astray from him he will graciously receive us upon
our humble submissions, that he will not load us beyond our strength, nor
punish us beyond our demerit, but that he will readily assist us in all our
needs and tenderly pity us in all our pitiable cases, and kindly accept of our
honest endeavors and reward them beyond all our hopes and expectations; in
short, that nothing shall be able to separate us from his favor, but only our
own obstinacy and wilful Rebellion, and that though in this case he will be
angry with us, yet he will wait to be gracious again in expectation of our
Repentance, and not hastily abandon us to everlasting ruin till we have sinned
our selves past all hope of recovery. For as to all these things the humane
nature in him is our constant Advocate, which being our nature as well as his,
makes our case its own, and is as much concerned for us as it could reasonably
be for it self,, if it were in our circumstances; than which what higher
encouragement to Loyalty and obedience can there be given to ingenuous minds,
to consider that he who reigns above in the Heavens and has the disposal of my
fate is my kinsman by nature, who by assuming my substance has assumed my
interest, so that whatsoever he does for me he does it for himself, that is,
for his own humane nature that is in me, and that therefore it is impossible but
he must continue kind to me whilst I continue dutiful to him, seeing that
without great provocation he can never be unkind sure to his own nature. For
this reason therefore God governs us by his Son in our own nature, that so by
this his near kindred to us he might the better assure our diffident mind of a
most gracious and merciful treatment at his hands, and thereby excite us to a
free and Cheerful obedience to him.

IV. God Governs us by his own eternal Son in our natures, that so he might the
more powerfully excite our gratitude and ingenuity, and thereby oblige us to
render him a more free and generous obedience, which is the obedience he
delights in, and that alone which answers the end of his Government, for that
which he aims at in governing us, is to subdue the Rebellion of our natures
against the eternal Laws of right reason, that thereby he may render us more
and more Rational, and consequently more and more prepared to participate of
the happiness of a rational nature, which is never to be effected by a forced
and constrained obedience; for so long as our obedience is forced, our Wills
and Affections are unsubdued, and all our outward submissions are only the
disguise of a treacherous and rebellious nature; we would still fly out into
acts of Rebellion, but we dare not; our inclinations are as stiff and obstinate
as ever, and the Restraint which our fear lays upon them is so far from
conquering them, that it only heightens and inrages them. Till therefore our
obedience becomes generous and free, and does proceed from a willing mind, from
a mind that is influenced by ingenuous motives, it will signify little or
nothing to the amendment of our nature, which notwithstanding its beautiful
rine and outside, will still remain corrupt and rotten at the core. Now to
render us freely and willingly obedient, what more effectual method could God
have taken than this of governing us by his own Son in our nature? For in this
our nature he was our Priest; and as I showed before, it was infinitely
reasonable he should be so; and by what more endearing motive can we be obliged
to obey him than this that now he is in Heaven, he rules and governs us in that
very nature which he sacrificed for us, when he was upon earth; and that it is
in that Individual humanity which as our Priest he offered up for us on the
Cross, that he now reigns over us at the Right hand of God; so that he who is
now our King was once our Sacrifice, and that not by constraint, but by his own
free offer and consent? For to redeem the lives of our souls which by a
thousand guilts were forfeited to the vengeance of God, he freely chose to
assume our nature and therein to undergo our punishment, that so we might
escape and be happy for ever; and being governed, as we are, by a King that
died for us, that willingly died a woeful shameful death to ransom our lives
from death eternal, what Monsters of ingratitude must we be, if we still
persist in our Rebellions against him! When I consider that he, who exacts my
obedience, has spent his own heart-blood for me, that he who requires me to
sacrifice my lusts to him, did cheerfully sacrifice his own life for me, how
can I grudg to comply with his demands without blushing and confusion! O
ungrateful! had he been as backward to die for thee, as thou art to submit to
him, thou had been a wretch, a miserable desperate wretch for ever. With what
face then can thou pretend to any thing that is modest or ingenuous, tender
or apprehensive in humane nature, that think it much to render him those
duties which he demands of thee, and which he demands for no other reason, but
because they are necessary to thy happiness, when thou know he never thought
it much to pour out his Soul for thee in the bitterest Agonies and Torments
that ever humane nature endured? If therefore it be possible to work up our
degenerate natures into a free and cheerful obedience to God, one would think
this consideration should do it, that he whom God has constituted our King to
demand our obedience, demands it in our own nature, which he assumed that he
might die for us, and thereby release us from that dreadful obligation we were
under to have died for ever. So that now while his Authority bespeaks our Awe
and Reverence, his blood bespeaks our gratitude and ingenuity, and that in such
Language, and with such powerful Rhetoric and persuasion as is impossible for
us to resist, unless we are resolved to outvy the Devils themselves in
ingratitude, who though they have been audacious enough to outface the
Authority of their Maker, were never so much Devils yet as to turn a deaf Ear
to the vocal blood and wounds of a Redeemer.

V. And lastly, God governs us by his own eternal Son in our own natures, that
thereby he may give us the more ample assurance of our future Reward. Had he
continued to govern us by himself immediately, we had wanted one of the most
encouraging instances of his immense bounty in rewarding obedience that ever
was given to the World, and that is his advancement of our Savior to that
Mediatorial Royalty which he now exercises at the right hand of the Majesty on
high; for had our Savior been God only, he had been incapable of Reward, his
happiness as such, being so immense as that it can admit of no addition; but
being Man as well as God, he is thereby capacitated for all that vast reward
which the possession of his Mediatorial Kingdom, together with an everlasting
Heaven includes; and all this reward is the product of that perfect and
profound obedience which he rendered to his Father whilst he was in this World.
So that now in him by whom God has promised to reward our obedience, we have
an illustrious instance of Gods liberality in rewarding Obedience; by his happy
fate we may be fully assured that we shall not serve God for naught, but that
the reward of our obedience shall ten thousand-fold exceed the labor and
difficulty of it, for he is a man as well as we, though he be hypostatically
united to God, and this man for some few years faithful service upon Earth, for
revealing Gods Will to men, and exhibiting a perfect example of obedience to
it, for exposing himself to some temporal Calamities; and finally for offering
up himself a spotless Victim for the sins of the World, is now advanced to the
utmost height of bliss and glory that it is possible for a Creature to arrive
to; he is set far above all principality and power; he is served and Adored, as
the only Potentate under God the Father throughout all the Heavenly World; he
is worshipped and Celebrated by Cherubin and Seraphin, by Archangels and Angels,
he is extolled in the Songs of the Patriarchs and Prophets, the Apostles and
Evangelists, the Confessors and Martyrs; and his Name is resounded with
everlasting praises and thanksgivings throughout all the vast Choire of the
spirits of just men made perfect; and in a word, he has all Power given him
both in Heaven and Earth, and to his all-commanding Will the whole Creation is
subjected. In this ever blessed King therefore by whom God now rules us, we
have for the assurance of our hope of a future reward, the most stupendous
instance of it that ever was given to the World. And indeed, since the great
end of Christ's Mediation was to reduce men to their duty by giving them a sure
and certain hope of the remission of their sins at present, and of a glorious
reward hereafter, it was highly condecent that it self should be an Example of
its own design, and that the glorious part of it should be made the reward of
the more painful and difficult, that so having in the Mediation it self a
signal instance of Gods immence liberality in rewarding obedience, we might
thereupon the more confidently expect that glorious recompense of Reward which
God has promised to those that obey him, and be thereby the more vigorously
excited to our duty. And hence our Savior proposes himself to us as an
instance of the reward of obedience, To him that overcomes will I grant to sit
with me on my Throne, even as I have overcome and am sat down with my Father on
his Throne: As much as if he should have said, that upon your overcoming the
difficulties of your duty, you shall receive a most glorious reward, you need
not at all doubt, having so illustrious an Example of it in my self, who having
conquered the difficult parts of my Mediation, which was to teach you as a
Prophet, and to expiate for you as a Priest, am now crowned with the reward of
transacting the glorious part of it, i. e. sitting with my Father on his
Throne, and there reigning with him in unspeakable Glory and Beatitude, and
accordingly the Apostle bids us Look unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our
faith, who for the joy that was set before him endured the Cross, despised the
shame, and is sat down on the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty on high,
Heb. 12.2.

SECT XIII. That Jesus Christ is this Mediator, of whom we have been treating.
HAving in the foregoing Sections explained at large the nature and Offices of
the Mediator between God and men, all that now remains is to prove, that Jesus
Christ, the Author of our Religion, is the Person whom God has ordained and
constituted this Mediator between him and us. And that he is so, he himself
openly averred whilst he was upon Earth, and afterward proclaimed it to the
World by the Mouth of his Apostles; but this singly by it self is no argument
at all of the truth of the thing; because a deceiver might have aver'd the same
thing, and since there were sundry pretenders to this Office as well as he, it
was necessary there should be some other evidence of his being invested with
it, besides his pretending to it; otherwise it would have been impossible for
us to distinguish him from those that falsely pretended to it, and accordingly
he himself tells us, John 5.31. If I bear witness of my self my witness is not
true, i. e. If I can produce no other testimony of my being the Mediator than
my own bare word, you have no reason at all to believe me; and therefore he
tells us that he had not only John's Witness to it who was his forerunner, but
also a much greater than John's even the Witness of his Father, ver. 32, 33.
36, 37. Now there are Three ways by which the Father Testified for him; all
which do abundantly evince his being the true Mediator. First, by sundry
ancient predictions of him which were all exactly accomplished in him, for the
Testimony of Jesus, says S. John, is the spirit of Prophecy, Rev. 19.10.
Secondly, by sundry Voices from Heaven, by which the Father proclaimed him his
well-beloved Son. Thirdly, by Miracles, which by the power of God he frequently
wrought in his own Person, while he was upon Earth, and in the persons of his
followers after his ascension into Heaven. To treat of all which would require
a Volume by it self: and therefore for the first of these ways I shall refer
the English Reader to the Reverend Mr. Kidders Demonstration of the Messiah,
wherein the Testimony of Prophecy is handled at large with very great strength
and clearness of Judgment. And as for the second way of Gods bearing Witness to
Jesus, viz. by Voices from Heaven, I refer the Reader to our Learned D.
Hammonds reasonableness of the Christian Religion at the end of his Practical
Catechism, it being my intent to insist only upon the Third and last way, of
Gods attesting Jesus to be the Mediator, viz. by Miracles; for this way our
Savior himself most insists on and appeals to. So in the aforecited Ioh. 5.36.
But I have a greater witness than that of John; for the works which the Father
has given me to finish, the same works that I do bear witness of me that the
Father has sent me. So also John 10.25. The works which I do in my Fathers
Name, they bear witness of me; And in John 15.24. Our Savior makes the
inexcusable aggravation of the Jews infidelity to be this, that they would not
be convinced by all those miraculous works which he had done among them; If I
had not done among them the works which none other man did they had not had
sin, but now have they both seen and hated me and my Father. In these and
sundry other places our Savior appeals to those miraculous works which he did,
as to a certain Testimony from God that he was the only true Messiah or
Mediator between God and men. And indeed, seeing the great aim and design of
our Saviors Mediation is to advance the Honor of God and the perfection of
Souls; and seeing how admirably it is framed and contrived to promote those
blessed ends; Miracles are a most certain attestation of the truth of it. For
though the Scripture tells us of false Miracles wrought by the power of evil
Spirits, and History furnishes us with innumerable instances of it; yet it is
against all reason to imagine that ever evil Spirits would exert their power to
attest a Doctrine so infinitely repugnant to their own temper and interest. Had
the design of our Saviors Mediation been to alienate men's minds from God and
Goodness, we might have justly concluded all his miraculous works to be nothing
but Magical Tricks performed by confederacy with the Devil. For how could we
have imagined either that God or any good Spirit would ever have employed his
power to propagate a Doctrine so infinitely repugnant to his Will and nature,
seeing it is equally incredible either that a bad Religion should be the Will
of a good God, or that the God of truth should bear false witness to a lie; and
therefore we always find that those false Miracles effected by evil Spirits,
whereof the Scripture and History make mention were always wrought to deprave
men's minds with vicious principles, and to seduce men from God to superstition
and Idolatry, or to confirm them in it; but that an impious spirit should ever
work Miracles to promote true Piety, to inspire men's minds with great and
worthy thoughts of God and suitable affections toward him, that a malicious,
proud, unjust and revengeful Spirit should by miraculous Signs endeavor to
reduce the World to the practice of Charity, humility, justice, patience,
meekness and equanimity is infinitely incredible; and therefore since the
Doctrine of our Saviors Mediation does above all the Religions that ever were
professed in the World, most powerfully oblige us to these and all other
instances of Piety and Virtue, we may depend upon it, that though the Devil had
known it to be a Lie, he would never have been so great a fool as to cheat the
World into the belief of it; for though he loves to deceive, yet there is
nothing in nature he more hates than to deceive men into Piety and Virtue,
because hereby he deceives himself, and betrays his own interest in the World.
The Miracles of our Savior therefore being all designed to attest a most pure
and heavenly Doctrine, a Doctrine that is throughout exactly conformable to the
Nature of God, and infinitely abhorrent to the Genius of Devils must
necessarily be the effects of a Divine power; because to work Miracles for the
attestation of such a Doctrine could be neither agreeable to any other nature
nor serviceable to any other interest but Gods.

Now of all the miraculous testimonies which God gave to our Savior there is
none to which he did so often appeal, and upon which he did so much stake the
credit of his Doctrine, as that of his own Resurrection from the dead: for thus
when he had performed that heroic act of Zeal, whipping the Money Changers out
of the Temple, and the Jews required some sign of him, by what authority he did
it, he bad them destroy this Temple, pointing to his own body, and in three
days I will raise it up again, John 2.19. So also when the Pharisees desired
him to give them some sign of his being the true Messiah, he tells them, that
no other sign should be given them but only the sign of the Prophet Jonas, for
as Jonas was three days and three nights in the Whales belly, so shall the Son
of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth, which
necessarily implies, that after that he should rise again, Mark 8.12. and
accordingly we find that after he was risen and ascended, the principal
business of his Apostles was to testify his Resurrection to the World; for so
Acts 1.22. S. Peter makes this to be the reason why it was necessary that one
should be chosen into the Apostolate, to supply the room of Judas that he might
be a witness with them of Christ's Resurrection; and in Acts 4.33. we are told,
that with great power the Apostles gave witness of the Resurrection of the Lord
Jesus, and still when they were to prove any Article of the Christian Faith,
this they urge as the great argument. Thus from the Resurrection of Christ S.
Paul proves the general Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. so also Acts 17.31. he proves
that God has appointed a day wherein he will judge the World in righteousness
by that man whom he has ordained, viz. Christ Jesus, by this very topic,
whereof he has given assurance unto all men in that he has raised him from
the dead; and 1 Pet. 1.3. that Apostle makes Christ's Resurrection from the dead
to be the great motive of credibility by which God had begotten them again into
a lively hope of future happiness; so also Acts 2.36. Therefore (says the same
Apostle, i. e. because God had raised him from the dead, ver. 24.) let all the
house of Israel know that God has made this same Jesus both Lord and Christ;
and Romans 1.4. he is said to be declared the Son of God by the Resurrection from
the dead; yea, so undoubted an argument is this of Christ's being the true
Messiah or Mediator, that the Jews themselves were convinced that they must
either allow him to be so, or else outface the truth of his Resurrection, which
put them upon all possible ways of stifling the report of it, knowing that if
once it obtained credit in the World, the last error would be worse than the
first, Mat. 27.64. from all which it is evident, that it was taken for granted,
not only by Christ himself and his Apostles, but even by his most avowed
Enemies, that supposing his Resurrection to be true, it would from thence
undeniably follow that he was the Messiah or Mediator.

In the management of this Argument therefore I shall endeavor these two
things:

First, To prove the truth and reality of this miraculous attestation which God
gave to our Savior, viz. by raising him from the dead.

Secondly, To show what an excellent convincing argument this is of the Truth
of his Doctrine or Mediation.

I. I shall endeavor to prove the truth and reality of this miraculous
attestation, which God gave to our Savior, viz. by raising him from the dead;
which being a matter of Fact, independent from all necessary causes, is capable
of no other proof to those who were not Eyewitnesses of it but only that of
Credible Testimony. Thus that Julius Caesar was killed in the Senate House is a
matter of Fact, the truth of which is acknowledged by all the World, and that
man would be accounted little better than mad that should make the least doubt
of it; and yet we have no other way of proving this, but only by the concurrent
Testimony of credible Historians, which being as great an evidence as the
matter is capable of, is as much as any reasonable man can require to induce
him to believe it. For although Testimony be the only evidence by which matters
of Fact can be proved, yet it is such an evidence as has force enough in it to
induce any reasonable man to believe its proposals, and there are ten thousand
things which we do as firmly assent to upon the evidence of Testimony as to any
propositions upon the evidence of Mathematical Demonstration. If therefore the
Resurrection of our Savior be but sufficiently attested, that is as good an
Argument of the truth of it as the nature of the thing will bear, and when it
is made but as apparent that a thing is, as it could possibly be if it really
were, there is no farther proof of it can be reasonably expected, and if
notwithstanding this men will not believe, it is impossible that any reason
should convince them: but in this Testimony of our Saviors Resurrection there
is as much evidence and Credibility as there can be in any Testimony
whatsoever. For to give a Testimony the utmost force of Credibility six things
are required. First, That they that give it should be certainly informed of the
truth of what they do attest. Secondly, That there should be a concurrence of a
sufficient number of Witnesses. Thirdly, That there should be no visible reason
to suspect their truth and integrity. Fourthly, That there should be no
apparent Motive to induce them to give false Witness. Fifthly, That they give
some great security for the truth of what they say. And Sixthly, That they also
produce some certain sign or token of the reality of their Testimony. And when
all these circumstances do concur in a Testimony, they render it as highly
credible as it is possible for a Testimony to be. Now in that Testimony which
we have of our Saviors Resurrection there was, as I shall show in the
particulars, a full concurrence of them all. For

I. They who testified it were certainly informed whether it were true or no,
for they declare that they were Eye and Ear Witnesses of it, Acts 3.15. and
relate at large the familiar conversation they had with him after his
Resurrection, Acts 10.41. and they tell the Story of it with so many
circumstances that it is impossible they should be deceived. For at his
Resurrection they find the Stone rolled away from the mouth of his Sepulcher
and no body therein, although it was guarded by Soldiers, so that it was
impossible for any body to steal him away; and that it was his own body wherein
he arose and no aerial Phantasm evidently appears by what he did to convince S.
Thomas who would not believe, unless he might put his hand into the hole of his
side, and see the print of the Nails that pierced his hands, to which our
Savior readily condescended: and so far were the Apostles from being
over-credulous, that when he appeared to them after his Resurrection, it is
said that they suspected him to be a Spirit or walking Ghost, and to convince
them of their mistake, he was fain to appeal to the judgment of their senses,
handle me, and see me, says he, for a Spirit has not flesh and bones as ye
see me have, Luke 24.39. and afterward more fully to satisfy their yet
scrupulous minds, he eat and drank in the midst of them, ver. 43. Now the more
suspicious and incredulous they were at first, the greater evidence it is, that
they were thoroughly informed of what they testified, that there was an
undeniable evidence in the thing, else how could it have satisfied such
scrupulous and incredulous persons, and that they were far from being willing
to be abused themselves, or from having any design to abuse the world. And that
their outward sense was not imposed upon by the strength of their Imagination
is evident in that he conversed with them forty days together, which was too
long a time for their senses to mistake an image of their fancies for a
reality. For how is it conceivable that so many persons as pretended to see him
after his Resurrection, should for forty days together imagine that they saw
him, heard him, eat and drank with him, when in reality all this Scene of
things was nothing but a dream or specter of their own fancies; that their
fancies should create and represent a person to them frequently appearing to
them preaching and instructing them, giving out Commissions, and administering
holy Ordinances to them; that their fancies should draw them out to the Mount
of Olives after a Specter, that was visible no where but upon the Stage of
their own Imaginations, and there represent it carried up into Heaven on a
Cloud? Surely, if they were in their Wits, it was impossible for them to
believe such a train of things to be real, had they been only the images of
their fancies; and yet that they were in their Wits is as apparent as the Sun,
both from their unanimous consent in the relation of the Fact with all its
circumstances, and from those wise and sober Writings which they left behind
them, which abound with excellent Morals, solid and coherent Reasonings, strong
and powerful persuasions, without the least intermixture either of flat
impertinence or ranting Enthusiasm: which is a plain demonstration that they
were certainly informed concerning the matter of Fact which they testified
whether it were true or false.

II. Another Circumstance requisite to render a Testimony highly credible is
the concurrence of several Witnesses; of which we have a remarkable instance in
this Testimony of our Saviors Resurrection. For if to those five hundred
Brethren and upwards, who, as S. Paul tells us, saw our Savior after he was
risen, 1 Cor. 15.6. you add the Congregation of the Disciples he appeared to,
when he baffled the Infidelity of S. Thomas, together with those great
Assemblies that saw him in the Mount of Galilee, and upon Mount Olivet, from
whence he ascended, it is not improbable but that there were some thousands of
Persons that saw him after his Resurrection, among all whom we find the most
exact agreement both in the matter and circumstances of what they did attest,
which had it not been true, must have been morally impossible. For how could so
vast a number of men have so punctually agreed in the same Story, had it been a
lie? Especially, when they were so narrowly sifted, so craftily examined, and
cross examined, as doubtless these men were (or at least would have been had
there been any just ground to suspect them) by the Jewish Magistrates, who were
all of them professed Enemies to our Savior and his Doctrine. For had their
Testimony been forged, it is not imaginable how they should foresee what
Questions the Magistrates would propose to them, nor consequently how they
should agree what Answers to return to their several Interrogatories; so that
when they came to be examined they must of necessity have thwarted and
contradicted one another, at least in some circumstances of time or place, or
the like, by which means the whole forgery must have soon been unravelled, and
the credit of it for ever dashed out of countenance. But that no such thing ever
happened is evident by the credit which their Testimony found, even among those
who had the best opportunities of examining whether it were true or false; for
the truth of Christ's Doctrine depending upon the truth of this Story of his
Resurrection, there can be no doubt but the Jewish Magistrates, whose interest
made them Enemies to Christ, would not have been wanting, had they thought it
feasible, to try all ways to disprove the truth of it; and if they did not, no
other reason can be given of it but only this, that the truth of the thing was
so notorious, that it would have been Ridiculous for them to attempt the
disproving it; but if they did, it had been a very easy matter for them, had
it been a lie, to have detected it: for the number of the Witnesses being so
great, and the Jews having every day opportunity of conversing with them, they
might have easily trapt them in their relations, it being impossible that among
a great number of conspiring Impostors there should be always an exact harmony
and agreement. For suppose that such a Story as this were told in London that a
certain man dwelling at Westminster, and pretending himself to be the Son of
God, and the lawful Heir of the Crown of England, had preached up a new
Religion, requiring all people under pain of damnation to embrace his Doctrine,
and submit to his Government, and that as a sign of the truth of all this he
had publicly declared that three days after his death he would rise again;
whereupon the last Friday was seven night he was put to death by the
Magistrates, and notwithstanding he was buried, and his Sepulcher dammed up
with a huge Stone, and a guard of Soldiers set to watch it, left his Proselytes
should steal him away, yet the Sunday following he arose, and has since been
seen by several hundreds, if not some thousands of the neighborhood, many of
whom had touched and handled him, eat, and drank, and conversed familiarly with
him, among whom there was Peter such a one, Thomas such a one, and John such a
one, naming some twenty or thirty persons well known among the neighbors, who
could give a more particular account of the matter, and tell the names of most
of the persons that were eyewitnesses with them; why now it cannot be supposed
but that as soon as ever this formal rumor began to spread (especially if it
found credit among the multitude, and the pretended witnesses of it should be
so bold as to go and assert it before the King and Council, as the Apostles did
before the Rulers of the Jews) I say, it cannot be supposed but that care would
be taken that the matter should be immediately sifted, and the several
neighboring Justices required to call these Witnesses to account, who by
pumping and examining, promising and threatening them could not fail of
extorting the truth from them in a very little while. For it is impossible but
they must have found them faltering in the relation of their Story, and
counter-witnessing one another. John would have told it with this Circumstance,
and Peter with the contrary, and Thomas would have thwarted and contradicted
them both, so that when they came to compare their several relations with one
another, in all probability they would have found as great a confusion among
them as there was in the language of the Bricklayers of Babel. And therefore
though at first perhaps the Story might have seemed plausible, and a great many
credulous people might have believed it, yet every day would have rendered it
more suspicious, and the truth must at last have triumphed and prevailed; but
yet though the Eyewitnesses of our Saviors Resurrection were thus sifted and
examined over and over, their relation every one day got ground and credit even
in Jerusalem it self, where the thing was transacted, and where every one might
easily inform himself concerning the credit of the Relaters, and the
circumstances of their relation; insomuch that forty days after it was so far
from being dashed out of countenance, that at one Sermon of S. Peter's there
were no less than three thousand persons converted to the belief of it, and so
it still grew and increased, till at last in despite of all the wit and malice
of its opposers, it was embraced and acknowledged throughout all the World;
which is an undeniable evidence of the exact agreement there was in the
testimony of the several Witnesses of our Saviors Resurrection.

III. Another Circumstance requisite to render a Testimony highly credible is,
when there is no visible reason to suspect the honesty and integrity of the
Attestors; which circumstance did also concur to credit the Testimony of our
Saviors Resurrection. For that the first testifiers of it were men of a clear
and unsuspected honesty, will appear to any man that seriously considers either
the Doctrine which they taught, or the Genius of their followers, or the manner
of their testimony, or the success it had among those who were best able to
satisfy themselves whether they were honest or no. First, as for their
Doctrine, there is nothing can be more contrary to lying, dissembling and
Hypocritical reservation, it strictly requires plainness and simplicity of
speech, and that our words should be the Images and Interpreters of our minds,
it brands and stigmatizes all deceit and falsehood with a most infamous
Character, and irrevocably consigns all wilful Liars to the miserable portion
of the Father of Lies. If then they believed their own Doctrine, it is not to
be imagined they would ever have defended it with frauds and impostures; and
whether they believed it or no, it is hardly supposable, that they would have
so loudly declaimed against dishonesty, had they been at least visibly
dishonest themselves, since by condemning it in others they must have libelled
themselves, and imblazoned to the World their own shame and infamy. And then
secondly, As for the genius and temper of their disciples and followers, it is
plain that there never was any thing more open and sincere: for such was the
ingenuous simplicity of the Primitive Christians, that they thought it a
disparagement to be put to their Oaths, thinking it sufficient for every good
man to give this assurance of his truth (...), I speak truly; and when they
were most severely examined by their bloody persecutors concerning their faith,
they never either denied or concealed it, counting it a most impious thing to
dissemble the truth, and though when they were questioned they could easily
have either denied or evaded it, yet they scorned to live upon such base terms,
to be beholden to their hypocrisy for their lives; yea so conspicuous was
their Honesty to all the World that the Heathen themselves were forced to
acknowledge it. For so Pliny in the account which he gave the Emperor Trajan of
the Christians, tells him, That after the strictest enquiry he could make of
them, even of those who had renounced Christianity, he found this to be the
greatest fault they were guilty of, that they used harmlesly to meet to worship
Christ, and at those meetings to bind themselves by a Sacrament that they would
not do any wickedness, that they would not steal, nor Rob, nor commit Adultery,
ner falsify their words, nor withold any thing wherewith they had been
entrusted, where ever it were required at their hands. Such was the temper of
the immediate Disciples of the Eyewitnesses of our Saviors Resurrection; and
is it likely that the Scholars would have proved so honest had they not been
taught by the Example as well as by the Doctrine of their Masters: For to be
sure had the Apostles been dishonest, their immediate Disciples must needs have
known something of it, and being acquainted with it, they would doubtless have
resolved either not to continue their disciples, any longer, or else to have
imitated them in all their secret Cheats and Knaveries; and so from the Masters
to the Disciples dishonesty would have been propagated from one generation to
another; but since the contrary happened, it is plain that the first Propagators
were men of very honest and sincere minds; which will yet further appear, if we
consider thirdly the manner of their Testimony, which they delivered with the
greatest plainness and simplicity of speech, the greatest freedom and assurance
of Spirit, and the greatest particularity, as to all its circumstances; they
never went about to involve their sense in ambiguous words, or to recommend it
to the World in a pompous style, in pedantick flourishes or flattering
insinuations, which is the way of all Impostors; but as men that were well
assured of the truth of what they said, they exposed it to the World in the
most naked and simple expressions, and so left it to recommend it self; they
did not whisper their Testimony in corners, as if they were either afraid or
ashamed to produce it in the open light; but with the greatest confidence and
assurance they published it in the midst of Jerusalem, yea and before the
Sanhedrin it self; where, if it had been false, 'twas impossible but it should
be detected; and whereas it is the way of Impostors to reserve themselves in
generals, knowing that should they descend to particulars, 'twould be hard for
them to avoid discovery or contradiction; the Apostles did not only report a
general story of Christ's Resurrection, but related it with all its most minute
and particular circumstances, nor did they Change or alter any one of them upon
different examinations before different Examiners; but still persisted with the
greatest constancy to themselves and harmony with each other; so that if ever
there might be any thing gathered of the temper of persons from the particular
manner of their discourses, we may certainly discern the greatest fidelity in
the Apostles in the manner of their expressing themselves to the World. But
then in the fourth and last place, the credit which they found among those who
were the best able to satisfy themselves whether they were honest or no, is a
further evidence of their fidelity; for had they been men of known honesty, it
is not to be imagined that they could ever have obtained so much credit in a
place where they were so intimately known, and among persons with whom they
every day conversed with the greatest openness and freedom, especially
considering how contrary their Testimony was to the genius and interest of
those who gave credit to them, many of whose hands had been imbrewed in the
blood of our Savior, by which they were obliged in their own vindication, so
far as in them lay, to disprove the story of his Resurrection; because if that
proved true, it proved them guilty of the most monstrous impiety that ever was
acted, viz. the murder of the Son of God. And is it likely that the Murderers
of our Savior would ever have believed the story of his Resurrection, which
was so clear an evidence of his innocence and their own guilt, had they had any
reason to suspect the veracity of those that attested it, and yet in despite of
themselves great numbers of them were forced to believe it, although as soon as
they did so, they were pricked at the heart with the sense of their horrid
impiety, and forced to cry out in a bitter Agony of Conscience, Men and
Brethren what shall we do to be saved? and as for those of them who had no hand
in his murder, to be sure they were greatly prejudiced against the belief of
his Resurrection, because upon that depended the truth of his Doctrine, which
plainly contradicted a great part of that Religion in which they had been
educated, and of which they were infinitely zealous, and therefore to be sure
they would never have given credit to it, had they not had undeniable evidence
of the truth and integrity of those that testified it; especially when it was
so easy for them to satisfy themselves about it. For it is not imaginable they
would ever have entertained so ungrateful a story, but upon the most strict
enquiry into the credit of its relators; and if upon enquiry they had found the
least flaw either in them or in their testimony, if they could have convicted
them of any dishonest practices for the time past, or catched them tripping or
contradicting one another in what they testified at present, they would soon
have made the World ring of it, and the Jews who were dispersed through all the
neighboring Nations, would have divulged to all the World their fraudulent
practices, and posted them up where ever they came for infamous Knaves and
Liars; which must have infallibly blasted the credit of their testimony, and
caused it to have been hissed out of the World for a fulsom Imposture.
Wherefore since no such thing ever happened, but contrariwise the credit of
their report of Christ's Resurrection did, in despite of all the wit and malice
of its opposers, every day spread and increase even in Jerusalem it self, where
the thing was acted, and where the reporters of it lived, and that not only for
a few days or months, but from year to year, even till Jerusalem it self was
destroyed; since, I say, all this is so evident, what greater argument can we
desire of the truth and integrity of those that attested it. And supposing them
to be honest, their testimony must be true, because it was not matter of
opinion, in which it is possible for the wisest men to be mistaken, but matter
of Fact, of which they had certain information from their own senses, and he
who says that he saw such a thing, and it is evident that his senses were not
imposed on, lies against his own conscience, if it be not true that he saw it.

IV. Another Circumstance requisite to render a Testimony highly credible, is,
that there is no apparent motive to induce the Attestors of it to testify
falsely. For whether they are honest or no, we cannot well suppose that in a
matter of importance they will testify falsely, without some great motive
inducing them thereunto: but as for the witnesses of our Saviors Resurrection,
had they not been certain of the truth of it, they could have no imaginable
motive to induce them to attest it; for they could never hope to reap the least
advantage from it either here or hereafter; not here, for their Lord had told
them beforehand, that if they would be his Disciples, they must suffer
persecution; and they themselves could not but foresee that by testifying his
Resurrection, they must infallibly alarm all the World against them, because
the Doctrine which they confirmed by it was extremely opposite both to the
present Religion and Interest of the Jews, and to the common Theology of the
Gentiles; and that therefore by going about to establish it, they must in
effect proclaim War against all the World, and consequently expose themselves
to the utmost Rigor and Severity that the wit and malice of men could invent or
inflict: which must be a very sorry motive sure to induce men in their wits to
undertake the propagation of a known Imposture. But perhaps it may be thought
they did all this for the glory and reputation of being the founders of a new
Sect. But from whence, I beseech you, could they promise themselves success?
not from their Master Jesus, who, if their testimony was not true, they could
not but know was still detained under the power of the grave; not from God,
whom if they testified falsely, they were conscious they wickedly belyed in
suborning his power and veracity to bear witness to a falsehood; not from the
force and charms of their own Eloquence or Sophistry, for that they pretended
not to; not from their Riches, for their Staves and Scrips were all the
Treasure they carried with them; nor from any Authority or Power they had or
ever were like to have; for how could such poor illiterate persons as they,
ever expect to arrive to an Authority great enough to contest with all the
power and wisdom of the World which was armed against them; in a word, not from
any proneness they found either in Jews or Gentiles to embrace the Doctrine
which they designed by this their Testimony to confirm and assert, that being
every where gainsaid and opposed by the interests and affections of both; and
if their Testimony was not believed (as 'twas very unlikely it should, if it
had not been true) what could they expect but to be branded to all posterity as
a company of infamous Cheats and Impostors: So that unless they had been
assured that their testimony was true, they had all the reason in the World to
expect that it would prove the most fatal and unprofitable Lie that ever was
invented or broached among mankind; since it was so far from promising them any
worldly advantage, that it visibly exposed them to all the miseries and
calamities of human life. And then if they knew this Story of Christ's
Resurrection which they attested to be a Lie, they had a great deal less reason
to expect any advantage from it in the World to come; for either they believed
that Religion which they sought to confirm by attesting this story, or they did
not; if they did not, how could they hope to fare ever the better in the other
World for endeavoring to propagate a false Religion in this; if they did, how
would they hope to be made happy hereafter by telling a Lie for that Religion
which excommunicates Liars out of the Kingdom of Happiness? Since therefore if
their testimony had been false, they could expect to reap no advantage from it
in either World, doubtless they would never have been so mad as to assert and
attest it, had they not known it to be true; for what man in his wits would
ever tell a lie that has no reason to expect any other fruit from it, but only
to die for it here, and to be damned for it hereafter?

V. Another Circumstance requisite to render a Testimony highly credible is,
that the testifiers of it do give some great security for the truth of what
they say; and therefore it is required by human Laws that in all great matters
of Fact the Witnesses should give the security of their Oaths, or of some great
pledge to be forfeited by them, in case their Testimony prove false. But never
did any men give greater security of their truth, than the Witnesses of our
Saviors Resurrection; for they sealed their Testimony with their Blood, and
rather chose to undergo the most witty and exquisite torments, than to recant
any part or circumstance of what they had seen and testified concerning it. For
of all the Apostles, who were the chief Witnesses of it, there was only one
that escaped a violent death, and he, as the Ecclesiastical Story tells us, had
not been delivered from it but by a Miracle. And doubtless those other
Disciples, who saw and conversed with our Savior after he was risen, and
together with the Apostles bore witness of it to the World, did proportionably
run the same fate: And how is it imaginable that so many men should all turn so
mad together as to lay down their lives for a pledge of the truth of a Story
which they knew to be all a m^re cheat and imposture? Some men indeed have
suffered Martyrdom for professing Propositions that were false, but then they
thought them to be true; but no man in his wits ever died in the defense of an
Assertion which he knew to be false. But as for the testifiers of our Saviors
Resurrerection they did all of them witness upon certain information, and did
assuredly know whether their Testimony were true or false; so that if Christ
did not rise, as they reported, they died in the defense of a known Lie, which
is such a piece of folly as does exceed all instances of extravagance. Suppose
that Aesop should have died a Martyr to his own Fables, or that the Author of
the Seven Champions should have laid down his life in the defense of S.
George's killing the Dragon, would not all the World have concluded them
incurably distracted? But as for the Apostles, their excellent Writings are a
sufficient demonstration, that they were men of very sound intellectuals, and
therefore tho we should suppose them to be so wicked as to love lying for its
own sake, we cannot suppose them to be so mad as to love it better than their
own lives, as they must necessarily do, if their Testimony of our Saviors
Resurrection were false. But supposing that one or two of them should have
proved so frantic, yet it is incredible that so many hundreds of men and women
should all agree together at the same time in the same mad project, viz. to
throw away their lives for no other purpose but only to cheat and abuse the
World, and that no one of them should be induced, by all the hopes and fears
that were set before them, to confess and discover the mad conspiracy. When
they began to report the Story, they could not but foresee the consequence of
it, viz. that they must either recant it, and thereby proclaim themselves
Impostors to the World, or else lay down their lives for it. So that had they
known it to be false, it would have been a Prodigy of Impudence in them, and
Folly together, not only without hope of benefit, but within prospect of a
certain ruin, to have divulged a known lie to the World, and under the severest
Persecutions to have persisted in it without the least regret of Conscience, or
concernment for their own ease and safety. There never was the like instance
among men, and I dare say there never will be so long as men love themselves,
and continue in their Wits; and to imagine that of the Witnesses of our
Saviors Resurrection, of which there is no parallel example among mankind, is
an Argument that we have much more inclination than reason to be Infidels. This
therefore is plain, that the Witnesses of Christ's Resurrection gave as great a
pledge of the truth of their Testimony, as it was possible for mortal men to
do, and if those men may not be believed who attest a thing upon certain
knowledge, and seal it with their blood, there is no credit can be given to any
human Testimony; because a man's life is the greatest security that he can
possibly give for his honesty.

VI. Another Circumstance requisite to render a Testimony highly credible is,
that the Witnesses do give some certain sign and token that what they testify
is true; and this the Eyewitnesses of our Saviors Resurrection did. For in
token that what they said was true they themselves wrought sundry Miracles in
his name: for so we read of the Apostles, that they went forth and preached
every where, the Lord working with them, and confirming the Word with signs
following, Mar. 16.20. and that with great power, i. e. miraculous works, the
Apostles gave witness of the Resurrection of the Lord Jesus, Acts 4.33. and
also at Iconium the Lord gave Testimony to the word of his grace, and granted
signs and wonders to be done by their hands, Acts 14.3. And the same was done
by S. Stephen at Ierusasalem, Acts 6.8. and by S. Philip at Samaria, Acts 8.6,
7. and by S. Paul at Ephesus, Acts 19.11. And S. Paul assures us, That from
Jerusalem, and round about unto Illyricum, the Gospel had been preached by him,
with mighty signs and wonders, and by the power of the Holy Ghost, Romans 15.19.
all which things being recorded in an Age wherein, if they had been false, they
might easily have been disproved, it had been the wildest project in the world
for the Apostles to have pretended to them had they not been notoriously true;
for they must needs think that all the World being prejudiced against them
would be sure to keep a very strict and watchful eye on them, and that if upon
the severest enquiry they were at any time taken tripping in this their
pretense of working Miracles, their fraud will soon ring through all the World,
which must unavoidably prejudice their Cause a thousand times more than all the
Miracles they pretended to could advance it; and for men that had the eyes of
all the World upon them falsely to pretend to work such innumerable Miracles as
they did, and this not in corners, but in public view, and to name the places
where they wrought them, and where they knew there were thousands that could
and would certainly detect and disprove them, would have been the most
prodigious instance of impudence and folly together that ever was acted by men
in their Wits. But so notoriously true was the matter of Fact, that their most
inveterate Enemies amongst both Jews and Gentiles have not the confidence to
deny it, although indeed they attributed it, even as the Jews did our Saviors
Miracles, to the power of Magic; for so in their Talmud, Tractat. de Idol. c.
1. the Jews celebrate S. James the Apostle as eminent for the gift of Miracles,
by whom the Nephew of Rab. Samuel being bit of a Serpent would not be cured
because every Disciple of Jesus was wont to heal in his name. And Lib. Sabbat.
Ierosol. they tell us of a Son of Rab. Iose, who having swallowed Poison was
cured by a Christian in the name of Jesus. And as for the Heathen Julian
himself, he confesses that S. Paul did very wonderful things, for he says, that
he was the greatest and most expert Magician that ever was, vid. Cyril. Alex.
lib. 3. and the same he pronounces of S. Peter also, id. lib. 9. So also Celsus
frequently charges the Christians with doing their mighty works by the power of
some Demon, adding a fiction of his own, viz. that they had received from
Christ certain Magical Books by which they were instructed to perform all their
Miracles, vid. Origin. cont. Cells. p. 302. and several other places, which is a
plain confession that such Miracles were commonly performed by Christians: But
that they did not perform them by any confederacy with evil Spirits, as these
bad men affirm, is evident because one of their greatest and most common
Miracles was dispossessing these evil Spirits of men's Bodies, and their own
Temples and Oracles. For the truth of which they often provoke their
Adversaries in their Writings and Apologies to come and make experiment of it.
Thus S. Cyprian in his Epistle to Demetrian Proconsul of Africa, O that thou
would but hear and see when the Devils whom thou worshipest are adjured and
tortured by us, and with the spiritual Rods and Torments of our Words are
ejected out of the Bodies they possess, when howling and roaring in a human
voice they confess the Judgment to come: Do but come and see whether these
things we say are not true. And a little after, If thou will come, says he,
thou shall see those whom thou worshipest for Gods stand bound and tremble as
miserable Captives under our hands. Others of them appeal to the Consciences of
the Heathens themselves, who had been Spectators of their miraculous Victories
over these infernal Spirits. So Minutius Faelix, All these things are very well
known to a great many of your selves, that your Gods are forced by us to
confess themselves Devils, when by the torment of our words, and by the fire of
our Prayers they are chased out of human Bodies, even Saturn and Serapis, and
Jupiter, and the greatest of those Gods you worship, being overcome with sorrow
are forced to acknowledge what they are, and tho it be to their shame,
especially when you are present, yet they dare not lie, but being adjured by
the true and only God they quake and tremble in the bodies they possess, and
either leap out immediately, or vanish by degrees. Others of them offer to make
the experiment even before the Tribunals of the Heathen, and to answer for the
success with their own lives. So Tertullian in his Apologetick. Let any man
that is apparently acted by one of your Gods be brought before your own
Tribunals, and if that supposed God, being commanded by any Christian to speak,
does not confess himself to be a Devil, as not daring to lie to a Christian,
take that malepert Christian and pour out his blood immediately. Yea, how
often, says he a little after, only upon our touch of and breathing upon
possessed persons are these Gods you adore forced to depart out of their Bodies
with grief and reluctance, you your selves being present, and blushing at it.
And these things, as Origin tells us, cont. Cells. lib. 7. were ordinarily
performed even by the meanest Christians, which is a plain Argument that it was
done merely by the power of Jesus, without any Conjuration or Magical Art. And
can we imagine that the Devil, without any constraint from some superior power
would ever have quitted that Tyranny he had so long exercised over the bodies
and consciences of men, who had thitherto adored and worshipped him, or that he
would ever have confessed himself to be a Devil to those men who sought the
ruin of his Kingdom, and made use of his Confessions to that purpose, had he
not been forced to it by the Authority of the Father of Spirits? Is it likely,
he would have exerted his power to the ruin of his own interest, and the
amendment of those Souls he had ensnared and captivated, as he must necessarily
have done should he have empowered the Witnesses of our Saviors Resurrection
to confirm their Testimony by Miracles? And since they all along declared they
did them in the name and by the power of Jesus, to be sure if it had not been
so, the God of truth would never have empowered them to impose such a cheat
upon the World. These Miracles of theirs therefore were plain signs and tokens
of the truth of what they did attest, viz. that Jesus was risen from the dead,
and that not only as they were so many divine seals by which God himself did
confirm their Testimony, whose goodness and veracity could never have permitted
him to set the seal of his miraculous power to a lie: But besides this the
Apostles Miracles were so many plain demonstrations that Jesus was risen and
alive, since they did them all in his name, and by his power. For how is it
possible, that Jesus could have empowered them to do Miracles had he been still
among the dead, and in a state of inactivity? A dead man can do nothing
himself, much less can he empower others to do Miracles. So that by those
miraculous Works which the Apostles did by the power of Christ they did in
effect thus bespeak the World: Look here, O incredulous World, if nothing else
will persuade you that our Lord is risen and alive, behold the vital operations
which he exerts in us his Disciples, tho of our selves we are as impotent as
you, yet no sooner do we invoke our great Masters Name, and implore his Aid,
but we are presently enabled to perform mighty things beyond the power of any
mortal Agent; without any other Charm but his powerful Name, we raise the Dead,
bind the Devils, restore the Blind, recover the Lame, and cure all manner of
Diseases; and is not this as plain a token of his being alive, as if he were
now standing before you in our room, and doing all these things in his own
Person? If he were dead still he could not act in us, as you see him do; and
therefore if nothing else will convince ye that he is alive again, behold these
mighty powers which he exerts in us, and be at length persuaded by these
sensible tokens of his activity, which we produce before your eyes, that he is
risen from the dead. For it is worth observing, that this gift of Miracles was
never so plentifully communicated to the Apostles as after Christ's Ascension
into Heaven, for before he ascended he commanded them to tarry at Jerusalem
till they had received the Gift of the Holy Ghost, or, which is the same thing,
the Gift of Miracles, Acts 1.4, 5. and this gift, as he himself tells them,
verse. 8. was to enable them to bear Testimony to him unto all the World, for he
being now ascended into Heaven they could no longer produce his person to
convince unbelievers of the truth of his Resurrection, and therefore to supply
this defect Christ gave them the gift of Miracles, that that might be instead
of his bodily presence a plain and sensible token of his being restored to life
again. And indeed this was as certain a sign of it as if he had continued upon
Earth, and openly conversed among men in the view of the World; for the most
crrtain sign of life is action, and by what has been said it is apparent, that
Christ did not more visibly act in his own Person when he was upon Earth, than
he did in the persons of his Apostles after he ascended into Heaven. These
miraculous Operations therefore which they performed by the Power of Jesus,
were all of them so many plain and sensible Signs and Tokens of the truth of
what they did attest, viz. that Jesus was risen from the dead. So that
considering all these circumstances of the Apostles Testimony, I dare boldly
affirm, that from the beginning of the World to this day there never was any
matter of Fact more sufficiently and credibly testified than this of the
Resurrection of our Savior; and by raising him from the dead God has bore
witness to him before all the World, that he really is what he pretended to be,
the true Messiah and only Mediator between himself and us.

Which brings me to the second Head I proposed, to show what an excellent
convincing Argument this is of the truth of our Saviors Doctrine and
Mediation, and how effectually it justifies his pretense of being the true
Messiah and only Mediator. It Is true, all the Miracles which our Savior
wrought while he was upon Earth, were plain demonstrations of his being sent
from God, and therefore to these, as I showed before, he frequently appeals in
his excellent Disputations with the unbelieving Jews; and when John Baptist
sent to inquire of him whether he were the Messiah or no, he returns no other
Answer but this, Go and show John those things which ye see and hear, that the
blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the Lepers are cleansed, and the
deaf hear, and the dead are raised up, and the poor have the Gospel preached
unto them, Matt. 11.4, 5. But his own Resurrection being the greatest Miracle
that he ever performed, to this both himself and his Apostles did most commonly
appeal; insomuch that S. Paul, 1 Cor. 15.14. says, That if Christ be not risen,
then is our preaching vain, and our faith vain; because this being the Grand
Miracle on which Christ staked the credit of his whole Doctrine; if this had
failed, there had been no reason to give any Credit to any thing that he
taught. The Resurrection of Christ therefore is a certain evidence of the truth
of his Doctrine; only as it was the greatest of his miraculous works, it proved
his Doctrine no otherwise than his other Miracles did; but it was the highest
proof of it, as it was the greatest of his Miracles. Wherefore to show what an
excellent proof of his Doctrine his Resurrection was, I shall endeavor to show
that Miracles in general, and particularly this of Christ's Resurrection are the
best evidences of a Divine Revelation, that the nature of the thing will bear,
and this I shall do by showing

First, that this is the most proper and convenient Evidence.

Secondly, That it is the most certain and infallible.

Thirdly, that it is the plainest and most popular.

Fourthly, That it is the shortest and most compendious.

I. First, That this evidence of Miracles is the most proper and convenient to
prove the truth of any pretense to Revelation. For as for the intrinsic
Arguments drawn from the nature and quality of the Revelation, they may prove
it indeed to be wise, and good and holy, but how they should prove it to be
immediately revealed from God I cannot apprehend. For as for the Moral Writings
of the Heathen Philosophers they were most of them very good, and wise and
holy; but yet it does not hence follow that the Authors of them were
immediately inspired when they wrote them: notwithstanding their goodness they
might be, and doubtless were the dictates of their own natural reason, and so
may any other Doctrine how good soever it be; and tho the Authors of such
Writings may pretend to be inspired, yet that is no argument that they are. For
all that I know they may pretend to it to give credit to their Doctrine, or
they may think themselves inspired when they are not; so that they have no
other way to convince me that what they pretend is true, but only by giving me
some certain sign and token that they are really inspired from above, and no
sign can reasonably convince me of this, but such a one as I have reason to
believe God alone did enable them to give me; for so long as I have just reason
to suspect that the sign which they give me was produced either by their own
power or by the power of some other Agent besides God, it is no sign at all to
me of their being inspired by God. Miracles therefore being the only signs we
can reasonably believe are produced by the immediate power of God, it is they
alone can indicate a man's being immediately inspired by God. For how can I be
assured that what a man says is immediately revealed to him by God, unless God
himself give me some sign or token that he is so, and how can I know that this
or that is a sign or token from God, unless it be something so extraordinary
and miraculous, as, that all things considered, I may reasonably conclude 'twas
God alone that produced it. I confess indeed, a Miracle singly is not
sufficient to demonstrate any Doctrine to be of divine Revelation; for unless
the Doctrine it self be good, at least unless it has no apparent evil in it,
there is no Miracle whatsoever can prove it to be divine. For there is no
argument in the World can persuade a reasonable man to believe God against
himself; but to believe a bad Doctrine to be the Will of God, because it is
confirmed by Miracles, is to believe Gods Power against his Goodness; and it is
not more certain that God does will what he confirms by Miracles, than that he
does not, cannot will iniquity; nay of the two, I should rather believe a good
Doctrine to be from God, barely because it is good, than that a bad Doctrine is
so because it is confirmed by Miracles, it being more possible for a wicked
Impostor to work a Miracle, than for a holy God to will sin. But yet the
goodness of a Doctrine singly considered, and without the confirmation of
Miracles, is no certain proof that it is of divine revelation. It Is true, those
things in any Doctrine which are morally good and founded upon eternal reasons,
may be demonstrated true by moral arguments without any additional confirmation
by Miracles; but if the Doctrine contain in it any Proposition that is matter
of pure Revelation, and cannot be known without it, it is hardly possible to
prove such a Doctrine true without producing some miraculous sign of its truth
and divinity. As for instance, how can a man know that God has appointed Jesus
to be the Mediator between himself and us, which is matter of pure revelation
wholly depending on the free will of God, unless God himself give us some
miraculous sign by which we may know that it is his Will and Appointment? And
therefore we find that there is no Revelation or pretense of Revelation but
what lays claim to this way of confirmation. Thus the Mosaic Religion was
confirmed by sundry great and stupendous Miracles, and even the false Religion
of the Heathen pretended to this way of confirmation also; for generally they
established their superstitious Rites by Magical Tricks and Incantations, they
conjured their Demons into their consecrated Images, and made the liveless
Stocks to move and speak, they pretended to effect extraordinary Cures by the
invocation of their Idols; they often raised the Devils they adored by their
Charms and Enchantments, and made them appear in strange visible shapes to
their superstitious Votaries, and by these and such like miraculous pretenses
they introduced all their Idolatrous Ceremonies; which is a plain evidence that
they thought Miracles to be the most proper and natural arguments of the truth
of any Revelation; and since the thing is capable of no better way of
demonstration, it is an unreasonable thing not to be satisfied with this; for
he who will not believe that a thing which may be is, without an impossible
proof of its existence, is unreasonably resolved right or wrong not to believe
it. So that this way of Christ's proving his Doctrine by his Miracles, and
particularly by his Resurrection, being the best and most proper; if we will
not believe it upon this evidence, we are incurable Infidels whom no reason in
the World can convince or persuade.

II. This evidence of Miracles is the most certain and infallible Medium to
prove the truth of any pretense to Revelation. For if God give a man power to
do Miracles in token that what he says is true, he thereby sets his own Seal to
the truth of it, and if we are satisfied that the Miracle was wrought by the
Power of God, and yet will not believe the Doctrine it seals, we do in effect
give the lie to God himself: for a real Miracle wrought to confirm a Doctrine
gives as great a certainty of the truth of that Doctrine as we can have of the
truth of God, which is the foundation of all the certainty in the World;
because if once it be granted that God may work a Miracle to attest a lie, we
can have no security of his truth; but for all that we know every thing that he
says or does may be an Imposture; and if so, for all we know he may have
deceived our faculties too, and then there is nothing can be certain to us. The
Miracles of Christ therefore, and especially this of his Resurrection, gives us
as great a certainty of the truth of his Doctrine as we can have of any thing.
For that he was raised by the power of God is evident, because he was really
dead, his heart was pierced, and the vital bonds were broken, which rendered
him utterly incapable to raise himself; and supposing that there be some Agent
in Nature besides God that was powerful enough to raise him, yet we are sure
the Devil would not do it, because as was shown before, he must thereby do a
thing infinitely contrary to his own temper, and apparently destructive to his
Interest and Kingdom; nor would any holy Angel have done it without a special
command and Commission from God, which is the same thing as if God himself had
done it immediately. So that it is plain Christ's Resurrection must be effected
either by the immediate Will, or by the immediate Power of God, and whether it
was one way or the other, 'twas a most certain evidence of the truth of his
Doctrine, because it cannot be imagined that the God of truth would either way
have raised him from the dead, had he been an Impostor, since in so doing he
must have taken the most effectual course to impose a Cheat upon mankind. For
whilst he was alive he promised to rise again the third day, and gave this as
the great Sign to the World whereby they should know that he came from God;
upon the hearing of which all unprejudiced minds (especially considering the
nature of his Doctrine) had abundant reason to conclude thus with themselves,
If this Man make good his word, we can no longer doubt but that he was sent
from God; for to be sure he cannot rise unless God raise him, and it can never
enter into our thoughts that the God of truth will raise him on purpose to
delude and deceive us. When therefore he was actually risen, they could not
without being guilty of the most unreasonable obstinacy, make any farther
scruple of his truth and veracity.

There was about six hundred years ago a certain Jew called El David, who gave
out that he was Christ, and drew a great many Proselytes after him, upon which
he was apprehended and brought before an Arabian Prince, who asked him what
Miracle he could do, to convince him that he was not an Impostor, to which he
answered, Sir, Cut off my Head, and in a little time you shall see me alive
again; which he said to prevent some greater torments which he feared would be
inflicted on him for deluding the People. Whereupon the Prince replied, A
greater sign than this thou can not give, and therefore if after I have
beheaded thee thou recoverest to life again, both I and all my People and all
the World sure will acknowledge thee to be a Messenger from God: and presently
he commanded him to be beheaded, and there was an end of the Cheat; and so
there would doubtless have been of the Christian Religion, if Jesus had not
been raised from the dead, for he said just as this El David did, Kill me if
you please, and when you have done so, you shall see I will live again, and
upon this I stake all the credit of my Doctrine. And therefore since it came to
pass according to his word, we have all the Reason in the World to resolve with
that Arabian Prince to believe and acknowledge him to be sent from God. For if
there be a God that loves sincerity and truth, as we are sure there is, we are
equally sure he will not conspire with an Impostor to cheat and delude the
World; and yet this he must have done, had Jesus been a deceiver, when he
fulfilled this miraculous sign of his Resurrection, upon which he suspended all
the credit of his Doctrine. So that now we have the same certainty of the truth
of our faith as we have of the truth of our knowledge; for the truth of our
knowledge supposes that there is a God whose Goodness will not suffer us to be
deceived in those things which we clearly apprehend, and the truth of our faith
supposes that there is a God whose Goodness will not suffer him to deceive us
in such things as he has given us sufficient reason to believe; for he who
gives me a sufficient reason to induce me to believe a false Proposition, is
guilty of seducing me into a false belief: and therefore since God in raising
Christ from the dead has given us a sufficient Argument to induce us to
believe that he sent him, it necessarily follows, either that he did send him,
or that he is guilty of deceiving and abusing us.

III. This evidence of Miracles is the plainest and most popular to confirm a
Revelation. If the Principles of revealed Religion were to be proved by natural
Reason and Philosophy, the Arguments of it would be too thin and subtle for
vulgar capacities, and men would never be fit to be Catechized into their
Religion till they had been trained up in the Schools, and there instructed in
the intrigues of Logic and Discourse; for the generality of men are capable of
no other notices of things but what are immediately impressed upon them by the
objects of sense, nor have they skill enough so exactly to compare simple terms
as to connect them into true Propositions, and from these to deduce their true
and natural Consequences. These are things that require far more leisure and
skill than Men's Education and Affairs will ordinarily afford them, so that had
there not been some plainer and easier way found out to prove the truth of
Christianity than this, it had been a Religion fit only for the Schools of
Philosophers; and the Vulgar who are not capable of close and strict discourse,
and have neither time nor skill enough to trace the footsteps of truth through
all the intricacies of reasoning and discourse, must have been damned to
eternal infidelity; and this without doubt was one main reason why the Moral
Philosophy of the Heathen had so little influence upon the People, because the
Arguments by which its Principles were proved and demonstrated were too fine
and subtle for vulgar apprehensions, insomuch that there were but few in
comparison that could comprehend the strength and force of them; and in all
probability as little effect would Christianity have found in the World, had it
not been proved and demonstrated by such evidence as is adapted to all
capacities. As for instance, the immortality of the Soul is one great Principle
of the Christian Religion; but now had we no other way of proving this
Principle than by Philosophical Arguments, how impossible would it have been to
convince the Vulgar of the truth of it? For first, we must have proved that the
Soul is immaterial, by showing that its operations, such as Free Will and
Reflection are incompetent with Matter; from hence we must have inferred that
it is immortal by showing that what is immaterial has no quantitative
extension, and consequently is incapable of division and corruption. Now, I
beseech you, what Iargon, what unintelligible Gibberish would this appear to
vulgar understandings? What an insignificant noise would such fine Speculations
make in the ears of an honest Plowman? But now the miraculous Resurrection of
our Savior is so plain and intelligible a proof of it, that every man may
apprehend the force of it that has the free use of his own faculties; for it
is but arguing thus, and the thing is clearly proved; Christ told the World
whilst he was alive that the Soul is immortal, and that there are everlasting
habitations of weal or woe prepared for her in another World; and in token that
what he said was true, he promised that the third day after his death he would
rise again, which he could never have verified, had not God given him power to
do it, and to be sure God would never have given him this power, had not his
saying been true; wherefore since God did empower him to rise again, it is
plain that he thereby approved the truth of his saying, and justified his
Doctrine to the World. This is such a plain and intelligible way of arguing
that the shallowest minds may easily apprehend the force of it; wherefore since
God designed Christianity to be a Religion as well for the Vulgar as for the
more refined and elevated understandings, it was highly reasonable that the way
of proving its Principles should be plain and intelligible to all capacities of
men.

IV. And lastly, This evidence of Miracles is the most short and compendious
way of proving the truth of Revelation. One reason why the moral Philosophy of
the Heathen had so little influence on the Vulgar was because their way of
proving the Principles of it was so long and tedious; for they were fain to
prove them by parcels, and when they had convinced their Auditors of the truth
of one Proposition they proceeded to another; and so they were fain to prove
them all singly and apart by distinct and different arguments; which was so
tedious a way that the vulgar had not leisure enough to attend to so great a
variety of reasonings, nor yet capacity enough to retain them; but he that
works a real Miracle, in token that such a Doctrine is true, proves it all at
once, and needs not trouble himself to demonstrate one Proposition after
another, for by giving a miraculous sign of the truth of such a Doctrine, God
does openly approve every Proposition contained in it, because it cannot be
supposed that the God of truth would approve any Doctrine in the gross, if any
part or Proposition of it had been false, since in so doing he must necessarily
have abused our understandings, and wittingly betrayed us into a false belief,
which to affirm of God is equally absurd and blasphemous. When therefore God
raised our Savior from the dead, he did by that one Act openly avow the truth
of his whole Doctrine, and proclaim to all the World that every Article in it
is as true as truth it self. So that now we need not trouble our selves to hunt
out for several Arguments to prove the several Articles of our Faith; for this
one Argument serves instead of all, that God by sundry Miracles, and
particularly by raising Jesus from the dead, has given Testimony that the
Doctrine which he taught is a true revelation of his Mind and Will to the
World. And thus you see what a clear and excellent evidence Christ's Miracles,
and especially his Resurrection is of the truth of his Doctrine: No wonder
therefore that the Apostle does so much prefer it above all other evidence, as
we find he does, 1 Cor. 2.4. For, says he, my speech and my teaching was not
with the enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of spirit and of
power; that is, I did not go about to convince ye with Rhetorical Harangues or
fine Philosophical Reasonings, but I clearly demonstrated the truth of what I
preached by the Miracles which through the power of the Divine Spirit, I
wrought amongst you. So that whether we consider the certainty of Christ's
Miracles, but especially of his Resurrection, or the powerful evidence which
they give to his Doctrine, I doubt not but upon an impartial view of the whole
it will appear that we have all the reason in the world firmly to assent to the
truth of Christianity, and consequently to this Article which comprehends it
all, that Jesus Christ is the Mediator between God and Man.

FINIS.
NOTES.
Page 35. Line 18.
a FOr thus Tertullian, hunc (i. e. (...)) Zeno determinat factitorem qui
cuncta in dispositione formaverit eundemque and fatum vocari and Deum and
animum Iovis, Apologet. 36 Pam. i. e. this Word, Zeno declares to be the Maker
of the World, who formed all things in a due temper, and is called Fate, and
God, and the Soul of Jupiter. And the Ancient Orpheus calls him the (...), and
the (...), i. e. the divine Word and immortal King, C^em. Strom. l. 5. p. 60*
So also Numenius the Pythagorean, as he is quoted by S. Cyril, cont. Iul. lib.
8. calls the Father the First, and the Word the Second God. So also Plotinus,
Enn. 5. l. 5. c. 3. (...), (speaking of this divine (...) or (...)) (...), i.
e. and this nature is God, a second God; and as for the Jews it is evident from
the Septuagint, and Philo, and the Chaldee Paraphrase that by the Word they
meant a divine Person, for Ezekiel. 1.24. the Septuagint has changed shaddai, the
undoubted name of the Omnipotent God, into (...) the Word, which to be sure
they would not have done had they not thought this Word a divine Person; and
then as for Philo the Jew, who lived in the Age when this Gospel was written,
he expressly calls this Word (...) next to the (...), i. e. a second God next to
the Father of all things, Quaest. and Solut. And elsewhere he tells us. (...)
The Word is superior to the whole World, and more ancient and general than any
thing that is made, Leg. Allegor. lib. 2. And again speaking of the Worlds
being the Temple of God* (...) says he, (...), i. e. in which Temple the High
Priest is the firstborn divine Word of God, de Somn. And in his Book de
Profug. he thus discourses of this Word, (...) (...) i. e. this divi^e Word is
superior to all things, it has no visible species by which it may be likened
to any sensible thing, but is it self the Image of God, the most ancient of all
intelligibles, and next to the most High, between whom and him there is no
medium. A great many other instances I could give out of this ancient Writer,
but these are sufficient to prove what I intend, viz. that by the Word he meant
a divine Person. And then for the Chaldee Paraphrase, which is one of the most
ancient Monuments we have of Jewish Learning, there is nothing more frequent in
it than to signify by this Phrase the Word a divine Person; for instead of
Jehovah, or God, in the Hebrew Text they commonly insert the word of Jehovah,
to which word they attribute personal actions, by which it is evident that they
looked upon it as a divine Person; thus for instance they attribute speech to
him, Genesis 3.22. where instead of God said, they render it, the word of God
said, Exodus 20.1. instead of the Lord said, they render it, the Word of the
Lord said. Again, they attribute hearing to him, Deuteronomy. 33.7. where instead of
the Lord heard, they insert the word of the Lord heard. And Genesis 3.22. instead
of the Lord said, behold the man is become as one of us, the Jerusalem Targum
runs thus, the word of the Lord said, behold Adam whom I created is the only
begotten in the World, even as I am the only begotten in the highest heavens.
And Exodus 19.3. instead of Moses went up unto God, in the Edit. Compluten. it
is Moses went up into the presence of the Word of God. So also in Exodus 17.7.
instead of I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, it is, I will
establish my Covenant between my word and thee. Again, Genesis 19.24. the
Paraphrase is, And the word of Jehovah sent benign showers upon Sodom and
Gomorrha to try them if they would yet repent of their evil works, which when
they saw they concluded, doubtless our evil works are not yet revealed before
the Lord, wherefore there was sent down upon them a shower of fire and
brimstone from the word of Jehovah in Heaven. So also on Genesis 28.20, 21.
Onkelos thus Paraphraseth, If the word of the Lord will be my helper, and lead
me in the way which I go, the word of the Lord shall be my God; And on Genesis
5.24. the Jerusalem Targum expressly asserts, that Enoch was drawn up to heaven
by the word of the Lord. And also on Genesis 22.14. the same Paraphrase affirms
thus, that Abraham worshipped and called upon the name of the word of Jehovah,
and said thou art Jehovah, etc. And on Deuteronomy. 18.19. thus both Onkelos and
Jonathan Paraphrase, He that refuses to hearken to my words, my Word shall take
vengeance upon him. And to name no more, on those words of the Hebrew Text,
Hos. 14.5. I will be as the dew of Israel, Jonathan thus descants, I by my word
will receive their prayers, and have mercy on them. A great many other
instances I could give, but these I think are sufficient to expose the great
Immodesty of Crellius, who in a set Discourse will needs persuade the World
that by the Word in the Chaldee Paraphrase is no where meant a Person, but
merely the speech or vocal Word of God: For how is it imaginable that by this
Word they should mean no more than that, when they so commonly attribute to it
personal actions, such as speaking, hearing, seeing, and desiring, drawing up
men to Heaven, raining down fire and Brimstone from heaven, and taking
vengeance upon men? With what tolerable propriety can these things be
attributed to a vocal Word? How can a Covenant be made between men and the
outward speech or declaration of God? What nonsense would it be to worship and
invocate the name of Gods vocal Word, and to say of it, thou art Jehovah? With
what tolerable sense can Gods declaration be called God or Gods only begotten
in Heaven? Lastly, How can God be said to receive our Prayers, and to have
mercy upon us by any such outward declaration? Since therefore it is evident
that by this Word they meant a Person, and since to this Person they ascribe
not only the Name, but the Worship of God, it is plain they believed him to be
a divine Person, and that which is the sense of this ancient Paraphrase in this
matter was without doubt the sense of the Jews in the Age wherein it was
written. And accordingly Chalcidius ad Timaeum in that book where he professes
to explain the Doctrines of the holy Sect. i. e. the Jews deliver this as their
sense of this divine word, Et ratio Dei Deus est humanis rebus consulens quae
causa est hominibus been beateque vivendi, si non concessum sibi munus a summo
Deo negligant, i. e. this Logos or Word of God is God taking care of human
Affairs, and is the cause or principle by which men may live well and happily,
if they do not neglect this gift which the supreme God has granted to them.
And to the same purpose Celsus, speaking the sense of the Jews, expressly tells
us, (...) (...)^ i. e. we agree with you that the Word is the Son of God.

Page 35. Line 20.
b Nay, and that by this Word the Jews mean not only a real and divine Person,
but even that very Messiah himself, of whom S. John here speaks, is evident,
considering that they not only give him the very same Characters that the New
Testament gives to our Savior, such as the (...), the Character of God, Phil.
de Agricul. lib. 2. and (...), the Image of God, Leg All. lib 2. suitable to
Heb. 1.3. such as the Manna, the (...) and (...), the bread and food which God
has given to the Soul, agreeable to John 6.33.35. such as the (...), the House
of the Father, in which he dwells, ib. de Migrat. Abraham. suitable to John
14.10. but besides this I say, they also attribute to him the very same Offices
that the New Testament attributes to our Savior; for thus as the Scripture
attributes unto Christ a Kingly Office under God the Father, so they make this
(...) or divine Word, the (...), i. e. the Governor of all things, and the
(...), the Viceroy of the great King, Ib. de some, and de Agricul. l. 2. where
he also tells us, that God who is King and Pastor of the World has appointed
the Word his first begotten Son (...), to undertake the care of his Sacred
Flock as his own Viceroy and Substitute; and so also as the Scripture
attributes to Christ the Office of an Intercessor between God and Man; so also
the same Author tells us, which is highly worthy our observation, (...) (...),
i. e. but this excellent gift the Father of all things has bestowed upon the
Prince of Angels, the most ancient Word, that standing in the middle he might
judge between the Creature and the Creator; and he always supplicates the
immortal God for Mortals, and is the Ambassador from the supreme King to his
subjects, and in this Gift he rejoices as highly valuing himself upon it,
saying, I stood in the middle between you and the Lord, as being neither
unbegotten as God, nor yet begotten as you, but am a middle between the
extremes, and a pledge for both; for the Creature with the Creator, that he
shall not wholly Apostatize from him, so as to prefer disorder before order,
and beauty; for the Creator with the Creature, to give him an assured hope that
the most merciful God will never abandon his own Workmanship; for I declare
peace to the Creature from him who makes Wars to cease, even God who is the
King of peace. In which words the same Mediatorial Office, which the New
Testament attributes to our Savior is expressly attributed to this divine
Logos. And in the above cited Book de Agricult. he expressly teaches that this
Logos or divine Word was that Angel whom God had promised to send before the
Camp of Israel, of which Angel Moses Gerund. as he is quoted by Masius upon
Joshua, Chap. 5. thus speaks, Iste Angelus si rem ipsam dicam, est Angelus
redemptor, de quo scriptum est, Quoniam nomen meum in ipso est, ille inquam
Angelus qui ad Jacob dicebat, Ego Deus Bethel, ille de quo dictum est, Et
vocabat Mosem Deus de rubo. Vocatur autem Angelus quia mundum gubernat,
scriptum est enim, Eduxit nos Jehovah (id est Dominus Deus) ex Aegypto: and
alibi, Misit Angelum suum and eduxit nos ex Aegypto. Praeterea scriptum est, Et
Angelus faciei ejus salvos fecit ipsos: De quo dictum est* Facies mea praeibit
and efficiam ut quiescat; denique ille Angelus est de quo vates, Et subito
veniet ad Templum suum Dominus quem vos quaeritis and Angelus foederis quem
cupitis. That Angel, to speak the truth, is the Angel Redeemer of whom it is
written, Because my Name is in him, this, I say, is that Angel who said to
Jacob, I am the God of Bethel; he is also that Angel of whom it is said, And
God called to Moses out of the Bush, for he is called the Angel, because he
governs the World, wherefore it is written Jehovah, i. e. the Lord God brought
us out of Egypt; and elsewhere, he sent his Angel, and brought us out of Egypt;
besides it is written, And the Angel of his face saved them. Of this Angel it
is also said, My Presence shall go before the Camp of Israel, and shall cause
it to rest. Lastly, This is the Angel of whom the Prophet speaks, The Lord whom
ye seek shall suddenly come to his Temple, the Angel of the Covenant whom ye
desire. By which last passage it is evident that by this Angel he meant the
Messiah, to whom all the ancient Jews refer that Prophecy; so that the divine
Word, according to Philo, is the Angel that went before the Camp of Israel, and
that Angel, according to Moses Gerundensis, is no other than the Messiah: and
that Philo himself by this Word understood the Messiah is evident by his
applying those words, Ezekiel. 6.12. (which the ancient Jews unanimously
understood of the Messiah) to him in lib. quod deter. potiorib. insid. soleat.
But to put all out of doubt the Targums use the Word of the Lord and the
Messiah promiscuously; for so on those words, Genesis 49.18. I have waited for thy
salvation O Lord, the Chaldee Paraphrase thus descants, Our Father Jacob said,
I expect not the Salvation of Gideon the Son of Ioas, which is a temporal
Salvation, nor the Salvation, of Sampson the Son of Manoah, which is a
transitory Salvation, but I expect the Redemption of Messiah the Son of David,
who shall come and gather together the Sons of Israel, his Redemption my Soul
expects; with which the Jerusalem Targum concurs almost word for word, only
with this difference, that instead of those words, But I expect the Redemption
of Messiah the Son of David, it has these words, But expect the Redemption
which thou have promised to give us by thy Word, that he should come to thy
people Israel, which is a plain evidence that by the Messiah and this Word they
meant the same thing; so also on those words, Even I am he, and there is no God
besides me, I kill and I make alive, I wound and I heal. Ionathans Targum runs
thus, When the Word of the Lord shall be manifested to redeem his People, he (
i. e. the Word of the Lord) shall say to all the people, see now because I am
he who was, and is to come, and there is no other God besides me, I kill in my
revenge, and reviving do revive the People of the House of Israel, I will heal
them in the last days; by which last days is evidently meant the days of the
Messiah, who therefore must be the same with this Word of the Lord here spoken
of.

Page 35. Line ult.
c For as they affirm of their word that he is (...), i. e. always without
time, and alone eternal, vid. Porphyry quoted by S. Cyril, C. Iul. lib. 1. p.
32. that he is (...), the most ancient Word of God, Phil. de somn. and (...),
the most ancient of all things that are, 16. Leg. Allegor. lib. 2. So S. John
affirms of his Word that he was in the beginning, that is, according to the
pluinest and most obvious sense at least, that he actually existed in the very
beginning of the World, and that consequently he was before all time, and the
most ancient of all things. Again, as they affirm of their word, that it is not
separated from the first Good or Father, (...), i. e. but of necessity is
together with him* being separatee from him only in personality, Plot. En. 5.
l. 1. c. 6. So S. John affirms of his Word, that it was with God from the
beginning, ver. 2. that is, in an inseparable union and conjunction, for
otherwise all other things were as much with God as he. Again, as they affirm
of their Word, that he is (...), the cause or artificer of the World, for so
all the Platonic Schools frequently style him, and so Plato himself, (...), i.
e. which World the Word, which of all things is the most divine, framed and set
in order, Epinom. and Philo call him, (...), the Instrument by whom God made
the World, Phil. lib. Chereb. So S. John affirms of his word* that all things
were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made, ver. 3.
Again as they affirm of their word that he is, (...)* i. e. if I may coin a
word, the Be-er, and that this Be-er, (...), i. e. is not a dead Be-er, that is
neither life nor mind, but that mind and life and Be-er, are the same thing,
Plotin. Enn. 5. lib. 1. c. 2. So S. John affirms of his word, that in him was
life, ver. 4. As they affirm, that the life or being of their Word was
knowledge or understanding, (...) (...), i. e. neither is this Mind or Word in
Potentia; neither is it self one thing, and its knowledge another, but its
knowledge is it self, or its own being, ibid. lib. 3. c. 5. So S. John affirms
of his Word that his life was the light of men, i. e. that it consisted of
knowledge, which is the light of human minds, ver. 4. as they affirm that the
(...), i. e. Intelligible light, proceeded (...), from the word Phil. de Opif.
mund. and that (...), i. e. that all light is from this word or wisdom,
Arist^b. apud Eusebius. praepar. p. 324. So S. John tells us of his Word, that he
was the true light which lights every man that comes into the world, ver. 9.
In short, as they style their word (...)* i. e. the Son of God, Plot. Enn. 5.
l. 8 c 5 And again, (...), i. e. the Son or Child of God, the full beautiful
mind, even the mind that is full of God, as also (...), i. e. the most ancient
Son of the Father of the Universe, Phil. lib. cui Tit. Deterius perf^ctiori
semper infestum esse. And also (...) i. e. the first born Son of God, Ibid.
lib. 1. de Agricu^t. So S. John styles his Word the only begotten Son of the
Father, ver. 14.18. Thus from first to last, S. John discourses of his Word,
and in the same Phrase and Language gives the same account of him as the Jewish
and Gentile Divines did of theirs, so that he must be supposed either to mean
the same thing by him, viz. a divine eternal Person, or to design to make the
World believe he meant so, for he who speaks or writes, must either equivocate
and dissemble his meaning, or mean according to the vulgar acceptance of the
words and phrases he speaks or writes; so that supposing S. John does here
sincerely express his own meaning; no man that understands the common use and
acceptance of his phrases can reasonably understand them any otherwise than of
a divine Person, and whether this were not his meaning, at least in all
appearance, I appeal to a very indifferent Judge, viz. Amelius, a Pagan
Philosopher, who very well understood the Language and Doctrine of the Gentile
Schools concerning the divine Legos or Word so often mentioned in their
Writings, and who casting his eyes upon this discourse of S. John, does with
all confidence pronounce this to be the sense of them, (...) (...), i. e. this
was that Word who, according to Heraclitus, existed from Eternity, and made all
things, and whom, by Jupiter, the Barbarian places in the order and dignity of
a Principal, declaring him to have been with God, and to be God, and that all
things were made by him, and that in him all things that were had life and
being. Vid. Eusebius. Praep. Evan. 540.

Page 51. Line 3.
d For thus Porphyry, as S. Cyril quotes him, (...), i. e. the divine essence
extends it self to three persons, whereof the highest God is the Good; after
him the second is the Maker of the World; and the third is the Soul of the
World; for to this Soul the Divine Essence extends it self: And of these three
divine persons Plotinus has treated at large, whom he expressly calls, (...),
three persons that are principles, viz. the Good or the One, the Mind and the
Soul, assuring us that these Doctrines concerning this divine Trinity, (...)^
i. e. that they were no* new, or of ye^terday, but were anciently, though
obscurely taught; and that what is now discoursed concerning them is only a
farther explication of them, but we have faithful Witnesses that these
Doctrines were taught of old, and particularly in the Writings of Plato
himself, before whom also Parmenides delivered them. And indeed Plato very
frequently mentions these three divine Persons; particularly, Phileb. p. 30.
(...), i. e. but Wisdom and Mind can never be or act without Soul, wherefore in
the Nature of God there is a Kingly Soul, and a Kingly Mind. And indeed so
ancient is this Doctrine of three divine Persons subsisting in the Godhead,
that Proclus calls it, (...), the Tradition of the three Gods in Timae. Plat.
p. 93. for so they sometimes call these three Persons three Gods, though as
themselves elsewhere explain it, they are only three subsistences in the same
divine indivisible Essence. And the same Proclus calls this Doctrine of the
Trinity (...) which says he, (...), i. e. the divinely inspired or delivered
Theology which teaches that this World was completed by these three. By these
and sundry other testimonies that might be produced it is evident that the
ancient Divines of the Gentiles acknowledged a Trinity of Persons in the
Godhead, the last of which they called (...) or Soul, for so thee Chaldee
Oracle, quoted by the abovenamed Proclus, (...)
(...)
i. e. after the Paternal mind, which in our Language is God the Son, I Psyche
or Soul dwell: and this Psyche, or as our Scriptures phrase it Holy Ghost, they
style (...) the most divine Psyche (...)* i. e. whom we may truly say is God
and not a Demon, Plotin. Enn. 3. l 5. c. 2. and the same Author tells us of
this Psyche that it is (...), i. e. that it is the word of the Mind or Son as
proceeding from him, and the energy or active power by which he operates, all
which exactly accords with the Catholic Doctrine concerning the Holy Ghost.

Page 51. Line 3.
e For so the above cited Philo, (...), i. e. when God accompanied with his two
highest powers, viz. Empire and Goodness, the middle being one, he impressed
thre^ ^hantasms on the sensitive or visive Soul, viz. of Abraham. each (...)
which exceed all measure, for these his Powers are all immense, but themselves
measure all things. De Sacrif. Abel and Cain. Now that by these Powers he means
the second and third Person in the Triune Godhead is apparent, because he
afterward calls God and these his Powers. (...), the three measures, and tells
us, (...), i. e. that the supreme God is Superior to these Powers of his, and
is to be seen without them, and appears in them, which plainly shows, that by
these two Powers he means some things that were really distinct from that God
whose Powers they were, and therefore since before he had told us that they
were both immense, what else can he mean by them but those two divine Persons
the Son and the Spirit of God? To the same purpose he discourses, lib. de
Cherub. where after he had given some uncertain guesses at the mystical sense
of those Cherubs that guarded Paradise, he thus concludes* (...), i. e. but I
remember I have heard something more learned from my own Soul, which being
often seized with a divine Enthusiasm prophesies of things which it understands
not, which so far as I can remember I will here deliver. By which solemn
Preface he gives us notice that some very great mystery is to follow, and then
he goes on* (...), i. e. My soul said to me with that only true God there are
two supreme and first powers, viz. Goodness and Power, and that by the first
all things were made, and by the second all things that are made are governed.
Since therefore, as I have shown before, he frequently asserts that all things
were made by the Son of God, it is evident that by Goodness here he means the
same Son; and if so, what else can he mean by Power but Psyche, or the Holy
Ghost. And these three divine Persons he elsewhere styles, (...), i. e. the
Being, the Ruling, and the Benefick power. l. 2. de Agric. N^^e. Thus far this
learned Jew, whose Writings, being originally in the Greek Language, have been
delivered down to us without any considerable alterations, but it is not to be
expected that those Writings of the ancient Jews, which are written and
preserved in their own Language should be so express in this Article of the
Trinity as those of the Gentiles, because for several Ages they were solely in
the possession of the Modern Jews, by whom this Article has all along been
obstinately rejected, and therefore may reasonably be supposed to be castrated
by them in all those places where they more openly countenanced the Christian
veri^y against them; but yet after all there are sundry passages remaining in
them which do very much favor this Article: thus Voisin in Prooem. Pug. fig.
quotes this passage from the Book Reschit. Chocmah, c. 3. Tres sunt Dii ut
explicatur in Zohar his verbis. Quis est sensus inquit R Iose horum verborum,
Deuteronomy. 4.7. Cui sunt Dii propinqui, dicendum erat cui est Deus propinquus. Sed
est Deus superior: est Deus timoris Isaac, est Deus inferior and ita dicuntur
esse Dii propinqui, i. e. there are three Gods as it is explained in the words
of the Book Zohar, R. Iose said, what is the meaning of those words, Deuteronomy. 4.7.
to whom the Gods are near, whereas it should have been said, to whom Gods are
near; but there is the superior God, there is the God of the Fear of Isaac,
and there is the inferior God, and so they are said to be Gods that are near.
And Martin Raimund, Pug. fid. p. 396. quo^es a passage out of Misdrasch Tillim,
in which there is mention made trium proprietatum quibus creatus est mundus, i.
e. of three Proprieties or Persons by whom the World was made. And to the same
purpose Rittangelius, in his Notes upon the Book Iezirah, quotes two passages
out of Imre Binah, Tria sunt primaria and primordialia capita and coaeterna,
idque testatur splendour eorum numerationesque intellectuales in aeternam
testantur Trinitatem Regis: There are three prime and primordial Heads and
Coeternal, and this their own light testifies, and the intellectual numerations
do eternally testify the Trinity of the King, p. 3. and 36. So also Ainsworth
on the first of Genesis quotes another passage from R. Simeon Ben Iocai in Z^ar
to the same purpose, which is this, Come and see the Mystery of the word
Elohim, there are three degrees, and every degree by its self alone, and yet
notwithstanding they all are one, and joined together in one, and are not
divided one from another. But to name no more, Grotius makes mention of some
ancient C^b^lists, quoted in a Book called Additamenta ad Lexicon Hebraicum
Schindleri, who distinguish God in Tria Lumina and quidem non^ulli iisdem
quibus Christiani nominibus Patris, Filii sive Verbi, and Spiritus Sancti, i.
e. into three Lights, which some of them call by the same names we Christians
do, viz. Father, Son or Word, and Holy Ghost; and indeed, as their most ancient
Writings do frequently make mention of the Word under the notion of a divine
Person, as has been showed before; so they do also the Ruach Hakkodesh or Holy
Spirit, to whom their most ancient Writers attribute all Prophecy or
Revelation; for so, as I find them quoted by learned men in Pirche, R. Eliezer,
c. 39. R. Phineas, inquit, requievit Spiritus Sanctus super Iosephum ab ipsius
Iuventute usque ad diem obitus ejus. i. e. the holy Spirit rested upon Joseph
from his youth till the day of his death. And c. 33. R. Phineas ait, postquam
omnes illi interfecti fuerant viginti annis in Babel requievit Spiritus Sanctus
super Ezekielem, and eduxit eum in convalle Dora and ostendit ei multa ossa,
etc. i. e. R. Phineas said, after they were all slain, the holy Spirit rested
twenty years upon Ezekiel in Babylon, and led him forth into the Valley of
Dora, and showed him a great number of bones; and indeed it was a Proverbial
speech of the Jewish Masters, as Maimonides tells us, More Nev. Part. 2. c. 45.
Majestas divina habitat super eum and loquitur per Spiritum Sanctum, i. e. the
divine Majesty dwells upon such a one, and he speaks by the Holy Ghost; and
that by this holy Spirit they anciently meant a real Person is evident, for so
Ionathans Paraphrase on Genesis 1.2. Spiritu misericordiarum qui est ab ante
Dominum, stante super faciem aquarum, i. e. the Spirit of mercies who is from
before the Lord standing upon the face of the Waters; and Bereschit Rabba
speaking of the Spirit that moved upon the face of the Water, Genesis 1.2.
expressly affirms, Hic est Spiritus Regis Messiae, this is the Spirit of Messiah
the King. So Ead. Hal. c. 12. Tempore Regis Messiae, quando constabilitum erit
regnum ejus and omnis populus ad ipsum collectus, recensebuntur singuli ex ore
Spiritus Sancti: In the time of Messiah the King, when his Kingdom shall be
established, every one shall be called over by the mouth of the Holy Ghost; in
which places there are things and actions expressly attributed to the Holy Ghost
which are proper only to a Person; and since by him they understood^ a Person,
they must necessarily suppose him a divine Person, since by what follows it
evidently appears that in their own Scriptures divine perfections were ascribed
to him; and by what has been said, that they believed three divine Persons in
the Godhead, and accordingly Eusebius tells us, (...), i. e. all the Hebrew
Divines do acknowledge after the most High God, and after his firstborn Wisdom
a third holy Power, whom they call the Holy Ghost, affirming him to be God, by
whom the Prophets were inspired, Praep. Evang. p. 327.

FINIS.

