Smyth Mayor.
Jovis xxx. die Julii, 1685. Annoque Regni Regis Jacobi Secundi Angl. etc.
primo.
THIS Court does desire Dr Scott to Print his Sermon Preached in the Parish
Church of S. Mary le Bow, on Sunday last, before the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and
Citizens of this City.

Wagstaffe.

August 10. 1685.
Imprimatur.

Hen. Maurice, Rmo Dom. Wmo Cant. Archipe. a Sacris.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Right Honorable THE Lord Mayor AND ALDERMEN Of
the CITY of LONDON. At St. Mary le Bow, July 26. 1685. BEING The Day of Public
Thanksgiving for His MAJESTY'S late Victory over the REBELS.

By JOHN SCOTT, D. D. Rector of St. Peter's Poor, London.

LONDON, Printed by R. N. for Rob. Horn at the South Entrance of the Royal
Exchange, and Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1685.

2 SAMUEL XVIII. 28. And Ahimaaz called and said unto the King, All is well. And
he fell down to the earth upon his face before the King, and said, Blessed be
the Lord thy God, which has delivered up the men that lift up their hand
against my Lord the King.


THIS Ahimaaz was a Soldier under Joab, in the battle which he fought with
Absalom, the Rebellious Son of his too kind and indulgent Father, King David;
who having newly pardoned him that unnatural murder of his brother Amnon, and
received him into grace and favor, and furnished him with a plentiful revenue,
and slendid equipage; so that if he had pleased, he might have lived in peace
and glory, and been a comfort to his Father, a Patriot to his Country, and a
blessing to his Family: and after he had finished the circle of a happy and
prosperous life, might have gone down with honor to his grave. The foolish
ungrateful young man, being thereto excited, partly perhaps by the insinuations
of a company of crafty Malcontents, but chiefly by his own Ambition,
imbarques himself in a wicked and desperate design, against his Father's Life
and Crown; in order whereunto, he industriously sets himself, by mean and poor
condescensions, to cajole and inveagle the rude and giddy Mobile; which, partly
by declaiming against the Male-administrations of his Father's Government,
partly by promising them a through reformation if ever he arrived to be a Judge
in Israel, he at length accomplished. And now having formed to himself a strong
and numerous party, he gets his Fathers leave to make a progress to Hebron, (a
factious town without doubt, and it lay Westward of Jerusalem) under pretense
of paying a Vow there; for so Religion is the usual sham of Rebellion: where
being arrived with 200 men out of Jerusalem, who followed him blindfold without
either fear or wit, he sends for one Achitophel, who had been a Councellor to
his Father, but at this time, as it seems probable, was discarded the Court for
some high misdemeanour: this cankered old wretch, glad of the opportunity to
revenge himself upon his Master, immediately joins interests with his undutiful
Son, and thereby increases his party into a strong and numerous Army, with
which he marches against his King and Father, and is overthrown in a pitched
battle; and notwithstanding his Father's orders to the contrary, is slain by
the hand of Joab, who wisely foresaw that David could never hope to Reign in
peace so long as the Rebel Absalom was alive. Hereupon Ahimaaz the son of
Zadock, a valiant Soldier, and swift and nimble footman, desires Joab his
General that he may be the messenger of the good tidings to the King; but Joab
having a kindness for the man, and wisely considering that the news of
Absalom's death would be very unwelcome to David, and in all probability
transport him into a high displeasure, and so prove fatal to the deliverer; at
first refuses to let him go, and in his room sends Cushi, who was either a
common or a foreign Soldier; but Ahimaaz upon his importunate desire, at length
obtains of Joab leave to follow him, and being much the nimbler, out-runs
Cushi, and being arrived into the King's presence, cries, All is well, being
unable either through excess of Joy, or want of breath to express his message
at lagre: after which having recovered himself a little, he throws himself at
the King's feet, and in a transport of Joy and Thanksgiving, thus expresses
himself, Blessed be the Lord thy God which has delivered up the men the lift
up their hand against my Lord the King.

In choosing which words for my Text upon this joyful occasion, God knows I
have no design to insult and trample on the memory of that woefully mislead and
unfortunate Gentleman, who was Captain of that late black Rebellion, the happy
overthrow and conclusion of which we are now thankfully commemorating. For
though it cannot be denied, but that his unnatural and undutiful behavior to
his late most gracious Father and Sovereign, did but too justly entitle him to
the Name and Character of Absalom; and that his Rebellion against, Infidelity
to, and barbarous aspersions of his present Majesty, who was always his
generous Patron and Benefactor, do but too deservedly brand him the perfidious
and ungrateful Absalom: yet considering the Relation he bore to our late dear
Sovereign of ever blessed Memory, the promising blossom of his Youth, before it
was blasted with wild and boundless ambition, and the glorious sphere in which
he once moved, where, had he not aspired to the Seat of the Sun, he might have
shone among Stars of the first magnitude, and shed forth a benign influence
upon his Country and Family. Considering these things, I say, I am so far from
triumphing on his ruin, that I heartily lament and bewail his being seduced
into the crimes that were the cause of it, and detest those cursed Achitophels
that seduced him, only to make him the tool of their own dire revenge and
restless ambition: and if God so please, may that same Justice which has
reached him, lay hands on them, and by a yet more infamous punishment revenge
his sin and ruin on their heads. And since his memory cannot live with honor,
I heartily wish it might dye in oblivion, that so having paid that debt which
Law and Justice and the necessary reasons of things exacted of him, it might
never hereafter be remembered against him, how desperately he broke through all
the ties of Nature, Honor, Gratitude and Religion, to precipitate himself into
a shameful and untimely fate. But this being only a hopeless wish, I shall in
pity to his memory, forbear running the odious parallel between Absalom and
him, through all the black circumstances of their sin and punishment, having
said enough already, and yet no more than what was necessary, to explain the
sutableness of the Text to the occasion, Blessed be the Lord thy God who has
delivered up the men that lift up their hand against my Lord the King: In which
words there are two things observable.

First, The great concern and interest God has in the overthrow of Rebels, It
is he that delivers 'em up.

Secondly, The great cause we have to return thanks to God when he delivers 'em
up.

I shall begin with the first od these, viz. The great concern and interest God
has in the ovethrow of Rebels, It is he who delivers 'em up. It Is true the
success of War, on which side soever it lights, depends upon the divine
Providence, which having the disposal of all events, whether they be adverse or
prosperous, turns the scale of victory on which side it pleases: for the second
causes upon which success and victory ordinarily depends, is the good conduct
of those who command, and the strength and courage and expertness of those that
execute; all which are under the command and sovereign disposal of God, who if
he pleases can infatuate the wisest and most skilful Commanders, blindfold
their judgments, confound their reason, and turn their wisdom into folly, so
that they shall run quite counter to their own designs, and blow up themselves
with their own trains; who if he does not infatuate 'em, can yet frustrate
their wisdom, and by a thousand accidents which they can neither foresee nor
prevent, baffle and defeat their most prudent and promising designs; who if he
pleases can divide and break the strength of the most numerous, dissolve and
confound the order of the best disciplined, melt and emasculate the courage of
the most resolute Armies; and having the sovereign disposal of all the second
causes of success in his hands, it is he alone that can decide the Battle and
determine the hovering Victory to which side he pleases; so that whether it
lights on the right or wrong side, on the usurping Rebels, or lawful Prince's
Crest, it is by his all-disposing direction and appointment: for though the
horse is prepared for battle, and secondary causes concur as means and
instruments, yet victory is of the Lord, Prove. 21.31. And though sometimes for
wise and righteous ends he permits unjust Arms to prosper and triumph over a
Righteous cause, of which we have a woeful instance in our memory; yet
ordinarily and regularly he declares on the righteous side, and awards success
according to the Justice of the cause. For Battle is an appeal to God, in which
the contending Parties join issue to put their case into his hands, and refer
the justice of their cause to his award and determination; and being hereby
constituted the sole arbitrator between 'em, he ordinarily decides the victory
according to the right of the case; and, unless there be some very great reason
moving him to the contrary, awards it to the juster side. They therefore who
make and unjust War, appeal to God in a wrong cause; and therefore have all the
reason in the world to expect that he will decide against 'em, and finally
award the victory to their enemies.

It Is true, God is not obliged in justice, always to determine the Victory to
the Just cause: for there may be just reasons, and many times there are, moving
him to the quite contrary. Sometimes it may be more for the public good, of
which he is the great conservator, that this particular righteous cause should
miscarry, than that it should prosper and succeed; in which case it is but
reasonable that he should rather permit a particular mischief, than hinder a
public convenience. Sometimes a good cause may be more effectually advanced by
a present overthrow, than by a victory; and when this happens, it is a good
reason why God should at present pronounce the sentence of victory on the
contrary side. Sometimes it may be necessary to deny success to those who have
the righteous cause on their side, in order to the crowning it with some
greater blessing; and to take away a less good, to make room for a greater, is
such an exchange, as is far from Robbery. And lastly, Sometimes for the sins of
those on the right side may be such as do render it not only fit, but necessary
for God to make 'em examples to the world, of his righteous severity. And what
greater severity can he express, than to abandon a good cause, and rather
permit it to fall to the ground, than see it upheld and supported by impious
and profane hands? But though there are these, and sundry other just reasons
why God should not always award success and victory to the right side; yet
doubtless he ordinarily does so: for all war is either between one Prince and
Nation and another, or else between Princes and rebellious Subjects. Now as for
the first, it is in most cases impossible for us certainly to determine which
of the two parties has the rightful cause; because we do not understand the
pretensions on both sides, nor are we capable of judging of those nice reasons,
and intricate circumstances upon which their opposite claims depend; and
therefore though we through our pity and ignorance together, do commonly
pronounce the vanquished cause the best, and upon that account do foolishly
murmur at the decisions of Providence, as if they were unjust and unequal; yet
God, who sees through all the circumstances of things, does many times most
certainly know the contrary, and so determines the case contrary to our blind
pity and ignorance, according to his own infallible judgment: and had we but
the understanding of God, I make no doubt but we should find many of those
prosperous causes which we condemn for unjust, to be most just and righteous,
and be fully satisfied, that the awards of Providence in the case are much more
equal than we imagine. But then, as for the other sort of war, viz. That
between Princes and their rebellious Subjects, it is evident that Providence
does much more constantly decide the success to the just and righteous cause,
and give judgment on the side of the injured Prince, against the Rebellious and
usurping Subjects. For if you consult History, you will find, that though for
just and righteous ends, God has sometimes permitted Rebellions to succeed;
yet where he has prospered one, he has usually cursed and blasted twenty. And
indeed, since War, as was before observed, is an appeal to God, the great
Arbitrator of all events; there are peculiar reasons why he should more
constantly declare himself for the right side in a Rebellious war, than in any
other:

First, Because Rebellion is an apppeal to him, in a cause that is plainly and
apparently unjust.

Secondly, Because it is an appeal to him, in a cause that very nearly touches
and effects his own Authority.

Thirdly, Because it is an appeal to him, in a cause that is of all others most
destructive of humane Society.

Meum's and Tuum's of Princes and Nations, being very often so blended and
confounded by Conquests, Leagues, and Intermarriages, and revolutions of
Empire; that it is not only difficult, but sometimes impossible to determine on
which side the Right lies: and though the contending Princes may in most cases,
perhaps, be able to inform themselves, whether the Cause they contend for be
right or wrong; yet the people can be no competent Judges of it, but are
obliged to acquiesce in their Princes judgment, and to follow 'em with an
implicit faith: so that if they are in the wrong, it is through invincible
ignorance, which renders their case extremely pitiable and excusable before the
just and righteous Tribunal of God. And therefore though He most perfectly
understands on which side the Right lies, be the case never so perplexed or
intricate, yet his compassion to their mistaken innocence, may in concurrence
with other reasons, especially when their enemies sins do outvy the justice of
their cause, sometimes prevail with him to give judgment of Victory on their
side. But as for Rebellion, the injustice of it is far more visible and
apparent, every man knows, or might easily know, if he were not extremely
wanting to himself, that his King is the Vicegerent of his God; and that being
so, he is indispensibly obliged by all the ties of Reason and Religion to
submit to his Will, and reverence his Person, and bow to his Authority; and
that he cannot lift up his hand against him, without fighting against God
himself; the truth of which is as obvious to our natural reason, and as plainly
asserted in holy Scripture, as of any Proposition in Religion: so that I dare
boldly affirm a Man may find as fair pretexts for any vice whatsoever, even for
Drunkenness, Whoredom or Perjury, as ever were made for Rebellion. And were I
to set up for a public Patron of wickedness, I hardly know a villainy in nature
so black and monstrous, which I could not more plausibly recommend to Men's
reason and consciences, than this of resistance against lawful Authority; which
is such a complication of Villainies, such a loathsome mixture of Hellish
Ingredients, as is enough to nauseate any Conscience but a Devil's. And though
Conscience and Religion are the Colors it usually marches under, yet is the
imposture of this pretense so fulsome and barefaced, that no Man in his wits
can be innocently abused by it. For certainly that Man must have a great mind
to rebel, his will must have a strong Bias of pride or discontent, faction or
ambition in it, that in despite of all the evidence from Reason and Scripture
to the contrary, can persuade himself that it is lawful for him, and much less
that it is his duty to lift up his hand against his Sovereign. And therefore
for Men to appeal to God in a cause so apparently wicked, is not submissively
to refer themselves to him, but openly to mock and affront him; were the case
obscure and difficult, though it were unjust, it were excusable, and might
fairly admit of a reference to the righteous arbitration of God: but to make a
vexatious appeal to his Judgment again, in a case which he has so often and so
expressly judged already, is a common Barratry; it is not to consult but to tempt
him, and under pretense of submitting to his determination, openly to defy his
authority: in effect, it is to appeal from his will to his providence, and to
bespeak him to declare himself against his own declaration. In this case
therefore where the injustice of the cause is so apparent, and consequently the
appeal to him about it is so profane and insolent, God is more peculiarly
concerned as sovereign arbitrator to award for the right side, by delivering up
the Rebel as a sacrifice to the just Revenge of his injured Prince.

in the World; and if it be all derived from him, then all those persons who
are vested with supreme Authority under him, must derive and hold it
immediately from him; and if they hold it immediately from him, they can be
accountable for the exercise of it to none but him: and if so, then for any of
their Subjects to presume to call 'em to account by a public formed
Resistance, is to arraign God's own Authority, and invade his peculiar; it is to
thrust him out of his Throne, and set themselves down in it, and there to
summon his Authority before 'em, and require it to submit its awful head to
their impious doom and sentence. For since in their several dominions all
sovereign powers are next to and immediately under God, it is by his Commission
alone that they act, and therefore to his Tribunal alone that they are
accountable: so that by resisting them, we do as directly resist God, whose
Deputy-Governours they are, as a Neopolitan does the King of Spain, by levying
Arms against his Viceroy of Naples; and by refusing to obey their just and
lawful commands, we demur to God's Authority, who in every Just thing they
impose or require, speaks to us by their mouths, and commands us by their Laws:
for so the Scripture tells us, not only that they are ordained of God, and that
to resist them is to resist the Ordinance of God, not only that they are the
Ministers of God; and that therefore for Conscience sake, or in reverence to
his Authority, which they bear, they are to be obeyed, Romans 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
but also that they judge for God, and not for men, 2 Chronicles. 19.6 and that
therefore their judgment is God's, Deuteronomy. 1.17. Whilst therefore we behave our
selves factiously and rebelliously toward those whom God has set over us, we
live as Outlaws in the Kingdom of God, without any respect to that visible
Authority by which he governs the World. And if this be so, then for Subjects
to rebel against their Prince, is neither better nor worse, than to appeal to
God against his own Authority, and to put this impious case to him, whether it
be He or they that have the right of Governing the World: for this is the
natural language of every rebellious appeal to God; Lord, we refer it to thee,
whether it be not just and lawful for us to take up Arms against thee, to
renounce and cast off thy Dominion over us, and fly in the face of all that
visible Authority by which thou art pleased to rule and govern us. Judge now we
beseech thee, between thy self and us, let the event decide the right of the
case, and do thou prosper and succeed us in this our undertaking, according to
the justice and righteousness of our cause. When therefore his own Authority is
thus nearly touched, by an appeal so Impious and Audacious, it is high time for
him, unless some mighty reason intervene to the contrary, to stir up his
strength, and make bare his Arm, in the vindication of his injured right, and
affronted Authority; and by delivering up the insolent Rebel to condign
punishment, to assert and maintain his Dominion over the world.

Thirdly and Lastly, Rebellion is an appeal of his Government is the public
good; that being infinitely happy within himself, and from the immense
perfections of his own nature, he can have no self ends to serve in ruling and
governing the world; but that his great design is to Bless his Subjects, and by
diffusing his goodness through the world, to make 'em all partakers of his
happiness. And if it be so, then we may certainly depend upon it; that as those
things and actions are most grateful to him, which are most beneficial, so
those are most odious and offensive to him, which are most prejudicial to the
world. Now there is no one thing whatsoever that is more beneficial to the
world than Government, which is the soul of Humane Society, by which it exists
and operates, without which it must inevitably dissolve, and its united parts
immediately disband and fly in pieces. For an ungoverned Society of men, is no
better than a herd of Wolves and Tigers, whose cross interests, inconsistent
humors, extravagant passions and affections, are perpetually prompting 'em to
tear and worry one another; by reason of which it is impossible for 'em to live
together with any comfort or security, but either they must submit their
passions to be restrained by Law, and their interests to be balanced and
adjusted by Government, or withdraw themselves like other beasts of prey into
dens and secret retirements, and there live poor and solitary as Batts and Owls
do, and subsist like Vermin by robbing and filching from one another. Since
therefore Government is so indispensably necessary for the Commonweal of men,
to be sure, God, who is supreme Lord of all, and the great end of whose
Government is the good of the whole, must have a very tender respect and regard
for it, and an implacable aversion to every thing that is destructive to it.
Now it is certain, there is nothing so destructive to Government as Rebellion:
For as for wars between Prince and Prince, and Nation and Nation, they are
indeed the plagues and scourges of Nations, by reason of the slaughters and
devastations they carry with 'em; but they subvert not Government, which is the
life of Nations: whereas Rebellion carries the same slaughters and devastations
with it; and besides that, it strikes at the very foundations of Government.
For though the design of the Leaders of Rebellion, is not to destroy
Government, but to usurp and ravish it out of the hands of the lawful
possessors; yet their practice tends directly to the destruction of it. For
whenever Subjects levy Arms against their Sovereign, they actually throw off
the yoke of his Government; and if they may throw off his, they may for the
same reason throw off another, till at last they have thrown off all, and
utterly dissolve themselves into a wild Tumult and Confusion: which being once
admitted, Government can have no other foundation to rest on, but the humor and
caprice of a wild multitude that is to be governed no otherwise, and no longer
than it pleases. And how is it possible for any frame of Government whatsoever
to subsist upon such fickle and mutable principles: So that when Subjects Rebel
against their Sovereign, they appeal to God against the very being of
Government it self, which is the life and soul of all humane Society, and do in
effect desire him finally to determine by the issue and event of things,
whether it be just and reasonable, that they should be ruled and governed. When
therefore the point they contend for, is so apparently destructive to humane
Society, of which he himself is the supreme head and Sovereign, and the final
decision of it is referred to his Arbitration: We have all the reason in the
world to presume, that he who is the God of order and not of confusion, will,
without some mighty inducement to the contrary, damn the Rebels cause, and
award success and Victory to the Government.

Since therefore there are so many peculiar reasons why the Lord of hosts, the
mighty God of War, should arm his Almighty power against the Rebelliuos: this
ought to caution us not to engage our selves in any Factious, Disloyal or
Rebellious design against our Prince and Government; because in so doing, we
take the most effectual course that it is possible for men to do, to oblige the
Almighty Providence of Heaven to fight against us. For there is no one sin in
all the black Catalogue of the works of darkness, which God is more concerned
to punish in this life, than this of Treason and Rebellion. And accordingly if
you consult those monuments of divine vengeance, which are transmitted to us,
both in Sacred and Profane history, you will find that there are none of any
sort so numerous and remarkable, as the dire and infamous Tragedies or Rebels.
And though from these no certain conclusion can be made of the fate and issue
of all particular Rebellions, because there are instances of some that have
prospered and succeeded; and particularly of one among our selves, and in our
memory, which next to the Rebellion of the fallen Angels, was perhaps the most
Barbarous and Infamous that was ever acted on the stage of nature. Yet this I
am certain of, that were it my design to draw down some exemplary judgment on
my own head, and even to entail the vengeance of heaven, upon my self and my
prosperity, I could not propose to my self a more probable and effectual way,
than Rebellion: Which of all the crimes and villainies that have ever been
perpetrated, either by Devils or men, has ever proved most fatal to the Actors
of it. Wherefore as we would not make our selves the marks of divine vengeance,
and expose our guilty heads to its Almighty Thunderbolts, it concerns us to be
very careful that we do not swerve from our due Allegiance to our Prince, that
we do not suffer our Pride or discontent to prey upon our Loyalty, nor imbibe
Seditious Principles, nor intriegue our selves with factious Combinations,
which are the Seminaries of Rebellion: but that out of an awful fear and dread
of God, we honor and obey the King; and avoid, as we would the Air of a
Plague Sore, meddling with those that are given to change.

I now proceed to the second observable in the Text, viz. That God's delivering
up of Rebels, is a just ground of praise and thansgiving to him; for the proof
of which I shall not need to urge any other argument, than the signal defeat
and overthrow of his late Rebellion, for which we are now rendering our
thankful acknowledgments to God. For considering the temper and quality of the
Persons, of which this unnatural Rebellion was composed, a very small Prophet
may easily prognosticate, to what a deplorable condition this Nation must have
been reduced, if it had prosper'd and succeeded; for it was nothing but a
common shore, into which all the kennels of the Nation ran, being partly made
up of the most debauched and profligate Atheists, that had broke through all
the Laws of humanity, and stripped themselves so naked of all the show of Piety
and Virtue, that they had not hypocrisy enough remaining to disguise their
lewd and villainous intentions; partly of beggarly Malcontents, who had no
other way to repair their broken fortunes, but by running in to the shipwreck
of the Nation; but chiefly of hot-brained furious Sectaries, whose blind zeal,
like the Devil in the possessed Man, threw 'em into Fire and Water, transported
and hurried 'em into any villainy, into Perjury and Murder, Treason and
Sacrilege, and would not permit 'em to stop at any thing, that made for the
Interest of their cause: such were the Ingredients of this poisonous mixture.
So that had God for our sins permitted it to prevail, we had quickly seen a
flourishing Kingdom, like Herod in all his glory and splendour, seized on, eaten
up by Lice, by a swarm of the basest and most infamous Vermin that ever bred
out of the filth of a Nation: We had seen the Atheist glutting his lust with
the rapes of our Wives and Daughters, and quaffing the tears of Widows and
Orphans: we had seen the beggar on Horseback flaunting in the spoils of our
fortunes, and triumphing on the heads of our Nobles and Gentry; and the bloody
Enthusiast imbrewing his hands in Loyal blood, appeasing his furious zeal again
with Royal Sacrifice, and throwing down all that is Sacred in our Jerusalem, to
make way for the erecting his Phanatick Babel, his Tumult and confusion of
Religions: in a word, we had seen our Laws trampled on, our Liberties inslaved,
and our yet Sacred and Virgin Throne, to our everlasting infamy, deflowred and
profaned by a spurious illegitimate Issue. With this dire spectacle our eyes
had most certainly been entertained, had this black Rebellion succeeded:
wherefore our Gracious God being moved to commiseration, by this woeful prospect
of our approaching Calamity, roused up himself like a mighty Man of War, and
with an avengeful eye looked down upon this Host of Assyrians, and with the
breath of his Nostrils, scattered the Rebellious Rout before him. Wherefore not
unto us, O Lord, not to our conduct or puissance, but to thy Name be all the
Glory and Honor. And since we are all of us sharers in this Great Deliverance,
it is just we should all return the Tribute of our Praise to our Great
Deliverer. O give thanks unto the Lord therefore for he is good, because his
Mercy endures for ever. Let Israel now say that his Mercy endures for ever.
Let the House of Aaron now say that his Mercy endures for ever. Let all them
that fear the Lord say that his Mercy endures for ever.

And as the best Return of Gratitude we can make to God, let us by our future
Loyalty to his Illustrious Vicegerent, by our firm relyance on his Royal
Promises, which hitherto have been ever sacred and inviolate, by our cheerful
submission to his Laws, and constant forwardness to oppose and detect all
treasonous designs against his Person and Government, endeavor as much as in
us lies to render his Reign safe and easy, and prosperous. And by our
immovable constancy in the profession and practice of our holy Religion, the
most pure and unsophisticated, the most Primitive and Loyal Religion of the
Church of England: let us endeavor to indear our selves to God, that so by our
faithful supplications we may prevail with God to fix the Crown upon his Royal
Head, to guard and protect his Sacred Person, to bless and secure his
Government, to abate the Pride, assuage the Malice, and confound the devices of
his Enemies; and after he has enjoyed a long, a pious and prosperous Reign
upon Earth, to Crown him with everlasting Glory in Heaven. To which Prayer I am
sure all that are the genuine Sons of the Church of England will with a true
Heart and Zealous affection say, Amen.

FINIS.

