Johannes Scott S. T. P.


PRACTICAL DISCOURSES Concerning OBEDIENCE, AND THE Love of God.

Vol. II.

By JOHN SCOTT, D. D. late Rector of St. Giles's in the Fields.

LONDON: Printed for W. Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard; and S. Manship at the Ship near the Royal Exchange in Cornhill,
MDCXCVIII.

To the Right Honorable DANIEL, Earl of Nottingham.
MY LORD,
I Am very sensible, that you are the known Favourer of Men of eminent Worth
and Learning; I only take this Opportunity of acquainting the World, that You
were so, of the Author of these following Discourses, that so you may receive
in larger Measures those Tributes which are due to Public Benefactors, the
Prayers and Praises of Mankind; For they who have, or shall be bettered by This
great Author's Works, are obliged in a peculiar Manner to remember that Right
Honorable Person, who by his Countenance did not only encourage him to be
serviceable, but did really endeavor to render him more useful to us, by
procuring for him a little Recess from the Toil and Labors of his weighty
Employment: Had this succeeded, in all Humane Probability he had lived longer,
and then we should have seen that truly Pious and most sublime Design he
intended to pursue; and should have been well acquainted with that uncultivated
part of Religion, The Duties of Piety toward God: And perhaps by Them, we
should have given a guess at the Praises and Hallelujahs of those blessed Beings
above, when they had been managed with that Strength of Eloquence, that Fervor
of Spirit, poised and tempered with such a Judgment as his. But he is gone to
bear a part in the Heavenly Choir, where (if he knows what is done here below)
it will be a pleasing Prospect to my dear departed Friend, to see Your Lordship
and your Noble Family, the Possessors and designed Heirs of the Honors of both
Worlds. I am,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble and most devoted Servant, HUMPHREY ZOUCH.

1 JOHN V.3. For this is the love of God, that we keep his Commandments; and
his Commandments are not grievous.
IN the first Verse the Apostle asserts, that whosoever believes that Jesus is
the Christ, that is, so believes as to act suitable to his Belief, is born of
God; he is become a Child of God by partaking of his Nature, and stamped with
his Likeness; and every one that loves him that begat, i. e. God his Heavenly
Father, loves him also that is begotten of him, has a true hearty Kindness
for all that are God's Children. And then in the second Verse, by this, says
he, we know that we love the Children of God, and consequently that we are born
of God, if we love God and keep his Commandments; that is, if we so love him as
to keep his Commandments. And indeed, if we do not so love him, we do not love
him at all, and consequently we do not love his Children, nor are we his
Children our selves; of which he gives a full Proof in the Text; for this is
the love of God, that we keep his Commandments; and his Commandments are not
grievous.

In which Words, you have First an Account of the Love of God, what it is; This
is the love of God, that we keep his Commandments: and Secondly, a Motive to
engage us to the Practice of it, and his Commandments are not grievous.

I begin with the first of these, the Account of this Love of God, what it is;
This is the Love of God, that we keep his Commandments. By the Love of God here
we are not to understand God's Love to us, but our Love to God, as is plain by
this, because it is placed in our keeping his Commandments. This is the Love of
God, that is, this is the natural Effect and proper Exercise of the Love of
God; for it is certain that keeping God's Commandments is not the Affection of
Love to him, but the Effect of it. So that the Meaning of the Words is this,
this is the most genuine Expression and inseparable Effect of our Love of God,
that we obey his Laws. And hence our Savior makes this the proper Trial and
Proof of our Love to him, If ye love me, keep my Commandments, John xiv.15. for
this he tells us, ver. 23. is the necessary Consequence of our Love to him; If
any man love me, he will keep my words, i. e. this will most certainly be the
Effect of his Love to me, that he will be obedient to my Will. And by this he
plainly tells us he will judge of the Sincerity of our Friendship to him, John
xv.14. Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. From all which it
is evident, that the most proper and characteristical Expression of our Love to
God, is our keeping his Commandments. And indeed considering that God is our
Sovereign Lawgiver, there are no Actions by which we can so naturally express
our Affection to him, as by those of Obedience and Submission to his Laws; and
therefore we find in Scripture, that to love God, and obey his Laws, and to
hate God and disobey them, are generally used promiscuously for one another,
and that for very good reason; for here our Love and Hatred of God are not
considered as conversant about God as God (in which sense perhaps there is no
Creature in the World can be said to hate him) but as conversant about him as
Lord and Governor of the World; as he gives Laws to Mankind, whereby he
commands them what to do, and forbids them what to avoid. And in this Sense, to
love God is to love him as Governing and Commanding, and as such, we can no
otherwise express our Love to him, but by keeping his Commandments. But for the
farther clearing of this, I shall in Prosecution of the Argument do these two
Things: I. Show you that wheresoever the Love of God is, it will most certainly
prove a Principle of Obedience to him. II. That the Love of God is in it self
the most perfect and effectual Principle of Obedience.


1. That wheresoever the Love of God is, it will most certainly prove a
Principle of Obedience to him. And this, I doubt not, will evidently appear, if
we consider that all the natural Expressions of our Love, as it is terminated
upon God, do of their own accord finally resolve themselves into Obedience to
his Will. For Love, wheresoever it is hearty and sincere, always expresses it
self in such Symptoms as these;

1. In industriously endeavoring to resemble the Beloved.

2. In conforming the Will, Designs, and Intentions, to the Will, and Designs,
and Intentions of the Beloved.

3. In a solicitous Care of avoiding those Things which may any ways displease
or distaste the Beloved.

4. In a cheerful Readiness to undergo any thing, be it never so hard or
difficult, for the sake of the Beloved. All which Expressions of our Love, when
it is terminated upon God, do most naturally run into Obedience to his Will.

1. If we love God, our Love will express it self in endeavoring to resemble
him. For every Man esteems what he loves to be lovely, and we naturally wish
that that were in our selves which we esteem to be lovely in another; that so
being like him, we may appear as lovely in his Eyes as he does in ours. And so
if we love God, we must necessarily esteem him exceeding lovely and amiable,
and that which we esteem and love as lovely in him, we cannot but wish for and
desire in our selves out of a natural Affectation of Loveliness: And that he
may have the same Reason to love us as we have to love him, we must needs
desire to resemble him in all those amiable Things that do endear him to us.
But now those Beauties in God being all of them only moral, which are the
immediate Objects of our Love to him, are capable of being transcribed by
Imitation, and made ours by copying and writing after them in our Actions; so
that if we heartily desire to partake of them, our Desire will necessarily
engage us to imitate them; for how can we be said heartily to desire that Good
which we may have, but will take no Care to acquire? I confess, did we love him
for his Eternity, or his Power, or his Immensity, we might wish to be like him,
but all in vain; because in these Perfections we are not capable of imitating
him: But the Beauties for which we love him, are his Goodness, and Wisdom, and
Righteousness, and Mercy, and the like; all which being imitable by us, we may,
if we please, derive into our selves, and transcribe into our own Natures. So
that if we love God, we must necessarily desire to resemble him in those Things
for which we love him; and those things being all of an imitable nature, our
Desire of resembling him will oblige and excite us to a careful and constant
Imitation of him. But now to obey God, and to imitate him in those Moral
Perfections for which we love him, are one and the same thing. Thus when I obey
God in being universally just and righteous toward himself and all his
Creation, I imitate him in that essential Justice and Equity of his Nature,
which is the eternal Rule of all his Actions. When I obey him in doing good to
all that are within the Reach of my Charity, I imitate him in the overflowing
Bounty and unlimited Goodness of his Nature. In a word, when I obey him in
forgiving those that injure me, I imitate him in his boundless Mercy, and
Readiness to forgive Offenders. And in fine, all our Obedience is comprehended
in being pure as he is pure, and holy as he is holy; in being good as he is
good, just as he is just, merciful as he is merciful: For though the Acts and
Expressions of these Moral Perfections in us are in many Instances different
from what they are in God, by reason of that Difference of Natures, Relations,
and Circumstances that there is between him and us; yet the Perfections in
general are of the same kind in him and us, though the particular Expressions
of them are various by reason of those accidental Differences. For though he
does not do all those particular Actions which he requires of us, and
consequently we in doing those Actions cannot be said to imitate the same
Actions in God; yet we imitate God in the general, in doing those Actions which
he himself would have done, had he had our Natures, and been in our Relations
and Circumstances. Thus God does not pray, because he has none superior to
him; nor humble himself, because he is infinitely great and perfect; nor
practice Chastity and Temperance, because he is a pure Spirit, and has no
Commerce with bodily Affections; and consequently we in doing of these Actions
cannot be said to imitate the same Actions in God, because he does not the
same. But he constantly does whatsoever is reasonable for him to do as God, and
as Governor of the World, and never varies in the least Punctilio from the
eternal Rules of Equity and Goodness; by which he gives a glorious Example unto
all his Reasonable Creatures, to excite both Angels and Men to do what is fit
and reasonable for them in their several States and Relations: And what is
reasonable for us Men to do, he has declared to us in his Laws; so that by
obeying his Laws we imitate God in the general, by doing what is reasonable for
us; though what is reasonable for God and us, whose Natures and Relations are
so different, be not the same in all particular Instances. So that in general
you see, to obey and imitate God is but the same Thing in other Words.
Wherefore since the Love of God does necessarily include a Desire of resembling
him, and that Desire necessarily produces a constant and vigorous Imitation of
him, and that Imitation is all one with obeying him; it hence necessarily
follows, that if our Love of him be sincere, it must finally resolve into
Obedience. For how can I love God, and not think him lovely? How can I think
him lovely, and not desire to be like him? How can I desire to be like him, and
not take Care to imitate him? And how else can I imitate him, but by obeying
him?

2. If we love God, our Love will conform our Wills, Designs, and Intentions to
the Will, Designs, and Intentions of God. For Love always unites the Will of
the Lover to the Will of the Beloved; and if it be mutual, it twists them
together into one Will, and confounds all their Discords into a perfect
Harmony; because Love does necessarily conclude in it Benevolence, which
consists in an unfeigned Will that all may go well with him whom we love; that
he may enjoy every Good that he wills, and accomplish every Desire, Design, and
Intention, so far as it is good and reasonable for him. So that supposing that
the Beloved be but his own Friend, that he wills and designs and pursues
nothing but what is really good and grateful to him; the Lover, as such, ought
necessarily to conspire with him in the same Will, and Designs, and Pursuits.
If therefore we heartily love God, we cannot but will what he wills, and design
and intend what he intends and designs; every Motion of that first great Mover
will be an effectual Law to govern all our Motions, and our Wills, and Desires,
and Designs, and Intentions, like the lesser Wheels of an Automaton, will
presently run at the first Impulse of that great Master-Wheel without the least
Rub or Hesitation, and in despite of all the Contentions of a rebellious Flesh,
and all the Counter-strivings of a perverse ungovernable Heart, our Love will
so captivate our Wills to God's, that between him and us there will be but one
Will, and End, and Interest. And our Wills being thus subjected to him by the
invincible Necessity of Love, all our inferior Powers, like smaller Garrisons
when the Master-Fort is taken, will presently surrender of their own accord.
For no Man can be a Rebel to God whether he will or no; because the Will is the
commanding Principle, and has such an absolute Empire over all our Actions,
that it is impossible for us to do what we will not. So that if we will and
design what God wills and designs, our Practice must necessarily be conformable
to his Will, so far as we know and understand it; for as God's Will gives Law
to ours, so our Will gives Law to our Actions, and so by consequence the Will
of God must be the Sovereign Law whereby both are regulated and determined.
From hence therefore it is evident, that if we sincerely love God, we shall
will as he wills; and that if we will as he wills, we shall act as he would
have us; and therefore for any Man to say that he loves God while he wills
contrary to his Will, or that his Will is reconciled to God's while he acts
contrary to his Commands, is gross Hypocrisy and deep Dissimulation: For as the
Love of God resolves necessarily into an Union of Wills with him, so that Union
of Wills resolves necessarily into Obedience to his Laws.

3. If we love God, that Love will express it self in a solicitous Care of
avoiding every Thing that may displease or distaste him. For the greatest
Ambition of Love is to appear lovely and amiable in the Eyes of its Beloved;
and that it may do so, it does most studiously avoid whatsoever may be
displeasing or distastful to it; and most industriously endeavors to adorn it
self with all those obliging Graces that are apt to endear and recommend it.
And so if we love God we cannot but desire to be lovely in his Eyes; and that
Desire, if it be sincere and hearty, must necessarily engage us to an endeavor
of acquiring whatsoever is amiable and pleasing, and of avoiding whatsoever is
hateful and grievous to him. But now Virtue and true Goodness are the only
Beauties that do endear us to God, and render us lovely in his Eyes, and Sin
and Wickedness the only Deformities for which he hates and abhors us: For his
Love and Hatred are not regulated like ours, by the unaccountable Impulses of a
mutable Fancy, but by steady and eternal Rules; so that he can never love what
he once hated, nor hate what he once loved. For the Immutability of God's Love
and Hatred consists not in this, that he always loves and hates the same
Persons, but that he always loves and hates Persons for the same Reason and
Motive. And indeed that Love is but a foolish Fondness, that Hatred but an
unreasonable Antipathy, that, without any reasonable Motive, always determines
on the same Person: And if God loves and hates our Persons upon reasonable
Motives, his Love and Hatred would be fickle and mutable, if when those Motives
cease his Love and Hatred should continue. If he should continue to love us
when the Reason is wholly ceased that first moved him thereunto, he must either
love us for no Reason, which would be a foolish Fondness, or he must love us
for contrary Reasons, which would be Fickleness and Inconstancy: And therefore
when God ceases to love and hate the same Persons when the Reason of his loving
and hating them ceases, it proceeds not from the Inconstancy, but the
Immutability of his Love and Hatred; for though they may change their Objects,
yet they can never change their Reasons. For the Reasons of God's Love and
Hatred are in the Objects whom he loves and hates; and therefore if he changes
the Objects of his Love and Hatred, and when they themselves are changed, if he
love a Person whom he hated when that Person is changed from hateful to lovely;
or hate a Person whom he loved when that Person is changed from lovely to
hateful; it is not he that changes, but the Persons who are the Objects of his
Love or his Hatred: For amidst all Changes of Objects, his Love and Hatred are
eternally the same, because they are eternally fixed and determined to the same
Reasons. But now his Love being naturally founded in Likeness, what can we
suppose should be the Reason of God's Love or Hatred to us, but only our
Likeness or Vnlikeness to himself? For if we resemble him in that Goodness, and
Truth, and Purity, and Justice, which are essential to his Nature, he must
needs love us for his own sake, because we partake of his Nature, and are
allied to him by a Similitude of Temper and Perfections. But then when we are
not only unlike, but contrary to him; when we are impure, spightful, and
malicious; when we are false, unrighteous, and unreasonable; he has an
Antipathy against us founded in his very Nature, and he can no more love us
whilst we are so contrarily disposed to him, than he can hate himself.
Wherefore since there is nothing can render us lovely in God's Eyes but only
our resembling him in Purity and Goodness, nothing can render us hateful,
offensive, and distastful to him, but our being impure, and wicked, and unlike
him; it hence necessarily follows, that we can no otherwise render our selves
amiable to him, no otherwise avoid offending and grieving him, but only by
keeping his Commandments; for therein all those Graces are enjoined wherein our
Resemblance of him consists; and all those Vices are forbid that are contrary
to him, and do deform us in his Eyes. So that by doing his Will, we imitate his
Nature; and shall acquire such a god-like Temper of Mind, as will render us
more glorious and lovely in his Esteem, than if we were decked with Stars, or
clothed in a Robe of Sunbeams; whereas on the contrary, by disobeying his
Will we contract such an Vnlikeness and Contrariety to him, as renders us more
offensive to him than the most loathsome Deformities in Nature. For in God's
eyes there is nothing ugly but Sin, nothing amiable but Virtue and true
Goodness. Wherefore since our Love of God necessarily includes an earnest
Desire of rendering our selves lovely and amiable in his Esteem, and since we
have no other way to accomplish this Desire but only by keeping his
Commandments; it hence necessarily follows, that we cannot sincerely love him
whilst we disobey him. For with what Confidence can we pretend to love him,
when it is indifferent to us whether we render our selves lovely or loathsome
to him; when by disobeying his Will we wilfully contract those Deformities
which we know he abhors, and which are more odious in his Eyes than any of the
most loathsome Spectacles in Nature? Is it possible that true Love should
consist with taking Pleasure in the only Things that can grieve and offend its
Object? Or were there ever such Lovers heard of, that affected the Deformities
that were most hateful to the Beloved? No, no; he that heartily loves, must
desire to be beloved; and he that desires to be beloved, must desire to be
lovely. Wherefore since nothing is lovely in God's Eyes but what is like God,
and we cannot be like him, unless we keep his Commandments; what an Immodesty
is it in us to pretend to love him while we choose to disobey him?

4. And lastly, If we love God sincerely, we shall be ready cheerfully to
undergo any Thing for his sake, be it never so hard and difficult: For Love is
a bold and vigorous Passion, it makes weak Things strong, and turns Cowards
into Heroes, and warms and animates the Heart with such a generous Fire, as
disdains all Opposition, and courageously out-braves the greatest Dangers and
Difficulties. For he that loves heartily would do any Thing for the sake of his
Beloved; and then measuring his Strength by the Greatness of his Desires, he
thinks himself able to do whatsoever he will. So strongly does this Passion
transport Nature beyond the Bounds of its Abilities, inspiring it with such
Force and Vigor as that scarce any thing is able to withstand it. If therefore
we love God sincerely and heartily, our Love must necessarily resolve into
Obedience to his Will, be it never so hard and difficult: For our Love will so
enliven and animate our Endeavors of serving him, and carry us with such
Spirit and Alacrity through all the weary Stages of our Duty, that it will be
our Meat and Drink to do his Will; and there is no Instance of Obedience, be it
never so hard and difficult, but our Love will smother, and render it not only
easy, but delightful. For what I do for him whom I love, I do for my self, his
Pleasures being mine, and our Wills, and Ends, and Interests being involved in
one another. So that if my Love be in any Measure intense and cordial, I shall
do his Pleasure and perform his Will with the same Complacency and Delight as
if I were doing my own; and whatsoever Difficulties I meet with in serving him,
I shall encounter them with Joy, that I am furnished with Opportunities of
expressing the Zeal and Sincerity of my Love to him. So that to pretend to love
God, and yet to boggle at the Difficulties of obeying him, is the most shameful
Hypocrisy in nature; for if we did as highly love him as we pretend, our Wills
would be so swallowed up in his, that it would be our Joy and Recreation to
serve him, and the very Thought that we are doing what is pleasing and grateful
to him, would level all the Mountains of Difficulties in our way, and render
them not only accessible, but easy. He therefore that stumbles at every Straw,
and startles at every Difficulty in Religion, must be a notorious Hypocrite if
he pretend to the Love of God: for where true Love is, Difficulty is so far
from daunting it, that that animates and encourages it, and instead of blunting
its Activity, whets and renders it more keen and vigorous; because the greater
the Difficulty is, the greater is its Opportunity of manifesting its own
Sincerity, and thereby of recommending it self to its Beloved; the Joy of which
not only balances, but endears all its Pains and Trouble. Hence the Apostle
tells us, that there is no fear in love, and that perfect love casts out
fear, 1 John iv.18. It inspires us with such Bravery and Courage, that there is
no Difficulty in our Obedience to him whom we love, that can daunt or terrify
us. Wherefore since this is a necessary Property of the Love of God to make us
ready to undergo any Thing for his sake, this also must necessarily resolve
into the keeping his Commandments; for if we are willing to do any thing for
God, we shall surely be willing to obey him; and though our Obedience in some
Instances may be difficult, yet our Love, if it be real, will conquer its way
through them all.

And thus you see how all the essential Properties of the Love of God do
finally resolve into Obedience; from whence it is evident, that wheresoever the
Love of God is, it will most certainly prove a Principle of Obedience.

II. I proceed now to the second Head of Discourse, which was to show, that the
Love of God is it self the most perfect Principle of Obedience. Not that I
think all other Principles in their own nature bad; for God himself has
proposed other Principles of Action to us besides this of Love; he has
denounced his fearful Threatenings against us to alarm our Fear; that by that we
may be moved to obey him, and propounded his glorious Promises to us to excite
our Hope, that that may be a Spring and Principle of Obedience in us. And
certainly that can be no bad Principle which is excited in us by divine
Motives: but yet it is most certain, that there is no Principle whatsoever can
be acceptable to God, that is quite separated from Love to him; for that which
makes it acceptable is this, that it is a Principle of Universal Obedience. But
now the Love of God being the greatest Instance of our Obedience, that can be
no Principle of universal Obedience that is wholly separated from it. It Is
true, the Religion of most Men begins upon a Principle either of Hope or Fear,
and it cannot be denied but they are very good Beginners; but yet till by these
we are induced to love God as well as to practice all other Duties, we are by
no means pleasing and acceptable to him: So that though the Fear of Punishment
and the Hope of Reward are good Ingredients in the Principle of our Obedience,
yet till they have some Intermixtures of Love with them, they can make no Claim
to the divine Acceptance. There may be indeed, and at first there generally
is, much less of Love in this Principle of Obedience than of Hope and Fear,
whilst yet the whole Composition is very acceptable to God; for the lowest
Degree of cordial Love, intermixed with our Hope and Fear, will leaven and
consecrate them into an acceptable Principle of Obedience; but still the less
Love there is in it, the more weak, and languid, and imperfect it is, and in
all its Progresses toward Perfection its Maturity is to be measured by the
Degrees of Love that are in it; and till our Love is arrived unto that Degree
of Ardency as to become the predominant Motive and Master-Ingredient in it, our
State in Goodness is very slow and imperfect. So that in short, the Principle
of our Obedience is more and more perfect the more of Love there is in it, and
the less of Hope and Fear; and when Hope and Fear are all swallowed up in Love,
and that is the sole Spring of Action within us, then it is the Principle of
Heaven, and the Soul that acts and animates the Religion of the Spirits of just
men made perfect. But to convince you how much our Obedience is perfected by
Love, I shall briefly give you these following Instances of it: 1. It rendereth
our Obedience universal and unconfined. 2. Spritely and cheerful. 3. Natural
and easy. 4. Constant and steady.


1. Love renders our Obedience universal and unconfined. When Men are acted
only by a Principle of Fear, they must be very narrow and stingy in their
Religion; for they will be sure to do no more than just what is necessary to
quiet their Fears and calm their Consciences; and because they do not like what
they do, but are merely forced upon it by the Terror and Anguish of their own
Minds, therefore, if they can, they will find some Way to pacify their
Consciences without doing it, or at least with doing as little as may be, or
with doing that only which they like best, and is most agreeable to their
vitiated Tempers. Thus Persons of sour and morose Natures, when they are acted
merely by the Terrors of their Consciences, commonly betake themselves to some
little affected Singularities and Severities in Religion; they will put on some
distinguishing Garb, and tip their Tongues with some peculiar Phrases, and
screw their Faces into a most devout and mortified Figure; they will condemn
themselves to a State of Silence, and retire from all the Pleasures and most
innocent Festivities of Conversation; they will frown all good Humor out of
their Houses, and will not endure so much as a Smile in their Families,
especially on the Lord's Day; and take a world of Care and Pains to moap their
Children into unsociable Statues, and to train them up in the Religion of
pensive Looks, and solemn Faces, and ejaculated Eyes; for this is such a
Reformation as is suitable to their sour and surly Natures; and therefore with
this they will seek to bribe their Consciences to connive at all their black
and devilish Inclinations. Thus also it is usual for Slanderers and Backbiters,
contentious and censorious Persons, when they are under an Agony of Conscience,
to list themselves into some Sect or Party, where, under a Pretense of being
the only People of God, they may consecrate their most unhallowed Passions, and
rail and backbite with Zeal and Devotion; where they may spit all their Venom
in spiritual Gossiping, and freely employ the Talent of their Ill Nature in
damning and censuring those they dissent from; for this is such a Conversion as
best agrees with their cankerous Inclinations, so that if they can but cheat
their Conscience with it, that and their beloved Lust will be very well
reconciled. Thus also the covetous and griping Oppressor, when he cannot
otherwise still the Cries of his Conscience, will betake himself to some of the
cheaper Exercises of Religion; he will fast and pray, hear Sermons, and receive
Sacraments, because all these Things he can do without intrenching upon his
Vice; he can say his Prayers for nothing, and save Money by keeping a Fast, and
eat and drink at the Sacrament gratis; all this is so cheap a Religion, that it
costs him nothing to maintain it, and so his covetous Mind has no Reason to
grudge at it; so that if his Conscience will be but satisfied with this, his
Lust and that may shake hands and be Friends. And to name no more, thus when
the intemperate and lascivious Person is dogged by the Fears of his guilty
Mind, it is usual for him to sigh and mourn, and make woeful Confessions of his
Sins; and when he has done so, to endeavor to persuade himself that this is
true Repentance; which if he can do, he may sin on securely, provided he does
but perpetually keep himself in this Circle of repenting and sinning, and
sinning and repenting; but if he cannot so cheat himself, he will next fly to
the Sanctuary of a partial Reformation, and disband the Vices he can best
spare, that so he may keep his more beloved ones in Pay; hoping that by a
Sacrifice of some few of his Sins, he may make an Atonement for all the rest.
Thus when Men are only acted by their Fears, they will find some way or other
to contract their Religion into so narrow a Compass, that it shall be sure not
to entrench too far upon the Liberties of their Lusts. For he that does a Thing
out of Fear is averse to the doing it, and that Aversation will so stint and
limit him, that he will contrive all Ways to do as little as he can, and still
the less he is forced to do, the better he will be pleased.

But Love is that great Soul that acts and animates the whole Body of Religion,
and equally diffuses its Influence through every Part and Member of it; for the
Will of the Beloved is the Law of the Lover, and every Thing pleases him, that
is pleasing to him whom he loves. So that if we love God, we shall do what he
commands, because it is his Will and Pleasure; and that Reason extends equally
to all as well as to any Instances of Obedience; and therefore if the Motive of
our Obedience be this, that it is God's Will and Pleasure, we must necessarily
obey him, so far as we understand, in every Thing that is so. For if we love
God, there will be such a Consent and Harmony between his Will and ours, that
we shall be best pleased with what pleases him; and being so, our Obedience
will be no longer limited by any particular Likes or Dislikes of our own, which
will then all vail and prostrate themselves to God's sovereign Pleasure, and so
there will be nothing but that to set Limits and Bounds to our Obedience. So
that then we shall be so far from contriving how to escape doing his Will, that
we shall be ready to court all Opportunities of pleasing him, and be so
passionately desirous of doing what we think is grateful to him, that we shall
not only perform what he requires by explicit Command, but be ready to comply
with the most secret Notices and Intimations of his Pleasure, and to do
whatsoever we think will please him when it is performed, whether it be
commanded or no.

2. Love renders our Obedience spritely and vigorous: For it is certain, there
is no Passion in humane Nature so active and vigorous as that of Love* for in
this all the other Passions are seated as in their common Root and Principle,
and like so many Streams, though they run several Ways and in different
Channels, yet do they all issue out of one common Spring, and that is Love. For
the Love of our selves is the Parent of all our Passions; it is that which makes
us hate what is contrary to us, and desire and hope for whatsoever is pleasant
and agreeable. And when we love any particular Object, and our Wills are
pleasingly affected with the Beauty of it, if it be a Thing that is possible
for us to enjoy, that excites in us a Desire of Enjoyment, if together with the
Possibility there be a Probability of enjoying it, that excites Hope and
Expectation; but if there be not, that excites Fear, and this Hope and Fear
being exalted to their highest Degree, turn into Confidence and Desperation. If
any Difficulty oppose it self to our Enjoyment, that excites Choler, and
Courage, and Boldness; and if we surmount those Difficulties that hindered our
Enjoyment, that excites Joy and Exultation of Mind. Thus Love, you see, as soon
as it is taken with the Beauty of an Object, immediately kindles its Desires,
excites its Hope and Fear, and carries the Fire into all the Passions which
hold of its Empire; so that having the united Force of all the other Passions
at its Beck and Command, its self must needs be extremely potent and vigorous;
and consequently when it is terminated upon God, and become the reigning
Principle of our Obedience to him, there is no Passion in our Natures can have
that Influence upon us to make us active and vigorous in the doing of his Will,
as this may reasonably be supposed to have; because when we are under the
Command of Love, that having in it the Force of all our other Passions, must
necessarily move and act us with all their united Influence. And when the
separate Force of all our Passions, like so many single Threads, are twisted
into one Cord, with what a potent, I had almost said omnipotent Vigor must
they draw and attract us? When our Love of God shall all at once awaken in us
the Desire and Hope of enjoying him, the Fear and Displeasure of losing him,
the Resolution and Courage to charge through every Difficulty that opposes our
Fruition of him; and our Obedience shall be all at once informed and animated
with the united Force of all those mighty Passions; how active and vigorous
must it needs be? For the Wise Man tells us, that Love is as strong as Death,
Cant. viii.6. that it is an equal Match for the all-conquering King of Terrors,
to whose Power the mightiest Things do stoop: And indeed it must needs be
strong when it has all the Force of Humane Nature in it, and is winged with
the united Vigor of so many strong and active Affections. Hence the Apostle
attributes a constraining Virtue to it, 2 Cor. v.14. For the Love of God
constrains us; it sweetly tyrannizes over all our Faculties; and by a willing
Violence forces and captivates us into Obedience. But when a Man is acted only
by a Principle of Fear, he must needs drive on heavily in the Course of his
Obedience; because what a Man does out of Fear, he would not do; so that he
acts with Aversation, and moves all along counter to his own Inclinations, and
has not the joint Concurrence of his other Affections as he has when he acts
out of Love; and consequently his Passions thwarting and crossing one another,
do retard and hinder each others Motions. So that though the Motion of Fear
does finally prevail, yet it is so broken and weakened by the counter-motions of
Inclination, that it cannot act us with that Spriteliness and Vigor as
otherwise it would do: for whilst our Fear gives Wings to us, our Inclination
hangs a Clog at our Heels, which wearies those Wings, and slackens and retards
their Flight. Whereas, on the contrary, when we are acted by Love, there is no
Counter-motion within to let and hinder us, but all our Passions unite and
conspire, and like the inferior Orbs of Heaven move harmoniously with Love the
first Great-mover, because there is nothing within to check or allay it, and so
we move on freely secundo flumine, with the full and uninterrupted Current of
our Natures. So that Love, you see, is a most active and vigorous Soul; it
makes us all Life, and Spirit, and Wing, and animates our Religion with such a
spritely Flame, as nothing is able to control or suppress. If therefore we
were but once thoroughly informed with the Love of God, this would so enliven
us, that there is nothing in Religion would be too hard for us; this would turn
Toils into Recreations, and Difficulties into Pleasures, and make us so nimble
and agile in our Obedience, that we should run the ways of Gods Commandments,
as David said he would do, when God should enlarge his heart with the love of
him, Psalm. cxix.32. And whereas languid Souls, enfeebled with the want of this
generous Passion, find Impossibilities, and complain of Impotencies, and make a
stop; we should go on and conquer with an invincible Power. Thus Love, you see,
is the most spritely and vigorous Principle of Obedience.

3. Love renders our Obedience free and cheerful and voluntary. He who obeys
God only from a Principle of Fear, obeys him against his Will; he takes down
his Duty as sick Men do Physic, with Loathing and Reluctance, and only submits
to it as a more tolerable Penance than the present Horror that he feels, and
the after-Damnation that he fears; he only chooses it as the least of two Evils,
that is, as a Thing that he hates, though not in so great a Degree as he does
those greater Evils which he knows are inseparable to his not choosing it: And
while it is thus with him, it is impossible he should obey with any Freedom or
Alacrity. For how can a Man cheerfully comply with what he hates, or become a
Volunteer to that which is his Torment? He may labor indeed at his Duty, and
tug hard, like a Gally-slave, at the Oar, but alas! it is sore against his Will;
he would fain be at his Lust again, but that he is chained to his Duty, and
kept in Awe by that flaming Scourge that is held over him; so that he is
perfectly pressed to serve God, and like an unwilling Victim is dragged to his
Altars. Now though this may be a good Beginning of Religion, which through the
Passion of Fear does usually make its first Entrance into the Soul, yet if it
stop here, and does not pass forwards into Love, it is but half way, and will
never be able to obtain an entire Possession. For whilst we obey God merely out
of Fear, we want one half of our Religion, and that is Love, which is that Half
too wherein the Subjection of our Souls to God consists; for while we only
fear him, that may constrain us to an eternal Homage and Obedience; but it is
Love alone that can inthrone him in our Wills, and make us Volunteers in his
Service. But when once this divine Fire is inkindled within our Breasts, it
will by Degrees melt away all our secret Repugnancies and Aversations to our
Duty, and so mould and temper our Wills to the Will of God, that at last our
Obedience will be no longer a Burden to us, but we shall run to our Duty with
the same Complacency and Delight, as we do now to our Pleasures and
Recreations, and do the Will of our Father upon Earth as it is done by our
Brethren in Heaven; who being all inflamed with Love to him, do find a Heaven
of Joys in serving and adoring him. For if we did heartily love God, it is
impossible but we should feel a Pleasure in pleasing him; our Wills would so
sympathize with his, that we should feel his Joys and taste his Pleasures; and
those Things only would be irksom and ungrateful to us, which we know do grieve
and distaste him. For Love turns Service into Wages, and pays her self with the
Pleasures of pleasing; she counts all Commands Favors, and is highly satisfied
with the Honor of obeying; and if she can but accomplish the Pleasure of her
Beloved, she thinks her self wholly recompensed for all her tedious Toils and
Labors. And certainly if our Souls were but inspired with any considerable
Degrees of this Heavenly Passion, we should find such Pleasure in pleasing God,
as would for ever engage us to serve him; for then every Service that we
rendered him would be a free Sally of an enamoured Will, and so our Hearts would
be wrapped up in every Duty, and our Souls would still be ascending
Heavenwards, like the Angel that appeared to Manoah, in the Flames of all our
Sacrifices. So that this Excellency also Love has above all other Principles
of Obedience, that it renders our Obedience most free, most cheerful, and
voluntary.

4. And lastly, Love renders our Obedience constant and steady. When a Man's
Religion is only animated with Fear, as it is weak and languid while it lives,
so it generally hastens to an untimely Period. For Fear is a Passion so
burthensom to humane Nature, that we cannot but desire to quit and discharge
our selves of it as soon as possible may be; and accordingly the Apostle tells
us, that there is torment in Fear, 1 John 4.18. for it separates the Soul from
the Enjoyment of her self, and gives such an ungrateful Tang to all her
Pleasures, that she can find no Rest or Satisfaction in any Thing so long as
she is haunted with it. Now when that which is the Principle of our Religion is
a Burden to us, we cannot but endeavor, if possible, to ease our selves of
it; which we cannot otherwise do, but either by going forwards to Love, or by
returning back again to sinful Presumption. For as for Fear, it is like the
Wilderness through which Israel passed, a Place where there is no abiding with
Content and Satisfaction; so that we must go back again into Egypt, or forwards
to Canaan, or be content to sit down in Misery and Disquiet. For we can never
be at Rest, till our Fear is either sweetened with an Intermixture of Love, or
stifled with vain Hopes and ungrounded Presumptions: And there being so many
Arts of Self-deceiving in the World, and skinning over the Wounds of
Conscience, if Men do not speedily cure their Fear by Love, they will soon find
some other Way to extinguish it; either they will promise their Consciences a
future Amendment, or else they will presently amend by Halves, or else they
will take Sanctuary in some false Notions in Religion, that tend to secure them
in their Sins, and render them quietly wicked: These or some other Ways they
will find to quit themselves of this troublesome Passion; and then when the
Weights of their Fear are down, the Wheels of their Religion will stand still
immediately. So that you plainly see, that bare Fear can never be a lasting and
steady Principle of Religion; and that because it is so troublesome, that Men
will not long have the Patience to endure it.

But as for Love, that is naturally a most sweet and grateful Passion; it
sooths and ravishes the Heart, and puts the Spirits into a brisk and generous
Motion; and so long as it continues pure Love, is always attended with Joy and
Pleasure: And being so in it self, it is much more so when it is terminated
upon God. For all the Disquietudes of Love arise from the Imperfections of its
Object; either the Person beloved is coy and cruel, which imbitters the Love
with Sorrow and Regret; or else he is fickle and inconstant, which inflames it
with Rage and Jealousy. But when our Love fixes upon God, it has neither of
these Causes of Disturbance; for he is infinitely loving unto all that love
him, and he never changes the Objects of his Love, unless they change, and
prove fickle and unconstant in their Affection to him. For whilst he has the
same Reason to love, his Love is always the same, and is as constant and
immutable as his Being. So that in the Love of God there is no Reason for any
of those Griefs and Jealousies that are so commonly intermingled with carnal
Loves and Affections; for it being fixed upon an Object that does so well
deserve, and will so amply requite it, it can find nothing there but infinite
Causes of Pleasure and Complacency: For the Object of our Love being infinitely
lovely, and infinitely loving, the Affection must needs be unspeakably pleasing
and grateful. So that the Love of God, you see, must needs be sweet and serene,
and productive of the most delightful and ravishing Emotions, there being
nothing in him but what tends to its greatest Content and Satisfaction; and
being so, it must necessarily prove a most lasting Principle of Obedience to
him; because wheresoever it is, it is always attended with such substantial
Pleasures and Delights, that there can be no Temptation to extinguish it; for
so long as we feel nothing in it but what is highly grateful to our Natures, we
shall be so far from using Arts to quit our selves of it, that we shall think
it our greatest Interest to promote and increase it. For still the more we love
him, the better we shall be pleased; and the better we are pleased, the more we
shall endeavor to love him: And so our Pleasure and our Love will mutually
provoke and augment one another, till both are arrived to the utmost Height of
their Perfection. Thus the Love of God, you see, is a lasting Principle; it is a
Fire that can live upon the Fuel which it self creates; and maintain it self
for ever in Strength and Vigor, by feeding upon the Joys and Pleasures which
it produces: So that if this be the Principle upon which we do obey, our
Religion must needs be lasting and steady; because it is acted and animated by
a Principle that is so.

Having thus demonstrated the Proposition in the Text, That wheresoever the
Love of God is, it will express it self in Obedience to his Will; I shall now
conclude the whole with some practical Inferences.

1. From hence I infer, how necessary it is to the very Being of Religion, to
keep up good Thoughts of God in the World; because without such, Men will never
be able to love him; and without Love, they will never be reduced to a through
Submission to his heavenly Will. For it is by Love alone that God reigns in our
Hearts, and does both acquire and preserve the Empire of our Souls. We may be
awed into a forced and fawning Submission, merely by the Dread and Terror of
his Power, and be obliged to serve him, as the Indians do the Devil, for fear
he should do us a Mischief, and tear us in pieces; but this is merely the
Religion of Slaves, who are forced to undergo one Evil for fear of another, and
to do what they hate for fear of suffering what they cannot endure. And as
Slaves do generally hate those whom they fear, and even whilst they are fawning
and cringing to their imperious Masters, had much rather cut their Throats if
they could do it with safety; so when Men are acted in their Obedience to God
merely by a slavish Dread of his Vengeance, they generally hate him whilst they
obey him; and if it were in their power, would rather ungod him, and pull him
down from his Throne, than render him those Homages which they dare not
withold. Now is it possible, that he who knows the Hearts of Men, and sees
the inmost Workings of their Minds, should ever be pleased with such a base and
sordid Religion; a Religion that is conjoined with such an inveterate Hatred to
his Person and Government, and restrains Men only by the Fear of Punishment
from flying in his Face; a Religion that is wholly founded in Passion, that
causes us to hate him, as well as to fawn upon him; that carries in it a secret
Antipathy to his Nature and his Laws, and would much rather vent it self in an
open Rebellion, than in a forced Submission, had it but Power enough to defend
it self from his Fury? And yet this is the best Religion that Mankind is
capable of without the Love of God. So that if ever we intend to keep up a
generous Religion in our Souls, such as becomes freeborn Minds to offer to the
great Sovereign of the World; we must be sure to purge out all those sower and
rigid Notions of God that represent him any ways unlovely to us.

2 ly. Hence I infer, how miserably those Men are mistaken, that make any Thing
a Sign of their Love to God, but what tends to their keeping his Commandments.
There are too many Persons that are apt to measure their Affection to God and
Christ by the mere Impressions of sensitive Passion, because upon some moving
and affecting Representations of those amiable Objects, they feel in themselves
the same sensitive Emotions as they are wont to do when they fall in Love with
other Things; that is, if they feel their Spirits soothing and ravishing their
Hearts, and their Hearts diffusing and opening themselves to let in those soft
and amorous Spirits, they conclude themselves presently infinitely in love with
God, and with their Savior: Whereas many times all this is merely the Effect
of an amorous Complexion, tinctured and inflamed with Religious Ideas, and is
commonly as remote from the Virtue of Love, as Light is from Darkness, or
Heaven from Hell. For as there are many Men who are sincerely good, that yet
cannot raise their sensitive Passions in their Religious Exercises; that are
heartily sorry for their Sins, and yet cannot weep for them; and do entirely
love God, and delight in his Service, and yet cannot move their Blood and
Spirits into the ravishing Passions of sensitive Love and Joy: So on the other
hand there are many gross Hypocrites that have not one Dram of true Piety in
them, who yet in their Religious Exercises can put themselves into wondrous
Transports of bodily Passion; who can pour out their Confessions in Floods of
Tears, and cause their Hearts to dilate into Raptures of sensitive Love, and
their Spirits to tickle them into Ecstasies of Joy. Which is purely to be
resolved into the different Tempers of Men's Bodies; some Tempers being
naturally so calm and sedate, as that they are scarce capable of being
disturbed into a Passion; others again so soft and tender, and impressible,
that the most frivolous Fancy is able to raise a Commotion in them. And hence
we see that some People can weep most heartily at the Misfortunes of Lovers in
Plays and Romances, and as heartily rejoice at their good Successes, though
they know that both are but Fictions and mere Ideas of Fancy; whereas others
can scarce shed a Tear, or raise a sensitive Joy at the real Calamities or
Prosperities of a Friend, whom yet they love a great deal better than others
can be supposed to do their feigned and Romantic Hero's. And yet because of
these sensitive Transports which Men do sometimes feel in themselves, when
their Fancies have been chafed a while with a pathetical Description of God,
they presently vote themselves his Friends and Lovers; whereas in Truth, that
which commonly moves their Affection, is not any thing real either in God or in
Christ; but some sensual Beauty attributed to them in fanciful Descriptions,
that smites their carnalized Fancies. For generally we find that it is a
Metaphorical God and Christ that such Men fall in love with; they set up an
Idol of God and Christ in their Fancies, and dress it in such carnal Metaphors
and Allusions, as their sensual Minds are most apt to be taken with; and then
imagine that it smiles on them, and kisses and caresses them, with all the
pretty endearments of a doting Lover; whereupon they grow so extremely fond of
it, that they are not able to forbear hugging and dandling it: But alas poor
Men! they hug the Cloud instead of the Godess; and while they think they have
God and Christ in their Arms, embrace nothing but a Specter of their own
Fancies: For let but any other Person, though it were only the Hero of a
Romance, or the Lover of a Play, be but described to them in the same Language,
and the same glistering Allusions, and they shall experience in themselves the
same Passion for them as they have for their God and their Savior. Thus in the
Roman Nunneries and Monasteries we generally find the Monks fall in Love with
the Virgin Mary, whilst the Nuns are all enamoured with Jesus Christ; that is,
they choose the Objects of their Love according to the different Inclinations of
their Sexes; and the Reason why they choose so differently, is no other than
this, that they both frame to themselves such different carnal Ideas of the
different Objects of their Love, as are most suitable and agreeable to their
carnal Inclinations; but very commonly neither the Monk loves the Virgin Mary,
nor the Nun, Jesus Christ; but they both merely dote upon the different Images
of their own Fancies; which do not at all represent those divine Beauties for
which those sacred Persons do so well deserve to be beloved. And thus it is too
commonly among our selves, when yet we pretend to be zealous Lovers of God.
Wherefore unless we have a mind to deceive our selves, let us no longer depend
on such fallacious Evidences as these; but let us try our Love of God by his
own Touchstone; and that is our Obedience to his heavenly Will. If any man
love me, says our Savior, he will keep my Words, Jo. xiv.23. and ye are my
friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you; for this, says St. John, is Love,
that ye walk after his Commandments, Ephesians. ii.6. For the Love of God and of
Christ being a rational Love, is only to be valued by those rational Effects it
produces in us; if it transform us into the Image of God, and makes us love
what he loves, and hate what he hates; these are much more certain Indications
of our Love to him, than the most ravishing Effects of sensitive Passion. For
though our Hearts were melted into a Transport and Fondness to him, yet so long
as our Hearts and our Practices are incomplyant to his Will and Laws, he will
look upon us, and deal with us as Hypocrites and Enemies; and esteem all our
sensitive Fondnesses toward him, but as the base Flatteries of Judas; who
kissed him, and then betrayed him.

3 ly. Hence I infer, what the great Reason is why God does so strictly enjoin
us to love him. For there is no Command whatsoever so often repeated in
Scripture, as this of loving God; Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul: What does the Lord thy God require of thee, but
to love him? O love the Lord all ye his Saints! Take heed therefore to your
selves that ye love the Lord your God. These, and a world of other reiterated
Injunctions of Love, do we meet with in the Sacred Pages. But how comes this to
pass? Does God need our Love, that he so importunately calls for it? Or does it
contribute any thing to his Happiness, to see himself beloved by all this great
World of Beings; which he has made, and which he has endued with the Capacity
of loving him? No, no; though doubtless the best Thing we can give him is our
Love, yet he is too happy in himself to need any thing of ours: For he is a
bottomless Fountain of Happiness, circumscribing all those Blisses that he can
need or desire within the boundless Circle of his own Being. Or does he court
our Love merely that he may glory in the Number of his Lovers, and pride
himself in those infinite Flames that concenter in him? No, nor this neither;
for he is so infinitely glorious in himself, that no Act of ours can either add
to, or substract from his Glory; which amidst all the Hallelujahs of Angels and
Saints, and all the Blasphemies of Men and Devils, shines with the same
unvaried Splendor and Brightness; and is neither diminished by our Hatred, nor
improved by our Love. Well then, if neither of these be the Reason, what is it?
It Is true, the Thing is infinitely reasonable in it self, That he who is so
lovely in himself, should be beloved; and that all our Affections should be
united in him, who is the Fountain of all our Beings and Well-Beings: And God
who is the Author of our reasonable Faculties, cannot but desire that we should
act reasonably; and love that best, which best deserves to be beloved. But is
there not some particular End for which God does so earnestly crave and exact
our Love? Yes, doubtless there is; and such as is every way worthy of him that
has proposed it. For it cannot be supposed that a Being infinitely wise,
should ever act without End or Aim; but God being infinitely happy, cannot be
supposed to propose any End for his own Advantage; because that would imply,
that he wants or desires some Good that he has not; and consequently, that he
is not happy. But then he being infinitely good as well as happy, we cannot
imagine what other End he should have of his Actions, but only to do good to his
Creatures, and promote their Happiness; and consequently, the End and Reason
for which he does so importunately demand our Love, is not to add any Thing to
himself, but to do good to us; for our goodness extends not to God, as the
Psalmist tells us, xvi.2. And though the Love of God be a very great Perfection
to our Natures, yet Job tells us, that it is no gain at all to God, that we
make our ways perfect, Job xxii.3. But though it is none to God, yet it is an
infinite Gain to our selves; and that is the End and Reason for which he
requires it: For, as I have already showed you, of all the Principles of our
Obedience to God, Love is the most pregnant and fruitful. Now God requires us
to obey him for our own Good, he having enjoined us nothing but what tends to
the Perfection and Happiness of our Natures; and he requires us to love him,
that so we may the more entirely and perfectly obey him; and thereby more
speedily arrive to that Happiness for which his infinite Goodness has designed
us. So that all the profit both of our Love and Obedience, accrues to our
selves; it is we only that reap the Fruit of our own Virtues; we only that are
exalted by those Homages that we render to our Maker; for he is as happy
without our Love, as he is with it; and all those united Flames of Angels and
Saints that meet and concenter in him, add not one spark to the infinite
Element of his Happiness; which were not infinite, could it admit of Increase:
But the Lovers themselves are glorified by their Love; and because they are so,
God requires and exacts it. For our Love being the great Soul of our Obedience,
and our Obedience the necessary Means of our Happiness, the Profit of both must
necessarily redound to our selves: and it is we only that must be enriched and
glorified by them. For this Reason therefore God requires our Love, that it may
be a living Principle to Obedience; and that being so, it might accelerate our
Happiness; for he whose Love of God is but arrived to the Degree of a reigning
Principle of Obedience, so as that his Obedience proceeds more from his Love
than from any other Passion, does already border on the heavenly State, and is
within the Confines of Perfection. For as for the Inhabitants of Heaven, they
are all acted by pure Love; which makes their Obedience pure and perfect: They
see God face to face; and by their Sight are all inflamed with Love to him; and
by their Love are winged with everlasting Vigor and Readiness to serve him;
and all their Aversations to his Heavenly Will being swallowed up in perfect
Love, they not only obey without Murmuring, but with infinite Ravishment and
Pleasure; and never feel themselves more in Heaven, than while they are
serving, praising, and adoring him. This is the happy State of those heavenly
Lovers; and to this we are approaching with full Speed, while we obey from a
Principle of Love: For Love will carry us on with Wind and Tide, from one
Degree of Perfection to another; and whilst poor slavish Souls that are acted
mainly by their Fears, are faign to tug at the Oar, and yet creep on but
slowly, and by insensible Degrees; we shall run forwards with Ease and Speed;
and get more ground at one stroke, than they can in twenty. For in one good
Action performed out of Love, there is more Virtue and Goodness, than in a
hundred of those whereunto we are dragged by our own Fears and Terrors; because
as the Degrees of Evil, so the Degrees of Good in all Actions, are to be
measured by the Degrees of Will that are in them; and doubtless in those good
Actions, that have Love for their Principle, there is much more of Will than in
those that proceed from Fear and Terror; and consequently, our Nature being
perfected by good Actions, and more or less perfected by them, the more or less
of Goodness they have in them, must needs be much more perfected by the good
Actions of Love, than by those of Fear. Whilst therefore we are acted in
Religion by the Love of God, our Souls are upon the Wing to Perfection, and in
a swift Tendency to the heavenly State; we are already in the Neighborhood of
glorified Saints and Angels; and if we continue our Course, shall soon be fit
for their Society and Converse. This therefore is the great End and Reason why
God does so importunately claim our Love, because this of all others is the
most perfective Principle of our Natures, and consequently the most conducive
to our Happiness.

4 ly. And lastly, from hence I infer, of what vast Importance it is to us in
Religion, to love God. For you plainly see, that Love is not only a Principle
of Obedience, but that of all others it is the most efficacious and operative;
that it does not only engage us to keep God's Commandments, but that it enables
us to keep them most universally, and vigorously, and cheerfully, and
constantly. So that what the Apostle says of brotherly Love, is more
universally true of the Love of God, that it is the keeping of the whole Law,
Romans xiii.10. that is, causally and virtually it is. For so Love is that
universal Cause which within its fruitful Womb contains all the Particulars of
our Obedience, and is naturally productive of them all; So that virtually it is
all Religion; it is Godliness, and Temperance, and Charity, and Humility, and
Righteousness, and Patience; being the common Cause and Parent of them all. For
Love has an universal Respect to the Will of the Beloved; it does not choose
what is easy and refuse what is hard, but likes what God likes, and
disapproves of what he hates; his Will being the great Reason of all its
Choices and Refusals: And whatsoever things in particular are distastful and
difficult to us, by its powerful Oratory it renders pleasant and easy. For he
that serves God out of Love, serves him with Delight; and he that serves him
with Delight, has no Clog to incumber him; none of those Aversations and
Antipathies to his Service; that do so load and depress unwilling Minds; he
does not row against the Current of Nature, but acts with the full Inclination
of his Mind, and so feels little or nothing of Drudgery in his Religion; and
being carried on with a full Tide of Delight, he goes easily and cheerfully
down with the Stream. Of such vast Importance is the Love of God to our
Religion, that it not only produces it, but renders it easy and pleasant; so
that without some Degree of this, our Religion can have neither Being nor
Well-being; and it is as possible for us to live without a Soul, and to be
nourished without Food, as it is for our Religion to be, and to thrive without
the Love of God.

Wherefore if ever we would be Religious indeed, if ever we would connaturalize
Religion to our Souls, so as to render it easy and delightsome to us; let us
endeavor to kindle this heavenly Fire within us; and certainly if we heartily
endeavor it, we cannot fa^^ of success. For there are so many mighty Reasons
to engage us to the Love of God, so many invincible Attractions in his Nature,
and in his Love toward us, as cannot but affect us if we seriously ponder and
consider them. For how can I reflect upon that amiable Nature of his, in which
there is an harmonious Concurrence of all Beauties and Perfections; where
Wisdom and Goodness, Justice and Mercy, and every lovely Thing that can claim
or deserve a rational Affection, are contempered together in their utmost
Degrees of Perfection? How I say, can I steadily reflect upon such a Nature as
this, without being charmed and captivated with the Love of it? How can I think
of that stupendous Love which he has expressed toward me, in giving me my
Being, and all the Blessings I enjoy; in preparing a Heaven of immortal Joys
for me, and sending his Son from thence to conduct me thither, without being
all inflamed with Love to him? Wherefore let us seriously set our selves to the
Contemplation of God, of the Loveliness of his Nature, and of his infinite
Kindness to us and all his Creation. Let us repeat the Thoughts of these Things
upon our Minds, and never give over pressing our selves with those infinite
Reasons we have to love him, till we feel the heavenly Fire begin to kindle
within our Breasts; and then let us never give over feeding and blowing it with
these divine Considerations, till it rise up into a triumphant Flame. And then
we shall feel our selves animated with a new Soul, and inspired with so much
Life and Activity in Religion, as that from our Experience we shall be able to
subscribe to the Truth of the Text, This is the Love of God, this the most
natural Expression and inseparable Effect of it, That we keep his Commandments.

1 JOHN V.3. -- And his Commandments are not grievous.
I Proceed now to the next Part of the Text, viz. the Motive by which this
obedient Love of God is enforced; and his Commandments are not grievous: (...),
they are not heavy, or burdensome; they have no such Weight or Difficulty in
them, as ought in reason to discourage us from keeping them. For in these Words
the Apostle seems to anticipate an Objection; alas if this be the Love of God
to keep his Commandments, what Man is able to love him? for if his Commandments
are not absolutely impossible, yet are they at least so extremely difficult,
that scarce any Man can have the Courage to undertake the Performance of them.
This, says our Apostle, is a mighty Mistake, or a wretched Pretense for Men's
Sloth and Idleness; for verily and truly the Commands of God have no such
Difficulty in them, but are in themselves very gentle and easy to be born. And
with this Assertion our blessed Savior does most perfectly accord, Mat. xi.30.
My yoke is easy, and my burden is light. And the Prophet David makes it not
only easy, but delightful, Psalm. xix.8. The Statutes of the Lord are right,
rejoicing the heart; the Commandments of the Lord are pure, enlightening the
eyes. And then in the 10 th Verse he tells us, that they are more to be desired
than gold, yea than much fine gold; and sweeter than honey, or the honeycomb.
So far they are from being Toils and Burdens, that in Reality they are
Pleasures and Recreations. But farther to demonstrate this Truth to you, That
God's Commands are not burdensome and difficult, I shall do these two things.

I. Show you that they are facile and easy in themselves. II. That Christ by
what he has done, has rendered them much more facile than they are in
themselves.
I. That the Commands of God are facile and easy in themselves: And this will
evidently appear if we consider, 1. That whatsoever they enjoin has some
natural Good appendent to it. 2. That every Thing which they enjoin is highly
agreeable to our reasonable Natures. 3. That They are all perfective of our
Natures, and conducive to our Happiness. 4. That in themselves they are plain
and simple, and direct, and have no Intricacies or Labyrinths in them. 5. That
they are all so inseparably connected to one another, that they mutually
promote and help forwards each other.


1. That whatsoever they enjoin has some natural Good inseparably appendent to
it, to sweeten and endear it. The great and wise First-Mover has so ordered
Things in the Course of Motion which he has established, that such and such
Actions should be ordinarily attended with such and such Effects and
Consequents; and this is one great Way by which he has signified to the World
his Dislike or Approbation of humane Actions by the Effects and Consequents
which he has chained and annexed to them. If in the Course of Things which he
has established, such an Action be ordinarily attended with a good Effect, he
thereby signifies his Approbation of it, and declares that it is his Will and
Pleasure that we should do and persevere in doing it: But if the Consequents
which in the Course of Nature are ordinarily linked to such an Action are evil
and hurtful, he thereby declares his Dislike and Abhorrence of it; and that it
is his Will and Pleasure that we should carefully and constantly avoid it. For
the great Author of our Beings has so framed our Natures, and placed us in
such Circumstances and Relations, that there is nothing vicious but is also
injurious to us; nothing virtuous but is advantageous; and in this the Good and
Evil of all humane Virtues and Vices do consist; and it is purely for this
Reason, why he forbids the one and commands the other; because he is our
Friend, and would not have us neglect any Thing that tends to our Good, nor do
any Thing that is hurtful and injurious to us; and because he knows that while
we are thus framed, and do continue in these Circumstances and Relations, it is
impossible but Virtue should be an Advantage, and Vice a Mischief to our
Natures. And indeed the great Sanction of the Law of Nature, is nothing else
but that natural Good and Evil which is ordinarily consequent to the Actions
which it commands and forbids. For when God had no otherwise revealed himself
to the World than only by the established Course and Nature of Things, that was
the only Bible whereby Mankind could be instructed in his Will and Pleasure;
and there being no Threats or Promises antecedently annexed unto bad and good
Actions, his Will and Pleasure concerning our doing or avoiding them, was only
visible in those good or bad Effects and Consequences, which in the Course of
Nature he had made necessary to them. And indeed the Moral Good and Evil of all
Actions, is finally to be resolved into the natural Good and Evil that is
appendent to them; for therefore our Actions are morally good, because they are
naturally beneficial to us; and therefore are they morally evil, because they
are naturally prejudicial and hurtful; and those that are neither of these, are
indifferent Actions; and stand in the middle between Good and Evil. And indeed
this Distinction of Actions by their Effects and Consequents, is in most
Particulars so plain and sensible, that all the World has taken Notice of it:
For whereas all good Actions have an apparent Tendency either to the Public
Good, wherein our own Private is involved, or to our own animal and sensitive
Good, our Quiet, and Health, and Reputation, and Prosperity; or to the
Perfection of our rational Natures, and the sovereign Pleasure and Happiness of
our Minds; all bad Actions tend directly contrary, either to the Damage and
Ruin of the Publick-Weal, or to the Hurt and Prejudice of our animal and
sensitive Felicity; to the diseasing of our Bodies, the staining our Names, or
the impoverishing our Estates; or to the defacing and blemishing the Beauty of
our rational Natures, and the Interruption and Disturbance of all the Pleasures
and Felicities of our Minds. And this Distinction of good and evil Actions is
so immutably fixed in the Nature of Things, that it can never be obliterated,
until God wholly alters the Course of his Creation, and impresses quite
contrary Laws of Motion on it. For so long as we continue what we are in the
same Nature and Circumstances, and Relations to God and one another,
Righteousness and Godliness, Humility and universal Love must necessarily be
good for us; and their Contraries bad and destructive to our Happiness.

Now this wise and excellent Constitution of Things does very much tend to the
facilitating of Virtue and Goodness to us. For when Things are so constituted
that it is become our Interest as well as our Duty to pursue Virtue and eschew
Vice; when that which distinguishes our Duty from our Sin, is the good that it
does us, and the apparent Tendency it has to our Happiness; this, if we love
our selves, must needs very much endear and recommend it to us: For now we
serve our selves in serving our Maker, the substance of all whose Injunctions
is no more than this, that we should pursue our own Happiness by doing all
those Things which are necessary thereunto. I confess had he made those Actions
which are our Sins to be our Duty, we had then some Reason to complain; for
then we should have been bound in pure Obedience to God to damnify our selves;
and like the wretched Priests of Baal, to cut and slash our own Bodies and
Souls merely to humor and gratify the Divinity whom we adore; then in obeying
him we must have acted our own Tragedy, and made our selves miserable in pure
Loyalty to our Maker. For there is such an inseparable Bane clings to all
vicious Actions as necessarily renders them destructive and venomous; and we
may as soon clip off the Sunbeams with a Pair of Scissers, as separate Vice
from its mischievous Consequences. But now when the Sum of all that God
requires of us is to be good to our selves, and Friends to our own Happiness;
to do what is beneficial, and avoid what is hurtful to us; when every Command
of his is an Instance of his Love to us, and exacts nothing of us but what we
would have done of our own Accord, had we but known what is good for us as well
as he; and loved our selves as well as he loves us: In a word, when at the End
of every good Action there stands some natural Good beckning and inviting us to
it; and at the End of every bad One some natural Evil to warn and affright us
from coming at it; so that we cannot run from any Duty into any Sin, without
leaving a Benefit for a Mischief, and leaping out of some Degree of Happiness
into some Degree of Misery: When things I say are thus, as it is apparent they
are, with what Conscience can we complain that our Duty is burdensome and
uneasy? This therefore is one great Reason why God's Commands cannot be
grievous, because they require nothing but what is beneficial, and forbid
nothing but what is hurtful and injurious to us. And sure no Man can have
Reason to complain, that is forbid Poison, and commanded to eat nothing but
what is wholesome and nourishing.

2 ly. Another Thing that facilitates the Commands of God is this, That they
are highly agreeable to our reasonable Natures. And hence the Apostle calls the
whole of our Religion a reasonable Service, Romans xii.1. And for the Truth of
this I dare appeal to any considering Man in the World, whether those Virtues
which God has enjoined be not in their own Nature far more reasonable than any
of the Contrary Vices; whether (supposing there be a God that made and governs
the World; and from whom we derive our Beings, and all the Blessings we enjoy
or expect) it be not much more reasonable in the Nature of the Thing, that we
should worship and revere, and love and honor, and obey him, than that we
should neglect and despise, blaspheme and rebel against him; or whether we can
behave our selves so unworthily to One that has deserved so well at our hands,
without doing the greatest Violence to our own Reason; whether since we are all
of us reasonable Beings, and our Reason is the noblest Ingredient of our
Natures, it does not much better become us to subject our blind Passions and
Appetites, to those eternal Rules of Temperance which Right Reason prescribes,
than to let loose the Reins to them, and suffer them to run headlong into all
Excesses and Riots; whether since we are incorporated into the great Society of
Mankind, it be not much more conducive to the Good of the Whole to behave our
selves justly and honestly, charitably and obliging one toward another, than
to defraud and oppress, malign and persecute one another. I dare appeal to any
Man that has ever thought twice of these Matters, whether in point of
Reasonableness, the Advantage is not wholly on the side of Virtue; yea, and
whether the opposite Vices compared with these Virtues, seem not as extravagant
as the wildest Freaks of a Madman, compared with the wise Managements of a
Minister of State. But I need not appeal to particular Men in this Matter,
since all the reasonable World is agreed in the point, and the Men of all Ages
and Nations, and Religions, how much soever in other points they have dissented
from one another, yet in this have still been unanimous, That Virtue is the
wisest and most reasonable Thing in the World, and Vice the most absurd and
irrational; and this not only in the general, but in all those particular
Instances of Virtue and Vice which Christianity commands and forbids. For
excepting the two Sacraments, and believing in Jesus Christ, and the
Observation of the Lord's Day, which are the instituted Means of our Religion,
there is nothing made Matter of Duty to us, but what all the wise World had
long before pronounced most highly fit and reasonable.

This therefore must needs render the Commands of God very easy to us, that
they do so perfectly agree with our reasonable Natures, and require nothing of
us either to be done or avoided, but what the Reason of every wise Man would
have obliged him to, whether God had commanded it or no. So that now to
facilitate our Duty, we have the full Concurrence of our Reason, which upon due
and impartial Consideration cannot but approve and recommend it to us as the
most reasonable Thing in the World; and if it be so, how is it possible that it
should be in its own Nature grievous? Is it so hard a Matter for Men to act
like Men, and not to live their own Reverse and Antipodes? Is it such a mighty
Burden to comply with the most genuine Inclinations of our Nature, and to swim
with the full Tide and Current of our Reason, in obeying those Commands which
are so far from offering any Violence to our Faculties, that they have their
full Consent and Approbation? Let Men say and teach what they please, it is as
apparent as the Sun, that the Difficulties of Religion commence not so much
upon the Stock of Nature, as of Education and evil Habits and Customs; for in
all other Instances, that which is natural is always facile and easy; and if
Reason be the Nature of a Man, Religion must be either natural or unreasonable.
So that Religion disagrees with us upon no other Account, but only because we
disagree with our selves; and it just so far crosses us, as we do the Current
of our own rational Natures. We have sophisticated our Natures with the
Intermixtures of sensual and devilish Habits, and they are these that the
Commands of God do agrieve; and so it is not the Man that is so burdened with
Religion, but it is either the Beast, or the Devil that is in him.

3 ly. Another Thing that facilitates God's Commands is this, That they are
mightily furthered and promoted by all the natural Instincts and Passions of
human Nature. There are certain Propensions in human Nature antecedent to all
Reason and Discourse, that seem to be implanted in us by the wise Author of our
Beings, for no other End but only to minister to Virtue and Religion; such in
particular are Self-Love, the Love of Truth, and of Pleasure, Commiseration and
Gratitude, and Affectation of Praise; all which do discover themselves in us in
our early Infancy, before we are capable of discoursing our selves into them.
For even in young Infants you may observe a great Inclination to defend
themselves, and to repel Injuries, which proceeds from the Principle of
Self-love that is in them; a vehement Desire of what seems good to them, and a
great Displeasure when they perceive themselves deceived; the later of which
must proceed from their Love of Truth, as the former from their Love of
Goodness. Again, when they see a miserable Object, or one whom they think so,
they presently bemoan it, and express by their Actions a very earnest Desire to
defend and relieve it; which proceeds from that natural Commiseration that is
in them. Again, as soon as they are able to distinguish Faces and Persons, we
see they express the greatest Love and Fondness to those that tend and feed
them, and do them most good; which is a plain Expression of their natural
Gratitude. And as soon as they understand the Meaning of Words or Actions, they
show themselves highly pleased when they are commended and applauded, and much
grieved and ashamed when they are derided and exposed; which plainly discovers
their natural Affectation of Praise. These and such like Instincts and
Propensions there are found in human Nature, which being well managed and
improved by our Reason, prove excellent Instruments of Virtue and Religion; and
do very much facilitate and further our Practice of them. For this our natural
Self-love being guided by our Reason, does strongly incline us to serve and
obey God, who being the most powerful Agent in the World, can do us the
greatest Good if we please him, and the greatest Hurt if we affront and provoke
him; so that as we love our selves, it concerns us to use all reasonable Ways
to endear and reconcile our selves to him. Thus our natural Desire of Good, if
conducted by our Reason, will incline us to do the best Actions, since from
these the greatest Good will necessarily redound to us; and our Love of Truth
by good Management may be easily improved into Honesty and Sincerity, and an
universal Abhorrence of Vice upon the Account of those notorious Cheats and
Impostures that are in it. Thus also by the Bias of our natural Commiseration,
we are strongly inclined to Charity and Beneficence, and universal Love; and by
its own innate Gratitude our Nature is propense to the Love of God, who is our
Sovereign Benefactor; to honor and obey our Parents, and do all the Acts and
Offices of a noble and generous Friendship. And to name no more, thus by our
natural Affectation of Praise we are strongly inclined to do praiseworthy
Things, and consequently to exercise our selves in all those amiable Virtues,
which by common Consent are looked upon as the Graces and Ornaments of human
Nature. Thus by all those Instincts that God has implanted in our Natures, we
are inclined to Virtue, and Obedience to his Will: And for this Reason chiefly
has he implanted them in us, because they are excellent Instruments of
Religion, having in them such a natural Aptitude and Proneness to facilitate
our Duty by inclining us to it, and to farther us in Holiness and Virtue. I
confess, there are none of these Instincts but may be improved into Vices; nor
is there any Thing so good, but what may be perverted to very bad Purposes: And
if Men will abuse themselves, and wilfully deboach the Instincts of their
Nature, there is no Remedy for their Folly; and they must thank themselves when
they feel the dismal Effects of it. But this I think is plain, that there are
no Propensions in human Nature, but what are much more improvable into Virtue
than into Vice; and if Men would but use themselves well, and as it becomes
reasonable Creatures to do, they would doubtless find themselves very much
farthered in their Duty by the natural Instincts which God has implanted
within them. And this is a mighty Advantage on Virtues side, that it is thus
aided and assisted with all the Instincts of our Natures; which like obedient
Handmaids, are most readily inclined to execute its Commands, and minister to
its Pleasure and Interest. How then is it possible that Religion in it self
should be burdensome and grievous to us, when the Propensions of our Nature do
so fairly comply with it, and it is helped forwards and promoted by all their
united Force and Influence? It Is difficult indeed for a Man to go against the
Grain; but to act according to Nature, to follow our own Propensions, and to do
what we are inclined to by natural Instinct, is doubtless the easiest Thing in
the World.

4 ly. Another Thing that makes those Virtues which God Commands to be easy is
this, that they are all so inseparably connected to one another, that they
mutually promote and help forward each other; For all the Virtues are so
mutually concatenated, that the stirring of any one Link moves the whole Chain.
Thus for Instance, the true Knowledge of God naturally inflames the Soul with
the Love of him; and then the Love of him insensibly transforms her into the
Image of his beloved Goodness; for he that loves God must needs be inamoured
with that divine Goodness which is the Root of his Love: And while he is
ravished with the Sweetness of his Good Will, the Undeservedness of his Grace,
and the Clemency of his Pardon, an heavenly Spirit steals into his Soul, and he
loves, and becomes like God so both at once, that like a Wedg of Steel, he is
transformed into the Likeness of the Fire that heats him; and is all inflamed
and enlightened at the same Moment. And as he burns with Love, so he resembles
the Goodness that set him on Fire, and becomes pure as that is pure, and holy
as that is holy, and just and merciful as that heavenly Original is which he
copies and transcribes. Thus wheresoever the Love of God is, it has all the
god-like Virtues attending it; and that being the first Link in the heavenly
Chain, whenever it moves, it communicates Motion to all the rest. For he that
heartily loves God, will love those whom God loves; and so the Love of God will
draw Brotherly-Charity after it; and he who loves those whom God loves, will be
just and righteous in his Dealings and Deportment toward them; and so
Brotherly-charity will draw Righteousness after it: And he that demeans himself
justly and righteously toward others, will neither undervalue them, nor
overvalue himself; and so Righteousness will draw Humility after it: And he
that does not overvalue himself, is fairly disposed to be sober in all his
Passions; and so Humility draws Temperance and Sobriety, and Meekness after it.
Thus one Virtue smoothens the Way to another, and makes it not only possible
but easy; for there is such a near Neighborhood between these heavenly
Sisters, that when we are arrived at one, we pass insensibly to the next; and
so on by Degrees, till we are gone round with them all. For though there be not
an immediate Dependence of every Virtue upon every one Virtue, so as to make it
necessary for a Man to have all Virtues in every Moment that he has one; for a
Man may be charitable, and yet not presently humble; as he may be just, and yet
not immediately temperate: Yet there is so near a Dependence between them, that
one always disposes the Mind for another; this Virtue always makes way for its
next Neighbor, and that for its next, and so on all around the whole Circle of
Virtues. Thus Humility naturally disposes the Mind to Meekness, Meekness to
Charity, Charity to Justice, Justice to Devotion, (which is giving God his Due)
and Devotion to Heavenly-mindedness and Contempt of the World; and so all along
there is a gentle and easy Transition from one to to other. Now this must
needs mightily facilitate the Virtues of Religion, that they are so nearly
confederated to each other, and so do naturally contribute to each others
Assistance. For whereas if it were not for this there would still be the same
Difficulty in practicing the second Virtue as there is in practicing the first,
and in practicing the third as there is in practicing the second, and so every
single Virtue would be equally difficult; now the main Difficulty lies in the
first we begin with, for by practicing of that we shall be so well disposed for
the next, that afterward we shall go on with much more Ease and Pleasure; for
the first Virtue being set a going, like the First-moving Heaven, will
communicate its Motion from Orb to Orb, from one Virtue to another, till the
whole Sphere whirls round in an harmonious Order. Thus all the Virtues you see
do naturally lighten and ease one another, and every one contributes something
to make every one more easy; so that had we but the Courage to begin to
practice them, we should find they would every day grow more easy and easy to
us, and that not only because we should be more and more Habituated to them,
but because they being mutually allied to one another, the stronger they grow
the more vigorously they must farther and promote each other.

5 ly. And lastly, Another Thing that makes the Virtues that God has commanded
us easy is this, that in themselves they are plain and simple and direct, and
have no Intricacies or Labyrinths in them. As for Sin and Wickedness it is an
inextricable Labyrinth, in which the further a Man goes the more he will
perplex and lose himself; it is a boundless Wilderness whose Paths do all
thwart and cross one another. For all Vices consist in Extremes, and are either
the Excesses or Defects of Virtue; so that there are two Vices to one Virtue,
and both are Extremes thwarting and running counter to one another. Now amidst
this great Diversity and Contrariety of Vices the Sinner must needs be
extremely amazed and distracted; for his Lusts are so infinite that he can see
no End of them, they do so cross and interfere with each other that while he
humors one he displeases another. For in gratifying his Sordidness he affronts
his Pride, and in feeding his Covetousness starves his Sensuality; so that his
wretched Soul wanders among infinite Cross-ways, and is miserably distracted by
its own contrary Desires, which, like Acteons Hounds, are continually worrying
and tearing her in pieces. But all the Paths of Virtue lie strait forwards
between the vicious Extremes, and like Parallel Lines do never interfere with
one another; they never raise any contrary Desires, nor distract our Minds with
inconsistent Passions; but all their Motions are regular and uniform,
conspiring with and promoting one another. For the Truth of it is, Virtue is
all but one entire Thing, much like the Center of a Circle, which though many
Lines are drawn from it round about, and it is looked upon sometimes as the
Term of this Line, and sometimes of that, yet it is one Term to them all, and
is in it self undivided: So is Virtue but one entire Perfection, though it seem
to be diversified in regard of the many Affections that it moderates, and the
several Actions which it does produce; And though its Precepts and Actions are
many, yet they are all ordinated to one End, and in that they are united as
well as in the Principle from whence they proceed. And upon this Account there
can be none of those perplexing Intricacies in the Paths of Virtue as are
ordinarily found in the Ways of Sin, because they are all of them direct and
strait, leading from one Principle to one and the same End; And the Principle
and End of our Motion being one, it is impossible but our Designs, Desires and
Pursuits should be simple and uniform; and consequently the whole Force of our
Souls being bent one Way, we must needs proceed with more Alacrity and Ease
than we can possibly do when it is divided and dispersed among so great a
Multiplicity of Ends and Objects as Vice proposes to us. So that here is one
great Advantage that Virtue has above Vice in respect of Easiness, that
whereas almost in every bad Action a Man has a different End, now to satisfy
this Lust, and anon the contrary; in every virtuous one his End is always the
same; and whereas the former acts variously and inconsistently, and his Desires
frequently clash and run a tilt at one another; the later always moves directly
and uniformly, by one and the same Rule toward one and the same End. And
whereas many Vices are in themselves full of Intanglements, Virtue is always
plain and open, and free. As for Instance, how do we perplex and entangle our
selves by Lying and Knavery, consuming the Pleasure of our Lives within a
winding Maze of little Tricks and intricate Contrivances? And what shameful
Retreats and false Colors, what Fucus's and Daubings are we feign to use to
avoid Contradiction and Discovery? Whereas were we but honest and sincere in
our Professions and Actions, our Way would be open and easy, and uniform;
wherein we might pursue all our Ends by the directest Means, and need never
wander about in the Labyrinths of a mysterious Subtilty; where we may walk
without blushing in the Sight of the Sun, and in the View of the World, and
have no Occasion to skulk into Coverts and Retirements. And the same may be
said of Ambition, and Covetousness, and Pride, and wandering Lust, Vices that
are usually full of great Intreagues and Mysteries; whereas the Contrary
Virtues are all plain and simple, and have nothing of Difficulty or Intricacy
in them. This therefore is a great Advantage that Virtue has in Respect of
Ease, that it is plain and uniform, and simple and direct. And so I have done
with the first Thing proposed, which was to show you that God's Commands in
themselves are facile and easy. I now proceed

2. To the second Thing, which is to prove that our blessed Savior by what he
has done, has rendered them much more easy than they are in themselves. Now
there are these Four Things which our Savior has contributed to the
facilitating the Commands of God.

1. The Assistance of his Holy Spirit. 2. The Influence of his own Example. 3.
The merciful Indulgence and Condescension of his Gospel to the Weakness and
Infirmity of our Natures. 4 ly. The glorious Rewards he has promised us upon
our sincere Obedience.
1. To the rendering of God's Commands easy, he has contributed the Assistance
of his Holy Spirit. For he has promised to give his Holy Spirit unto every one
that asks; and therefore though our Nature of it self be extremely weak, and
not able of it self to stand under the easy Burden of its Duty, if we will
but struggle and do what we are able, he is engaged by promise not to suffer us
to sink* For if by doing what we can, it is in our Power to engage him to
enable us to do what we cannot, it is certainly in our Power to do all; for
though in our own Strength we cannot do all, yet if we please, it may be in our
Power to do more than all through him that will strengthen us, if we will but
do what we can.

2 ly. To the rendering of God's Commands easy, he has also contributed the
Influence of his own most holy Example. For by his own most perfect Obedience
to the Commands of his Father, he has not only set us a Copy to write after,
but he has also given us most convincing Evidence that our Obedience is both
possible and honorable. That it is possible we see by what he has done, and
it is certain that what has been done may be done; that it is honorable we
see by his doing of it; for certainly so great a Person as the Son of God,
would never have stooped to an inglorious Obedience. So that the Example of our
Savior not only encourages our Obedience, but crowns and dignifies it; and
renders it a fit Object both of our Endeavor and Ambition: For by doing
himself what he requires of us, he has plainly demonstrated not only that it
may be done, but also that it highly becomes us to do it. Thus the glorious
Example of our Savior whilst it directs our Obedience, does at the same Time
excite and encourage it. For he conversed among Men with a modest Virtue, such
as was suitable to an ordinary Course of life. His Piety was even, constant,
and unblamable; complying with civil Society, and a secular Conversation. It
broke not forth into high Transports and Seraphic Expressions; but was such as
was both fit and easy for Mortals to imitate. His Virtue consisted not in
prodigious Fastings, or high Abstractions from Sense, but in a life of Justice
and Temperance, Humility and Charity, and Patience; that is, in such a Life as
was not only proper, but possible for us to lead. And by this Means he has
transmitted to us the more of an imitable Virtue; for he did not outrun the
Capacities of Men in prodigious Expressions of Sanctity and Virtue; but
complied with our Weakness, and kept pace with our Strength, that so he might
entertain us all along with the Comforts of his Company, and the Influences of
a perpetual Guide. And as that Rule of Faith which he has propounded to us is
fitted to our Understandings, being very short, easy and intelligible; so the
Copy of Manners which he has set before us is not only fitted with
Excellencies worthy, but also with Complyances possible to be imitated. And
therefore how efficaciously must such a glorious Example contribute to the
facilitating the Commands of God to us, since it does not only point us to our
Duty, but also excite us to perform it; and that both by its Condescension to
our Strength and Capacity; and by the plain Demonstration it gives, that our
Duty is both possible and honorable?

3 dly. To the rendering of God's Commands easy to us, our Savior has also
contributed the merciful Indulgence and Condescension of his Gospel to the
Weakness and Imperfection of our Natures: For in his Gospel he has mercifully
considered our State, that we are but frail imperfect Creatures, that are very
prone to act inconsiderately, and to be ever and anon surprised in this great
Hurry of Temptations; and therefore in his holy Gospel he has made Provision
for us accordingly, that is, he has proportioned our Burden to our Strength,
and taken the Measure of our Duty by our Capacities. For all that he has
required of us as the Condition of our eternal Salvation is only this, that we
should honestly endeavor to understand what he commands and forbids us, and
that we should not live in the wilful Neglect of any known Duty, or in the
wilful Commission of any known Sin; and if we do this he has engaged himself
to make such a merciful Abatement for our Infirmities and Inadvertencies, and
Follies and Surprises, that they shall never rise in Judgment against us so as
to exclude us from eternal Happiness. So that now there can be nothing our Duty
that is naturally impossible, nothing necessary to our eternal Happiness that
is morally impossible; that is, that cannot reasonably be expected from us,
considering our State and Circumstances; and what is neither of these cannot be
supposed to be very grievous and burdensome. For unless we account it hard
that we are not left at Liberty to be obstinate Rebels to our God and Savior,
and with an audacious Forehead to reject what they command, and pursue what
they forbid, it is certain there can be no such Thing as a Burden or Grievance
in all our Religion.

4 thly. And lastly, To the rendering of God's Commands easy to us our Savior
has contributed the Promise of a glorious Reward upon Condition of our sincere
Obedience: And this is such a vast Contribution to the Ease of our Duty, as is
sufficient to turn it all into Jubilee and Recreation. For when I seriously
consider that after I have spent a few Moments here in the noble Exercises of a
sincere Piety and Virtue, I shall be translated into a Region of immortal
Pleasures, where, in the Society of my God and Savior, of Angels and of
blessed Spirits, I shall spend an Eternity in one continued uninterrupted Act
of rapturous Love and Joy and Pleasure; where, in a perfect Freedom from all
the Arrogancies of Flesh and Blood, and from all the Vexations of an
ill-natured World, I shall live as happily for ever as all the Joys of an
everlasting Heaven can make me; in a word, where I shall have nothing else to
do, but to converse with the most happy Lovers, and to bear a part in that
ravishing Consort of Praises and Halelujahs, wherewith they laud and celebrate
the Fountain of all their Happiness: I say when I consider these Things,
methinks I am enabled by those glorious Hopes and Expectations to scorn and
despise all Difficulties, and, if need require, even to embrace the Flames of
Martyrdom: But as for those gentle Toils of watching and praying, of keeping a
constant Guard upon my self and contending against the Stream of my own
depraved Inclinations; Lord! how inconsiderable they appear to me; And how
heartily do I pity those miserable crest-fallen Souls that tamely suffer
themselves to be frighted out of Heaven by such harmless Scare-crows. Thus
while I stand on the Tiptoes of my Hope, and see Heaven at my Journeys End, I
overlook all Rubs and Hardships in my Way, and pass on triumphantly without
minding them. And indeed when the Reward of our Obedience is so great, so
infinitely transcending the Desert of it, I am astonished to think that ever
any reasonable Being should be so shameless and immodest, as to take any Notice
of those trifling Difficulties that are in it: For with what Conscience can we
account any Thing hard, the Reward whereof is a Crown of immortal Glory? How
can our Voyage be troublesome, when our Port is the Indies of Pleasure? No, no;
the Work can never be hard that has Heaven for its Wages, the very Prospect
whereof is enough to reconcile us to all the Difficulties in the Way to it, and
to carry us through them not only with Ease but with Triumph. For he that has
Heaven for his Haven must be infinitely peevish if he quarrels at a rough Sea,
and does nor bless the Storms and Winds that are driving him thither.

And thus I have proved to you at large that the Commands of God are not
grievous, and that both because they are easy in their own Nature, and are
made much more easy by our Blessed Lord and Savior.

But after all that has been said, I do foresee a material Objection that will
be made against this Discourse, and that is this; That it contradicts the
universal Experience of Mankind. For do not the Generality of those Men that
have attempted a religious Life find by Experience a great deal of difficulty?
Are they not forced to strive and wrestle with themselves, and to do the
greatest Violence to their own Inclinations? Are they not forced to keep
themselves under a severe Discipline, to pray earnestly, and watch diligently
to prevent the Surprises and Incursions of those Temptations that continually
way-lay them wheresoever they are, and whatsoever they are about? And do they
not many times find the difficulties so great, as that they are quite beaten
off and utterly disheartened by them?

All this I confess is very true, and may very well be so without any Prejudice
to the Argument in hand; for we have not been discoursing of what Religion may
accidentally be, but of what it really is in it self. The Light in it self is
pleasant to the Eye, but yet it may accidentally be grievous if the Eye be sore
or weak, and not able to endure its Splendour. And so Religion, though in its
self extremely easy, yet it may and often does become accidentally difficult
to us, by Reason of those sinful Prejudices against it which we do too often
contract in the Course of a sinful Life But it is an unreasonable Thing for Men
to measure the Easiness of God's Laws not by their own intrinsic Nature, but
by the Reluctance and Opposition which they find in their own Hearts against
them. For to a Man in a Fever every Thing is bitter, but yet the Bitterness is
not in the Honey he tastes, but in the Gall that overflows his own Palate. And
so to a vicious Man every Virtue is a Burden, but the Burthensomness is not so
much in the Virtue as in his own Repugnancy to bear it. For I have already
proved at large that Religion is every way agreeable to humane Nature, and
therefore there can be no other Reason why it should not agree with us, unless
it be that we disagree with our selves. We spoil our own Natures and do
degenerate from the humane Nature into the brutal or diabolical; and what
wonder is it that the Religion of a Man should be a Burden to the Nature of a
Beast or a Devil? But if we would take but a little Pains to retrieve our
selves and weed out those unnatural Habits with which our Nature is overgrown,
we should find that our Religion and That would very well accord, and then that
which is our Burden would become our Recreation. I confess before this can be
accomplished, we must take a great deal of Pains with our selves; we must watch
and pray, and strive and contend, and undergo the severe Discipline of a
sorrowful Repentance, if ever we mean to recover our Natures again. But for
God's sake consider Sirs, there is now no Remedy for this, and you may thank
your selves for it; for you must undergo great Difficulties, take which side
you please. If you resolve to continue as you are, you must be most wretched
Slaves to your own Lusts; you must tamely submit to all their tyrannical
Commands, and run and go on every Errand they send you; and though they
countermand each other, and one sends you this Way, and another the quite
contrary; though Sloth pulls you back, and Ambition thrusts you forwards, and
Covetousness bids you save, and Sensuality bids you spend; though Pride bids
you strut, and Flattery bids you cringe, and there is as great a Confusion in
their Wills and Commands as there was in the Language of the Brick-layers of
Babel; and though in such a Huddle of Inconsistencies you are frequently at
your Wits end, and know not what to do, yet you must be contented to endure the
Hurry, and if you cannot do all at once, you must do what you can; and when you
have done so, it is a thousand to one but there will be as many of your Lusts
dissatisfied as satisfied: And in the mean time while you are thus hurried
about in the Crowd of your own sinful Desires, your wretched Conscience will
ever and anon be alarming you with its ill-boding Horrors, and griping and
twinging you with many an uneasy Reflection. Thus like miserable Gally-Slaves
you must tug at the Oar, work against Wind and Tide, and row through the Storms
and Tempests of your own Conscience; and all this to run your selves upon a
Rock, and invade your own Damnation. So that considering all, I dare say the
Toil of being wicked is much more insupportable than that of a holy Life; and
which is sad to consider, it has no other Issue but eternal Ruin; for the
wages of Sin, says the Apostle, is death, Romans vi.23. And methinks it should
be very uncomfortable for a Man to work so hard for nothing but Misery, and
even to earn his Damnation with the sweat of his Brows; especially considering,
that the Toil and Drudgery of a sinful Life has no End. For though Custom and
Habit renders all other Things easy, yet by accustoming our selves to do Evil,
we add to our Toil and render those cruel Taskmasters, our Lusts, more
tyrannical and imposing; for still the more we gratify them, the more craving
they will be, and the more impatient of denial, and so by working for them we
shall but increase our own Toil, and still acquire new Degrees of Labor and
Drudgery. But as for the main Difficulty of Religion, it chiefly lies in the
Entry to it; for there we must shake hands with all our darling Lusts, and bid
them adieu for ever; and to persuade our selves thoroughly to this is the main
Difficulty of all; for then, to be sure, they will cling fastest about us, and
use their utmost Oratory to stagger our Resolution, and the old Love we have
born them, and the dear Remembrance of the Pleasures which they have
administered to us will make our Hearts relent and our Bowels yearn toward
them. But if with all those mighty Arguments wherewith our Religion and our
Reason furnishes us, and all those divine Assistances which we are encouraged
to ask, and if we do, are assured to obtain, we can but conquer our
Reluctancies, and heartily persuade our selves to part with them; this is the
sharpest Brunt in all our spiritual Warfare; for now if we do but keep the
ground that we have gotten, and maintain our Resolution against the Temptations
that assault it, our Lusts will every day grow weaker and weaker, and that
Pleasure and Ease, that Tranquillity of Mind and Peace of Conscience which we
shall feel accruing to us out of the Discharge of our Duty, will by Degrees so
indear and connaturalize it to us, that at last it will be much harder for us
to sin than to obey. Wherefore let us stand no longer, like naked Boys,
shivering upon the Brinks of Religion, wishing that we were in, but afraid to
venture; but let us consider seriously, resolve sincerely, and then leap in
boldly; and though at first we may find it difficult to swim against the
Stream, and stem the Tide of our own bad Inclinations; yet if we can but hold
out courageously a while, we shall feel the Current slacken by Degrees till the
Tide of Nature turn, and run the contrary Way; and then we shall be carried on
with Ease and Delight, and swim cheerfully and pleasantly down with the Stream.
For when once we have conquered the bad Inclinations of our Nature, Religion
will be a mighty Ease and Refreshment to us, and we shall feel a thousand times
more Pleasure and Satisfaction in it than ever we did in all our sinful
Enjoyments; so that then we shall find the Truth of the Text, and be able to
pronounce from our own Experience, that God's Commandments are not grievous.

PSALM CXIX.68. Thou art good, and thou do good.
I Have been discoursing concerning the Necessity of our loving of God in order
to our being truly Religious, and showed you at large that this is not only the
great Principle of all Religion, but that of all others it is the most fruitful
and operative. And now that I may lay this Foundation of true Religion in you,
I shall explain to you the infinite Cause and Reason that we have to love him;
and because Goodness is the Beauty of a reasonable Nature, and Beauty is the
Object of Love, I shall endeavor to demonstrate to you the infinite Goodness
of God, that I may thereby affect you with his Beauty; and if possible, inflame
all your Souls with the Love of him. And that I may the more fully convince you
of the divine Goodness, I shall endeavor to prove it from four distinct
Topics: 1. From the Nature of God; 2 ly. From the Creation of God. 3 ly. From
the Providence of God: And 4 ly. From the Revelations he has made to the
World. And these I intend shall be the Arguments of four distinct Discourses;
the three first of which lie plainly in the Text, Thou art good, and thou do
good.

Thou art good: That plainly denotes what God is in himself, that he is
naturally and essentially good; that he is of a most loving, kind, and
benevolent Nature, and has a most vehement Propension to do good to others
founded in his immutable Being. Thou do good: that denotes the Exercise and
Outgoing of this his essential Benevolence in the Works of his Creation and
Providence; and that this his natural Propension to do good is not at all
sleepy or unactive, that it is not a lazy and restive Woulding or Volition; but
that it always sallies forth into Action, and does most vigorously exercise it
self either in making of Objects to employ it self about, or in upholding and
governing them when they are made. So that the Words contain these two things:
1. What God is in himself; Thou art good. 2 ly. What he is in those Actions
that are determined without himself; Thou do good.


1. I begin with the first of these, What God is in himself. Thou art good, i.
e. Thou art so essentially, and according to the unalterable Propension of thy
Nature. And this, as I told you, I shall in the first Place endeavor to
demonstrate from the Nature of God, that is, from that entire Complexion of all
possible Perfections whereof his Nature is composed. For in Order to our
handling of this Argument, this must be premised, that God is a Being endowed
with all possible Perfections, and consequently thereunto that he is infinitely
powerful and infinitely wise; and consequently to that that he is infinitely
Happy; and consequently to this, that he loves himself infinitely; and that all
this is so, is very evident from the Nature of the Thing. For first we must
necessarily suppose one Original Cause of all Things; for else we can give no
possible Account how those Things, that once were not, could ever come into
Being; and we must also as necessarily suppose that this Original Cause was
Self-originated, i. e. that it received its Being and Existence from none but
it self; for else it cannot be the Original Cause, but must it self be the
Effect of some other Cause that was in Being before it: That existing of it
self without any Cause, it is infinitely removed from Not-being; for that which
is without any Cause can ever be without any Cause, merely from that exuberant
Fullness of Essence that is in it self. And that which can be for ever without
any Cause must necessarily be so, because this is a most necessary Act, and as
such must be exerted ad extremum virium Agentis; consequently to which we must
also suppose, that that which is infinitely removed from Not-being has the
utmost Perfection of Essence in it. For the Notion of Essence, nakedly
considered, is to be; and therefore by how much the more remote any Essence is
from Not-Being, by so much the more perfect it must necessarily be. Again, in
Consequence to this we must also suppose, that that which has in it self,
without any Cause, the utmost Perfection of Essence, must have in it self also
the utmost of all other Perfections that by way of Adjunct or Attribute, such
an inexhaustible Essence is capable of; that is, that it must be Powerful and
Wise, and whatsoever else is a possible Perfection of Essence. For Plenitude of
Essence consists in being as much as it can be; and so long as any Being is
capable of being any more than it is, it has not all the possible Degrees of
Essence in it; for every Perfection, that Essence by way of Attribute is
capable of, is a Degree of positive Entity. Thus Wisdom and Power are not mere
Privations of Weakness and Folly, but Things that have some Degree of real
positive Essence in them, and consequently what Being soever has not these,
must necessarily have it in some Degrees of Not-Being; and it is impossible that
any Essence should be infinitely removed from Not-Being, which has any Degree
of Not-Being in it. Lastly, consequently to this we must also suppose, that a
Being endowed with all possible Perfections, being infinitely Powerful and
infinitely Wise, must needs be infinitely Happy; for wheresoever those great
Perfections are, they must necessarily supply whatsoever is necessary to an
infinite Happiness: And then from hence it nessarily follows, that a Being that
is thus infinitely Happy must needs infinitely love and delight in it self;
because within the vast Circumference of its own Being, it has every Thing
that it needs, desires, or affects. These are all plain and easy Deductions,
and seem as naturally to follow from one another, as the most immediate
Consequences do from First Principles. This therefore being supposed, which you
see is very reasonable, that God is infinitely Powerful, and Wise, and Happy;
and that because he is so, he loves himself infinitely; I doubt not but from
each of these it will naturally follow, that he is also infinitely good and
benevolent.

1. He is infinitely powerful; and therefore he is good. For Power is nothing
but an Ability to act; and Action is the End of all Ability for Action: So that
the greater any Power is, the farther it must necessarily be removed from
Inactivity; and consequently infinite Power must be so infinitely removed from
it, that it cannot be supposed to exist without Exercise; or if it could, yet
it cannot be imagined that any Being, in whom infinite Power exists, should
determine with it self, that the best Use it could make of that Power, were to
make no Use of it at all; because such a Being can with as much Ease to it
self, act as not act. And therefore since every Being does necessarily delight
in the Exercise of its own Perfections, it cannot be supposed but a Being
infinitely powerful should necessarily delight in the Exercise of its Power,
when it can as easily exercise it as suffer it to sleep on in eternal
Inactivity; and consequently when it can exercise its Power more vigorously as
easily as less, and can do more Things as easily as fewer, it must necessarily
choose to do it; because, as the having of Power inclines the Agent to act, so
the having of more Power inclines it to act more vigorously. Wherefore if the
doing of Good to others be a much greater Exercise of Power than the doing of
Evil, it will hence necessarily follow, that God being infinitely powerful must
be infinitely prone to do Good; because he cannot but be delighted in that
whereby this great Perfection of his Nature is most vigorously Exercised. But
now for God to choose to employ his Power in doing Mischief to others rather
than Good, would be to choose to do less rather than to do more, when both are
equally easy to him; and consequently to lay a needless Restriction upon the
Exercise of his Power; and so far to render it useless and in vain. For in
doing Mischief to others, he must be supposed either wholly to annihilate them,
or to make them miserable, and continue them so; but by doing Good to others,
he must be supposed either to uphold them in those Beings he gave them, or to
perfect those Beings; and thereby to render them as happy as their Capacities
will bear: And certainly to do either of the later is a much more vigorous
Exercise of Power, than to do either of the former. For, for God to annihilate
Beings, or reduce them to Nothing, is rather to withdraw his Power from them
than to exercise it upon them; because that which is not of it self, cannot
continue to be of it self, it being in the Nature of the Thing as possible for
a Thing to be of it self in the first Moment of its Existence, as to be of it
self in any Moment of its Duration. So that the Continuance of our Being, and
the Original of it must necessarily be owing to the same Power; and
consequently, as our Continuance in Not-Being must necessarily have followed
upon the Non-exercise of this Power, so our Relapse into Not-being must as
necessarily follow from the Discontinuance of the Exercise of this Power. So
that to our Annihilation there needs no more than the bare Suspension of the
Exercise of Almighty Power upon us, or a ceasing to uphold us in Being; for to
the upholding us in Being, there is required a continued Exertion of that
creative Power that first brought us into Being; for if we can exist of our
selves this one Moment, we might as well have done so the Moment before, and
may as well do so the Moment after; and so backward and forward to all
Eternity. So that unless we had such an exuberant Fullness of Essence in us as
to exist of our selves from all Eternity past to all Eternity to come, we
cannot exist so much as one Moment without new Supplies of Being from that
infinite Fountain whence we were originally derived; and that we are this
Moment, is as much the Effect of God's Power, as that we were that Moment when
we first came into Being. So that whereas by annihilating us God would choose to
exercise no Power at all, that is, to render his own Omnipotence useless by
giving it a Quietus from Action; by upholding us in Being his Power is still as
vigorously exercised about us as it was in the first Moment of our Creation;
and therefore by how much more suitable it is to infinite Power to act than to
be idle, by so much more suitable to it it must necessarily be to uphold us in
our Beings, than to annihilate and destroy us.

And then for making us miserable and continuing us so, it is a much less
vigorous Exercise of Power than to perfect our Beings, and thereby to render us
happy. And verily should God turn the whole World into one entire Globe of
unquenchable Fire, and continue its wretched Inhabitants for ever weltring in
its Flames, I should not look upon this as so great an Act of Omnipotence as it
is to perfect our rational Nature so as to render it immutably and eternally
happy. For to the making of any Being perfect and happy, there is required many
more Causes and many more Acts than there is to the making them miserable. For
the greatest Part of Misery consists in the Privation of Happiness, and for God
to deprive his Creatures of Happiness is not so much the Exercise as
Non-exercise of his Power; for then he deprives us of it when he ceases to do
any Thing for us, and refuses to produce or to contribute to the producing of
what tends to our Happiness: So that this Part of Misery consisting in a mere
Privation is not so properly the Effect of the Exercise of Power, as of the
Suspension of the Exercise of Power. So that unless we can suppose that the
Omnipotent Creator of the World chooses rather not to act than to act, we must
necessarily suppose that he chooses rather to bestow Happiness on his Creatures,
than to deprive them of it. And as for the positive Part of Misery which
consists in Pain and Torment, I dare appeal to any Man whether it be not much
more easy to vex and torment any Being than it is to render it happy. For even
a Child can put a Man, yea an Elephant to Pain; but to make a sick Man well, a
poor Man prosperous, a mad Man sober, or a Fool wise, are such mighty Things as
do most commonly transcend all humane Power whatsoever. But then to retrieve
such imperfect Beings as we from the Bondage of Sense and Sensuality, and from
being almost Beasts to raise us up by Degrees to an equal Height with Angels,
to fill and thereby enlarge the narrow Capacities of our Natures till by
filling they are widened almost to Infinity, and yet still to supply them with
new Degrees of Happiness proportionable to their vast enlargements, is a Work
that highly deserves to be the eternal Exercise of Omnipotence it self.

Since therefore the End of Power to act is Action, and every Thing naturally
inclines to its End, and consequently the greater the Power of any Being is,
the greater is its Inclination to Activity; and since the doing of Good to
others is a much greater Exercise of Power than the doing of Mischief; it hence
necessarily follows, that God being Omnipotent must thereby be infinitely
inclined to do Good, and that because doing Good is infinitely the largest
Sphere of Activity. So that if when it is equally possible and easy for him to
do Good, as not, he should choose not to do it, he would choose directly contrary
to the necessary Inclination of an Omnipotent Being, which is to do that which
is the greatest Exercise of Power.

2 ly. God is infinitely Wise, and therefore he is Good. For the greatest
Wisdom consists in proposing the worthiest Ends, and choosing the properest
Means to obtain them. Wherefore if doing Good to others be the worthiest End
that God can propose to himself, it will necessarily follow that by the
Infinity of his Wisdom he is inclined to do Good. For as his Power inclines him
to act, so his Wisdom inclines him to act for the worthiest End; but doing Good
to others is evidently the worthiest End that God can be supposed to aim at;
for it cannot be imagined that he can design any further Good to himself, any
new Addition to the vast Treasure of his Happiness; which is so infinitely full
that it can admit of no Increase: So that whatsoever he does besides the
enjoying of himself, he cannot be supposed to do for any Self-end; because he
has all that Good already within himself that he can possibly either desire or
aim at. So that all those Actions of God which are terminated without himself,
must have either no End at all, which cannot be supposed of the Actions of an
All-wise Agent, or else they must have for their End either the Happiness or
the Misery of others; but to make the Misery of others their End is by no Means
consistent with his infinite Wisdom. For to make pure abstracted Evil the End
of Action is so far from being infinitely wise, that it is impossible; because
the very Notion of an End necessarily includes Good in it, either real or
apparent; but God can reap no Good from the Misery of others, because he is
infinitely happy already; and to be sure others can reap no Good from that
which God intends to be their Misery; that that therefore should be God's End
which is no End, which has nothing of the Nature of an End in it, implies a
plain Contradiction. So that to say that the End of God's Actions is the Misery
of others, is all one as to say he acts for no End at all; and how an
infinitely wise Agent can be said to act at Rovers, to do Things without any
Level or Aim, I cannot apprehend. But supposing it were possible that pure Evil
might be an End, yet it is as evident as the Sun that it cannot be the End of
infinite Wisdom; for infinite Wisdom necessarily inclines to do that which is
wisest; but if it were in it self indifferent to the Almighty whether he did
Good or Evil to others, yet his infinite Wisdom would incline him to do Good;
because in the doing of Good there is much more Wisdom exercised, than in the
doing of Evil. For what great Skill does it require in an Almighty Agent to
make others miserable? If it has a mind to turn them out of Being, it is but
withdrawing that Almighty Arm that upholds them, and they will presently sink
into Nothing of their own Accord; but what great Wisdom is there in it, thus to
unravel his own Workmanship, to weave a Penelope's Web, and to do and undo
eternally? And if he has a Mind to make them miserable and continue them so,
it is but suspending his own Almighty Influence, and refusing to concur to
their Happiness, and they will soon be as miserable as Misery can make them. I
confess to invent an acute Torture requires some Skill; but yet we plainly see
that a very little Wit joined with a great deal of Malice and Cruelty is
sufficient to make an exquisite Tormentor; since even Men of very ordinary
Understanding have invented as sharp Torments as Men are able to bear. So that
for God to do Evil requires very little Contrivance, and consequently is so far
from being an Exercise worthy of his infinite Wisdom, that not only a finite
but a very shallow Understanding, armed with sufficient Power and Malice, can
invent and inflict as exquisite Tortures as is possible for any Being to bear.
But to the perfecting of Beings and rendering them happy, especially of free and
rational Beings, there is required a long series of rare and admirable
Contrivance; for to the effecting of this noble End, there are so many
Impediments to be removed, so many concurrent Means to be employed, such an
incomparable Skill required in the Choice of such as are most fit and
effectual, and methodizing them into such a regular Connection with, and
Dependence upon one another, as that they may all successively second and
promote each other, that even the Wisdom of God, how infinite so ever it be,
may here find Scope and Matter enough to employ and exercise it self for ever.
And I dare appeal to any reasonable Man whether in that Method of saving Souls
which God has revealed to us in his Gospel, (though yet we cannot see all,
because we are not able to discern the admirable Connection it has with the
whole series of divine Providence) there be not infinitely more Wisdom and rare
Contrivance, than an Omnipotent Being need to employ in effecting the greatest
Mischief imaginable; whether in the contriving of Laws so suitable to, and
perfective of our Nature, and in the composing such unanswerable Reasons and
Motives to press and engage us to the Observance of them; and in all that
admirable Series of Providence, by which he seconds and forces those Reasons,
he has not exercised incomparably more Wisdom than he could have done in
effecting the greatest Evil in Nature. As for Example, suppose he should have
designed to kindle some mighty unquenchable Flame in some dark and dismal
Recess of the World, with a Resolution to hurl all reasonable Beings into it,
without any Respect or Consideration; this doubtless would have been as great a
Mischief as can well be imagined; but what Contrivance does it ask for an
Almighty Being to accomplish such a direful End? Could not he have roasted a
little World of Worms, and tortured a Company of Beings that are not able to
resist him, without employing infinite Wisdom in the Management and Contrivance
of it? Or, Which will as well serve my Argument, could there have needed as
much Wisdom to design and effect this, as there did to contrive and manage the
great Methods of our Salvation? Sure no man can be so senseless as to imagine
it. Well then, if God be infinitely Wise, and Doing the greatest Good to others
be a much higher Exercise of Wisdom than doing the greatest Evil, it will hence
necessarily follow, that even his infinite Wisdom must needs incline him to do
Good. For as the End of Power is to act, so the End of Wisdom is to act wisely;
and every Thing, as I told you, inclines to its End, and consequently the more
Wisdom it has, the more wisely it is inclined to act: Wherefore since doing
Good is the greatest Act of Wisdom, God, who is infinitely wise, must needs be
infinitely inclined there unto.

3 ly. God is infinitely happy, and therefore he is good: for God's infinite
Happiness does necessarily exclude all Want, all Desire, and all Prospect of
any Degree of Happiness beyond what he enjoys; and where all these are excluded
there can be no Self-end: For a Self-end is some Good desired and aimed at,
which yet we are not possessed of; and if God has no Self-end, he can have no
End at all, but only to do Good to others. But perhaps you will object, how can
you say that God has no Self-end, when the Scripture so plainly tells us that
his own Glory is his End, and this End he does as well obtain by doing Hurt as
by doing Good to others; by damning of some, as well as by saving of others? To
which I answer, that if by the Glory of God you mean any Thing else but the
free Communication of his Goodness to others, it is false to say that his Glory
is his End; and if this be his Glory, then what I said is infallibly true, that
the only End of God is to do Good. But if you think that his Glory consists in
being praised and commended, admired and applauded by his poor impotent
Creatures, you have very mean Conceptions of him, if you think that this is his
last End. For what Advantage is it to God, that we applaud and commend him? Can
the Praises and Panegyricks of a small Handful of Breath either make him more
glorious than he is, or more glorious in his own Esteem? Alas! No; He is an
infinite Stage and Theater to himself, his Prospect being every way adequate to
his Glory, and his Glory as unbounded as Eternity it self: So that if all his
Creation should join Hearts and Voices to extol and laud him, yet they could
not add either one Spark to his Glory, or one Degree to that infinite
Satisfaction he takes in it. So that when we have praised him as much as we are
able, he is still but as glorious as he was before, and he still knows that he
deserves infinitely more Praises than we are able to render him. And how can it
be imagined that he who is so infinitely satisfied with himself, and has such
infinite Reason for it, should find any need of our poor Praises and
Commendations? And if he finds no Need of it, how can he propose it to himself
as the End of his Actions, since the End of Action is always some Good, which
yet we have not, but do desire to enjoy? It Is true he does command us to praise
and laud and acknowledge him, but he commands us this as he does all other
Things, not for his own Good, but for ours. He bids us extol and admire his
Perfections, that by that he might engage us to transcribe and imitate them,
and so by glorifying him to glorify our selves; So that still the Glory that he
designs and aims at consists not in receiving any Good from us, but in doing
and communicating of Good to us. And therefore though it is true that God does
obtain this great End of his Glory as well in damning of some as in saving of
others, it is not because he reaps any Good from it, but because he does Good
by it. For if he should damn and punish any Being without any good Reason, he
could not expect so much as to be praised and commended for it; but if he does
it for good Reason, it is because it is good either for himself or others: For
himself it cannot be, for how can an infitely happy Being reap any Degree of
Good from another Misery and Punishment? And therefore it must be for the Good
of others, that they by the Example of those whom he punishes may be warned
from incurring those Sins for which he punishes them, and from running away
from their own Duty and Happiness. So that even the End of Punishment is to do
Good, and this is the great Glory that God aims at in doing it. And indeed
considering that God is infinitely happy, there is no other Glory but this that
he can propose as the great and ultimate End of his Actions. For all the
Inclination that is in any Being either not to do Good, or to do Hurt to
others, arises from Indigence and Insufficiency; either we envy or we covet the
Good which another enjoys, the former of which restrains us from adding any
more Good to him, as the latter excites us to deprive him of that which he is
already possessed of; both which do apparently arise from the Want and
Indigence of Good in our selves. But now in God there being no Want of Good, it
is impossible there should be either Envy or Avarice in him; and both these
being excluded, there can be no Temptation at all in his Nature either not to
do Good, or to do Hurt to others. For we see among Men, the more perfect and
happy they are, the less good still they desire for themselves, and the more
for others. Since therefore the great God is infinitely perfect and infinitely
happy, it is impossible he should desire any Good for himself; and therefore if
he act for any Good at all, as he cannot but do, it must be for ours. For

4 thly. And lastly, God loves himself infinitely, and therefore cannot but be
good. For whatsoever Being loves it self, must necessarily love its own
Resemblance and Likeness; for that which is lovely in us is lovely in another,
and if there be any Reason why we should love our selves, there is the same
Reason why we should love another that resembles us in those Things for which
we love our selves. It Is true, we poor imperfect Creatures do many times love
our selves without Reason, out of a mere blind Impetus and necessary Instinct
of Nature. But God, being infinitely wise governs all his Motions by the wisest
Rules, and does every Thing for the best and most excellent Reasons; and
consequently does not love himself he cannot tell why, out of any blind
unaccountable Instinct in his Nature; but he loves himself so far only as he
has Reason to do it, and it is because he has infinite Reason for it that he
loves himself infinitely: And the Reason why he loves himself to that infinite
Degree that he does, is because he is infinitely perfect, and so has infinite
Reason to be delighted and satisfied with himself; and this being the Reason,
he cannot but love others that resemble him in that for which he loves himself.
For though others cannot be infinitely happy as he is, yet they are happy in
such a Degree as there Capacities will bear; and when they are so, he has the
same Reason, though not so much, to love them as he has to love himself. And
he that loves Happiness in another as well as in himself, will not only love it
where it is already, but be very much inclined to propagate it where it is not.
So that this, I think, is a most plain Case, that if Perfection and Happiness
be the Reason of God's love, he cannot but love it in another as well as in
himself; and if he love it in another, he cannot but be inclined to contribute
to the producing it. And therefore unless we suppose God, contrary to the
Genius of all other Beings, not to love his own Resemblance, nor to be at all
concerned to propagate it; we must necessarily suppose him to be Good, or which
is all one, inclined to make others happy. And to say that God loves Happiness
in himself, but yet that he affects to make others miserable without any
Prospect of Advantage to himself, is to say that he loves Contraries in
different Objects, that is, Happiness in himself, and Misery in others; which
is to make his Love to be guided by the extravagant Impulses of a mutable
Fancy, and not by the steady Rules of Wisdom. But since it is impossible for
any Being to love that which is contrary to himself, we may be sure that God
cannot love Misery, whose Nature is so infinitely happy; and since I am sure
that every Being must love its own Resemblance, if it love it self; I am as
sure that God loves that others should be happy, as I can be that he is so
himself.

And thus I have endeavored from the very Nature of God to demonstrate this
great Truth to you, That he is good; and plainly proved to you that by all
those infinite Perfections which are the necessary Results of his
Self-existence he is most strongly and vehemently inclined to do good to
others. And now to conclude all, we will briefly consider what Use may be made
of this Discourse for the Guidance and Conduct of our Lives and Actions.

1. Then, if God be good, this may serve to support us under all the sad Events
that befall us in this World. For what greater Satisfaction than this can any
reasonable Man desire, to be under the Government of, and to have all his
Affairs disposed by a God that cannot but be good? For now all Events and
Accidents that befall us must be what God intends and designs them, because he
has the Management and Disposal of them all; and to be sure a good God can
never have an ill Design upon his Creatures. It Is true, when his Creatures
prove Malefactors, he may and does chastise and punish them; but even in doing
thus he has a most gracious and merciful Design, namely, to reform the
Offender himself; or to make him a public Example to all the rational World,
that they may take warning by his Ruin, and not run upon the Rock that dashed
him in pieces. And to punish Offenders is as great an act of Mercy to the
Public, as it is to reward the Loyal and Obedient; for if out of a fond
Indulgence to insolent Rebels he should let them go on in a State of Impunity,
the Public would suffer a great deal more by it than those Rebels can do by a
just and deserved Punishment; for their Impunity would embolden others to take
the same Courses, and so the Contagion would run on without any stop from one
to another, till the Whole were infected, and the Plague of Wickedness became
Epidemical to all the reasonable Creation; and so by sparing a few he would
destroy a great many, and his Mercy to Particulars would be Cruelty to the
Whole. But so long as we are honest and sincere in our Obedience to God, we may
be sure that whatsoever befalls us in particular is intended for our good; for
he cannot intend Hurt to an honest Soul without doing open Violence to his own
Goodness; because the Hurt of such an one is a pure Mischief; it can serve no
good End, but is likely to prove a greater Prejudice to the Public, than it
can be to the Person that endures it: For as the Impunity of great Offenders
will imbolden others to offend, so the ruining of obedient Subjects will
discourage others from obeying. So that to design Hurt or Damage to a sincerely
good Man is to do Mischief for its own sake, and this can proceed from nothing
but pure abstracted Malice, which is the very Quintessence of a Devil; but I am
sure can have no Room in the Breast of our good God and merciful Father. I
confess in this Life all Things do fall out so alike to all, that it is
impossible for us to judge of God's particular Design and Intention toward us
by the Nature of the Things that we suffer; and therefore in this Case the only
infallible Course we can take is thoroughly and impartially to examine our
selves, and if upon a serious Review of our own Hearts and Ways we can truly
say that we have been honest and sincere to God and our Duty, we may be as sure
that he designs good to us in all those Afflictions that he lays upon us, as we
can be that there is such a Being as God in the World. And if for the Time past
we should find that we have been bad and false and hypocritical; yet since God
still continues us in this Life of Trial, and permits us the Privilege of
being Candidates and Probationers for the Heavenly Preferments, we may safely
conclude from the Goodness of his Nature that whatsoever he does to us he
designs as no Harm; for how can it be imagined that the good God should design
our Misery at that very time, while he continues us in a Probation for
Happiness? Wherefore let us cheerfully undergo whatsoever he lays upon us,
concluding that there is nothing but Good can come from a good God; that even
his Punishments are cordial, and all his Rods dipped in Love; and though they
may smart severely, and fetch Blood from our very Hearts; yet let us determine
with our selves that they must be good or bad according as God intends them,
and that the good God must needs intend them for good.

2 ly. Is God thus naturally and essentially good? Then this may serve for an
excellent Standard whereby to judge of our Opinions in Religion. For most
Opinions in Religion have either a near or remote Tendency to the Honor and
Dishonor of God's Goodness; and though I will not say that every Opinion is
true that seems to extol and advance the Goodness of God, yet I am sure that
every Opinion must be false that does either directly or by true Consequence
deny or disgrace it. For let our Opinions be true or false, yet this I am sure
is eternally true, that God is good; and while I am sure of this, I can never
believe any Doctrine true that thwarts and contradicts it; because I am sure
that from Truth there is nothing but Truth can be inferred throughout the
longest Train of Deductions. This therefore we ought to be infinitely cautious
of, how we entertain any Opinion whatsoever, that seems but to clash with the
Goodness of God; for if it but seem to do so, we are bound by all the Zeal we
owe to the divine Goodness to suspect it of Fashood, or at least not to be
over-confident of its Truth till we see it fairly acquitted of that foul
Imputation. For to preserve in our Minds consistent Opinions of the Goodness of
God is a thing that we ought to be as careful of, as of the Apple of our own
Eyes; because an ill Opinon of God is a Flaw in the very Foundation of our
Religion and our Comfort; and it will be impossible for us to serve him long,
either with Sincerity or with Pleasure, if we do not firmly believe him to be a
good Master.

3 dly. Is God thus naturally and essentially good? Then this may serve to
hearten and encourage us in his Service. For to be sure so good a Master will
never prove unkind to any faithful Servant; that he will not burden us above
our strength, but most freely contribute to us all the Assistance that is
necessary to enable us to our Duty; that he will not be angry with us for
Trifles and Punctilio's, but consider our Weakness, and pity our Follies, and
make the most candid Interpretation of our Actions, and finally judge us by the
Measures of a Friend; that when we wilfully miscarry, he will not presently
cast us off for ever, but will be entreated by our Repentance, and appeased by
our Amendment, and graciously receive us again into his Mercy and Favor; that
he will not be narrow and stingy in the Recompense of our Duty to him, but
reward us a Thousand-fold with such immense Glories and Beatitudes, as shall
make us for ever bless the Moment we entered into his Service: All these things
we may confidently conclude and build upon from the transcending Goodness of
his Nature. And what greater Encouragement can we expect, or desire? Why then
are we afraid, O foolish Souls, that we are! Why are we afraid to engage in his
Service? Where can we hope to find a more gracious, compassionate, and
bountiful Master; one that will be more ready to help and to pity, to pardon
and reward us? If there be any equal Rival to God in all the World, any in
whose Service you can engage your selves with equal Hopes and Encouragements;
go on and prosper in the Service of that great Rival. But if God be infinitely
the best Master in the World, as doubtless he is, Why do we stand Debating the
Case any longer? Why do we not run at least as cheerfully to his Service, as we
would to the greatest Advancement that any Mortal Prince can tender us? In the
name of God, Sirs, be once so Wise as to consult your own Interest, and do not
stand any longer in your own Light. Behold the great and good God stands ready
to entertain you, and condescends to invite you to the most glorious Service
that ever was; a Service that is most easy and reasonable, that is intermixed
with infinite Pleasure and Sweetness, and crowned with the Reward of all that
an everlasting Heaven means. Wherefore as you love your selves, and value your
own Welfare, resolve once for all with those in the Prophet; Other Lords
besides thee have had dominion over us, but thee only, Our good God, will we
now serve.

4 thly. And lastly, From hence I infer, that it is an unreasonable Thing for
Men to suspect the Goodness of God, because of some uncertain Appearances in
the World to the contrary. For from the very Principles of God's Nature we are
certainly assured that he must be good, which is the highest Demonstration that
Things are capable of; and therefore to suspect his Goodness upon the Account
of some little Appearances to the contrary, is to confront Demonstrations with
slender Probabilities, and overruled a Certainty with a doubtful Guess. And yet
how common is it for Men to arraign the Goodness of God merely upon the Account
of some visible Effects of his Power, which to their narrow Apprehensions seem
hurtful and mischievous; as if we had such an entire Prospect of all the
Relations and Tendencies of God's Actions, as that none could possibly appear
either good or evil to us, but what is really so. Whereas, God knows, we are a
company of miserable short-sighted Creatures, and are not able to see from the
Beginning to the End of any one Action in all the Train of God's Providence; so
that though this or that Action may appear evil to us, considered singly and in
the present Effects of it, yet in it self it may be highly good, considering
what a Dependence it has upon what went before, and what a Tendency it has to
what is to follow after. For God by his infinite Comprehension having all
Things present and before him, has so ranked and disposed them, that from
first to last they are all but one complicated and orderly united Means to
bring about those great Ends which he first designed and intended; and
consequently all the Passages in the World in his providential Dominion over
them have a strict and mutual Dependence on each other, and so cannot be judged
of singly and apart from one another, there being no one Action but relates to
Millions of others, yea to all others from the first to the last Link of Action
in the whole Chain of Providence. And therefore for us to measure the Goodness
of God's Providence in general by those particular Parts of it that lie before
us, is just as if a Man should judge of a whole Consort of Music only by
hearing three or four Notes of a well-composed Lesson, whereas the whole
Harmony consists in a well-composed Mixture of a thousand Notes and Discords,
wherein all the particulars are so interwoven as that the several Notes united
in one Lesson have a most excellent Symetry and Proportion to one another. For
in the whole Consort of the divine Providence there are a thousand Discords,
which, to us who hear them singly and apart from the rest, do many times yield
a very ungrateful Sound; whereas could we discern but the whole Composure, and
hear how elegantly all thole Discords are mingled into one entire Harmony, we
should never be able to forbear admiring the Skill, and adoring the Wisdom and
Goodness of the great Harmostes. But since it is so impossible for us to discern
all the Connections and Tendencies of God's Actions, how unreasonable is it for
us to censure the Goodness of his Nature, because there are some Actions of
his, and some Effects of those Actions, whose Goodness at present we are not
able to discover. Wherefore, if we have either Reason or Modesty in us, we
ought to be satisfied with those Arguments of his Goodness that are drawn from
the Principles of his Nature, and though we cannot account for the Goodness of
all his Actions in particular, yet firmly to resolve that nothing but Good can
come from a good God.

PSALM CXIX.68. Thou art good, and thou do good.
I Proceed to the second Part of the Text, viz. the Operations of God that flow
from the immutable Goodness of his Nature; Thou do good: And these as they
flow from the Goodness of God's Nature, so they are plain Proofs and
Indications of it. For as the Nature of Things is demonstrable by their Effects
as well as their Causes, so the Goodness of God may be as well demonstrated by
the Operations it exerts, and the Effects it produces in the World, as by those
Principles and Perfections of his Nature from whence it necessarily arises. And
it is as certain that that Being must be good that has all the necessary
Causes and Principles of Goodness in it; for if it were indifferent to the
Almighty whether he did Good or Evil, he would doubtless either retire from
Action and do neither, or else he would do as much Mischief as Good; or if he
were inclined to do ill he would do it, and not force himself to act contrary
to his own Inclinations. Wherefore since he does Good so constantly and so
universally, he can neither be supposed to be averse nor indifferent to it; and
if he be neither of these, his doing Good must necessarily proceed from the
immutable Inclination of his Nature thereunto. If therefore we can prove from
the whole Course and Series of God's Operations that he does Good, it will be
an infallible Argument that he is so. Now all those Operations of God that pass
out of himself, and terminate upon others are reducible to Creation and
Providence; both which will afford us abundant Instances of the Truth of the
Text, that God does Good.

I. I begin with the first, viz. Creation; in which it is apparent that God
has done an infinite deal of Good. And hence the Psalmist tells us that the
whole earth is full of the goodness of the Lord, Psalm xxxiii.5. so also Psalm
civ.24. O Lord how manifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them all;
the earth is full of thy Riches, [i. e. the Riches of his Goodness] and so is
the great and wide Sea. And God himself after his great Work of Creation, upon
a general Survey of the whole Fabric of Beings, pronounces all to be very
good, Genesis i.31. But to demonstrate more particularly the great Goodness that
God has expressed in his Creation, I shall briefly give you these four
Instances of it.

1. That whatsoever Beings are incapable of Happiness in themselves, he has
made them so far as they can be, subservient to the Happiness of others. 2.
That he has given actual Existence to all kinds of Beings that are capable of
any Degree of Happiness. 3. That he has furnished them with all the sufficient
Means and Abilities to obtain the utmost Happiness that they are capable of. 4.
That in all those Beings that are capable of Happiness, he has implanted a
natural Disposition of Doing Good to others.
1. That whatsoever Beings are incapable of Happiness in themselves, he has
made them so far as they can be, subservient to the Happiness of others. For it
is impossible that all Beings that are capable of Happiness could ever have
been actually happy, had not God created some Beings that are utterly incapable
of it. For thus all the Heavenly Bodies, the Air, and Earth, and Fire and Water
are Beings utterly incapable of Happiness, they being all inanimate, and
consequently void of all Sense and Perception either of Happiness or Misery;
but yet it cannot be denied but they are indispensably necessary to the
Happiness of a World of animated Beings that are capable of some Degrees of
Happiness. Thus, for instance, the Happiness of all sublunary Things, of Men
and Beasts, of the Fowls of the Air and the Fishes of the Sea, depends in a
great Measure on those dead inanimated Elements; and therefore if God had not
created some Beings incapable of Happiness, there are many Beings that are
capable of it must either have not been, or have been miserable. And therefore
God has not only created these, but out of his great Goodness to his living
Creatures he has created them in such an Order as renders them as subservient
as they can be to their Welfare and Happiness. Thus the Sun, whom God has
ordained the universal Foster-father of all sublunary Beings, though he feels
no Happiness himself, is created by our great Benefactor in such a Form and put
in such a Course of Motion, as renders him most serviceable to all those
animated Beings, that are capable of Happiness. For first he is created of a
fiery Substance, by which he not only enlightens this lower World, but warms
and cherishes it with a fruitful and vigorous Heat. And then God has cast all
its mighty Substance into the Figure of a perfect Globe, that so if the Earth
moves round it, it might be able to communicate the comfort of its Light and
Heat to it throughout all the Circle of its Motion; or that if it moves round
the Earth, it may by its Figure, which is most apt for Motion, be the better
enabled to walk his Rounds about the World, and so visit all his
Foster-Children, and refresh them with his Light and Warmth as often as their
Necessities require. And then for his Situation in the World, what an exact
Care has the good Father of Beings taken to place him in such a convenient
Distance as that he might neither be too near us, nor too far from us; both
which would have been equally mischievous. For had he been advanced higher in
the Heavens, he would have left us continually frozen and benighted; had he
been thrust lower, he would have perpetually scorched us with the too near
Neighborhood of his Flames. But from that Orb wherein he is placed all his
Aspects on us are benign; and Thanks be to a good God we neither want his Heat
or Light, nor are we scorched and dazzled by it. For if God had not been very
careful of the Public Good he might as well have fixed the Sun in the Orb of
the Moon as where it now is, and then as its Nearness to us would have turned
the World into a Torrid Zone, so it would have run through the whole Zodiac in
the space of a Month, and consequently the four Seasons, viz. Winter and
Summer, and Spring and Autumn which do now fill up the Circle of the Year,
would have been all thrust together in four Weeks; by means whereof as all
living Creatures would have been very much prejudiced by the frequent Changes
of the Air, so all Vegetation must have necessarily ceased. For the Winter
Frost must have Killed the Fruits of the Earth before ever the Summers Heat
could have ripened them; and the Fruits of the Earth being destroyed all living
Creatures must have perished with Famine. Since then there are an infinite
Number of other Places in the Heavens wherein God could have fixed the Sun if
he had pleased, but none so commodious for the World as that where it is, what
could move him to choose this above all others but only his great Care of the
Welfare of his Creatures? Once more, If we consider the Course of its Motion,
how could it have been more exactly ordered than it is for the public Benefit
of the Inhabitants of the World? For whereas in it self 'twas as apt to move in
a direct Line as in a Circle, which if it had done, only one half of the Earth
could have been warmed and enlightened by it, whilst the other had been covered
with eternal Frost and Darkness; the good God has appointed him to run about
the Globe, and that with so much Swiftness, notwithstanding he is so vast a
Body, that once in Twenty four Hours he brings Day into both the Hemispheres;
and whereas had he always moved round in the same middle Circle without ever
swerving either Southward or Northward, all those vast Tracts of Earth that lie
beyond the Polar Circles would have been well nigh lost in an everlasting
Winter, and consequently their wretched Inhabitants condemned to Famine and
Cold; the good God has chalked him out those oblique Paths of the Zodiac, in
which in the Summer he travels toward the Northern, and in the Winter toward
the Southern Hemisphere, and so once a Year brings a warm Summer to them both.
Thus God has placed the Sun in the Heaven as his Almoner, and furnished him
with all the Advantages he is capable of to relieve the Necessities of his
Creatures; and every Morning he visits us from his bountiful Master, and with
his kindly Influence ripens the Fruits of the Earth for us, and comforts us
with the Warmth and Brightness of his Rays. And though he receives no Happiness
himself, yet is so framed, and placed, and moved by the Father of Lights, that
he abundantly administers to the Happiness of others.

And the same may be said of the Moon, which is a kind of Deputy-Sun to supply
his Place in the Night, and by the moist Warmth it diffuses to promote the
Generation and Growth of all vegetable Beings. And that it may do this the more
effectually its Motions are not confined, like the Sun's, within the Tropicks;
but in pity to those poor Animals that dwell nearer toward the Poles the good
God has sent her some degrees farther to visit them in their long
uncomfortable Nights and supply the Suns absence from them, and temperate the
Cold and Darkness that covers them, with the Warmth and Brightness of her
Beams. And accordingly when the Sun goes Southward she draws nearer toward the
Northern, when Northward, toward the Southern Pole, as if she pitied those
poor Regions that are thus forsaken of the Sun, and so went in pure Charity to
those fatherless and bewidowed Animals that inhabit them, to supply his Absence
with her own vicarious Light. But 'twould be endless to recite the vast
Commodities we receive from the other heavenly Bodies, and what infinite Care
the good God has taken so to order and direct the Course of their Motion, as
that those Beings that are capable of Happiness might be most benefited by them.

But then if from hence we descend into the Air, how proper a Medium is this
fluid and transparent Element to convey to us the Light and Influences of the
heavenly Bodies? What a convenient Volary is it for feathered Animals? For
being the most fluid of all Bodies it easily gives Way to the Vibration of
their Wings, and so, that as that Air that is under them bears them up; so that
which is before them is no Hindrance to their Motion. In a word, how necessary
is it to supply and refresh the Spirits of all Animals in general, which if
they did not suck in new Air almost every Moment would immediately be
suffocated.

Again, if from the Air we descend to the Earth, how liberally has the good
God impregnated its vast Womb with the Seeds and Principles of all those Herbs,
and Flowers, and Plants, and Minerals that can be any ways Subservient to the
Happiness of those numerous Animals wherewithal it is peopled; insomuch that
it is become a general Magazine of Provisions not only for the Necessities, but
for the Delights of its Inhabitants.

Thus also the Sea, that vast Continent of Water, is so contrived by the
Almighty Creator, that it not only administers to the Sustenance and Delight of
its own Inhabitants, but also to the Happiness of all other Animals. For from
its vast Treasury of Waters it sends forth fruitful Streams into all Parts of
the Earth through diverse Holes that are bored at convenient Distances, and
forces them to climb up to the Tops of Mountains, not only that they may be
able to run down again with Ease, but also to carry themselves to such Heights
afterward as the Necessities of Men and Beasts do require; so that even the
most Inland Parts of the Earth are made fruitful by their Moistures, and all
their thirsty Inhabitants are watered and refreshed by them. Besides which it
is also most highly useful for Navigation, whereby the remotest Parts of the
World maintain an easy Correspondence, and do mutually change the Commodities
of Life with one onother. Lastly, if we consider the Fire, what a most useful
Servant has the great Creator rendered it to Mankind? For by this we do not
only supply the Absence of Summer, but do also prepare all our Food, and render
it wholesome and pleasant, and most successfully serve our selves in all Arts
and Manufactures.

Thus I have briefly touched upon all the visible Creation of inanimate Beings,
and shown you how careful the great and good Creator has been to improve them
all to the utmost to the Happiness of his animated Creatures, that so there
might no necessary Supply be wanting to complete those several Degrees of
Happiness for all Beings in the World, and none might be miserable but such as
choose to be so. What a noble Instance is this therefore of the immense
Goodness of God in this Work of Creation, that he has made all Beings that are
incapable of Happiness to minister as much as they are able to those that are
capable of it, and thereby spread his Table with an infinite variety not only
of Necessaries, but of Delicacies to treat and entertain all his sensitive
Creation? Who can suspect his Goodness, when the Heavens and all the Elements
do so loudly proclaim it, by their being so contrived and ordered by his
Wisdom, as to do the utmost Good they are able to those Things that have any
Capacity of Happiness?

2 ly, Another Instance of his doing good in this great Work of his Creation is
his giving actual Existence to such innumerable Kinds of Being that are capable
of Happiness. Were we but able to survey the whole Scale of Beings from the
lowest of sensitive to the highest of rational, we should doubtless find in it
such an innumerable Company of Rounds as all our Arithmetic could never be
able to compute, For we see that even this Earth, which is but a very little
Spot of the World, contains in it such a prodigious Army of distinct Kinds of
sensitive Beings as all the Histories of Animals were never able to muster; and
could we but reckon down from Man, to the lowest Mite of animated Matter that
the Earth and Sea contains, we should find that even here there are so many
Kinds of Beings as are capable at least of some Degrees of Happiness, as would
give us Cause enough to admire and adore the infinite Fecundity of the divine
Goodness. And is it likely that this Earth, which is but the Sink of the World,
should be the only inhabitable Part of it? That since the Almighty has so well
stocked this little Enclosure, he should for ever leave desolate of Inhabitants
all those immense Tracts of pure Ether in which the Planets and Fixed Stars do
swim? That when he has so thronged this dark Cellar with living Creatures, he
should make no Use at all of those vast and glorious Rooms, but let them stand
empty for ever, as if he had erected them only for Pomp and Show, without any
Design to people them with such noble Inhabitants as they are capable to
receive? Well then, let us but suppose, as we may very fairly do, that the
other Parts of the World are stocked with living Creatures but in the same
proportion with this, and then what an innumerable Drove of distinct kinds of
Bings will the Whole consist of? And indeed considering what infinite Degrees
of Being are within the Sphere of God's Omnipotence, and how suitable it is to
his Goodness in his Productions to reach the utmost Limits of Possibility, it
seems no way unreasonable to believe that he has given actual Existence to all
possible Kinds of Beings that are capable of Life and Happiness, and can
without any Prejudice either to themselves or Neighbors be contained within
the Compass and immensity of the World; and consequently that he has not only
filled with living Creatures the Earth and Air and Sea, but, if it be possible,
all the Capacities of an immense and infinite Space. But whether this be so or
no, it is an abundant Evidence of the Goodness of God, that he has created
such innumerable Kinds of living Creatures, the meanest of which are capable of
some Degree of Happiness. For unless we will assert one of the greatest
Absurdities in our modern Philosophy, That all sensitive Animals are nothing
but mere Machins, and consequently have no Sense or Perception in them; we must
allow them all, even to the smallest Insect, a Capacity of some Degree of
Happiness. For whatsoever has Sense is sensible of Pleasure, and whatsoever is
sensible of Pleasure is capable of Happiness; and he that made so many Beings
capable of Happiness, to be sure never intended that their Capacities should be
in vain. Behold then the vast Design and Project of the divine Goodness that
would let nothing lie buried in the Abyss of Nonentity, whose Idea included
but a Possibility of being happy, and has given actual Existence unto all
kinds of Beings, even the most inconsiderable Animals, for which it was better
to be than not to be; that at least has raised up an innumerable Company of
Beings into a Capacity of being happy, and made such ample Provision to supply
their Natures with all the Degrees of Happiness that they are capable of! For

3 dly, Another Instance of his doing good in this great Work of Creation is
his furnishing all these Beings with sufficient Means and Abilities to obtain
the utmost Happiness that they are capable of. For I have already shown you,
that God has so made and ordered the inanimate World that it administers
sufficient Matter of Happiness unto all sensitive Beings; that the Heavens and
the Elements by the Ordination of God do all conspire together to contribute to
our Happiness, to warm and refresh us, to feed and cloth us, and to render our
Lives, not only supportable, but pleasant and delightful. And of this vast
Contribution every Animal, even the most minute, has its Share; so that now
they can want nothing that is necessary to their Happiness, but only an Ability
to use and apply the liberal Provisions that God has made for them; and this
he has also most graciously furnished them with, For in all Brute Creatures
God has implanted a natural Instinct by which they are strongly inclined to
that which is good for them, and as strongly averse to what is hurtful and
injurious; so that by their very Natures he has impelled them to make Use of
those Provisions which he has made for their Happiness; and he has also
furnished them with a natural Sagacity to provide against Want, and with
fitting Instruments of Sense to relish and enjoy the several Pleasures which he
has prepared to entertain them: All which he has done to that vast Advantage,
that it is impossible for humane Wisdom to say how any one Kind of Animals could
have been more exactly framed for the enjoyment of such a Happiness, as is
proper to its Nature. But then for us Men that are capable of much more than a
mere sensitive Happiness, he has not only prepared such a Happiness as is
proportionable to our Capacities, but has also implanted in our Natures a full
Ability to obtain it. For as for our sensitive Happiness, there is sufficient
Provision made for it in the common Storehouse of Nature, and by the Industry
and the good Use of our Reason we may ordinarily secure our selves, if we
please, from the Want of whatsoever is necessary thereunto; for a very little
of these sensitive Enjoyments is enough to make a wise Man happy, and we want
no bodily Organs or Sensories to relish any of those Pleasures of which our
sensitive Happiness is composed. And then for our supreme Happiness, as we are
reasonable Beings, God by giving us Reason, and Understanding, and Freedom of
Choice, has furnished us with sufficient Ability to obtain it. For our
Happiness, as we are reasonable Creatures, consists in the most perfect
Exercise of our noblest Faculties, viz. our Understanding and our Will; and
there is no Object in Nature about which these Faculties can be perfectly
exercised but only God, who is the Fountain of all Truth and Goodness; and
consequently our Happiness as Men must consist in the Enjoyment of God, that
is, in knowing, and loving, and resembling him for ever. And in order to our
obtaining of this, God has furnished us with Understanding, by the good
Improvement of which we may easily arrive to the Knowledge of him; for he has
placed us so advantagiously in Being, that, as from a convenient Station in a
noble Theater, we are able to contemplate the admirable Schemes of those
magnificent Works which God has set round about us; and from the Vastness of
the whole Structure, the Variety of its Parts, and the beautiful Order which
appears in their admirable Connection, we can easily infer, that such a noble
Production must needs be owing to an Almighty Skill and Goodness. And then such
is the Frame of our Natures, that we easily love that which we know to be
lovely, and consequently if we are not prejudiced by preternatural Lusts, that
which we behold of God in his Works will imprint such an amiable Notion of him
in our Minds, as will almost necessarily engage us to love him; and then our
Love will provoke us to imitate those Beauties for which we love him, we being
naturally ambitious of transcribing those Perfections into our selves which we
love and admire in another; and then by imitating him, we shall by Degrees be
molded into his Likeness and Resemblance; for Acts will beget Inclinations,
Inclinations will grow into Habits, and Habits will become our Nature. So that
you see God has implanted an Ability of knowing and loving and resembling
himself in the very Frame and Structure of our Natures; these Things we are as
capable of as of any Thing whatsoever that is rational and manly; we are as
capable of knowing God, as of knowing any Thing that is knowable; as capable of
loving him, as of loving any Thing that is amiable; as capable of resembling
him, as of imitating any Thing that is imitable; and these are the noblest and
most essential Parts of the Happiness of a rational Nature. Now what an
undeniable Instance is this of the Goodness of God, that he has not only made
so many Kinds of Beings capable of so many different Degrees of Happiness, but
that he has furnished them all with such abundant Means and Abilities to
obtain it? O blessed God, what Heart can be so stupid and insensible as not to
admire and adore thy exuberant Goodness, which has thus extended it self to
the utmost Borders of Entity, and blessed with its overflowing Streams such an
infinite Number of Beings! What Tongue is able sufficiently to praise and extol
thy Benignity, that out of thine own immense Fullness have supplied such a vast
Creation with such Capacities, and such Means, and such Abilities of being
happy!

4 thly. And Lastly, Another Instance of his doing good in this great Work of
Creation, is his implanting a natural Inclination of doing good to others in
all those Beings that are capable of Happiness. For it being his Design to
propagate this Sort of Beings by way of Generation to the End of the World, he
has implanted in all Parents, as well sensitive as rational, a natural Love
and Good Will to their Offspring, and that to such a Degree as we see the most
timorous and helpless Creatures are not only very industrious to nurse and
cherish them, but very courageous in their Defense and Preservation, which is a
great Instance of the indulgent Care which the great Father of Beings has of
all his Children, that he has committed them in their Infancy to such tender
Nurses that will be sure to take Care to make Provision for them when they are
not able to provide for themselves; that he has not trusted them to the
Compassion and good Nature of other Beings to be maintained by the Alms, and
free Benevolence of their fellow Creatures, but has taken Security for their
liberal Nurture and Education from the very Nature and inmost Bowels of their
Parents; who were so framed that they cannot choose but make Provision for them
if they are able, without doing the greatest Outrage to themselves, and
stifling one of the strongest Inclinations of their Natures; which inclination
of natural Parents does therefore loudly proclaim the infinite Goodness of the
great Parent of all Things to his Children; because there can be no other
Reason assigned why he should implant this Inclination in our Natures, but
because he loved us, and was therefore resolved to take the most effectual
Course that Care might be taken of us, when we were not capable to take Care
for our selves. And can we think that the supreme Father, who has implanted in
all natural Parents such a necessary Inclination to do good to their Children,
should be forgetful and regardless of his own Offspring? He that planted the
Eye, shall not he see? And he that gave the Ear, shall not he hear? And by the
same Reason, he that has so strongly inclined our Natures to the Love of our
Offspring, shall not he love his own? Shall not his Nature be as strongly
inclined to do good to them? For the whole Creation being nothing else but the
Expansion or Spreading forth of the divine Simplicity and Perfection, all
Creatures do more properly belong to God than Families or Actions do to the
Principles from whence they flow; so that we are as it were Flesh of his Flesh,
and Bone of his Bone; and no Man, says the Apostle, hates his own Flesh, but
rather nourishes and cherishes it: And if Man does not, can we imagine that God
does? For as for Man, we see the more perfect he is, and the more suitable to
his Nature he acts, the more he is inclined to do good, and that not only to
his own but to all others that are within the Sphere of his Beneficence. He
finds in himself such a diffusive and all-spreading Principle of Love as
renders him an universal Friend and Benefactor to the World, and makes him
sympathize in the Happiness and Misery of all Beings; and this brave Temper of
Mind is doubtless one of the highest Perfections that the Soul of Man is
capable of. Since therefore originally we came no otherwise to the Knowledge of
God's Perfections than as we found them copyed out and transcribed into our own
Natures, how can we imagine that God should not be inclined to universal Love
and Beneficence, when we acknowledge it a Perfection in our selves to be so?
Can there be any Perfection in us that is not in God in the utmost Degree of
Possibility? And therefore if the Inclination to do good be a Perfection in us,
it must needs be in God in all the possible Degrees that an infinite Nature is
capable of; and since he has so framed all reasonable Natures, that universal
Love and Proneness to do good is one of their greatest Perfections and
Accomplishments, we may be sure that his own, which is the great Standard and
Pattern of all reasonable Natures, is infinitely loving and prone to do good.
And thus you see what mighty unanswerable Instances there are of the Goodness
of God in the Works of his Creation.

Wherefore to conclude this Argument; From hence we see what mighty Obligations
we are under to serve and obey, so far as we are able, the great and good
Author of our Beings, who has not only created us, but created us in a vast
Capacity of Happiness, and furnished us with sufficient Means and Abilities to
attain it. Wherefore since, all our Powers and Abilities are from him, we are
bound in Justice to employ them in his Service; and since by giving us those
Abilities he has done us so much good, and rendered us capable of such immense
degrees of Happiness, we are obliged in Gratitude not to employ them in doing
any Thing that is any ways displeasing or dishonorable to him. For what can be
more just or reasonable than that God should have the Use of those Powers which
he gave us, and in which he still retains an unalienable Right and Property?
That the Temples which he has built should be forever dedicated to his
Service, and not turned into Dens of Thievs, or made Stables of Filth and
Uncleanness. So that for us to withdraw our selves from his Service, or to
employ our Powers to any wicked Purposes, is to commit a Robbery upon the
Author of our Beings, and most unjustly to desseise him of his own Goods,
wherein he has a far more absolute Propriety than we pretend to have in the
Cloths on our Backs: And in every bad Action we do, steal Gods own Powers and
Faculties from him, and with extreme Injustice employ them against himself. Now
what a monstrous Thing is it that we, who think our selves so highly affronted,
when any one charges us with Robbery and Injustice, should make no more
Conscience of robbing God, and alienating from him those Faculties and Powers
of Action, in which he has a far more undoubted Propriety than any Creature
can have in any Good it enjoys; but when he has been so good a Creator to us
as to create in us such an ample Capacity of being happy, and furnished us with
such abundant Means and Abilities of attaining thereunto, then to eloigne our
selves from his Service, and to pervert those Powers of Action to sinful
Purposes by which he has enabled us to be happy; is not only unjust, but
barbarously ungrateful. For now in sinning against God we fight against him
with his own Mercies, and arm the Effects of his Bounty against his
Sovereignty; and as if we were resolved to revenge our selves upon him for
making us so good, and raising us up into such an excellent State of Nature, we
shamefully dishonor him with his own Blessings, and take all Advantages we can
to grieve and offend him from the very Means and Abilities which he has given
us to be happy. He gave us Reason and Understanding to discern what is good for
our selves, and Liberty of Will to choose and embrace it; and we like
ungrateful Wretches employ that Reason and Liberty in contriving and choosing
the highest Treason against him. He gave us Powers and Abilities of Action,
that so we might not only discern and choose what is best for us, but might
also pursue and obtain it; but we like base Caitiffs exert those Abilities in
grieving and offending our most gracious Benefactor. Wherefore be astonished O
ye Heavens, and be horribly afraid O all ye Works of God! For whilst you are
all obedient to the Laws of your Maker, and never swerve from those Lines of
Motion he has prescribed you; we, whom he has advanced into the highest Class
of Beings, and endowed with the largest Capacities and Abilities of being
happy, are become so base and so shameless as to injure him with his own Gifts,
and to convert his very Blessings into Weapons of Rebellion against him.
Wherefore unless we are ambitious of rendering our selves the most absolute
Monsters both of Injustice and Ingratitude, unless we have a Fancy to aspire to
a Perfection in Baseness, and to rival the Devils themselves in the most
infamous and ignominious Degrees of Wickedness; let us employ all our Faculties
and Abilities for Action in the Service of him from whom we received them, and
exercise his Gifts in a perpetual Acknowledgment of his Goodness.

PSALM CXIX.68. Thou art good, and thou do good.
I Have already handled two of those four Topics from whence I intended to
demonstrate the Goodness of God, viz. his Nature, and the Works of his
Creation; of the First of which I discoursed, upon the former Part of the
Words: Thou art good. Of the Second upon the later; Thou do good. But now
because the Doings, or Operations of God include his Providence as well as his
Creation, and God does good in that as well as in this; no doubt but the
Psalmist in these Words had a respect to the one as well as the other.

I proceed therefore to the Third Topic, from whence it does most evidently
appear, and that is his Providence. Thou do good, i. e. thou do good in the
great Works of thy Providence, and thereby thou do manifest the Goodness of
thy Nature, in that as thou did create a World to great and good Purposes, so
thou do still continue to do good to it in upholding and governing it by a
most gracious Providence. Now in the Managment of this Argument I shall do
these two things.

1. Give you some general and comprehensive Instances of Gods doing good in the
Works of his Providence. 2. That though there may be some Things in the World
that to us seem to be very ill and hurtful, yet it is infinitely unreasonable
for us to suspect the Goodness and Beneficence of the divine Providence.
First, I shall give you some general and comprehensive Instances of Gods doing
good in the Works of his Providence; and they are these Four.

1. His upholding Things in that good Course and Order wherein he first created
them, excepting only when the public Good of his Creatures requires him to
interpose. 2. His continuing Mankind under an awful sense of Religion,
notwithstanding the great Degeneracies of human Nature. 3. His supporting of
Government in the World, notwithstanding the violent Tendency of our corrupt
Nature to Anarchy and Confusion. 4. His contributing to the Invention and
Improvement of all those useful Arts and Sciences that are in the World.
1. His upholding Things in that good Course and Order wherein he first created
them, excepting only when the public Good of his Creatures requires him to
interpose. That that Order and Course of Things which God first established in
his Creation was exceeding good and beneficial to it, I have proved at large in
my former Discourse; and that God still continues the same good Will to us is
apparent, since he still continues things in the same beneficial Course and
Order wherein he first created them. For we see the Heaven and the Elements
still as kind to us as ever; the Sun, Moon and Stars do still run the same
Courses, and still they cherish and refresh us with the same benign Influences;
and though for six Thousand years together they have been perpetually visiting
us, and spending the liberal Alms of their great Creator upon us, yet to this
Day they are neither wearied, nor exhausted; but still continue to do us good
with the same Freedom and Vigor as when they first danced round the World, and
sang together for Joy. The Fire, and Air, and Earth and Water are still as
liberal to us as ever, and do supply us with the same Necessaries of Life as
they did from the first Moment of their Being; and though for so many Ages we
and innumerable other Animals have been liberally maintained out of these vast
Storehouses of Nature, yet still we find them replenished with an
inexhaustible Fullness. So that still not only the Earth, but all the other
Elements are full of the Goodness of the Lord; yea, and though in their
Qualities they are quite contrary to one another, yet are their Animosities so
tempered by the gracious Providence of Heaven, that they all live together like
Brethren in unity, and the Dryness of this drinks not up the Moisture of that,
nor does the Cold of the one quench the Heat of the other. The Fire invades not
the Air, nor the Water the Earth, but every one keeps within its proper Bounds;
and though in sundry Places the Water be above the Earth, yet contrary to its
own Nature which is to flow and expatiate it self, it does only overlook its
Banks, but does not overflow them, being bounded by that merciful Providence,
which in mere Pity to the Inhabitants of the Earth, says to its proud Waves,
hitherto shall ye go, and no further. So that in short the Continuation of the
regular Motions of the Heavens, of the Vicissitudes of Seasons, and alternate
Mutation of Bodies, of the safety of the whole Universe, notwithstanding the
rude Clashings of turbulent Matter, and of the exact Symmetry of all the Parts
of it in Despite of the frequent Rencounters of so many contrary Principles,
shows not only the Power and Presence of some great Mind, but is also a plain
Evidence of the Continuation of his Care and good Will to the World. And as he
has continued the inanimate World in that most excellent Course and Order
wherein he first created it, so he has still preserved all those innumerable
Species of Animals which he first gave Being to; so that in so many Ages and
among so many Chances there is not one Kind of them has either failed, or
perished, or become less capable of Happiness, or less furnished with Means and
Abilities of obtaining it. So that his Providence is nothing else but a
constant Repetition of the Goodness of his Creation; and all the Difference
between them is only this, that in the one he made all Things Good, in the
other he continues them so. It Is true, God has left himself at Liberty when
Occasion requires immediately to interpose in the Course of Nature, and to vary
from the Order of his Creation. And indeed unless he had done so, he would in a
great Measure have tied up his own Hands, and incapacitated himself from
Governing the World; but yet he never makes Use of this Liberty but for very
good Reason, to serve some very great and excellent End of his Government;
either to punish some notorious Sinner, or some very sinful People, that so by
their Example others may be warned from treading in their Footsteps; or to
deliver or preserve some eminently virtuous Person, or Nation, that thereby
others may be encouraged to imitate and transcribe their Virtues; or lastly, to
confirm and ratify by some miraculous Effects some necessary Revelations of his
Will to the World: Unless, I say, it be to serve some such excellent Ends as
these, he never interposes by his absolute Power to make the least Interruption
in the established Course and Order of the Universe. And as soon as ever he
has obtained the good Ends that he aims at, he withdraws his Hand, and
immediately remits Things to their primitive Course and Order. So that if Gods
Creation be good, as I have largely proved it is, his Providence must needs be
so too; because it continues the Course and Order of the Creation, and never
interrupts, or varies it, unless it be to do some great Good to the World. Thus
God in his Providence does continually spread forth the mighty Wings of his
Goodness over all his Creation, and thereby reaches out Perseverance to the
Being and the Happiness of every Creature.

2. Another Instance of his doing good in this great Work of his Providence is
his continuing Mankind under an awful Sense of Religion notwithstanding the
great Degeneracies of human Nature. It is very strange to consider how this
heavenly Spark has been kept alive in the midst of such a vast Ocean of
Impiety as has overspread the World; for considering into what monstrous
Barbarism Mankind have immersed themselves, how miserably they have defaced
their own Nature, and blotted out their Reason; insomuch that in several Ages
and several Parts of the World they have had scarce any other Remains of
Humanity in them, but only their Language and their Shape: I say, considering
these Things, it is impossible but all Sense of Religion must long e're now
have been extinguished in us, had not the divine Providence from Time to Time
been exceeding careful to cherish and revive it: And this it has done by very
strange and extraordinary Methods; sometimes by inflicting strange and amazing
Judgments upon great and notorious Offenders; sometimes by showering down
miraculous Blessings and Deliverances upon virtuous and good Men; sometimes by
raising up eminent Examples and Preachers of Righteousness, such as the
Patriarchs among the Jews, and the Philosophers among the Gentiles; sometimes
by making immediate Revelations from Heaven, and confirming the Truth of them
by miraculous Effects; and sometimes by permitting evil Spirits to appear to
possess the Bodies of their Enthusiasts, and to deliver Oracles by them; which
though it sometimes tended to promote false Religions among Mankind, yet did
always prove instrumental to cherish and enliven the Sense and Belief of a
Divinity. By these and such like powerful Methods has the good Providence of
Heaven from time to time revived in us the dying Sense of Religion, and in
Despite of our selves continually kept us under its Aw and Restraints; which if
it had not done, we should have immediately run headlong into the most
deplorable Confusions and Disorders. For not only our eternal, but our temporal
Interest too is bound up in Religion; for this is the Foundation of all human
Society, and of all the Blessings that redound from it; it is this that gives
Life and Security to all those Pacts and Covenants by which Men are linked to
one another, and incorporated into regular Societies. For if once Men were
abandoned of all Sense of Religion they would own no other Law but that of
their own Interest, and esteem themselves no longer obliged by their Oaths and
Covenants than it is their Interest to keep them; and he that thinks himself
bound to be honest no longer than he needs must, will by the same Principle be
obliged to be a Knave as soon as he can. So that if once Men could disingage
themselves from the Sense of Religion and the Ties of Conscience, all those
Pacts and Covenants, which are the Cement of Society, would presently be
dissolved and rendered insignificant; for what will it signify for Men to take
Oaths and Covenants of Fidelity to any Society, since whether they take them or
no, they will be faithful so long and no longer than it is their Interest to be
so. And this vital Cement that unites us being dissolved, our Society will soon
disband of its own Accord, and we, like the Parts of a dead Body having lost
the Soul that united and hold us together, shall immediately disperse our
selves and fly abroad into Atoms, and out of an eternal Distrust and Diffidence
of one another, having no Religion or Conscience to secure each others Honesty,
shall be forced to withdraw like other Beasts of Prey into Dens and secret
Retirements, and there live poor and solitary, as Bats and Owls, and subsist
like Vermin by robbing and filching from one another. And in this deplorable
Condition we should be forced to wander about the World naked and destitute
both of all the mutual Aids and Assistances of each other, and of all the
blessed Hopes and supports of Religion, which are the only Comforts and
Refreshments that in such a calamitous State our wretched Natures would be
capable of. So that without the Sense of Religion we should be of all Creatures
the most wretched and miserable. And this the good God foresaw very well, which
made him so careful to inspire us with an awful Sense of Religion; and when
through the Degeneracy of our Nature it was in so much Danger of being utterly
extinguished, to awaken and revive it again from Time to Time by the wise and
gracious Methods of his Providence, that so we might live happily here as well
as hereafter, by enjoying the Blessings of each others Society, and the
continual Supports and Comforts of Religion: For it is to him that we owe our
Sense of Religion, and it is to our Sense of Religion that we owe all the
Conveniences and Comforts of our Lives. How much Reason therefore have we to
admire and adore the good Providence of God, that has taken so much Care of
us; that would not suffer us to make our selves the most wretched and miserable
of all Beings; that has been so vigilant to rouse and awake us when we were
nodding into a lethargick Stupidity, and sleeping away all the Happiness and
Comfort of our Lives; in a word, that has kept Religion alive in us in
Despite of all our Attempts to extinguish it, and would not suffer us to
destroy the Foundation of our own Happiness!

3 dly. Another Instance of the Goodness of God's Providence to us, is his
supporting of Government in the World, notwithstanding the violent Tendency of
our corrupt Natures to Anarchy and Confusion. If we reflect but a little upon
the depraved Natures of Men, what ungovernable Passions they carry about with
them, how sick they are of every Yoke, and how impatient of every Restraint;
how greedily they covet an unbounded Liberty, and how much the greatest Part of
Men are of this violent Temper; it will afford us matter of sufficient
Astonishment to think how Government and good Order could be so long preserved
as it has been among such a sort of wild and extravagant Creatures; especially
considering how much more numerous the governed Party is than the Governing,
and how apt the Government it self is to be rendered odious by ill Management,
by the Tyranny and Oppression of those that sit at the Stern, and the perpetual
Factions and cross Humors and Interests of the inferior Ministers of State: I
say, considering all these Things, it is a Wonder how the Ship of Government
should live so long as it has sailed in the midst of such Tempests and
Hurricanes; and doubtless long ere now it must have been swallowed up in
Anarchy and Confusion had it not been guarded by the Providence of that God,
who, as the Psalmist tells us; stills the noise of the Seas, and the noise of
their Waves, and the tumult of the People, Psalm lxv.5. And how much his
Providence has been concerned in securing of Government in the World, is
evident from the Care it has taken to keep Men under an awful sense of
Religion, which is the main Foundation upon which Government leans, and without
which it must necessarily sink into Ruin and Confusion; for, together with
Religion away go all Principles of Loyalty; and when these are all gone, their
Obedience to Government will wholly depend upon their Interest, and
consequently whenever it is their Interest to rebel, they have no Obligation
at all to restrain them. And as Providence has been very careful to secure the
main Foundations of Government, so it has been no less careful to infatuate
the Councels, and bring to light the dark Contrivances, and baffle the open
Attempts of those that have sought to undermine it; and this in such a
remarkable manner, that all the World has taken peculiar Notice, and all
Histories abound with innumerous Instances of it. And in all the Rises and
Falls of the Empires of the World there has ever been observed a most
astonishing Concurrence either of such happy or unhappy Accidents, as have very
much furthered their approaching Fates; which is a notorious Evidence how much
God is concerned in the securing of the Governments of the World, in that he
does so immediately interpose in their Rises and Falls; and whenever in his
just Displeasure he pulls down one, he always takes Care to establish another
in the Room of it, lest through too long Interregnums the Nations of the Earth
should insensibly crumble into Anarchy and Confusion, and finally involve
themselves in all the consequent Mischiefs of it. For the Subversion of
Government, like the opening of Pandora's Box, must necessarily let loose a
swarm of Miseries into the World; for without Government wronged Innocence can
never be righted, invaded Property can never be retrieved; but every Man will
be exposed to every Man's Lust, which must immediately involve us into a State
of War, in which like so many Dogs we should try all our Right by our Teeth.
Into such a miserable State would Mankind be reduced, if God did not uphold the
Governments of the World. So that whatsoever Benefits we receive from the
Governments under which we live, we owe it all to the divine Providence; by
whose Procurement it is that Kings reign, and Princes decree justice, Prove.
viii.15. It Is to this blessed Cause that we are to attribute our sitting safely
under our own Vines, and peaceably enjoying the Fruit of our Labors; that we
are not banished from Society, and exposed to the Spoils and Ravages of those
that are mightier than our selves; that we are not become more savage than
Wolves to one another, and that the whole World is not converted into a
Commonwealth of Cannibals: For this would be the consequence of the Dissolution
of Government, and that would be the Consequence in all probability of God's
withdrawing his Providence from the World.

4 thly, And lastly, Another Instance of the Goodness of God's Providence to us
is its contributing to the Invention and Improvement of all those useful Arts
and Sciences that are in the World: For if we seriously consider the prodigious
Numbers of these wherewith the World does abound, and wherein the Generality of
Mankind are employed; we are never able to imagine how they could have all been
invented and improved as they are, without the Direction of an Almighty
Providence. For had not the divine Providence prolonged the Lives of the first
Inventers of them to such a prodigious Age as it did, they would not have had
Time to collect Experiments enough whereon to found any certain Theorems of
natural Science. How could they have measured the Motions of the heavenly
Bodies, or given any tolerable Account of their slow Revolutions, if they had
not lived so many Hundreds of Years as they did? And though the Rudiments of
proportion are lodged in our Minds, yet it is not imaginable how Men could ever
have improved them into so many various Practices, of Arithmetic, Music,
Geometry, and Mechanics, had they not been at first either inspired by God, or
had a long Space of Time allowed to reduce them into Rules of Practice. And he
that shall but seriously consider how far out of the Road of ordinary
Experience many of the most useful Arts of the World lie, such as Writing and
Printing, by which a Man may talk with his Friend a thousand Miles Distance,
and converse with the World when he is dead and gone, will find sufficient
Reason to attribute the Invention of them to the Sovereign Direction of the
divine Providence; without which neither am I able to imagine how the medicinal
Virtues of sundry Herbs and Vegetables and Minerals could have been discovered,
which now are of great Use to us, since even these also do lie exceedingly
remote from common Observation. And when I also consider how many Things are
requisite to the completing of the most useful humane Arts, and what Intricacy
and Mystery there is in them, insomuch that in many Cases we are not able to
give any Reason why this or that Cause in our Art should produce this or that
Effect; I must needs conclude, that the Invention and Improvement of them has
been exceedingly promoted by the wise Providence of God. And what Reason have
we to adore and admire its unspeakabl Goodness toward us, that by instructing
us in so many excellent Arts has not only found sufficient Employment for the
greatest Part of Mankind to subsist by, but has also taught us mutually to
assist one another with all Kinds of Commodities and Conveniences of Life! So
that now we want nothing that either Nature or Art can supply us withal, the
good God having furnished us, not only with Materials to work upon, but also
with Art and Skill to manage and contrive them to the best Advantage. One would
have thought it had been sufficient for him to have created a World for us, and
therein to have furnished us with all that is necessary for our Being and
Subsistence, and so left it to our selves to use and apply his Blessings as we
pleased; but that he should condescend to instruct us in so many Arts of
improving his Blessings, how to dress and cook them to the best Advantage, and
one way or other to render the meanest of them all useful and beneficial to our
selves and others, is such a gracious Condescension of Goodness as for ever
deserves our Praise and Admiration. And so I have done with the first thing
proposed, which was to show you what apparent Instances there are of the
Goodness of God in his Providence toward us.

2. I proceed to the next Thing proposed, which was to show you that though
there be some Things in the World that to us seem to be very ill and hurtful,
yet it is infinitely unreasonable for us therefore to suspect the Goodness and
Beneficence of God's Providence; that because we see such an unequal
Distribution of good Things to bad Men, and bad Things to good Men, and do find
so much Sin and Wickedness in the World, and so great a part of Mankind
overrun with so much Barbarism, Superstition and Idolatry; because, I say, we
see and find such Things as these in the World, we have no Reason at all to
charge the Providence of God. For let us consider, 1. That the Irregularities
and Evils which God permits in the World are not the Effects of his Providence,
but of the Choices and Actions of free Agents. 2. That many Things seem evil to
us in the World, because we take false Measures of Good and Evil. 3. That many
other Things seem evil to us in the Course of God's Providence, merely because
we often mistake bad Men for good, and good Men for bad. 4. That many Things
seem Evil to us in the Course of God's Providence, because we are acquainted
but with a small Part of the World, and do judge of what is good and evil for
the Whole by what we find is good or evil for this small Part. 5. That many
other Things seem evil to us in the Course of God's Providence, because we
judge of them by their present sensible Effects, and are not able to comprehend
the universal Drift and Connection and Dependence of them. 6. That many other
Things seem evil to us in the Course of God's Providence, merely because we
understand very little of the other World.


1. That the Irregularities and Evils which God permits in the World are not
the Effects of his Providence, but of the Choices and Actions of free Agents.
That there is such a Thing as Sin in the World is by no Means to be charged
upon the Providence of God; for that neither commits any Sin it self, nor
impels or necessitates any others to commit it. Let no Man say when he is
tempted, he is tempted of God; for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither
tempts he any Man, Jam. i.13. It Is true, he permits us Men, whom he has made
free Agents, to act freely; and if there were no Fault at all in making of free
Agents (as certainly there was not) what Fault can there be in permitting them
to act congruous to their own Natures? And is it just that God's Providence
should be blamed, because it does not metamorphose free Agents into necessary
ones; that is, because he does not unmake what he has made, and subvert the
Laws of his own Creation? or is it reasonable that we who are the only Authors
of Sin, should blame the Providence of God for suffering us to be so? For if
Sin be an Evil, it is an Evil to us; and consequently we are much more
concerned to prevent it, than the Providence of God; and if when we may, we
will not do it, it is unreasonable that we should blame God for not forcing us
to prevent it whether we will or no. So that all the Quarrel we can have
against God's Providence is only this, that it does not tie our Hands, and
fetter our Liberty in the Chains of an Adamantine Necessity; that is, that he
does not undo his own Workmanship, and thereby confess himself overseen in his
Creation of us, when there is no kind of Reason for it. For I beseech you, what
hurt is it for Men to be made free Agents, and left to their own Choice whether
they will be happy or miserable? And if it was no Fault at all for God to make
us so, what Reason have we to blame him for continuing us what he made us? If
therefore while he continues us free Agents we will needs choose what is evil,
and misimploy the Talent of our natural Liberty, the Fault is ours and not
God's, and we may thank our selves for all the bad Consequents of it; and since
not only Sin but most of the other Evils that are in the World proceed from our
ill Use of our own Liberty, we ought in all Reason to charge them upon our
selves, and not upon the good Providence of God.

2 ly, That many Things seem evil to us in the Course of God's Providence that
are not so in themselves, by Reason that we commonly take false Measures of
Good and Evil. We think it a very great Evil, for Instance, that good Men are
not blessed with great Plenty and Abundance, and that bad Men are; because we
imagine Plenty and Abundance to be a very great Good, and the contrary a very
formidable Evil: And this makes us blame the Providence of God, because we see
the good Things of this World so promiscuously distributed without any
Discrimination of Persons; whereas in reality Plenty and Abundance approaches
nearer to the Nature of an indifferent Thing than of a very great and desirable
Good. For if we consult our own Experience, we shall find that all worldly
Goods are just what we make them, and that they do as commonly prove Plagues as
Blessings to the Owners of them; that they entangle their Affections, ensnare
their Innocence, disturb their Peace, provoke and pamper their extravagant
Lusts, and betray them first into Luxuries, then into Gouts or Dropsies,
Catarrhs or Consumptions; and these most commonly prove the Effects of outward
Abundance. So that in it self it is almost of an indifferent Nature, and does
good or Hurt to us according as we use and improve it; and threfore though God
sometimes suffers good Men to want, and bad Men to enjoy it, we have no Cause
to quarrel at it; for he understands the just Value of things, though we do
not; he knows that the best of worldly Things are bad enough to be thrown away
upon the worst of Men, and so expresses his scorn of the admired Vanities of
this World by scattering them with such a careless Hand, and indulging the
Enjoyment of them to the most despicable Persons. So that we ought to conclude,
that he sets no great Value upon them, since he concerns himself no more in
their Distribution; for why should he partake in the Errors of vulgar Opinion
by expressing himself so regardful of these Trifles as to put them in golden
Scales, and weigh them out to Mankind by Grains and Scruples?

3 ly, That many other Things seem evil to us in the Course of God's Providence
that are not so, merely because we often mistake bad Men for good, and good Men
for bad. For I dare say that that Observation upon which we ground our Quarrel
against the Providence of God, viz, that it fares worst with the best, and best
with the worst of Men, is not half so general as we make it; for it is to be
considered that generally we pity the miserable and envy the prosperous, and
these Passions of ours do commonly bribe our Judgments, and make us think worse
of the one and better of the other than either of them do deserve. For, those
whom we pity we are inclined to love, and those whom we love we are inclined to
think well of; and if we think well of them whether we have Reason for it or
no, we conclude that God ought to be as fond of them as we: As on the contrary,
those whom we envy we always hate, and those whom we hate we are inclined to
think ill of; and if we think ill of them we think that God is obliged to think
so too. And because we are so unreasonably inclined by our Passions to pass
such false Judgments upon Men, is it fit that we should quarrel at God because
he does not judge as unreasonably as our selves; or because he does not reward
and punish Men according to the sentence that our blind Pity or Envy passes
upon them? If we could but strip our selves of all Passion, and were but able
to judge of Men, not by what they appear, but by what they really are; I doubt
not but we should find that even in this Life it fares best with the best, and
worst with the worst of Men; but since we are not competent Judges of this
Matter, we should have a Care of reproaching the Providence of God with a Maxim
that has no other Foundation in the Nature of things, but our own fallacious
Observation.

4 thly, That many Things seem evil to us in the Course of Gods Providence that
are not so, because we are acquainted but with a small Part of the World, and
do judge of what is good or evil for the Whole, by what we find is good and
evil for this small Part. We are never able to comprehend how far the Dominions
of the divine Providence extend, nor how many Orders of Beings as well above as
below us are concerned in its Empire and Government; but unless we could do
this, we cannot be capable Judges of what is good or bad in the general Course
of its Actions. For that is good or bad in the Providence of God, that is good
or bad for its whole Empire and Dominion; and though this or that may be an
Inconvenience to this or that Part of it, yet these particular Inconveniences
may be a great Convenience to the Whole. As for Instance; suppose a Man should
come into the Country of Syberia, which is a great Part of the Empire of
Russia, whither that Emperor is wont to banish all great Malefactors; he would
there find the Inhabitants in a most miserable Condition, they being there
exposed to Hunger and Cold, and perpetual Slavery. So that if a Man should
judge of the whole Empire by this Part of it, he would conclude that Emperor to
be a most savage Tyrant, and his Country to be the most miserable Place in the
World; whereas in Reality all the other Parts of that Empire are rendered more
happy by the Miseries of this Place, which serve to strike an Aw into all the
other Subjects of it, and to restrain them within the Bounds of their Loyalty
and Duty. And so unless we had as full a Prospect of the whole Dominion of Gods
Providence as we have of this little Spot of it, we ought not to censure his
Government of the Whole by the little Inconveniences that occur in his
Government of a Part; for in such a vast Dominion, as God's is, there may be a
thousand good Reasons, that we know not of, why some Parts of it should be more
unhappy than others; and if in some particulars he incommodes this Part for the
public Commodity of the Whole, we are so far from having any Reason to
complain, that we ought in all Justice to praise and adore his Goodness for it.
It is enough for us that we understand so much of Gods Nature as we do, and
have such apparent Instances of his Goodness in the Works of his Creation and
Providence; and therefore if we in this little Part of Gods Empire suffer some
small Inconveniences, we ought to bless and adore his Goodness for those
greater Goods we enjoy, and to rest satisfied with this, that our particular
Inconveniences may for all we know be great Conveniences to the Public.

5 thly, That many other Things seem evil to us in the Course of Gods
Providence, because we judge of them by their present sensible Effects, and are
not able to comprehend the universal Drift and Connection and Dependence of
them. For, as I have already shown you in the former Discourse on this
Argument, there is a continued Juncture and Dependence from first to last
between all the Actions and Contrivances of divine Providence, and every one
has a Relation to every one from the Beginning to the End of all that mighty
Chain of Causes whereof it consists. So that it is impossible to judge rightly
of one Part of Providence separately from the rest, because we see not the
Relation it has either to what went before, or to what is to follow after; and
though singly considered it may be hurtful, yet in Conjunction with all the
rest it may be exceedingly advantageous. He that looks only on the first Links
of that curious Chain of Providence in the History of Joseph, will be apt to
entertain a very bad Opinion of the Whole; first he is thrown into a desolate
Pit, then sold a Slave, then falsely accused, then cast into Prison: Lord, what
a tragical Prologue is here! But then take all those Things in Conjunction with
what follows, and you shall presently see that Scene clear up, and all those
sad Preparations ending in a joyful Conclusion. And if we consider that most
glorious Part that ever Gods Providence acted on the Stage of the World, viz.
the History of our blessed Savior; how dark and gloomy does the former Part of
it look, if we view it separately from the Antecedents and Consequents of it?
Surely, if any Thing would justify our hard Censures of God's Providence, it
would be the beholding of such a rare and excellent Person exposed to so many
Miseries and Calamities; to see him cast forth to the wide World as a helpless
Prey to the Rage of his Enemies, to behold him hanging upon the Cross, deserted
of his Friends, mocked and tormented by his barbarous Murderers, and in the
most bitter Agonies breathing out his white and innocent Soul: O good Lord!
What a dismal Prospect of thy Providence is here? But stay a little, let us but
see the glorious Light that in Conclusion broke out of this dismal Darkness;
first he is raised from the Dead, then he ascends up to Heaven, where at the
right Hand of his Father he reigns an eternal King in full Power and Authority
to give Gifts unto Men, and bestow those immortal Rewards on them which he
purchased for them with his Blood. So that though singly and apart the first
Scenes of this great Providence were very dismal and affrighting, yet
considered altogether, how beautiful and harmonious does it appear? So true is
that of the Preacher, Eccles. 3.11. He has made every thing beautiful in his
time: Also he has set the world in their heart, so that no man can find out
the work that God makes from the beginning to the end. And therefore because
we are not able to see from the Beginning to the End of God's Providence, it is
an unreasonable Thing for us to censure the Whole, because of some seeming
Inconveniences that we see in those Parts of it that lie before us. Let us
stay but till the winding up of the Bottom, till all is finished, and Present
it one entire Piece to our View, and then we shall have leave to censure, if we
can find any Reason for it.

6 thly, And lastly, many other Things seem evil to us in the Course of God's
Providence which are not so, merely because we understand very little of the
other World. It seems to us a mighty Evil in Providence that so great a Part of
the World is left in Darkness and Ignorance, and in so great a Measure deprived
of the vast Advantages of true Religion; but how do we know how God will
dispose of them in the other World, what Abatements he will make them, and by
what Measures he will judge them; whether he will not allow them some farther
Time of Trial, and so make good to them there whatsoever has been wanting to
them here? But whatsoever he does or will do, this we may be sure of, that he
will damn none but those that are first self-condemned, but those that
knowingly and willingly miscarry; and if so, then he will exact of them but in
Proportion to their Abilities, and will not require Brick where he has given
no Straw. But which way soever he deals with them, to be sure first or last he
will not be wanting in any Degrees of Kindness to them that are fit either for
a wise Sovereign to grant, or a reasonable Subject to demand; and if he will do
so (as undoubtedly he will) how unreasonably do we complain of his Providence
toward us? And though in this Life, we see many good Men reduced to a very
calamitous Condition, yet how do we know how necessary this may be to the
securing of their Happiness in the World to come? For since our main State and
Interest is in that other World, there is no doubt but the Providence of God
over us does chiefly Respect that; and if so, how unreasonably do we censure it
upon the Score of the present Evils it exposes us to, when we know so little of
the future State, to which all its Transactions do chiefly relate? Wherefore,
let us forbear a while till we come into the other World, and understand the
whole Design and Contrivance; and then we shall see that all will be right and
well, yea and infinitely better than ever we could imagine. But for us to
censure now, when we know so little of our future State, which is the main and
ultimate Scope of Providence, is just as if a Man should pass his Judgment on a
Picture when he sees nothing of it but some few rude Lines and very imperfect
Strokes. Let us have but the Patience to suspend our Judgment a while till God
has finished the whole Draught, and given it all its natural Colors and
Proportions, and then I am sure we shall see Cause enough forever to admire his
Skill, and adore his Wisdom and Goodness. And thus you see by apparent
Instances how good God is in his Providence toward us, and how unreasonable it
is for us to censure his Goodness notwithstanding all those seeming Evils that
happen in the World.

And now what remains but that with all Humility and Cheerfulness we resign up
our selves into the Hands of our most merciful Father, concluding, as most
certainly we may, that whatsoever he does with us, or howsoever he disposes of
us, it will be all for our good in the later End, if it be not through our own
Default. For where can we be safer than in the Hands of an Omnipotent and
Omniscient Goodness, a Goodness that knows what is best for us, and wills what
it knows to be so, and does whatsoever it wills. Surely in such Hands our
Condition is a thousand times better and safer than if we had full Power to
effect our own Wishes, and all the Events that concern us were in our own
Disposal. And if God should shake us off from all Dependence on him, and resign
up the whole Conduct of our Affairs into our own Hands; if he should say to us,
since you mislike of my Conduct I will no more intermedle with you, or any
thing that concerns you; take your selves into your own Disposal and manage all
your Concernments as you please: If I say, he should do thus with us, we should
be left in a most forlorn and deplorable Condition, and unless we were wholly
abandoned of our own Reason as well as Gods Providence, we should on our bended
Knees resign up all into his Hands again, and beseech him for his Pity and his
Mercy sake to do any Thing with us that will consist with his Goodness; to
scourge and chasten us for our Frowardness as much and as long as his own
fatherly Bowels will endure it; rather then give us up to our own Conduct, or
leave our Affairs in the Disposal of our own blind and precipitant Wills. For
so long as God is so powerfully and so wisely good as he is, it is the Interest
of every Creature in Heaven and Earth to be at his Disposal, and to take up
that self-resigning Prayer of our Savior, Father, not our Wills, but thy Will
be done. For since God wills our good as much or more than our selves, it must
doubtless be our Interest that his Will should take place whenever it stands
in Competition with ours; because he does not only wish well to us as much as
we do to our selves, but he knows what is best for us a great deal better than
we. Wherefore let us learn in all Conditions to repose our Minds in the good
Providence of God, and to satisfy our selves in its Managment and Disposal of
us; for whatsoever Condition it may bring us into whilst we are wandering
through this Vale of Tears, this is most certainly and eternally true, that God
is good, and does good,

JOHN III.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life.
THE Three first Topics from whence I undertook to prove the Goodness of God,
I have already handled on another Text, and showed 1 st, from his Nature, 2 ly,
from his Creation, and 3 dly, from his Providence, That he is infinitely good.
I proceed now to the 4 th, and last, viz. from Principles of Revelation, the
main of which is comprehended in the Text, God so loved the World, etc.

It is indeed a most glorious Instance of the Goodness of God, that when he had
imprinted his Laws upon our Nature in such legible Characters, and given them
such apparent Sanctions in the Nature of Things; having made such a sensible
Distinction between Moral Good and Evil, by those natural good and evil
Consequents which he has inseparably intailed on them: And when Mankind by
their wilful Wickedness and Inadvertency had almost obliterated the Law of
their Nature, and extinguished their natural Sense of Good and Evil, and
immersed themselves in the most barbarous Impieties and Immoralities:
Notwithstanding all this that he had done for us, and we against our selves, he
should still be so kind and compassionate as to put forth a new Edition of his
Laws, and reveal his Will anew to us in such an extraordinary manner; that when
he had implanted a Light in our Natures that was sufficient to have directed us
into the several Paths of our Duty, and we by our own Neglect and Abuse of it
had almost extinguished this Candle of the Lord in us, and consequently
involved our selves in Midnight Darkness and Ignorance; he should then be so
compassionate as to hang out a Light from Heaven to us to rectify our
Wanderings, and guide our Feet in the Paths we should walk in, was such a
glorious Expression of his Goodness as for ever deserves our most thankful
Acknowledgments. But then that he should not only reveal to us what he had
before imprinted on our Nature, and we had most unworthily rased out and
obliterated; but also discover so much more to us than ever we did or could
have known by the Light of our Nature; that he should not only repeat his
former Kindness to us, which we had so shamefully abused, but make such
stupendous Additions to it as he has done in the Revelation of his Gospel;
that manger all those Impieties and Provocations by which for so many Ages we
had excited his Patience, he should not only so love us as to restore to us the
Light which we had almost extinguished, but to give his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, etc. is such an amazing Instance
of Goodness as can hardly be reflected on without an Ecstasy of Admiration.

In which Words you have God's revealed Love and Goodness to the World measured
by a twofold Standard.

1. By the Greatness of the Gift which he has bestowed upon the World; God so
loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son: 2. The blessed End for
which he did bestow him; that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but
have everlasting life.
I. I begin with the first of these viz. the Greatness of the Gift, by which
the Greatness of his Love to us is measured; God so loved the World, that he
gave his only begotten Son: (...), he gave him; that is, he delivered him up
from out of his own Bosom and everlasting Embraces; for so Ephesians. v.2. it is
(...), he gave himself for us, or delivered up himself for us, for so we render
the Word (...), who was delivered for our offenses, Romans iv.25. Now what a
stupendous Expression of God's Love this was, will appear by considering these
six Things, which are all of them expressed or implied in the Text; 1. That he
gave him up who was not only the greatest, but the dearest Person to him in the
whole World. 2. That he gave him up for Sinners. 3. That he gave him up for a
whole World of Sinners. 4. That he gave him up to become a Man for Sinners. 5.
That he gave him up to be a miserable Man for Sinners. 6. That he gave him to
be a Sacrifice for the Sins of Sinners, that so he might not only with more
Effect but with more Security to us, interceed for our Pardon.


1. The Greatness of God's Love and Goodness toward us appears in this, that
he gave up for our sakes not only the greatest but the dearest Person to him in
the whole World; for as the Text tells you, it was his only begotten Son. Which
Phrase doubtless imports a much higher signification than his being begotten in
the Virgins Womb by the Overshadowing of the Holy Ghost. For though it cannot
be denied but in Scripture he is called the Son of God, sometimes upon the
Account of this his divine Generation in the Virgins Womb, and sometimes upon
the Score of his being ordained by God to the Messiaship; sometimes because he
was raised by God from the Dead, and sometimes because he was installed by him
into his Mediatorial Kingdom: Yet upon neither of these Accounts can he be
properly called the only begotten Son; for upon the three last Accounts sundry
others have been as properly begotten by God as our Savior; some having been
installed by him into great and eminent Offices; others raised from the Dead;
others truly ordained by him his Messiah's, or anointed Ones; so that upon
neither of these Accounts can he be styled the only begotten Son, others having
been thus begotten as well as himself. And as for the first, his being
conceived by the Holy Ghost in the Virgins Womb, this was not sufficient
neither to entitle him the only begotten; because though it was indeed a
miraculous Production, yet was it not so much above the Production of the first
Man as to place him in that singular Eminence. For the forming of Adam out of
the Substance of the Earth was altogether as miraculous a Production as the
forming of Christ out of the substance of the Woman; and therefore since Adam
is called the Son of God, Luke 3.38. because God immediately formed him of the
substance of the Earth; he had thereby as good a Right to the Title of God's
only begotten Son as Christ himself had; because God immediately formed him of
the substance of a Woman. Wherefore his peculiar Right above all others to this
glorious Title of God's only begotten Son must necessarily be founded upon some
higher Reason than this, that is, upon some such Reason as is wholly peculiar
to himself. For if he be really and truly God's only begotten Son, all other
Persons whatsoever must necessarily be excluded from that Claim; and
consequently he must be so begotten of God as no other Person is, or ever was:
And to be- so begotten of God, is to be begotten by him by a proper and natural
Generation, which is nothing else but a vital Production of another in the same
Nature with him, from whom it is produced; even as a Man begets a Man, and
every Animal begets another of the same Kind and Nature with it self: And thus
to be begotten of God, is to be begotten into the same divine Nature with
himself; to derive or communicate from him the infinitely perfect Nature and
Essence of a God. And in this Sense only our blessed Savior is the only
begotten Son of the Father, as being generated by him from all Eternity into
the same Nature, and communicating from him his own infinite Essence and
Perfections; in which sense he is truly the only begotten Son, because in this
Sense, and in this only, none is or was, or ever shall be begotten of the
Father but himself.

When therefore it is said that he gave his only begotten Son, the Meaning is
this; he gave up that infinitely great and dear Son of his, that is, his
natural Image and Resemblance; that only Son to whom from all Eternity he has
communicated his own most perfect Essence and Nature. If then it was so great
an Instance of Abraham's Faith and ardent Love of God at his Command to offer
up his only Son Isaac, a Son, who though how hopeful soever, yet who fell
infinitely shorter of the Perfection of our Savior than the Light of the
Glowworm does of the Light of the Sun; what an astonishing Miracle of Love was
it in the great Father of the World to give up his only begotten Son; a Son
whom he had begotten in his own divine Nature, and to whom he had communicated
all the infinite Perfections of his own Being; a Son who was the most perfect
Image of himself, who was infinitely powerful and wise and good, and differed
from him in nothing but only in being his Son; who had the Fullness of the
Godhead dwelling in him, and whom, being infinitely perfect as himself, he
loved as infinitely as his own Person, and consequently could as easily have
given up himself for us, as he did, that dearly Beloved in whom his Soul was so
well pleased? Who but a God of infinite Love and immeasurable Inclination to do
good to his Creatures, would have given them such an inestimable Jewel out of
his Bosom; a Jewel wherein all the Brightness of the Divinity did sparkle, and
which upon that Account was as dear and precious to him as his own Life? And
hence we find the Apostle valuing the Greatness of God's Love to us, by the
Greatness and Dearness of the Person whom he gave up for our sakes; in this was
manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten
Son into the World, that we might live through him, 1 John iv.9. And indeed
without this Consideration of his being the only begotten Son of God by eternal
Generation and Communion of Nature with him, God's Love in giving him up for us
would not be comparably so considerable as it is. For if, according to the
Doctrine of the Socinians, he should only have caused a Man to be born for us
after another manner than other Men are, and then have delivered him for our
sake; there would have been no such great Expression of his Love in this Way of
redeeming us, more than what must have appeared should he have chosen to redeem
us any other Way. To have redeemed us indeed, by what Means soever, would have
been a most glorious Expression of his Love and good Will to us; but since the
Scripture has raised the Consideration of God's Love higher from the Dignity
of the Person whom he sent to redeem us, by how much higher the Dignity of this
Person is, by so much greater is the Estimation of his Love. But if the Dignity
of Christ's Person, as the only begotten Son of God, consisted merely in being
a Man born into the World in such an extraordinary Manner, this would have made
such an inconsiderable Addition to his Love in redeeming us, that he would have
much more agrandized his Kindness to us to have offered up an Angel of Heaven
for us, though of the most inferior Order, than to have thus delivered up his
only begotten Son. But to offer up his natural Son to whom he had communicated
his Nature, his Son who was God coeternal and co-essential with himself, was a
more transcendent Expression of his Love to us, than if he had unpeopled Heaven
for our sakes, and delivered up to us the whole Quire of Angels, Archangels and
Seraphims.

2 ly, The Greatness of God's Love and Goodness toward us appears in this
also, that he gave up his only begotten Son for us when we were Sinners: And
this is implied in that Expression, God so loved the World; that is, the World
as it then was, a base, depraved, and degenerate World; for of this very World
whom God thus loved, the Apostle gives this extreme bad Character, the whole
World lies in Wickedness, 1 John v.19. And St. Paul distributing the whole
World into Jews and Gentiles, pronounces universally concerning them, that they
were all under Sin, Romans iii.9. So that in giving up his Son for such a World
as this, he must necessarily give him for Sinners. And certainly should we
measure God's Goodness by our own, this Consideration is enough to render his
giving his only begotten Son for us a most incredible Expression of it; that
when by our Sins we had provoked him beyond the Sufferance of any Patience but
his own; when in Despite of all those innumerable Mercies wherewith from Time
to Time he had sought to oblige us, and mauger all those Stupendous Judgments
with which from one Generation to another he had endeavored to curb and
restrain us; when he had used so many effectual Arts to reclaim and amend us,
and we by our own Obstinacy had bafled and defeated them all, and in stead of
mending grew worse and worse under all his powerful Applications; one would
have thought that now at last, in stead of trying any further Experiments on
us, he might have been sufficiently provoked to give us up, as Physicians do
their Patients when they are past all Hope of Recovery, and so let us alone to
perish in our own Obstinacy. And doubtless if after all these Provocations we
had known that he had intended to send his Son into the World, our own Guilt
and Consciousness would have made us conclude that the Design of his sending
him was only to ruin and destroy us, to extirpate the whole Race of us from the
Face of the Earth, that so his Creation might be no longer scandalized with the
Remembrance of such a Generation of Monsters. But now that after so many
repeated Affronts and Rebellions, and in the midst of so many loud-crying
Guilts that perpetually rang in his Ears, he should still persevere to love us
in such a transcendent Degree, as to part with what is nearest and dearest to
him for our sakes, even his only begotten Son out of his Bosom, is such an
astonishing Expression of his Goodness to us, as we can never sufficiently
magnify and admire. Had Mankind been as innocent as they are guilty before God,
had their Virtues been as great and as numerous as their Crimes were; yet to
send his great Son down from Heaven to visit them, had been such an Instance of
condescending Goodness in him as would have justly merited our everlasting
Praise and Remembrance; but to send him down to Sinners, to such a Race of
obstinate and incorrigible Sinners, and that not to destroy but to save them;
to obtain for, and tender to them a Kingdom of immortal Pleasures, and use all
possible Means safely to conduct them thither; Lord, what a Miracle of Love is
this! And hence the Apostle estimates this prodigious Instance of the Love of
God, by the Vndeservingness of those upon whom it was exercised; but God, says
he, commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet Sinners Christ
died for us, Romans v.8.

3 dly, The Greatness of God's Love and Goodness toward us appears in this
also, that he gave up his only begotten Son for the whole World of Sinners; he
did not confine and limit this great Design of his Goodness by granting a
monopoly of it to a few particular Favorites, but settled it as a public
Charter upon the whole Corporation of Mankind; for he so loved the World, says
the Text, that he gave his only begotten Son; that is, for the benefit of the
World. For how could his giving of his Son have been an Expression of his Love
to the World, if he had not given him for the public Benefit of the World? Had
his Design been to restrain his Gift to a few particular Persons, whom he had
designed to rescue from the general Shipwreck, the Text must have run thus, God
so loved some particular Persons in the World, that he gave up his only
begotten Son. For to make that an Instance of his Love to all which he designed
only for the Benefit of a few, is to pretend a Love to the greatest Part of Men
which he never intended them; for that by the World here he means the whole
World, he himself assures us, 1 John ii.2. And he is the Propitiation for our
Sins: And not for ours only, but also for the Sins of the whole World. And what
he means by the whole World, he tells us in the same Epistle, 1 John v. The
whole World lies in Wickedness. So that this whole World that lies in
Wickedness, is that whole World for whose Sins Christ is a Propitiation; and
that whole World for whose Sins Christ is a Propitiation, is the World whom God
so loved, as to give his only begotten Son for. But the Apostle yet more
expressly tells us, that the head of every Man is Christ, 1 Cor. xi.3. And if
so, then every Man is a Part of Christ's Body; and if so, then every Man has a
Communion in the Benefits of his Blood; for Ephesians. v.23. he is said to be the
Savior of the Body; and more expressly yet, Heb. ii.9. it is said, that by the
grace of God he tasted death for every Man. So that the Scripture has as
emphatically declared the universal Extent of this great Gift of God's Love, as
it was possible for it to do in any human Words; and methinks it is strange that
any Men should presume to restrain it, when they have no other Defense for so
doing but only an odd Distinction that makes the whole World to signify the
smallest Part of it, the Body of Christ to import a few particular Atoms of it,
and every Man to denote one Man of Ten Thousand.

Behold then the immense Goodness of God, that has not only given up his Son,
for Sinners, but for a whole World of Sinners, and excluded none but those who
exclude themselves from the Benefits of this mighty Donation! That has planted
this heavenly Tree of Life in the midst of a sick and sinful World, and has
not confined or enclosed it for the Use of a few selected Patients; but laid it
open for all Comers, that whosoever would, might take of its Fruit, and eat and
live for ever. O good God! How vast is thy Love, that has thus impartially
diffused it self over such a wide World of Sinners, that in this stupendous
Gift of thy Son had so kind a Respect to every Individual, and made no
Exception of any how sinful and unworthy soever, that will but comply with the
merciful Terms and Conditions of it?

4 thly, The Greatness of God's Love and Goodness toward us appears also in
this, that he has given up his only begotten Son to become a Man for Sinners.
For whatsoever he was upon God's giving him up, he was what God gave him up to
be; and therefore since upon God's giving him up he became a Man, it
necessarily follows that he gave him up to become so. And indeed since God had
such a merciful Design as to send his Son into the World to reform and save it,
it was highly convenient for us, though not for him, that he should come to us
in our own Natures, not only that he might consecrate human Nature that had
been so miserably desecrated and profaned; but also, that he might endear
himself to us by the great Honor he did us in assuming our Natures; and that
having our Passions, and being in our Circumstances he might by his own
Practice give us an Example how to govern the one, and how to behave our selves
in the other. Had he come down from the Heavens inrobed with Splendour and
Light, and preached his Gospel to us in the midst of a Choir of Angels from
some bright Throne in the Clouds, this indeed would have been more convenient
for him, as being more suitable to the natural Dignity and Majesty of his
Person. But the All-merciful Father in the Disposal of his Son consulted not so
much his Convenience as ours; he knew well enough that should he have sent his
Son to us in such an illustrious Equipage, his Appearance amongst us would have
been more apt to astonish than to instruct us, and to have fixed our Thoughts
in a profound Admiration of his Glory than to have directed our Steps in the
Paths of Virtue and true Happiness; and that it would be much more for our
Interest that he should conduct us by his Example than amaze us by his
Appearance; and therefore that he might do so, he sent him to us in our own
Natures, that so going before us as a Man he might show us by his Example what
became Men to do, and direct us by the Print of his own Footsteps. Since
therefore he assumed our Nature purely for our sakes, what a stupendous
Instance of God's Goodness was this; that for the sake of a World of miserable
Sinners he should be content that his own most dear and most glorious Son
should condescend to become a Man, and to empty himself into our Nature; that
he who by the Divinity of his Nature was exalted more above that of the highest
Angel than that is above the lowest Animal, should personally unite himself to
a Handful of Dust, and marry his Divinity to the Infirmities of our Nature;
that he whose Throne was in the Heavens, and before whose sacred Feet the whole
Choir of heavenly Angels lie prostrate, should abase himself so low, as to come
down among Mortals, and associate himself with Companions so unworthy of him? O
good God! When thou have condescended so low, what is there thou will not
condescend to, to do good to thy Creatures? But this is not all, you shall see
him stoop lower yet; For

5 thly, The Greatness of God's Love and Goodness toward us appears also in
this, that he gave up his only begotten Son to become a miserable Man for
Sinners. It would have been some Abatement to his mighty Condescension, if when
he sent him down among us in our Nature he had made him supreme visible Monarch
of the World; if he had crowned him with all the Splendors of an earthly
Condition, if he had ushered him into the World in a triumphal Chariot with all
the Kings of the Earth either prostrate before him or chained at his
Chariot-Wheels: This though a vast Condescension in the eternal Son, yet would
not have been so low as it was to be born of a poor Mother, to be educated as a
Carpenters Son, to be exposed to Want and Penury, to the Contempt of every
sordid Wretch, and the perpetual Persecutions of a borish and ill-natured
Rabble; and yet this was the wretched State to which God humbled his own dear
Son for our sakes. For the Design of his Humiliation being to raise us, the
most merciful Father consulted not so much what was for his Ease, as what was
for our Benefit; for he knew well enough that should he have introduced him
into the World in earthly Pomp and Magnificence, it would not have been so well
for us; that we were too Ambitious already of the Vanities of this World, and
that that had been the great Snare that had entangled and ruined us; and that
therefore it was necessary when his Son came among us, he should take us off
from our over-eager Pursuit of them, disgrace and expose them to us by his own
voluntary Refusal of them; that by seeing him trample on them when they lay all
at his Feet we might learn to despise them, and be at length convinced what
foolish Bargains we make when we sell our Innocence and our Happiness for such
insignificant Trifles. He thought it much more necessary for us, that his Son
should exercise his Virtue than display his Greatness among us; and therefore
he placed him in such Circumstances of human Life, wherein by his own Example
he might copy out to us the noblest Pattern of holy living. For of all States,
that of Affliction affords the largest Sphere to exercise human Virtue in; and
therefore in this State out of his good Will to us he placed his own Son, that
herein he might set us a Patten of Obedience to Superiors, and Contempt of the
World; of Patience and Courage and Meekness and Resignation to the Will of God;
that so by his Example we might be excited to the Exercise of all those passive
Virtues, which are not only most glorious, but most difficult to human Nature;
and that by beholding how mean and yet how good he was, we might all become
more ambitious of being good than great in the World.

Now what an amazing Instance of God's Goodness is this, that merely for our
sakes, and to promote our Happiness; he should depress his own Son into such a
miserable Condition, that he who was in the Form of God, who thought it no
Robbery to be equal with God, should, by the Appointment of his own Father to
whom he was so infinitely dear, make himself of no Reputation, take on him the
Form of a Servant, become a Man of sorrows* and acquaint himself with Griefs;
and all this to put himself into a better Capacity of doing good to the World?
Good God! When I consider with my self that once there was a Time when thou
did send thy blessed Son from Heaven to assume my Nature; that therein he
dwelt upon this Earth and conversed with such poor Mortals as my self; that he
suffered himself to be despised and persecuted, and by thy own Appointment
wandered about like a poor Wretch naked and destitute of all those Comforts
which I abundantly enjoy, and all this that he might the more effectually do
good to a World of ill-natured Sinners, methinks this wondrous Prodigy of Love
not only puzles my Conceit, but outreaches my Wonder and Admiration: And though
it be a Love that exceeds my largest Thoughts, such as I have infinite Cause to
rejoice in, but could never have had the Impudence to expect; yet while I stand
gazing on it, methinks I am like one that is looking down from a stupendous
Precipice, whose Height fills me with a trembling Horror and even oversets my
Reason.

6 thly, And lastly, The Greatness of God's Love and Goodness toward us
appears also in this, that he gave his only begotten Son to be a Sacrifice for
the Sins of miserable Sinners; and this is plainly implied in that Expression,
he gave his only begotten Son: For in the two Verses foregoing the Text, our
Savior foretells his own Death; for as Moses, says he, lifted up the Serpent
in the Wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up: That whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have eternal Life; and then it
immediately follows, for God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten
Son, that is, he gave him to be lifted up upon the Cross, even as the Serpent
was lifted up by Moses in the Wilderness; that so by his precious Death and
Sacrifice he might make an Atonement for the Sins of the World: And accordingly
he is said to be delivered up for our offenses, Romans iv.25. even as the
Sacrifice was delivered up at the Door of the Tabernacle to propitiate God for
the Sins of the Offerer. For to complete the propitiatory Sacrifices under the
Law three Things were requisite; first, the offering of it at the Door of the
Tabernacle; the slaying of it, and the presenting of its Blood either within
the Holy of Holies, or elsewhere, all which were found in the Sacrifice of our
blessed Savior. First, he offered himself to God as a willing Victim for the
Sins of the World. Hence Joh. xvii.19. for this cause, says he, do I sanctify
my self, that is, offer up my self as a Sacrifice to thee; for so in Levit.
xxii.2, 3. and sundry other places, to hallow or sanctify any Thing to the Lord
denotes the offering it to him in Sacrifice. And accordingly we find that that
Prayer by which Christ consecrated himself to the Lord, Joh. xvii. was much
like that by which the High Priest did consecrate his Victims before the Altar
on the great day of Expiation; for as he, before he slew the Sacrifice, did
first commend himself and his own Family; then the Family of Aaron and the
whole Congregation to the Lord; so our Savior, in this excellent Prayer
whereby he sanctified himself to his Father a Sacrifice for the Sins of the
World, first commended himself to him, then his Apostles, then all those who
should afterward believe in his Name; which having done, he went forth
presently to the Place where he was apprehended, and carried to Judgment and
condemned to Death. Then as a propitiatory Sacrifice he was slain for our sins,
for so St. Peter tells us, Ephesians. ii.24. he bore our Sins in his own Body on
the Tree; that is, that natural Evil of a most shameful and painful Death was
inflicted on him for our Sins, that so he might make an Expiation for them, and
free us from the Guilt and Punishment that was due to them. Hence in that
Prophecy of him, Isa. liii. we often meet with such Expressions as these,
surely he has born our Griefs, and carried our Sorrows; he was Wounded for our
Transgressions, he was Bruised for our Iniquities: The chastisement of our
Peace was upon him, and with his Stripes we are Healed. The Lord has laid on
him the iniquity of us all: For the transgression of my people was he stricken:
Thou shall make his Soul an offering for Sin, and he shall bear their
Iniquities: He was numbered with the Transgressors, and he bare the sin of
Many, and made intercession for the Transgressors: All which Expressions do
plainly imply that what he suffered he suffered for our Sins as a Sacrifice
substituted in the Room of us who were the Offenders, that so he might make
Expiation for us, and obtain our Pardon from his Father. And accordingly in the
New Testament he is said to be made a Curse for us, to be our Ransom and
Propitiation, to redeem and reconcile us, and obtain the Remission of our Sins
by his Blood; to die for us and for our Sins, and to be our Propitiation; all
which Expressions being applied to the Sacrifices of Atonement under the Law,
and from them derived upon our Savior do plainly denote him to be a Sacrifice
of Atonement for the Sins of the World. And then lastly, there is the
presenting of his Blood for us in Heaven, and in the Virtue thereof his
interceeding for us with his Father. And hence the Blood of Christ, as it is
now presented in Heaven, is called the blood of Sprinkling, which speaks
better things than that of Abel, Heb. xii.24. In which he plainly alludes to
the High Priest's sprinkling of the Blood of the Sacrifice in the Holy of
Holies, which was a Type of Christ's presenting his Blood for us in Heaven, as
you may see, Heb. ix.7. compared with the 11th and 12th Verses. Verse 7th he
tells us that the High Priest entered not into the Holy of Holies without
blood: But then Verse 12th it is said that Christ with his own blood entered in
once into the holy place, having obtained eternal Redemption for us. And in
Virtue of this Blood, which he poured out as a Sacrifice of our Sins upon the
Cross, he now pleads our Cause at the right Hand of his Father, and ever lives
to make Intercession for us. So that you see the Death of Christ had in it all
the necessary Ingredients of a propitiatory Sacrifice for the Sins of the
World; and having so, what a prodigious Instance is it of the Love of God to
us, that rather than destroy us, he would give up his own Son to be a Sacrifice
for us? I do not deny, but if he had pleased he might have pardoned and saved
us without any Sacrifice at all; but he knew very well that if he should do so,
it would be much worse for us. He knew that if he should pardon our Sins
without giving us some great Instance of his implacable Hatred of them, we
should be too prone to presume upon his Lenity, and thereupon to return again
to our old Vomit and Uncleanness; and therefore though it would have been more
for the Ease and Interest of his blessed Son to have pardoned us without any
Sacrifice at all, yet such was his Love to us, that because he foresaw that
this Way of pardoning would prove fatal and dangerous to us, he was resolved
that he would not do it without being moved thereunto by the greatest Sacrifice
the World could afford him, and that no less a Propitiation should appease his
Wrath against Offenders than the Blood of his own Son; that so by beholding his
Severity against our Sins in this unvaluable Sacrifice of the Blood of his Son,
we might be sufficiently terrified from returning again to them, by the very
same Reason that moved him to pardon them; that we might not think light of
that which God would not forgive without such a vast Consideration, but might
tremble to think of repeating those Sins, the Price of whose Pardon was the
dearest Blood of the Son of God. Hence is that of the Apostle, Romans iii.25, 26.
whom God has set forth to be a propitiation, through faith in his Blood, to
declare his Righteousness, that is, his righteous Severity against Sin, for the
remission of Sins that are past, through the forbearance of God; to declare, I
say, at this time his Righteousness; that he might be just, that is,
sufficiently severe against the Sins of Men so as to warn them from returning,
and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus. So that now he has reduced
Things to an excellent Temper, having so provided, that neither himself nor we
might be damnified; that we might not suffer by our doing again what we have
done; and that he might not suffer by our doing still the same; that he might
be what he is, a pure and a holy Savior; and that we might be what we ought,
dutiful and obedient Subjects. Now what an amazing Instance of God's Love is
this, that he should so far consult the good of his Creatures as to Sacrifice
his own Son to their Benefit and Safety? How inexpressibly must he needs love
us, that for our sakes could behold his most dearly beloved Son hanging on the
Cross, covered with Wounds and Blood, forsaken by his Friends, despised and
spit on by his Barbarous Enemies; that could hear him complain in the
Bitterness of his Soul, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And yet
suffer him to continue under that unsufferable Agony till he had given up his
white and innocent Soul an unspotted Sacrifice for the Sins of the World: Yea,
that notwithstanding the infinite Love that he bore him, and the piteous Moans
that his Torments forced from him, was so far from relieving him, that for our
sakes he inflicted upon him the utmost Misery that human Nature could bear;
that so having an experimental Sense of the most grievous Suffering that
Mankind is liable to, and being touched with the utmost Feeling of our
Infirmities, and in all Points tempted like unto us, he might carry a more
tender Commiseration for us to Heaven, and know the better how to pity us in
all our Griefs and Extremities. For in all things it behoved him, says the
Apostle, to be made like unto his Brethren, that he might be a merciful and
faithful high priest, Heb. ii.17. Hear O Heavens, and give Ear O Earth, and let
all the Creation attend with Astonishment to this stupendous Story of Love,
which so far exceeds all the heroic Kindnesses that ever any Romance of
Friendship thought of, that no less Evidence than that of Miracles could have
ever rendered it credible. Well then might the Apostle say, herein is love, not
that we loved God, for after such vast Obligations this is no great Wonder, but
that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our Sins, 1 John
iv.10. And thus you see what an unspeakable Instance of the Love of God, his
giving his only begotten Son is. I shall now conclude this Argument with a few
practical Inferences from the whole.

1. From hence I infer what monstrous Ingratitude it would be in us to deny any
Thing to God that he demands at our Hands, who has been so liberal to us as to
give up his only begotten Son for our sakes. O blessed God! If it were possible
for us to do or suffer for thee a thousand Times more than at present we are
able, what a poor Return were this for the Gift of thy Son, that unspeakable
Expression of thy Goodness? And can we deny thee any Thing after such an
Instance of Love, especially when thy Demands are so gentle and reasonable?
When he requires nothing of us but what is for our good, and the Requital he
demands for all his Love to us, is only that we should love our selves, and
express this Love in doing those Duties which he therefore enjoins, because
they tend to our Happiness; and avoiding those Sins which he therefore forbids,
because he knows they will be our Bane and Poison? Can any of my Lusts be as
dear to me as the only begotten Son was to the Father of all things? And yet he
parted with him out of Love to me; and shall not I part with these for the Love
of him? How can we pretend to any Thing that is modest or ingenuous, tender or
apprehensive in humane Nature, when nothing will oblige us, no not this
astonishing Love of God in sending his Son from Heaven to live and die
Miserably for our sakes? Lord! What do thy holy Angels think of us? How do thy
blessed Saints resent our Unkindness toward thee? Yea, how justly do the
Devils themselves reproach and upbraid our Baseness; who, bad as they are, were
never so much Devils yet as to make an ungrateful Return of such a vast
Obligation?

2 ly, From hence I infer how desperate our Condition will be if we defeat the
End of this Gift of the Son of God, and render it ineffectual to us. For God
has no more Sons to bestow upon us, he being the only begotten of his Father;
Heaven and Earth are not able to furnish him with such another Gift to bestow
upon us; and if he should lay a Tax upon all his Creation to raise one great
Contribution to the Happiness of Mankind, and exact the utmost of every
Creature that it is able to Contribute, it would all fall infinitely short of
what he has done for us in this inestimable Gift of his own Son. So that if
this prove ineffectual, it is beyond the Power of an omnipotent Bounty to
relieve us. For though God can do all Things that can be well and wisely done,
and do not imply a Contradiction; yet this can be no Relief at all to us, who
reject his Son, and refuse to be made happy in the gracious Method which he
has prescribed to us. For after this mighty Gift of his own Son to save us
according to the Method of his Gospel, there remains nothing more to be done
for us, but either to save us whether we will, or no; or else to make us happy
in our Sins, and save us notwithstanding our Continuance in them; the former of
which can neither be well nor wisely done, because by saving us against our
Wills he must deal with us in such a Way as is repugnant to that Law of Liberty
that is implanted in our Natures, and use us not as Free, but as Necessary
Agents. And if considering all things, it was best and wisest that he should
make us free Agents, then it can neither be well nor wise to govern us as
necessary ones; since by so doing he must alter the Course of our Nature, and
consequently swerve and decline from what is best and wisest, which would be to
do Violence to the Perfection of his own Nature. And then as for the latter, he
cannot do it; because it implies a Contradiction. For to make Men happy in
their Sins, is to make them happy in their Miseries; Misery being as
inseparable from Sin as Heat is from Fire, and as intimately related to it as
the Son is to the Father; and consequently he may as possibly make a Father
without a Son, as a Sinner without Misery. When therefore God has done all for
us that can possibly be done, and we by our own Obstinacy have rendered all
ineffectual, we are beyond the Power of Remedy, and must necessarily perish in
our Sins. And when we have no other Hope to depend on but this, that the
All-wise God will undo his own Workmanship, and unravel our Nature by governing
us contrary to the most wise Constitution of it; or that the All-powerful God
will effect Impossibilities, and do that for us which is not an Object of
Power, how deplorable and desperate must our Condition be? Wherefore, as you
would not run your selves beyond the Reach of all Mercy, and excommunicate your
own Souls from all Hope of Salvation, be now at last persuaded to comply with
Christ's Coming, which was to reduce you from the Error of your Ways, and to
bring you to a serious Repentance.

JOHN III.16. -- That whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting Life.
IN these Words you have the Love of God measured by a twofold Standard; first
by the Greatness of the Gift which he has bestowed upon the World, God so
loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son; Secondly, by the blessed
End for which he did bestow him, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, etc. The first of these I have already gone through, and now I shall
proceed to the Second, viz. The blessed End for which he gave his only begotten
Son, That whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting
life.

In which Words you have also two very great Instances of God's infinite Love
and good Will to Mankind; the First is his imposing upon us such a gentle, and
easy, and merciful Condition, That whosoever believes in him. Secondly, His
proposing such a vast Reward to us upon our performing of this Condition.

I begin with the first, viz. His imposing upon us such a gentle and easy, and
merciful Condition, That whosoever believes in him should not perish. In the
Management of which I shall do these two Things: 1. Show you what it is that is
included in this Condition, whosoever believes in him. 2. How good God has
been to us in making the Condition which he has imposed upon us so gentle and
merciful.


1. What is it that is included in this Condition? To which I answer in
general, that believing in Christ does not only denote a naked Assent to the
Truth of this Proposition, That he is the Son of Cod, and the Messenger of Gods
Mind and Will to the World, and the Savior of Mankind; but that it also
includes whatsoever is naturally consequent thereunto. For thus it is very
ordinary with the Scripture to express the natural Effects and Consequents of
things by their Causes and Principles. This is the love of God, says the
Apostle, that we keep his Commandments, 1 Jo. v.3. whereas in strictness of
Speaking, our keeping his Commandments is only the Effect or Consequence of our
loving him. So Prove. viii.13. The fear of the Lord is to hate evil; whereas
indeed this is only the Effect, or Consequence of the Fear of the Lord. Thus by
knowing, and hearing, and remembering of God the Scripture usually expresses the
consequent Effects of them, Thus Act. xxii.14. The God of our Fathers has
chosen thee, that thou should know his Will; that is, that thou may not
only know it, but by thy Knowledge may be suitably affected with it; (for it
was not to a bare contemplative Knowledge of it that St. Paul was chosen:) and
then it follows, and see that Just one, and should hear the voice of his
Mouth; that is, that hearing the Voice of his Mouth, thou should thereby be
induced to obey it; for he was not merely to hear Christ speaking to him out of
the Heavens, but that hearing him he might submit to his Will, and become his
Apostle to the World. Many other Places I might easily give you, where the
natural Effects and Consequents are in Scripture expressed by their Causes and
Principles. And thus also Faith or Believing whenever it is used in Scripture
to signify the Condition of the Gospel Covenant always imploies its natural
Effects and Consequents, that is, sincere and universal Obedience to those
Rules of Holy Living which the Gospel prescribes; for this is the most natural
Effect of our believing in Jesus Christ. And hence it is called the obedience
of Faith, Romans xvi.26. that is, the Obedience which springs from Faith, as from
its Cause and Principle; And accordingly, Romans x.16. you find that to believe
and to obey the Gospel signifies one and the same Thing; But they have not all
obeyed the Gospel, says he; for Esaias says, Lord, who has believed our
report? that is, who has believed it, so as to obey it? So that wheresoever
Faith is mentioned singly as the Condition of the Gospel Covenant, it is
apparent it must be understood in the largest Sense, as comprehending that
Obedience which is the Effect and Consequence of it. So 1 John v.1. Whosoever
believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God; that is, whosevever so
believes the Truth of this Proposition as to practice upon it, and govern his
Life and Actions according to the Tenor and Direction of it, is truly a Child
of God. For he who believes Christ to be the Messiah, but continues obstinately
disobedient to his Laws, is so far from being truly and really a Child of God,
that he thereby becomes ten Times more a Child of the Devil; for, says the
Apostle, If I have all Faith, and have not Charity, I am nothing; and Gal. v.6.
For in Jesus Christ neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
Uncircumcision, but Faith which works by Love; and if so, then Faith it self
is nothing abstracted from this blessed Effect of it, i. e. working by love:
For in Gal. vi.15. he tells us that Circumcision is nothing, but the new
Creature; by which new Creature he means an obedient Temper and Disposition of
Mind, as he plainly tells us, 1 Cor. vii.19. Circumcision is nothing, and
Uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of the Commandments of God. So that
by these different Variations of expression it is apparent, that by Faith as
significant in the Account of Christ, he always means a working Faith, the
Effect of which is the new Creature, or keeping the Commandments of God. And so
I have done with the first Thing proposed, which was to show you what is
included in this Condition, whosoever believes in him, which you see is not to
be confined to a bare and naked Belief of him, but must be extended further,
even to that whole Course of Obedience which is the natural Effect of such a
Belief. So that whosoever believes in him, is as much as if he had said,
Whosoever so believes in him, as sincerely and universally to obey him.

2. I proceed now to the next Thing, which was to show you how good God has
been to us in making the Condition which he has imposed upon us, so gentle and
merciful; and this will appear if we consider these five Things.

1. That he has put nothing into this Condition but what is in its own Nature
exceeding good for us. 2. That he has most mercifully proportioned the Whole
to the present State and Circumstances of our Nature. 3. That he has rendered
the Whole almost necessarily consequent to our believing in Jesus Christ. 4.
That to beget that Belief in us, he has given us the most plain and convincing
Evidence. 5. That to render this Belief operative, he has engaged himself to
assist, actuate, and inliven it by his ow immediate Concurrence.
1. That God has put nothing into this Condition but what is in its own Nature
exceeding good for us. For there is no Precept in all the Gospel but what
contains either some effectual Means or apparent Instance of what is morally
and eternally Good; and whatsoever is morally good is naturally so. For the
moral Goodness of Things consists in the Fitness and Reasonableness of them,
and that which is the moral Good, or Duty of Men consists in doing that which
is eternally fit and reasonable for them, considering the Frame and
Circumstances of their Natures, and the different Relations wherein they are
placed in the World. But now for Men to do what is eternally fit and
reasonable, is naturally good for and beneficial to themselves; because by so
doing they perfect and advance their Natures, and accomplish their own
Satisfaction and Happiness. For our Reason being that proper Character of our
Natures that distinguishes us from all sublunary Beings, and sets us in a Form
of Being above them; the Perfection of our Nature must necessarily consist in
being perfectly reasonable; in having our Understandings informed with the
Principles of right Reason, and our Wills and Affections regulated by them; and
when once we are released from the Slaveries of Sense and Passion, and all our
Powers are so perfectly subdued to this superior Principle of Reason, as to do
every Thing that it commands, and nothing that it forbids, and we choose and
refuse, and love, and hate, and hope, and fear, and delight, according as right
Reason directs and dictates; then, and not till then we are come to the full
Stature of perfect Men in Christ Jesus. Now all the Duty of the Gospel being a
reasonable Service, as the Apostle calls it, Romans xii.1. the End and Tendency
of it must be to habituate us to live according to the Laws of right Reason,
which is all one as to advance us to the Perfection of reasonable Beings; and
being once arrived at this, we shall find unspeakable Satisfaction from within
our selves, and feel a Heaven of Joys springing up within our own Bosoms. For
when once our disjointed Powers are set in Order, and all our Faculties reduced
to their natural Subordination, our Nature will be in perfect Rest and Ease,
being freed from that unnatural Violence and Oppression under which it now
groans, and cured of all those Spasms and Convulsions of Mind which are the
inseparable Effects of its Lapse and Degeneracy. And all the Motions of our
Wills and Affections being regulated by the eternal Reason of our Minds, with
what delightful Relishes and sweet Gusts of Pleasure shall we taste and review
our own Actions, they being always such as our best and purest Reason does
approve of with a full and ungainsaying Judgment? So that God's Commands, you
see, being all of them most reasonable must necessarily tend to the Perfection
and Happiness of our Nature; besides, that they generally promote even our
sensitive Happiness, our Pleasure, and Profit, and Reputation in this World.
Now what a most endearing Instance is this of God's Goodness toward us, that
he should make our Benefit the Measure of our Duty, and oblige us to nothing
but what is for our good; that he should so far concern himself in our
Happiness, as to impose it upon us under the Penalty of his severest
displeasure, and to enforce his Laws with such inviting and such dreadful
Sanctions, only to secure us from running away from our own Mercies? So that to
be a Christian, is in Effect nothing else but only to be obliged to be kind to
our selves, and bound in Conscience to be happy: Good God, that thou should
be so infinitely Zealous of our Welfare as to make the Means of it the only
Matter of thy Laws, and to promise such vast Rewards, and denounce such
dreadful Punishments against us for no other Reason but only to affright and
allure us out of Misery into Happiness! That thou should hate our Sins so
implacably, only because they are our irreconcilable Enemies, and be so
infinitely pleased with our Obedience, only because it leads to our endless
Bliss and Perfection! And that it is thus, is so plain and apparent, that we
cannot but acknowledge it a most convincing Instance of God's infinite Goodness
toward us,

2 ly, That God has most mercifully proportioned this Condition to the present
State and Circumstances of our Naure. He saw very well into what a deplorable
Condition humane Nature was reduced, how its Strength was broken, and its
Health and Vigor impaired and decayed; how its Reason was clouded, and all its
Faculties depraved; how apt it was to be surprised, and to act unadvisedly;
sometimes for Want of Time, sometimes for Want of Order and Distinction in its
Thoughts; how much it was hindered from acting regularly by intervening
Accidents, and how it was weakend and determined by the bad Habits and
Necessities it had generally contracted: and seeing it reduced to this sad
State, he has most graciously accommodated its Burden to its Strength, and
taken Measure of its Duty by its Ability to discharge it. For though in his
Gospel he requires that we should perfect holiness in the fear of God, and be
perfect, as our Father in Heaven is perfect, that is, that we should advance to
the utmost Degrees and Improvements in Virtue that our Natures are capable of;
yet he requires this of us under such moderate Penalties as are no ways
destructive to our eternal Happiness, such as the hiding his Face from us, and
other such like paternal Severities and Castigations; his correcting us with
the Rod of temporal Judgments, and abating us in the Degrees of our future
Happiness proportionably to our moral Defects and Non-improvements, which
Penalties though they are sufficient to quicken our Endeavors, and excite us
still to a farther Progress from one Degree of Virtue to another; yet are they
not such as do excommunicate us from Heaven, or disseize us of the Reward of
our honest and sincere Obedience. And indeed should God have been severe in
marking what we do amiss, and exacted of us under the Penalty of Damnation the
utmost Degrees and Improvements that are possible for us to attain, no Flesh
would be saved; it being morally impossible for us in this degenerate State to
do always the utmost Good, or avoid the utmost Evil that we are able; and
therefore out of a tender Regard to the Weakness and Infirmity of our Nature,
he has only forbid those Neglects and Miscarriages under this Declaration that
they are inconsistent with the Sincerity of our Submission and Obedience to
him. But as for our moral Defects and Infirmities and Surprises, though so far
as it is in our Power to avoid them, they are truly Sins against the Law of
Perfection, and as such we ought to lament, and beg Pardon for them; yet,
Thanks be to a merciful God, we shall only be chastned for them here, that we
may not be condemned with the World, as the Apostle expresses it, 1 Cor. xi.32.
and reap less Happiness in the other World for having sowed less Degrees of
good than we might, and ought to have done in this; as the same Apostle in 2
Cor. ix.6. It Is true indeed, as for wilful Sinners, he has concluded them (as
it is very reasonable he should) under the Sentence of eternal Death; for
should he let such go unpunished, he must even resign up his Government, and
leave the wretched World in a State of Anarchy and Confusion; but yet to these
he has extended as much Kindness, as was possible for a wise and gracious
Governor to do; for he has not so irrecoverably concluded them under this
direful Sentence, but that still he does indulge to them the saving Remedy of
Repentance, having for the sake of Jesus, and his all-sufficient Propitiation
bound himself by Promise to pardon and receive into his Favor every wilful
Sinner in the World, if he will but repent of what is past, and amend for the
future. Thus to save the miserable World he has gone to the utmost Borders of
what is fit and reasonable, and done as much for us as it was possible for the
Justice and Rectitude of his Nature to admit of; for should he have proceeded
any further he must have pardoned impenitent, Sinners which he could not have
done without allowing and encouraging their Rebellion: And to pardon an
Offender that persists in his Fault, that is neither sorry for it, nor willing
to amend it, is utterly incongruous to all wise Rules of Government, and cannot
be practiced by any Government either divine or humane without endangering its
own Foundations. What then is there beyond this that we can modestly ask, or
God wisely grant? If God had summoned us to his Privy Council in Heaven, and
there promised to grant us any Terms of Salvation that we our selves could
think fit to propose to him, surely the utmost that any modest Man could have
asked would have been only this; Lord! Be but so merciful as to consider the
Weakness and Infirmity of our Natures so as not to cast us off for every
Neglect or Miscarriage that was only possible for us to avoid: And if at any
time we should be such Wretches as knowingly and wilfully to Offend thee, be
but so gracious as to receive us again into thy Favor whenever we heartily
repent and amend: This is the utmost that we can request at thy Hands, and for
this we will praise thee on the bended Knees of our Souls, and adore thy
Goodness for ever and ever: Why now all this he has freely granted us of his
own Accord; and is not this a most amazing Instance of his Goodness, that of
his own free Motion he should thus indulge to us the utmost Mitigations that we
could have modestly desired, and condescended so far to our Weakness, that
without an unpardonable Impudence we cannot desire him to condescend yet
further.

3 dly, That he has rendered the Performance of the whole Condition of our
Salvation almost necessarily consequent to our believing in Jesus Christ: For
in that Revelation of his Will which he has made by Jesus Christ he has
pressed the Performance of this Condition upon us with such irresistible
Arguments, as must needs prevail wheresoever they are heartily believed and
duly considered. What Man can be so stupid as to trample upon Christ's Law,
that firmly believes and considers those glorious Rewards it proposes to all
that sincerely obey it? What pleasures of Sin can seduce that Man from his Duty
who is firmly persuaded that after a few Moments Obedience he shall swim in
Rivers of Pleasures that flow from God's right Hand for evermore? How can any
Man have the Courage to violate the Laws of our Savior, who heartily believes
and considers those direful Punishments which he has denounced against the
Transgressors of them? And what Evils or Miseries can scare that Man from his
Duty, that is chained so fast to it by the Consideration of that Wrath of God
which is revealed from Heaven against all Unrighteousness and Ungodliness of
Men? How can any Man love his Sins any longer, that believes and reads that
bloody Story of them that is written in the Agony and Passion of the Son of
God? When we consider that he was delivered for our Offenses, and that our Sins
were the principal Actors of all that woeful Tragedy; that they were these that
betrayed, arraigned, and condemned him; that borrowed the Throats of a
barbarous Rabble to cry out Crucify him, Crucify him; that buffeted and
scourged him with the Hands of the rude Soldiers; that gored his Sides with the
Spear, pierced his Temples with the Thorns, rent his sacred Hands and Feet with
the Nails that fastened him to the Cross; how can we believe and consider that
our Sins did thus barbarously treat the best Friend we have in the World
without being all inflamed with Indignation against them? Again, how can we
reflect upon that dreadful Displeasure God expressed against our Sins in this
dismal Example of Sacrificing his own Son for them, without being filled with
Horror, and struck into a trembling Agony at the Thought of them? Once more,
How can we be so desperately foolhardy as to go on in our Sins, if we believe
and consider the Article of the Day of Judgment, wherein we must give an
Account of whatsoever we have done in the Flesh whether it be good, or evil,
and stand or fall to all Eternity according as we have discharged or neglected
this great Condition of our Salvation? These are such mighty Arguments, as one
would think, it were impossible for Men firmly to believe, and yet not be
persuaded by them. Thus God in his Mercy and Goodness to us has furnished the
Revelation of his Son with such prevalent Motives, that our believing in him
almost necessarily draws after it the Performance of the whole condition of our
Salvation; for upon our believing in Jesus, and considering his Proposals, we
are compassed round about with so many puissant Reasons to submit our selves to
his Laws, as (one would think) all the Temptations of the Devil and the World
are not able to resist. So careful has God been to secure us from Sin and
Misery, that knowing the Force of our natural Reason to be so weak to secure
us, he has sent us down these fresh Auxiliaries from Heaven, by whose
Assistance, if we do but trust to and employ them, we may easily repulse all
the Temptations of Sin, and fight our Way through all the Difficulties of our
Duty. For this is the Victory, says the Apostle, by which we overcome the
World, even our Faith, 1 John v.4. which Words are urged by him as an Instance
of the Easiness and Gentleness of our Obedience to the Gospel, which is the
Condition of our Salvation; for v.3. says he, this is the love of God, that we
keep his Commandments, and his Commandments are not grievous. Well, but how
does this appear? Why says he, for every one that is born of God overcomes
the World, and this is the Victory that overcomes the World, even our Faith.
For who is he that overcomes the World, but he that believes that Jesus is
the Son of God, v.5. So that he proves the easiness of the Gospel Commands by
this Argument, that the keeping them depends upon that Faith by which we
believe Jesus to be the Son of God. By this means therefore God has mercifully
rendered the Condition of our Salvation easy to us by rendering the Performance
of it so necessarily consequent to our believing in Jesus; in which how good he
has been to us will evidently appear, if we consider.

4 thly, That to beget this Belief in us he has given us the most plain and
convincing Evidence; viz. the Evidence of those miraculous Works wherewith he
accompanied the Ministry of our Savior and his Apostles, and sealed and
confirmed it to the World; which of all Kinds of Evidence is the most apt to
convince, and persuade the World of the Truth of any divine Revelation; for
this Kind of Evidence appeals to Men's Senses, and is such an Argument as they
may see and touch and handle; and Men are generally apt to give more Credit to
their own Senses than to the clearest Inferences and Deductions of Reason. And
indeed the Generality of Men are hardly capable of any other Notices of Things
but what are immediately impressed upon them by the Objects of their Sense; for
they have not Skill enough to compare simple Terms so exactly with one another
as to compound them into true Propositions, and then to infer from every such
Proposition its natural Consequents and Deductions. These are Things that
require a great deal more Art and Leisure, than Men's Educations and Affairs
will ordinarily afford them. But Miracles are Things that are obvious to Men's
Senses, and from them to infer a divine Commission in the Person that works
them, is not only possible but very easy to the most vulgar Understanding. For
Miracles being the visible Effects of a divine Power cannot be supposed to be
wrought by any but Persons that are divinely commissionated, and he that shows
me an immediate Effect of God's Power gives me that in Token that he came from
God. So that the Argument of Miracles, you see, is the most plain and
intelligible of all others; and as it is so, it is the most powerful to
convince and persuade Men. For whereas had our Savior proved his Doctrins in a
Way of rational Discourse and Inference, he must have proved them all singly
and apart by distinct and different Arguments, which would have been so tedious
that the Vulgar would never have Leisure enough to attend them, nor yet
Capacity enough to retain them; but by this Argument of Miracles he proved them
all at once, because his Miracles were a Token that the God of Truth did
approve his Doctrine; and it cannot be supposed that the God of Truth would have
so visibly approved of his Doctrine in the Gross, had any Part or Proposition of
it been false and erroneous. Thus God out of his infinite Goodness has not
only revealed his everlasting Gospel to us, but has also taken the most
effectual Course to convince and persuade us of the Truth of it. He has set
his own Almighty Power at Work to still the Seas, and raise the Dead, to cure
the Blind and Lame and Diseased, to change and vary the Course and Order of his
Creation, and all this for no other Purpose but to persuade Mankind of the
Truth of those glad Tidings which he revealed from Heaven to them by his own
Son. And as he has given us the best Evidences to convince us of the Truth of
his Gospel, so he has taken the most effectual Course, to continue and
perpetuate it to the World. For first, he raised up sundry Eyewitnesses who
conversed with our Savior, and beheld his Miracles, and after they had seen
him risen from the Dead, and ascended up into Heaven, did openly publish and
testify them to the World, and finally confirmed and ratified their Testimony
by laying down their Lives for it; which was as high a Confirmation as could
possibly have been given of the Truth of it. But lest after all, the World
should suspect them, God also furnished them with the Gift of Miracles, and
continued that Gift as an Heirlome to their Successors for Three Hundred Years
together; that so as the Testimony of the first Eyewitnesses was confirmed not
only by their Martyrdoms, but by their Miracles also; so it might still be
handed down from them through the successive Generations in the same infallible
manner till it was spread over all the World, and needed no farther Martyrdoms,
or Miracles to confirm it. O blessed God! What care have thou taken, first to
provide, and then to secure the Evidences of our holy Religion, that all
Generations might have sufficient Motives of Credibility; and that Mankind
might still have abundant Reason to believe in thy Son to the End of the World,
when they shall see him come down from Heaven to Judgment? How easy therefore
has God rendered the Condition of our Salvation to us, when he has not only
rendered the Performance of it so necessarily consequent to our believing in
Jesus, but also to beget this Belief, in us has given us such abundant
Evidence? How can we sufficiently admire and adore his Goodness that has been
so infinitely solicitous to secure our Happiness, and has so contrived Things
that we cannot heartily believe his Gospel and not be persuaded by it to comply
with the Terms of our Salvation; nor yet impartially consider the Evidence of
his Gospel, and not heartily believe it? And yet as if all this were not enough,

5 thly, And lastly, to render this Belief operative and effectual, he has
engaged himself to assist, actuate, and enliven it by his own immediate
Concurrence. Provided we use our own honest Endeavor he has assured us again
and again that he will give his Holy Spirit to every one that asks; that he
will work in us to will and to do, if we will but take care to work out our own
Salvation with fear and trembling; and that to him that has, i. e. makes an
honest Improvement of that Strength that he has, it shall be given, and he
shall have more abundantly. So that though one would have thought he had done
sufficiently for us before in giving us such abundant Evidence to beget in us
an hearty Belief of his Gospel, and such prevalent Motives to persuade us to
submit to it, and comply with his gracious Proposals; yet such was his Goodness
to us, such his importunate Care of our Welfare, that he could not stop here,
nor think that yet he had done enough for us till by an irrepealable Promise he
had obliged himself to us to cooperate with us, and by the immediate
Influences of his Grace to bless and succeed our honest Endeavors. So that we
can no sooner attempt our own Restoration, no sooner set our selves in the way
to our Happiness, but the good God is immediately present with us, exciting our
Fath, fixing our Consideration, animating and encouraging our poor Endeavors,
and supplying us with all manner of Grace and Assistance that our State and
Necessities require. Nay, and many and many a Time, while we are Sleeping on in
our wretched sinful Security, he comes in Pity to visit us, and ever and anon
suggests good Thoughts to our Minds to rouse and awake us out of those fatal
Slumbers, to enliven our Faith, and call up our Consideration; nay, and
oftentimes he does so urge, and second, and repeat those Thoughts to us, that
by being so haunted with their Importunities, we are forced to fix our Minds on
them whether we will or no. And though we like ungrateful Wretches do many
times stifle his good Motions, and turn a deaf Ear to his Calls and gracious
Invitations to Happiness; yet does he not presently give over, but whilst we
are running away from him, we hear a Voice behind us calling after us to
return; and though we still run on, yet still he follows us with his
Importunities through the whole Course of our sinful Life, till either he has
brought us back, or we have run our selves past all Hope of Recovery. These are
Things, I dare say, that every Man in the World, one Time or other, has had
sensible Experience of. And is not this a strange Condescension of Goodness to
see the God of Heaven and Earth thus courting and wooing a Company of impotent
Rebels to lay down their Arms, and accept his Grace and his everlasting
Preferments? And though they reject his Motions, and stop their Ears to those
still Whispers of his that secretly invade their Souls; yet to consider how he
still solicits and importunes them, as if he would take no Denial, and were
resolved not to let them alone till he had persuaded them to be happy; O good
God! what prodigious Stories of Love are these? What strange amazing
Condescentions to thy wretched undeserving Creatures? And now after all this
what can the Lord our God do more for us that is consistent either with his own
Wisdom, or with the Freedom of our Natures? He has done all that can be done
to draw us to Heaven, and if that will not do, it is by no Means fit that he
should drag us thither; since it would be a most mean unreasonable
Condescension in him to force us to be happy when we are unwilling to accept
it, and to prostitute the Reward of Piety and Virtue to those that scorn, and
reject it.

And now to conclude this Argument; from hence I infer how monstrously
ungrateful those Persons are who complain of the Difficulty and Burthensomeness
of this gentle and merciful Condition of our Salvation: When in so many
Instances it is apparent how merciful God has been in imposing such a
Condition upon us. In the Name of God what would you have Sirs, would you have
Heaven drop into your Mouths, while you lie still and do nothing? Or can you
think it is fit that so vast a Reward should be prostituted to the lazy Wishes
of such Drones and Sluggards, as do not think it worth the laboring for? That
those golden Fruits should hang down from Heaven to us on an overladen Bow, to
be cropped by every idle Wanton Hand, that will stretch forth it self to take and
eat it? Surely no reasonable Creature can be so senseless, as to entertain such
a wild and fond Conceit. Well then, would you have God admit of such a
Condition of Salvation, as includes in it a License to enjoy your Lusts, and
gives you Liberty to be as wicked as you please? But alas! if God should be so
fond of your Salvation as to offer Violence to his own Nature and Government,
by yielding to your Sins, and granting you a free Dispensation to enjoy them;
yet it is impossible in the Nature of the Thing; because your Salvation will
not consist with it. For to be saved from Misery whilst we are let alone to
enjoy our Sins is a Contradiction, and so not the Object of any Power, no not
of Omnipotence it self. For Sin it self is the greatest Misery that human
Nature is liable to; it is this that convulses all its Faculties, that racks and
stretches them out of Joint, and distorts them into an unnatural Figure and
Position; it is this that makes us our own Reverse, transposes our Head with our
Feet, and makes our Reason truckle to our Sense; our intellectual Faculties
that were made to govern, to serve those brutish Passions and Appetites which
Nature designed to be their Vassals; which is such a barbarous Violence to the
very Frame and Constitution of our Nature, as will, whenever we recover out
of our lethargick Stupidity, be as sensibly dolorous to our Souls, as Racks, or
Wheels, or Catasta's to our Bodies. So that for God to save us from Misery
whilst he suffers us to continue in our Sins, is altogether as impossible as it
is to save us from burning, whilst he suffers us to continue weltring in the
Flames of Fire; and to make us well in Sickness, or easy in Diseases are not
more repugnant to the Nature of Things, than it is to make us happy in our Sins;
and yet this is the only Matter we complain of, that God will not allow us a
free Dispensation to be wicked in that which is the Condition of our Salvation.
O blessed God! How is it possible thou should ever please such froward,
peevish, and ungrateful Creatures, who will never be satisfied unless thou
performest Impossibilities, and make Contradictions to be true for their
sakes? For shame therefore let us no longer complain, that the Condition of our
Salvation is too hard and rigorous; but since God has been pleased to
condescend so low to us, as to indulge us whatsoever is consistent with our
Salvation, let us admire and adore his Goodness, and with our Souls inflamed
with Love and Gratitude to him, cheerfully undertake what he has so mercifully
enjoined us.

JOHN III.16. -- That whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting Life.
I Am now upon the latter Part of this Text, that whosoever believes in him,
etc. In which there are two great Instances of God's Goodness to us: First, his
imposing upon us such a gentle and merciful Condition, that whosoever believes
in him: Secondly, his proposing to us so vast a Reward upon the Performance of
it; should not perish, but have everlasting Life. The first of these I have
handled already, and now I proceed to the second, viz. the vast Reward he has
proposed to us upon the Performance of this merciful Condition. And in this you
have First, the negative Part of it, that whosoever believes in him, might not
perish.

Secondly, the positive One, but have everlasting Life,



I. I begin with the first of these, that whosoever believes in him, might not
perish.

In prosecution of which Argument I shall do these three Things; 1. Show you
what is meant by perishing here. 2. By what Right we were concerned in, and
obliged to it. 3. What unspeakable Goodness God has discovered to us in
freeing and absolving us from this Obligation.


1. What is meant by perishing here, or not perishing? That whosoever believes
in him, should not perish, that is, that whosoever believes in him might be
pardoned, or absolved from the obligation of perishing for ever, to which his
Sins have rendered him justly liable. For that by this Phrase (...), he should
not perish, or be destroyed, is not meant the Annihilation or Destruction of
our Beings, as the Socinians and some others imagine, is evident by its being
opposed to everlasting Life, which, as I shall show you hereafter, does not
denote our mere Continuance in Life and Being for ever, but our Continuance in
a most blissful and happy Life for ever; and consequently the Destruction that
is here opposed to it must not denote our eternal Discontinuance to be and
live, but our living most wretchedly and miserably for ever. And indeed
wheresoever Death, or Destruction is spoken of in Opposition to eternal Life,
this is apparently the Sense of it. So Romans vi.23. The wages of Sin is death,
but the Gift of God is eternal Life through Jesus Christ our Lord. Now that by
Death here is understood a State of endless Misery and Suffering, in Opposition
to that State of endless Happiness which eternal Life implies, is evident;
because he cannot mean the first Death, which consists in the Separation of the
Soul from the Body; for though this were originally the Wages of Sin, yet in it
self it is not so now, but the necessary Condition of our Nature; for whether
we Sin or no, we must undergo it, being obliged to it by the irreversible
Decree of our Maker. But the Death here spoken of is the Effect of our own
personal Sin, without which we are not liable to it, as you may plainly see v.
21. What fruit had ye then in those things, (i. e. those Sins) whereof ye are
now ashamed? For the end of those things, or Sins, is Death. Wherefore since it
cannot be meant of the first, it must be meant of the second Death, which St.
John makes mention of Rev. 2.11. He that overcomes, shall not be hurt of the
second Death. And what that is, the same Author tells you Rev. 20.14. And death
and hell were cast into the lake of fire: This is the second Death; that is,
this Lake of Fire, or the Torments and Miseries which condemned Sinners endure
in it, is the second Death; for so he explains himself v. 10. And the Devil
that deceived them, was cast into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, where the
Beast and the false Prophet are, and shall be tormented Day and Night for ever
and ever. And this is that Death which is opposed to the immortal Rewards of
the Blessed, as you may see Rev. 21.7, 8. He that overcomes shall inherit all
things, that is, all those immortal Recompenses which God has prepared for
virtuous Souls. But the fearful and unbelieving, etc. shall have their part in
the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstrone: Which is the second Death.

And as Death, when opposed to eternal Life, denotes a State of endless and
continued Misery, so does Destruction also. So Mat. 7.13, 14. Broad is the way
that leads to Destruction. Narrow is the way which leads unto Life: By the
later of which it is granted on all hands he means Life eternal; and that by
Destruction he means a State of endless Misery, is evident from Matthew. 10.28.
but fear him which is able to destroy both Soul and Body in Hell; which
according to St. John's Exposition, Rev. 20.10. is to torment them Day and
Night for ever and ever. And this destroying in Hell our Savior elsewhere
expresses by casting into Hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched;
where their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched; which is as plain a
Description of an endless State of Misery as Words can express; for how is it
possible that Annihilation should signify either a Fire that never goes out, or
a Worm that never dies: So also, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, meaning the wicked
Persecuters at Christ's coming to Judgment. Now that by that everlasting
Destruction he means a State of endless Suffering and Torment is evident, if we
consider the Description which our Savior gives of that Punishment to which
the Wicked shall be sentenced at the last Day; Go ye cursed, says he, into
everlasting Fire, Matthew. 25.41. And lest we should fancy that it is the Fire
only that is eternal, but not the Punishment, v. 46. of that Chap. And these,
says he, shall go away into everlasting Punishment: but the Righteous into
Life eternal. And that they do actually exist in this Fire, and continue in the
Torment of it is evident by those Actions that are therein attributed to them,
such as weeping and wailing and gnashing of Teeth, Matthew. 13.42, 50; which
Actions are plain Indications not only of their subsisting in this everlasting
Fire, but of the extreme Horror and Anguish they shall therein endure. And as
this Fire is said to be everlasting, so the Everlastingness of it is described
so as to exclude all Limits, and prescind from all Determinations. For Fire
must be extinguished e're it can cease to burn, and therefore that which cannot
be extinguished can never end; but such is that Fire whereunto the Wicked are
condemned at the Day of Judgment; so Matthew. 3.12. whose fan is in his hand; --
but he will burn up the chaff with unquenchable Fire. And that the Sufferers
shall be no more extinguished than the Fire that burns them, is evident from
Rev. 14.11. And the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever. And
they have no rest day nor night. And how can the smoke of this Fire be said to
be the smoke of their torment ascending up for ever and ever, unless they exist
in it for ever and ever; especially considering what follows immediately after,
they have no rest day nor night? Which Expression is the same with that by
which the same Author signifies the eternal Happiness of good Men; so Rev. 4.8.
They rest not day and night, saying, holy, holy* holy; and Rev. 7.15. The are
before the Throne of God, and serve him day and night in his Temple. And if Day
and Night here, when applied to the State of Heaven, denotes the continued
blisful Employment of happy Souls there forever; then for the same Reason, when
it is applied to the State of Hell, it must denote the continued Miseries of the
Damned there forever. Well then, if the Fire of Hell be everlasting, yea if it
be so absolutely everlasting as that it is unquenchable; and if those that are
cast into it shall be tormented for ever and ever, all which the Scripture does
directly teach; then it necessarily follows, that the Wicked must subsist in
their Miseries for ever, and be coeternal with the Flames that torment them.
The Reason therefore why that future Punishment to which our Sins do consign
and oblige us, is called by the Name of Destruction, Perdition, and Death, is
not because it puts a final Period either to our Being or Subsistence, as some
fondly Dream; but because it forever separates and disjoyns us from God, who is
the better and the nobler Life of Man, and from all those sweet Perceptions of
Comfort and Pleasure, of which Life is the Principle. And there is no Language,
Phrases, or Expressions can be supposed to patronize a contrary Opinion, since
the same Scriptures which say that the Wicked shall be destroyed, and perish,
and die, say also that they shall be tormented with never-dying Pains, as they
plainly and frequently do. This I have the longer insisted upon; because it is
a very dangerous Thing for Men to be deceived in this Matter, not to know the
worst of the Consequents of their own Follies, but to expect an easier and a
shorter Hell than ever they are like to find. And so I have done with the first
Thing proposed, viz. what is here meant by perishing, and proved to you at
large that hereby is meant living miserably forever.

2 dly. I proceed now to the next Thing proposed, viz. how we came to be
concerned in, and obliged to this dreadful Penalty? To which I answer, that
originally we were hereunto obliged by the Law of our Nature; for Man being
naturally an immortal Creature, must necessarily be forever liable to the
natural Effects of his own Actions; and therefore since Misery is the natural
Effect of sinful Actions, if we continue Sinners forever, we must necessarily
continue miserable forever; And if God should have inflicted no other Miseries
upon wicked Souls when they are separated from their Bodies than what are
necessarily consequent to their own Wickedness, these would be an Hell of
insufferable Torment to them. So that from the very Immortality of our Natures
we are capable of everlasting Perseverance in Sin, and from our everlasting
Perseverance in Sin we are fatally damned to evelasting Misery. And as by the
Law of our Natures we are thus bound over to eternal Punishment, so are we also
by the positive Sentence and Determination of God, who has not only obliged us
to obey him under the Penalty of enduring forever the Miseries that are
naturally appendent to our Sins, but has added thereunto all those positive
Torments which the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, and the Horrors of outer
Darkness do imply: For so in his Word he has plainly declared to us that if
after he has tried us to the utmost, we will not be reclaimed, but are so
desperate as to proceed in our Wickedness maugre all the Arts and Methods he
can use to reduce us, he will at last shut us up in a State of endless and
irreversible Torment. And this is no more than what he might very justly and
rightfully do; for he being the Supreme Lawgiver of the World, has an
immutable Right to enforce his Laws with such Penalties as are sufficient to
secure them from being violated by his Subjects; for otherwise he would be
defective in his Power of Legislation; for how could he have sufficient Power
to make Laws, if he had not Right to enforce them with sufficient Penalties?
But we that are his Subjects being so apt to offend, and so extremely liable to
Temptations thereunto, no less Penalty could be sufficient to secure our
Obedience than that which is eternal; for which Reason he has enforced his
Laws with the Threatening of it. And if God thought no less than the Threatening
of eternal Punishment necessary to deter Men from their Sins, what less than
the Execution of that Threat can be sufficient to render them Examples of his
Severity against it? For Threats without Execution are but mere Scare-crows;
and it is highly unreasonable for us to be afraid of any Threat, which we have
Reason to conclude shall never be executed upon us. Wherefore, since the
Sovereign Lord and Governor of the World has in himself an unalienable Right
to enforce his own Laws by what Penalties he pleases, and since to enforce them
in the highest Degree he has established them under the Penalty of eternal
Torment; it is no less reasonable for him to execute this Penalty than it was
to threaten and denounce it; otherwise his Threats will be altogether
insignificant. For the End of legal Threats is to terrify the Subject from
Disobedience; but since we are assured that God will do nothing but what is
just and reasonable, why should we be terrified at any Threats of his, which he
cannot as reasonably inflict as denounce against us? Nor is it any Blemish to
the divine Goodness, that he has threatened such an heavy Punishment against
those that transgress his Laws; for since he has enjoined us nothing but what
is for our good, and tends to our Happiness; and since the End of his Threats
is to oblige us to observe his Injunctions; it hence necessarily follows, that
the more terrible his Threatenings are, the more he obliges us by them to pursue
our own Happiness. And certainly for God to lay his Creatures under the
strongest Obligations to be happy, is so far from being a Blemish to his
Goodness that it is a most glorious Expression of it; and if we will be so
obstinate as to incur that direful Penalty under which he has obliged us to be
happy, it is but just and reasonable that he should inflict it upon us, and
make us feel forever the rueful Effects of our own Folly and Madness. Wherefore
since we had all broken his Laws, and wilfully rendered our selves guilty
before him, we thereby became most justly obnoxious to this most dreadful
Penalty of perishing forever. And thus you see by what Right we were concerned
in, and obliged to this Penalty.

3 dly, I now proceed to the third, and Last Thing proposed, which is to show
you the unspeakble Goodness that God has expressed to us in that Way and
Method which he has prescribed to release us from this Obligation of perishing
forever. For the Way and Method prescribed by him is this, to send his own most
blessed Son to suffer in our Stead, that so we repenting of our Sins and
forsaking them, might upon the Account of his Sufferings be released from this
Obligation to eternal Punishment. And hence Christ is said to put away Sin by
the Sacrifice of himself, Heb. ix.26. that is, to make Expiation for it, even
as the Jewish High Priest did by those Sacrifices which he offered. And
accordingly, Col. i.14. it is said, that in him we have Redemption through his
Blood, even the forgiveness of Sins; that is, upon Condition we heartily and
sincerely repent of them. For, if we walk in the light, says the Apostle, as
he is in the light; that is, if we forsake our Sins, and become pure as he is
pure, and holy as he is holy; we have fellowship one with another, and the
blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all Sin. This therefore being the Way
and Method which God has prescribed to release us from the Obligation to
eternal Punishment, what an unspeakable Love and Goodness he has herein
expressed to us will evidently appear by the Consideration of these four Things.

1. His admitting of another to suffer in our Stead. 2. His exacting such a
Suffering for the Price of our Pardon, as was most effectual to secure us from
sinning again. 3. His consenting that his own Son should submit to this
Suffering. 4. His choosing to grant Pardon to us upon his Suffering as a
Sacrifice for our Sins.
1. One very great Instance of God's Love and Goodness to us in this Method of
Pardon is his admitting of another to suffer in our Stead. Had he been pleased,
he might have exacted the Punishment of the Criminals, and made the Offenders
smart forever in their own Persons; yea, and this he might have justly done
notwithstanding the best Reason they could render him to the contrary. For the
best Reason a Sinner can render why he should not be punished, is his hearty
Repentance; for next to being perfectly innocent, the best Thing we can do, is
to reform when we have done amiss; but yet this does not at all diminish the
Guilt and Demerit of our past Transgressions. For Repentance does not at all
alter the Nature of the Act, nor make it less evil, nor less deserving of
Punishment; and therefore since the Act it self obliges us to Punishment, our
Repentance of it does no way cancel the Obligation. It Is true, God might if he
had pleased, have pardoned us upon our Repentance without any other Reason or
Motive; but it is certain, that Repentance is not a sufficient Reason to move
him to declare a Promise of Pardon to a sinful World, it being no way
consistent with the Safety either of divine or humane Governments, so far to
encourage Offenders as to indemnify them universally by a public and standing
Declaration merely upon their future Repentance and Amendment; because by such
a Declaration they must let loose the Reigns to all manner of Licentiousness.
For if Subjects are now so prone to transgress when they have so much Reason to
expect a severe Punishment for it, how much more prone would they be, were
their Governors so easy as to assure them beforehand that the Punishment due
to their Crimes should be immediately remitted upon their unfeigned Repentance?
Wherefore, since our Repentance is no sufficient Reason to oblige God to pardon
us, and much less to move him to make a Promise of Pardon to us; and since this
is the best Reason that we can offer in our Behalf, to move him thereunto; it
hence necessarily follows, that if he had pleased, when once we had broken his
Laws, he might have justly executed upon us that eternal Punishment which he
had threatened, notwithstanding all we could have done to move him to the
contrary. But such is his inexpressible Goodness toward us, that to put
himself into a Capacity of pardoning penitent Sinners with Safety to his
Government, and of making a public Grant of Pardon and Indemnity to them,
thereby to encourage them to repent, he has graciously admited another Person
to suffer in our Stead; that so neither their Persons might be ruined, nor yet
their Sins be unpunished, and that he might sufficiently express to them his
Severity against their Sins without exposing them to the eternal Smart of it.
For though the Suffering of this Person, as I shall show you by and by, was a
sufficient Reason to move God to forgive us upon our unfeigned Repentance, yet
it was no such Reason as did necessarily oblige him thereunto; for if he had
pleased he might have righteously exacted our Punishment at our own Hands, and
made us forever rue for our own Folly and Madness; but such was his Goodness
toward us, that for the Sufferings of the Innocent he has mercifully
acquitted the Punishment due to Offenders, and so scourged our Sins upon the
Back of our Savior; for though he suffered for us, yet we suffered not in him,
our Persons were not at all damnified by those bitter Agonies which he endured
for our Sins; so that to a wonder of Mercy they have been so severely punished
as it is fit they should, and yet we who were the Authors of them never felt the
Smart. Blessed God! How merciful have thou been to thy Creatures, that have
thus found out a Way to distinguish the Sin from the Sinner, and so to punish
the one, as to let the other escape? For by his gracious Admission, Christ has
once suffered for Sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God,
1 Pet. iii 18.

2 ly, Another Instance of God's Love and Goodness to us in this Method of
Pardon, is his exacting such a Suffering for the Price of our Pardon as is most
effectual to secure us from sinning again, which is a plain Instance of the
mighty Care he has taken to pardon us in such a way as might be most for our
future Security. For it would have been no way proper for the wise Governor of
the World to grant a general Pardon to Offenders without some sufficient Reason
moving him thereunto. Now that Repentance which is the best Reason we can offer
him is not sufficient, I have already showed you, because it is not sufficient
to secure his Government, in the good Management whereof the Welfare of all his
Subjects is involved. For his Laws requiring nothing but what is for our good,
it is truly our Interest to be kept under a strict Obedience to them; so that
should he pardon us upon any Reason that is not sufficient to secure his
Government and our Obedience, it would be a public Nuisance and Damage to
Mankind; and consequently the greater the Reason is that moves him to pardon us
what is past, and the more it enforces our Obedience for the future, the
greater is the Goodness which he expresses in pardoning us, and the more it
conduces to our Welfare and Happiness. But now upon what higher Motive could he
have made a Grant of Pardon to us than upon the most meritorious Sufferings of
his own Son for us? For since nothing that we could do was a sufficient Reason
to move him to promise to us the Forgiveness of our Sins, it was requisite that
something more should be done for us by some other Person, and the greatest
Thing that any other Person could do for us to move God to forgive us, was to
suffer in our Stead; because hereby not only a public Acknowledgement is made
of what we have deserved for our Sins, but something of the Punishment due to
them is paid as a public Satisfaction to the Law. So that if God pardons us
upon such a Reason, he does by the same Act express his most tender Mercy to
us, and his implacable Severity against our Sins; for by pardoning us upon the
Sufferings of another in our Stead, he expresses his hearty Good Will to us,
and openly signifies how unwilling he is to ruin us. But then by exacting the
Sufferings of another in our Stead, before he will be induced to grant a Pardon
to us, he manifests to us how implacably he hates our Sins, and how inexorably
severe he is against them. But then if he pardon us upon this Reason of
another suffering in our Stead, then the greater and more excellent the Person
is that suffers for us, the greater Reason he has to forgive us upon it. For
such as the Person is that suffers, such is the Moment and Value of his
Suffering; because the End of all such vicarious Punishments being only this,
to give such an Example of the Severity of Governors against Offenders, as may
be sufficient to vindicate the Honor of the Law, and secure the Obedience of
the Subject; the Value of his Suffering, who thus suffers for us must consist
in this, that it is a more or less exemplary Signification of the Severity of
the Lawgiver against our Sins for which he suffers; and doubtless it would be a
higher Signification of God's Severity against our Sins not to pardon us but
upon the Sufferings of an innocent Angel, than not to pardon us but upon the
Sufferings of an innocent Man. What a most exemplary Signification then is this
of his Severity against our Sins, that he would not pardon us but upon the
Sufferings of his own most innocent Son; who being the greatest Person in all
the Creation, did by his suffering in our Stead exhibit the greatest Instance
of God's Severity against our Sins that could possibly have been given by any
Person whatsoever that was capable of suffering for us? So that his suffering
in our Stead was apparently the best and highest Reason that could possibly
have been given to move God to pardon us, and consequently his pardoning us in
such a Way and upon such a Reason is a most glorious Instance of his Goodness
toward us, and of that tender Regard he has of our Welfare. For now in the
very Method of his pardoning us what is past, he has taken a most effectual
Course to secure our Obedience for the future, that very Reason that moved him
to pardon us being the greatest Reason that can be urged to terrify us from
sinning again. For what Consideration is there that can fill us with greater
Horror against our Sins than this, that the Guilt of them is so great and
heinous that the most merciful Father would never have forgiven them, had not
his own most glorious Son suffered for them in our Stead? And indeed had not
God thus provided for the securing of our Obedience in the very Method of his
Pardon, his Grace in pardoning us would have been very insignificant; for our
Welfare and Happiness being all bound up in our Obedience, our Pardon without
this could not have secured us from being miserable. So that if in the Method
of his Pardon he had not so manifested his Severity against our Sins as to
discourage us sufficiently from sinning again, his very Mercy and Compassion
would have proved destructive to us; because it would have encouraged us to Sin
on, and thereby to make our selves miserable. For Sin and Misery are so
inseparably interwoven, that all the Pardon God can give us while we continue
in our Sins is not sufficient to prevent our being miserable; but such has
been his Goodness toward us, such his Care to prevent our Sin and Misery, as
that in the very Reason that moves him to pardon us, for what is past, he gives
us a most terrible warning not to Sin again. For he that can behold such a
dreadful Spectacle as the Son of God dying for Sin, and yet Sin on, is a
valiant Sinner indeed, and may with the same Courage follow his Lusts into the
Flames of Hell. So careful has the good God been to plot and contrive for the
Welfare of his Creatures, that he would not so much as pardon them when they
had offended him, but in such a Way as was most for their Security and Good.

3 dly, His consenting that his own Son should submit himself to this
Suffering, is another great Instance of his Goodness toward us in this method
of pardoning us. That he should not only admit of a Sacrifice to bear our
Transgressions and suffer in our Stead, but that himself should provide one for
us, and such a one too as his own most dear and precious Son, is such a Miracle
of Love and Goodness as the whole Creation cannot parallel. For though Mankind
had provoked him to that Height that none but a God of infinite Patience could
have born it, yet such was his Unwillingness to inflict that direful Punishment
upon them which he had justly threatened, and they had justly deserved, that
notwithstanding all their Demerits he was still vehemently inclined to be
propitious to them. But then how to save them, and at the same Time so to
manifest his Severity against their Sins as was needful to preserve the
Authority and Honor of his Laws that had threatened Destruction to them, was
the great Difficulty; for should he have wholly omitted the Punishment, he
would have very much undervalued the Authority of his Laws in the Esteem of his
Subjects, the main security of their Authority being the Punishment annexed to
them; but on the contrary should he have exacted the utmost of the Punishment,
he must have destroyed the whole Race of Men, we being all Offenders in his
Sight. In this Extremity therefore, that he might pardon such a World of
Sinners with safety to his Government, it was highly necessary for him to
exhibit to the World some dreadful Example of his Severity against them, such
as might be sufficient to prevent Offenders from taking any Encouragement from
his pardoning them to offend again. But to make a Sinner such a great Example
of his Severity against the Sins of others was impossible, because his own Sins
may deserve the utmost Severity that God can inflict upon him; and therefore
among our selves who were all Sinners there was no Person could be found fit to
be made such an Example of his Severity against the Sins of the whole World.
And if an innocent Angel should have freely offered up himself to bear our
Punishment, and Suffer in our Stead, his Suffering in our Room would not have
so sufficiently expressed Gods Severity against the Sins of a whole World of
Sinners, as was convenient; for what great Severity would it have been to have
exacted the suffering of one innocent Angel, in lieu of that eternal Punishment
that was due to a whole World of Men? Wherefore it being highly convenient,
that the Dignity of the Person who suffered for us should be such as might
render his Suffering in some Degree proportionable to the Punishment due to our
Sins, that so his Suffering in our stead might be as exemplary to the World, as
if we our selves had suffered to the utmost of our Desert, and there being no
Creature of that Dignity either in Heaven or Earth; in this Extremity, the
eternal Son of God himself interposes, and freely offers to unite himself to
our Natures, and therein to suffer in our Stead, upon Condition that on our
unfeigned Repentance and Amendment a free Charter of Pardon might be granted
for all our past Provocations. So that now an Expedient being proposed by which
God might both pardon our Sins, and sufficiently manifest his Severity against
them, to secure the Authority of his Laws, and deter us from sinning again;
though he saw how dear an Expedient it would prove, that it would cost him the
most precious Blood of his own Son; yet such was his tender Pity toward us, so
great his Unwillingness to ruin us forever, that he freely complied with the
Motion, and consented that his Son should be sacrificed for the Sins of the
World. And hence it is said, that he spared not his own Son, but delivered him
up for us all, Romans viii.32. And the Reason why he deliverd him up, as he tells
us, v.3. of the same Chapter, was to condemn Sin in the Flesh, that is, to
pronounce in the Suffering of his own Son for it, what a dreadful Punishment it
deserved, and how much his Soul was incensed against it, that would not pardon
it without such a mighty Propitiation. How inexpressibly gracious therefore
has God been to us, that when for the securing the Authority of his Laws it
was so necessary to condemn our Sins, rather than condemn them in our own
personal Punishment, he should choose to condemn them in the sufferings of his
own Son? It was a great Instance of his Goodness toward us to admit of another
to suffer for us, in our stead; but to admit of his own Son, who is the Darling
of Heaven and the Delight of his Soul, and not only so, but freely to give and
deliver him up for us, and amidst all the yearnings of his fatherly Bowels
toward him, not to spare his precious Life when it was to be made the Price of
our Redemption, is such a Miracle of Love as transcends all Hyperboles.

4 ly and lastly, his choosing to grant Pardon to us upon the Sufferings of his
Son as a Sacrifice for our Sins, is also another great Instance of his Goodness
to us in this Way of pardoning us. For the End of granting Pardon to Sinners
upon their Repentance being to encourage them to repent, it was highly
convenient to grant it to them in such a Way and upon such Reason, as might
most effectually assure them thereof. And considering what was the general
Persuasion of Mankind in this Matter, there was no such effectual Way to secure
them of Pardon upon their Repentance, as this of granting Pardon to them upon
the Motive of a Sacrifice for their Sins. For however it came to pass I know
not, but it was a Principle generally received by Men of all Nations and
Religions, that to appease the incensed Divinity it was necessary; First, that
some Sacrifice should be made to him for their Sins, and then that some high
Favorite of his should intercede with him in their Be-; half; upon which were
founded those two great Rights of Propitiatory Sacrifices, and worshipping of
Demons, which made up a great Part of all the Heathenish Religions in the
World. For as for Propitiatory Sacrifices, they were generally used not only by
the barbarous, but by the most civilized Heathens; which Sacrifices they
devoted unto God to be their Proxies in Punishment, to undergo the Punishment
that was due to them for their own Sins. And hence is that of the ancient Poet,
Cum sis ipse nocens, moritur cur Victima pro te? -- When thou thy self art the
Offender, for what Reason should the Victim die for thee? And Porphery tells us
that the first Rise of the Sacrifice of Animals was, Abstin l. 4
(...), certain Occasions requiring that a Soul, should be offered up for a
Soul, that is, the Life of a Beast for the Life of a Man; for it was the
constant Opinion that the more worthy the Sacrifice which they offered, the
more effectual it was to appease their offended Divinities. And hence in many
Places, the ordinary Sacrifice of Atonement which they offered, was the Lives
of Men; and though this indeed was most used in the most barbarous Countries,
yet in Cases of great Danger and Extremity the Greeks and Romans, themselves
did frequently Sacrifice humane Lives to their Gods; for so it is recorded of
the Romans, that when their City was in great Danger of being taken by Hanibal,
they sacrificed a Man to their Tutelar God: And Servius tells us of the
Massilians, that in Time of Pestilence one of the poorer sort was wont to offer
himself to be sacrificed for the whole City; who being for a whole Year
nourished with the purest Meat, was then led about the City adorned with sacred
Vestments and Cathartick Herbs, the People following him making solemn
Execrations that the Plague might be removed from the City and fall upon his
Head; which done, they offered him up in a Sacrifice. And in other Places they
offered up pure Virgins of the noblest Families, to propitiate their angry
Gods; and elsewhere, as Servius tells us, they were wont to cast a Man into the
Sea with this Imprecation, (...), that is, be thou our Purgament, or
Redemption. So also it is said of the Athenians, that they maintained some of
the most unprofitable and ignoble of their People, that so when any great
Calamity befell the City, they might offer them up in Sacrifice to appease
their Gods. And that Passage of Caesar concerning the Gallic Nation is very
observable, that in Cases of great Danger and Calamity they either devoted
themselves to the Altar, or else offered up some Man in their Stead; quod pro
vita hominis nisi hominis vita reddatur, non posse Deorum immortalium Numen
placari arbitrantur; that is, thinking that the immortal God's would never be
appeased unless they offered up to them the Life of a Man for the Life of a
Man: All which is an Evidence that they not only thought Sacrifices necessary
to appease God, but that they also believed the better the Sacrifice was, the
more effectually it did appease him. Nor did they think it less necessary that
there should be some Intercessor between them and the Supreme Divinity to
Solicit their Cause, and render Sin propitious to their Desires. And hence it
was the general Doctrine of their Divines, that 'twas great Profaneness for any
thing that was earthly and sinful immediately to approach that Pure and Divine
Being; but that the Demons were to be the Mediators and Agents between him, and
mortal Men, (...), as Plato in his Sympos. expresses it; that is, God is not
approached by Men, but all the Commerse, and Intercourse between him and us is
performed by the Mediation of Demons. So that howsoever they came by this
Principle it is apparent that they generally believed both Sacrifices and a
Mediator to be necessary Means to reconcile them to God, and that without these
they could not satisfy themselves that God would be propitious to them, no not
upon their Repentance and Reformation. Some good Hopes they might have, and it
is apparent they had, from the Goodness and Benignity of the Divine Nature,
that if they forsook their Sins God would not be inexorable to them, at least
they could not tell but they might find Mercy; but yet they durst not
absolutely trust to this without devoting some other to suffer in their Stead,
and engaging some other to intercede in their Behalf. And therefore we see that
when the King of Nineveh upon Jonah's Preaching obliged his People to Fasting
and Repentance, the utmost Encouragement he could give them was only this; Who
can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that
we perish not, Jonah iii.9. Wherefore to give us the highest Assurance of
Pardon if we repent, God has been so infinitely good to us as to choose that
very Method of reconciling us to himself, which we had chalked out to him, and
to meet with us in our own Way, thereby to give us a fuller Assurance of his
most gracious and merciful Intentions to us; for how could he have better
satisfied the Anxiousness and Jealousy of our guilty Minds, than in granting us
our Pardon in that very Way, wherein we did so universally hope for and expect
it? Good God! How indulgent have thou been to thy poor Creatures, that wast not
only so ready to pardon them upon their Repentance, but so careful to give them
the most effectual Assurance of it; that so thou might remove all
discouragements out of the Way to our Amendment and Happiness? For doubtless
the Reason why he took this Way of Pardoning us more than another, was not only
because it was best in it self, and most for the Interest of his own
Government; but also because of all others it was the most effectual to satisfy
our guilty Fears, and assure us of his merciful Intentions to receive us into
Favor again upon our Repentance and Amendment. For when Mankind were so
unanimously agreed in this Belief, that without a Sacrifice and a Mediator he
would not be appeased, how could he more effectually have convinced our
Mistrust of his Mercy, than by sending his own Son to be our Sacrifice and
Mediator; to die for our Sins upon Earth, and intercede for our Pardon in
Heaven? So that if now we will heartily repent of our Sins and forsake them, we
have all the security of Mercy that we can desire; our God being attoned by the
noblest Sacrifice that ever was, and interceded with, on our Behalf by the most
powerful and prevailing Mediator. Having therefore such an High Priest over the
House of God, we may safely draw near with a true Heart, in full assurance of
Faith, as the Apostle expresses it Heb. x.21, 22. Thus you see how good and
gracious God has been to us in the Way and Method which he has prescribed of
pardoning our Sins, and releasing us from the obligation of Punishment for
ever; which is so wise and good, and every way God-like, that I think, had I no
other Reason to believe the Christian Religion, but only this wondrous
Contrivance of pardoning Sinners revealed in the Gospel, this would have been
enough to persuade me that none but a God could be the Author and Contriver of
it. And now I shall conclude this Argument with a few Inferences.

1. From hence I infer what a very great Evil Sin is, seeing it is such an Evil
as binds us over to perish for ever, and such as nothing can make Expiation
for, but only the precious Blood of the Son of God; such, as our Savior must
die for, or our Souls must have suffered for, to all Eternity. How different
therefore are our Thoughts from God's! We think it a Matter of Sport and
Laughter, a Thing to Play, and make Merry with; but God, who knows the inmost
Nature of things, looks upon it as a Thing of such a black and horrid Nature,
as that nothing but the Blood of our Souls, or the Blood of his Son can make
Expiation for. O blessed God! Had we but such Thoughts of our Sins as thou
have, how should we start and tremble at the Sight of them, and with what
Horror and Amazement should we reflect upon them? Surely if all the Devils in
Hell should stand round about us in the most ghastly Shapes and Apparitions, it
would not put us into half that Agony of Fear, as would the Sense and
Remembrance of our own Guilts and Follies. For had we but a Window into Hell to
look through and see what unsufferable Torments the damned Ghosts undergo there
for those Sins we make so light of; how they burn and roar in those Flames of
Lust, about which we like silly Flies do sport and dally; or had we but the
Cross always standing before our Eyes with the Son of God hanging on it for
those Sins that are our Recreation, sighing and groaning out his innocent Soul
in Torment and Agonies to expiate those Faults which we commit with so much
Greediness and Pleasure; surely either of these sad Spectacles would be
sufficient to cool our Courage, and to make us afraid of ever sinning more.
Why then should not our Belief of these Things have the same Effect upon us, as
the Sight and Sense of them must needs be supposed to have? O my Soul, why
should I be so mad as to hug and embrace my Lusts any longer, when I believe
the Evil of them to be so great as that the merciful Father would never have
forgiven them, had not his own most blessed Son born their Punishment, and
freely submitted himself to suffer for them in my Stead; yea, and which I
verily believe he will never Pardon yet, unless I heartily repent of, and
forsake them; but notwithstanding all that his Son has suffered to make
Expiation for them, will yet pursue and prosecute them with the most direful
effects of an endless and omnipotent Vengance?

2 ly, Hence I infer the Certainty of our perishing for ever, if we do not
repent of our Sins and forsake them. For if God would not have forgiven them
upon our Repentance, unless an Expiation had been made for them by the Blood of
his Son; how can we imagine that he will now forgive them whether we repent of
them or no? When all that could be obtained for us from our offended God by the
vocal Blood and Wounds of his own Son, (whose Language was a thousand Times
more effectual for us, than all the Retorick of Angels could have been) was
only this, that if yet we would heartily repent and amend, we should certainly
find Mercy and Favor at his Hands; can we be so assured as to hope for any
more? Is it likely, that our obstinate Continuance in wilful Rebellion against
him should be a more prevalent Advocate for us, than the most eloquent Blood of
that innocent Lamb, which spoke better Things for us than the Blood of Abel?
Will he be more indulgent to our Sins than he was to the obedient Sufferings of
his own Son, whose Blood cried Mercy, Mercy, with a Voice more moving and
persuasive than the united Prayers of a World of sinful Creatures could have
done, though they had been washed in Floods of penitent Tears? Let us not
therefore be so fond as to presume, that when the utmost that God would grant
us for his own dear Son's sake, was to receive us to Mercy upon our unfeigned
Repentance; he will now for our own sakes pardon us whether we repent or no.
And since at the powerful Entreaties of the Blood of Jesus he has indulged to
us as much Mercy as was fit for him to grant, and much more than we could ever
have hoped for, let us not be so immodest as to expect any farther, but fix
this as an eternal Verity in our own Minds, that either our Sins, or our Souls
must perish; and then if after all that he has done for us we will continue
wicked, there is no Remedy but we must be miserable for ever.

3 dly, And lastly, Hence also I infer how inexcusable we are if we now perish
in our Sins, now God has done such great Things for us, and contrived such an
excellent Way to pardon us. So that now there can be nothing wanting to the
Accomplishment of our Pardon, but only our own Repentance and Reformation; for
God and our Savior have done all that is to be done on their Part; our Savior
has suffered for us, and God has accepted it as an Expiation for our Sins.
And now the whole Matter sticks at us, and there is nothing wanting, but only
our Repentance; and if we will not Repent, and thereby entitle our selves to
that merciful Pardon which God and our Savior have prepared for us, there is
none can be blamed for our Ruin but our selves: For when Inquisition shall be
made for the Blood of our Souls, the only Cause of our Ruin will be found to be
this, that we were wilfully and obstinately impenitent. What then shall we be
able to say for our selves, when we come to plead for our Lives at the Tribunal
of God? Shall we plead that our Condition was hopeless and desperate, we being
bound over for our past Sins to an irrevocable Damnation? Alas! With what
Confidence can we plead this, when God had been so merciful as not to exact of
our own Persons the Penalty which his Law had denounced against us; but
graciously admitted another to suffer for us, and upon his suffering promised
to forgive us if we would heartily repent? Or can we pretend that by this
gracious Indulgence of his he encouraged us to Sin on, and gave us Reason to
hope that he, who without our Repentance had remitted so much of the Severity
of his Laws as to admit another to suffer in our Stead, might as easily be
induced to remit all whether ever we repented or no? Why how could he have more
effectualy discouraged us from sining on, when he would admit of no less
Suffering, but what, considering the Greatness of the Person who underwent it,
was as dreadful an Example of his Severity against Sin as if he had damned for
ever a whole World of Sinners? Or will you urge that you thought it in vain to
return, since by your former Sins you had for ever forfeited the Favor of God?
For though there was some Hopes that he might be entreated to pardon, or remit
your Punishment; yet 'twas in vain to hope that after so many Provocations he
would ever be thoroughly reconciled again, so as to receive you into Grace and
Favor. But when by sending his own Son to die for us, he had given us so plain
a Proof of the Sincerity of his Affection toward us, with what face can we
suspect his Kindness? For is it likely that he who was so good as to give his
Son for us whilst we were in Impenitence, should be so implacable as to deny
his Love to us upon our Repentance and Amendment? Was it not a much higher Act
of Love to give his Son for Sinners, than to receive poor prostrate Penitents
into Favor? He then who was so free to do the former, we might well imagine
would be much more free to do the latter. Or lastly, Dare we plead for our
selves, that considering the Anxiousness and Jealousy of guilty Minds, God had
not given us such Security of his Readiness to pardon and be reconciled to us,
as was requisite to dispel all those Fears and Doubts by which we were
discouraged from Repentance and Amendment? But how weak and groundless this
Plea is, will soon appear to all the World, when it shall be considered what an
effectual Course God took to obviate all our Doubts and Fears by pardoning us
in our own Method, namely, upon the Motive of a Sacrifice, and Intercession of
a Mediator; especially of such a Sacrifice and Mediator as his own Son: For let
him be never so severe and stern, yet it is impossible he should be inexorable
to the vocal Blood and importunate Intercessions of that dear Person, whom he
loves above all the World. And now when God had so contrived the Method of his
pardoning us, as to take from us all Occasion either of presuming upon his
Mercy whilst we continue impenitent; when he has taken such an effectual
Course to raise both our Hopes and Fears, which are the Springs of our Action,
to their highest Pitch and Capacity, and given us the greatest Certainty that
the Nature of the Thing will bear, that he will punish us for ever if we Sin
on, and pardon, and receive us into Favor if now at last we will repent and
return; what can we say for our selves, if in Despite of all this we will run
from Mercy whilst its Arms are open to embrace us, and leap into Hell with our
Eyes open, and we see it gaping ready to devour us?

JOHN III.16. -- But have everlasting Life.
I Am now upon the last Branch of the Text; which is to show you the great
Goodness of God to us in promising to us such a vast Reward upon our performing
such an easy Condition as our believing in Jesus Christ; in which Reward there
is first, the privative Part of it, or the Misery it rescues us from, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish; Secondly, the positive, or the
Happiness it instates us in, but have everlasting Life. In the management of
which I shall do these two Things; 1. Show you why this Reward is termed
Everlasting Life. 2. How unspeakably good God has been to us in proposing to
us such a vast Reward.


1. Why this Reward is styled by the Name of Everlasting Life; For it is very
usual with Scripture to express all the Blessings it promises to Men by the
Name of Life; for thus by Life the Old Testament very frequently expresses
those temporal Blessings, which are therein promised and proposed: So Deuteronomy.
xxx.15. See, I have set before thee this day, Life and Good, and Death and
Evil; in which he plainly refers to those temporal Blessings and Curses, which
he had proposed to, and denounced against them, Chap. xxviii. for so v.19. of
this Chapter he explains himself, I call Heaven and Earth to record this day
against you, that I have set before you Life and Death, Blessing and Cursing:
Therefore choose Life, that both Thou and thy Seed may live. So Levit. xviii.5.
Ye shall keep my Statutes and my Judgments: Which if a Man do, he shall live in
them; that is, he shall enjoy all those temporal Blessings, which I have
therein promised: For so Ezekiel. xx.21. their living in them is opposed to his
pouring out temporal Judgments upon them. And hence the Statutes of the Mosaic
Law are called the statutes of Life, in which whosoever walks, shall surely
Live, and not Die, Ezekiel. xxxiii.15. And as these temporal Blessings promised in
the Old Testament are commonly expressed by Life, so those eternal Blessings
promised in the New Testament are very frequently expressed by Life also. So
Mat. xviii.8. It is better for thee to enter into Life halt or maimed, rather
than having two Hands or two Feet, to be cast into everlasting Fire. So also
Mat. xix.17. If thou will enter into Life, keep the Commandments. And Joh.
iii.36. He that believes on the Son, has everlasting Life: And he that
believes not the Son, shall not see Life; but the wrath of God abides on him.
And because the Blessings which the Gospel proposes are not temporal but
eternal; therefore that Life by which they are expressed is styled eternal,
everlasting, and immortal: For so 2 Timothy i.10. We find Life and Immortality
joined together; and Romans vi.22. Ye have your fruit unto Holiness, and the end
everlasting Life; and Verse. 23. The gift of God is eternal Life. Now that it is
not called eternal Life merely as it is a State of endless Being and Existence,
is evident; because Being and Existence are indifferent Things abstracted from
all sense of Happiness and Misery; but eternal Life is proposed to us as a
Thing that is infinitely desirable in self, as being the Crown and Reward of
all our Obedience; for which Reason it is called the crown of Life, Jam. i.12.
And therefore the Reason why the everlasting Blessings of the Gospel are
expressed by Life are, First, Because of the inestimable Worth and Value of
Life.

Secondly, Because Life is the Root of all our Sense of Pleasure and Happiness.

Thirdly, Because it is the Principle of all our Activity.



1. The everlasting Blessings of the Gospel are called Life, because Life is
the most inestimably precious of all the Blessings we enjoy. For without Life
there is nothing can be a real Blessing to us, nothing that we can taste,
relish, or enjoy: And this the Devil knew well enough when he pronounced so
confidently, Skin for Skin, yea all that a Man has will he give for his Life,
Job ii.4. Now it is usual with Scripture to describe the Blessings of the
future State by Things that are of the greatest Value among Men, by Riches and
Treasure, by a Crown and a Kingdom, by a Paradise, or a Garden of Pleasure; but
as if all these were too faint and dim to represent the true Value of that
blessed State, it is styled Life also, which is much more valuable than either,
yea than all those Things together. And hence the Apostle calls it a more
exceeding and eternal weight of Glory, 2 Cor. iv.17.

2. It is called Life, because Life is the Root of all our Sense of Pleasure
and Happiness. For without Life we are nothing else but a Lump of stupid and
insensible Flesh, incapable of perceiving either Pleasure or Pain. So that all
Sensation being founded in Life, and all Pleasure a sweet and grateful
Sensation; by a very easy Figure the natural Effect and Operation of Life is
expressed by Life. And indeed all the Advantage of living consists in living in
a Sense of Pleasure; and therefore it has been very much disputed among
Philosophers, whether this temporary State of ours, in which there is so great
an Intermixture of Pain with Pleasure, and Misery with Happiness, does not
better deserve the Name of Death than Life; and those of them who thought it
more liable to Misery than Happiness, affirmed it to be a State of Death, and
strictly maintained this Paradox, that at our Birth we die into a worse State
than Nonexistence, and at our Death are born into a true and proper State of
Life. But they who counted our present Life to be intermixed with more Pleasure
than Misery, esteemed our present Existence a Privilege deserving the Name of
Life; which is an Argument that both placed all the Privilege of living in
those pleasant Perceptions that are founded in it. And thus also according to
the Scripture Philosophy to live, as it imports Advantage to us, is to live in
a State of Joy and Pleasure; so Psalm. xxii.26. The meek shall eat and be
satisfied: They shall praise the Lord that seek him; your Heart shall live for
ever, that is, you shall so abound with Matter of Joy and Praise that your
Hearts shall be satisfied and contented for ever. So Joh. xiv.19. Because I
live, ye shall live also; that is, because I rise from the Dead and live for
ever, ye shall rejoice and be glad. So also 1 These. iii.8. For now we live, if
ye stand fast in the Lord; that is we rejoice in your Constancy and
Perseverance, for so it follows immediately after, For what thanks can we
render to God again for you, for all the joy wherewith we joy for your sakes
before God? How properly therefore may the future State be expressed by Life,
since it is the proper Scene of Happiness where Joy and Pleasure does for ever
abound; where there is an inexhaustible Spring of pure unmingled Delights
issuing forth in Rivers of Pleasure from God's right Hand for ever? So that if
there be any Thing worthy of the Name of Life, it is the blisful State of those
happy Souls above, who live in the continued Sense of all those unspeakable
Joys and Comforts that an everlasting Heaven imports.

3 dly, And lastly, it is called Life, because Life is the Principle of all
Activity. It Is this that inlivens all our Instruments of Action, and
communicates Motion to all our Faculties and Powers. And hence the State of
Heaven may well be called the State of Life, because it is a State of the
highest Activity, wherein all our Faculties act with unspeakable Vigor, are
freed from all that Weight of Sin and Matter that here do continually clog and
incumber them, and entertained with such agreeable Objects as do perpetually
employ and exercise them to the utmost of their Strength and Activity: Where
infinite Truth and infinite Goodness being always in our View and Prospect,
will continually draw forth the utmost Force of our Understandings, Wills, and
Affections in the most rapturous Contemplation, Fruition, and Embracements of
that all-glorious Object in which we behold them; So that we shall not only Act
suitably to the Genius of our rational Natures, but in every Act shall exert
our utmost Activity, and know, and love, and rejoice, and delight as much as
ever we are able. Wherefore since in that blessed State we shall be all Life
and Spirit and Wing, since all our rational Faculties shall be most incessantly
and vigorously employed about the most agreeable and consentaneous Objects, we
being converted as it were into pure Acts of Knowledge, and Love, and Joy, and
Satisfaction; our State and Condition may be very well expressed by Life, which
is a most vigorous Principle of Activity. So that as Life is the most
inestimable Jewel we have, as it is the Root of all our Sense of Pleasure, and
the Principle of all our Activity, it does most properly express the infinite
Value, Pleasure, and Activity of that blisful State which God has prepared to
reward our Obedience. And so I have done with the First Thing proposed, which
was to show you for what Reason the eternal Rewards of the Blessed are so
frequently expressed by everlasting Life.

2. I proceed now to show you in the second Place, how unspeakably good God
has been to us in proposing such a vast Reward upon the Performance of such an
easy Condition. In the Management of which I shall first discourse of this
Reward absolutely, and show you how great it is in it self. Secondly,
comparatively, and show you how great it is in Respect of the Condition upon
which it is promised.

1. We will consider it absolutely how great it is in its self. And here I do
not pretend to give you a perfect Map of all the Beatitudes of that heavenly
State; for that is a Talk fit only for an Angel, or a glorified Spirit; all I
aim at is to give you such an imperfect Account of it as God has thought fit
to impart to Mortals in the Scripture, which though it fall infinitely short of
the Thing it self, yet is doubtless the best and utmost that our narrow
Capacities can bear. In short therefore concerning this blessed State, God has
revealed to us, that it includes these six Things: 1. A perfect Freedom from
Evil and Misery. 2. A most intimate Enjoyment of himself. 3 A most endearing
Fruition of our glorified Savior. 4. A most delightful Conversation with
Angels and glorified Spirits. 5. The infinite Glory and Delightfulness of the
Place, wherein all these Felicities are to be enjoyed. 6. The endless Duration
of this most blessed and happy State.


1. Everlasting Life includes a most perfect Freedom from Evil and Misery. For
so we find the State of the Blessed in Heaven described, that they hunger no
more, neither thirst any more; that the Sun lights not on them, nor any heat,
that is, that they are no longer liable to the scorching Heats of Persecution;
but that God has wiped away all tears from their Eyes, Rev. vii.16.17. And
hence also Heaven is called a State of Rest, Heb. iv.9, 11. There remains
therefore a rest to the people of God. Let us labor therefore to enter into
that rest: Which denotes this State to be a perfect Sabbath, and Jubilee of
Redemption from all Evil and Misery. For as soon as the Souls of good Men
depart out of this corporeal State in which they now live, they are immediately
released from all those bodily Passions of Hunger, and Thirst, and Pain, and
Diseases whereunto they are now liable by Reason of their Union with the Body;
and having in a great Measure conquered their Wills while they were in the
Body, and subdued them to the Will of God, they shall immediately commense into
an high Degree of Perfection. For being freed from the Encumbrances of Flesh
and Blood, from the Importunities of their bodily Passions and Appetites, and
the Temptations of Sensuality that do now continually solicit them, they shall
no longer be liable to those Irregularities of Affection that do here disturb
the Tranquillity of their Minds; and their Actions and Affections being always
regulated by their Reason, their Consciences shall be no longer bestormed with
those Terrors and Affrightments, which nothing but the Sense of Guilt can
suggest to them; but enjoy a perpetual Calm and Serenity. And being thus freed
from all Evils and Disquietudes both from within and without, they shall be at
perfect Ease, and for ever enjoy a most undisturbed Repose. O blessed Day, when
I shall take my Leave of Sin and Misery for ever, and go to those calm and
blisful Regions, whence Sighs and Tears and Sorrows and Pains are banished for
ever more!

2. Everlasting Life includes a most intimate Enjoyment of God* For God being a
rational Good, is capable of being enjoyed by rational Beings no otherwise than
by Knowledge, and by Love, and by Resemblance; all which Ways he has promised
that we shall enjoy him, when once we are arrived into that blisful State. For
as for the Knowledge of him St. Paul tells us, that whereas now we see through
a Glass darkly; we shall then see him Face to Face: And whereas now we know in
part, then we shall know even as also we are known, 1 Cor. xiii.12. and St.
John tells us, that we shall see him as he is, 1 John iii.2. Which expressions
must needs import such a Knowledge of him as is unspeakably more distinct and
clear than any we enjoy in this present State. For then the Eyes of our Minds
shall be so invigorated that we shall be able to gaze on the Sun without
dazzling, to contemplate the pure and immaculate Glory of the Divinity without
being confounded with its Brightness; and our Understandings shall be so
exalted that shall we see more at every single View than we do now in Volumes
of Discourse; and the most tedious Trains of Inference and Deduction. And
enjoying a most perfect Repose both from within and without, we shall have
nothing to disturb or divert our greedy Contemplations, which having such an
immense Horizon of Truth and Glory round about them, shall still discover
farther and farther, and so entertain themselves with everlasting Wonder and
Delight. For what an infinite Pleasure will that all-glorious Object afford to
our raised Minds, which then shall no longer labor under the tedious
Difficulties of Discourse, but like transparent Windows shall have nothing to
do but only to receive the Light, which freely offers it self unto them, and
shines for ever round about them; when every new Discovery of God, and of those
bottomless Secrets and Mysteries of his Nature shall enlarge our Capacities to
discover more, and still new Discoveries shall freely offer themselves as fast
as our Minds are enlarged to receive them! This doubtless will be a Recreation
to our Minds infinitely transcending all that we can conceive or imagine of it,
especially considering that all our Knowledge shall terminate in Love, that
sweet and grateful Passion that sooths and ravishes the Hearts, and dissolves
it into Joy and Pleasure: For God being infinitely good and amicable, the more
we know him the more Cause and Reason we have to love him. When therefore we
are arrived to that Degree of Knowledge which the beatifical Vision implies, we
shall find our Hearts inflamed with such a vehement Love to him as will issue
into an unspeakable Delight and Satisfaction, and even overwhelm us with
Ecstasies of Joy and Complacency, for if those divine Illapses, those more
immediate Touches and Sensations of God, which Good Men do sometimes experience
in this Life, do so affect and ravish them that they are even forced into
Triumphs and Exultations; how will they be wrapped and transported in that State
of Vision, when they shall see him so immediately, and love him so vehemently,
and their Souls shall be nothing else but entire Globes of Light and Love, all
irradiated and inflamed with the immediate Effluvia's of the Fountain of Truth
and Goodness? But alas! As these Joys are too big for mortal Language to
express, so are they too strong for frail Mortality to bear; and if we but for
one Day or Hour should see God, and love him as those glorified Spirits do, we
should questionless die with an Ecstasy of Pleasure, and our glad Hearts being
tickled with such insupportable Joys, by endeavoring to enlarge themselves to
make Room for them, all would quickly stretch into a Rupture. But then as our
Knowledge of God shall terminate in the Love of him, so both together shall
terminate in our Resemblance of his Perfections; for having so immediate a
Prospect of his Beauties, and being so infinitely enamoured with them, with
what inexpressible Vigor must we imitate and transcribe them? And our
Imitation being invigorated with such a clear Knowledge and such a vehement
Love, cannot fail of producing the described Resemblance; so that the more we
know God, the more we shall love him; and the more we know and love, the more
we shall imitate and resemble him. So that then both our inward Motions and
outward Actions will be all most pure and perfect Imitations of God which will
produce such an exact Agreement between his Original and our Copy, that whilst
we interchangably turn our Eyes to God and our selves, and compare Beauty with
Beauty, it will fill our Minds with unspeakable Content to see how the Image
answers to the Prototype, what a sweet Harmony and Agreement there is between
his Nature and our own. For if from our Love of God there must necessarily
result to us such ineffable Joy and Complacency, what a ravishing Delight will
it afford us to see the Signatures of those adorable Beauties for which we love
him, stamped and impressed upon our own Natures; when the Glory that shines
about, and inflames us, shall shine into us and become our own; and those
amiable Ideas of him which are impressed upon our Understanding, shall stamp
our Wills and Affections with their own Resemblance! For so the Apostle tells
us it shall be, 1 John iii.2. For when he shall appear, we shall be like him;
for we shall see him as he is. Lord, how must our Souls be enlarged and widened
to be able to contain all those mighty Joys that must necessarily spring from
our Fruition of thee! And to what a Degree of Happiness shall we be advanced,
when we shall be entertained with all the delights that the Enjoyment of an
infinite Good can afford us, and have Hearts great enough to contain them all
without being overcharged with their Weight and Number!

3 dly, Everlasting Life includes a most endearing Fruition of our glorified
Savior. And certainly this is none of the smallest Ingredients of that blisful
State, that we shall ever be with our blessed Lord; as the Apostle expresses
it, 1 These. iv.17. For herein it is evident the same Apostle placed one great
Advantage of his future State; for so he tells us, he had a desire to depart
and to be with Christ, which is far better, Phil. i.23. And indeed it is
impossible but it must be a vast Addition to the Happiness of all virtuous and
grateful Souls to see this blessed Friend and Benefactor, who came down from
the Bosom of his Father, and for their Sake exposed himself to a miserable
Life, and shameful Death; to see him sitting at his Father's right Hand crowned
with Majesty and Honor, surrounded with the whole Choir of Angels and Saints,
like a Sun in the midst of a Circle of Stars. How must it needs rejoice the
Hearts of all the Lovers and Followers of this blessed Lamb, to see such a
happy Change of his Circumstances! To see him that was formerly despised and
spit on, and so unworthily treated by an ill-natured World, adored and
worshipped, praised and admired by all the Court of Heaven, and celebrated with
the Songs of Cherubins and Seraphims, of Archangels and Angels, and the
Spirits of just Men made perfect; to behold him, that hung upon the Cross, and
poured out his Blood there in Groans, and Agonies merely to make miserable
Sinners happy, advanced to the highest Pitch of Splendour and Dignity, and made
Head and Prince of all the Hierarchy of Heaven. Verily methinks though I were
excluded from that happy Place, and had only the Privilege to look in and see
my blessed Lord and Savior, it would be a most heavenly Consolation to me to
behold the Glory and Honor and Happiness with which he is surrounded, though I
were sure never to partake of it; and the Communion I should have in the Joys
of my Master, the sweet Sympathy in all his Pleasures would be a Heaven at
second Hand to me, and I should feel my self unspeakably happy in being a
Spectator of his Felicity and Advancement. But Oh! When that dear and blessed
Person shall not only permit me to see his Glory, but introduce me into it;
when his blessed Mouth shall bid me Welcome, and pronounce my Euge bone Serve!
well done Good and Profitable Servant, enter into thy Masters Joy; when I shall
not only see his beloved Face, but be admitted into his sweet Conversation, and
dwell in his Arms and Embraces for ever; when I shall hear him record the
wondrous Adventures of his Love, through how many woeful Stages he past to
rescue me from endless Misery; how will my Heart spring with Joy and burn with
Love, and my Mouth overflow with Praises and Thanksgivings? O blessed Jesu! How
happy will the Day be when I who am loaded with so many vast Obligations to
love thee, shall be introduced into thy Presence, to see thy Glories, and
Sympathize in thy Joys, as thou did in my Miseries; to thank and praise thee
Face to Face for all those Wonders of Love with which thou have obliged me, and
to bear a Part in that heavenly Song, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to
receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and
blessing; who have redeemed us to God by thy blood, our of every Kindred, and
Tongue, and People and Nation, Rev. v.9, 12.

4 thly, Everlasting Life includes a most delightful Conversation and Society
with Angels and glorified Spirits. For when we come to the City of the Living
God, the heavenly Jerusalem, the Apostle tells us, what our Society will be,
viz. an innumerable company of Angels, the general Assembly and Church of the
firstborn, God the judge of all, the Spirits of just Men made perfect, and
Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, Heb. xii.22, 23, 24. Lord, what
glorious Society is here! Society in which there is nothing intermingled, but
what is Heavenly and Divine; it being altogether composed of the best and
wisest and noblest Beings in the World. For as for the blessed Saints and
Angels, they are all most perfectly refined from all that Folly and
Peevishness, Disguize and Dissimulation which is the Bane of humane
Conversation; their Understandings are exceeding large and comprehensive, and
their Charity and Goodness is full as extensive as their Knowledge: And in such
a Conjunction of Wisdom with Goodness, what an excellent Society must there
needs be produced? For as their great Goodness must needs render their
Conversation most free and amiable, so must their great Knowledge and Wisdom
render it no less profitable and delightful; and as the latter must needs
instruct them in all the wise Arts of Endearment, so the former must needs
oblige them to use and improve them to the utmost. O how heavenly therefore
must their Conversation needs be, whilst it is thus managed by pure Wisdom and
most perfect Love; whilst the most glorious Knowledge is the Scope, and the
most ardent Friendship the Law of all their Converse! Who would not be willing
to leave a foolish, froward, and ill-natured World, for the blessed Society of
those wise Friends, and perfect Lovers? And what greater Happiness can we
desire, than to spend an Eternity in such sweet Conversation! Where we shall
hear the deep Philosophy of Heaven freely communicated in the wise and amicable
Discourses of Angels and glorified Spirits, who mutually impart the Treasures
of each others Knowledge without any Reserve or Affectation of Mystery, and
freely philosophize without wrangling Disputes, or peevish Contentions for
Victory; where Wisdom is the Entertainment, and Love and mutual Endearments the
Welcome; where there is Harmony without Discord, Communication without
Disputes, and everlasting Discourse without Wrangling. O happy Day! When I
shall depart from this impertinent and unsociable World, and all my good old
Friends that are gone to Heaven before me, shall meet me on the Shores of
Eternity, and congratulate my Arrival to that blessed Society! Where I shall
freely converse with the Patriarchs and Prophets, the Apostles and Martyrs, and
be most intimately acquainted with all those brave and generous Souls, who have
recommended themselves to the World by their glorious Examples; where Angels
and Archangels shall be my familiar Friends, and all those illustrious
Courtiers of the great King of Heaven shall own me for their Brother, and bid
me welcome to their Masters Joy, and none will disdain my Company though never
so much above me in Glory and Perfection; but from the highest to the lowest
will all receive and entertain me with the tenderest Indearments of heavenly
Lovers.

5 thly, Everlasting Life includes also the infinite Glory and Delightfulness
of the Place wherein all these Felicities are to be enjoyed. For though the
very State of the Blessed be sufficiently glorious to transform the most dismal
Place into a Paradise, and to create a Heaven in the darkest Dungeon of Hell;
yet such has been the Goodness of God, that he has prepared a Place
proportionably glorious to that blessed State; which according to the
Sciripture Account is the highest Heaven, or the upper and purer Tracts of the
Ether. For so our Savior tells the penitent Thief, to day shall thou be with
me in Paradise, Luke xxiii.43. and where this Paradise is St. Paul informs us,
2 Cor. xii. for Verse. 2. he tells us of his being caught up to the third
Heaven, which in the 4th Verse. he calls Paradise, where he heard unspeakable
Words. Now that by the Third Heaven he means the uppermost, viz. that Heaven of
Heavens which is the Throne of God's most glorious Residence, where Jesus sits
at his right Hand among the holy Miriads of Angels and glorious Spirits, is
evident from this; because according to the Jewish Philosophy, to which he here
alludes, Heaven was divided into three Regions, viz. the Cloud-bearing,
Star-bearing, and Angel-bearing Region, the last of which they called the Third
Heaven, in which they placed the Throne of the Divine Majesty. And that by
Paradise he means the same Place is as evident, because by this Name the Jews,
in whose Language he speaks, were wont to call it the Third Heaven, or
Angel-bearing Region. And hence Rab. Menachem on Leviticus, tells us it is
apparent that the Reward of our Obedience is not to be enjoyed in this Life;
Verum post dissolutionem Justus adipiscitur Regnum quod dicitur Paradisus,
fruiturque conspectu divino; i. e. but after Death the Just shall obtain that
Kingdom which is called Paradise, and there enjoy the beatifical Vision. And
it is very usual for them to express the Blessings of the future Life by
enjoying the Delights of Paradise; and therefore is this heavenly Region of
Angels called by the Name of Paradise in Allusion to the earthly Paradise of
Eden, denoting to us, that as that was the Garden of this lower World, which of
all other Places did most abound with Pleasures and Delights; so this is the
Paradise of the whole Creation, the most fruitful and delightful Region within
all this boundless Space of the World. Nor indeed can it be imagined to be
otherwise, it being the Imperial Court which the great Monarch of the World
has chosen for his special Residence, and which he has prepared to receive
and lodge the glorified humane Nature of his own eternal Son, and to entertain
his Friends and Favorites for ever. For if these Out-Rooms of the World are so
royal and magnificent, how infinitely splendid must we needs imagine the
Presence Chamber of the great King to be, the Glory of whose Presence will
render it more lightsome and illustrious than the united Beams of ten thousand
Suns. And therefore though the Scripture has nowhere given us an exact
Description of this glorious Place, because indeed no humane Language can
describe it; yet since God has chosen it for the everlasting Theater of Bliss
and Happiness, we may reasonably conclude that he has most exquisitely
furnished it with all Accomodations requisite for a most happy and blisful
Life, and that the House is every way suitable to the Entertainment. Whenever
therefore a pure and virtuous Soul gets free from this Cage of Flesh, away it
flies under the Conduct and Protection of Angels through the Air and Ether
beyond the Firmament of Stars, and never stops till it is arrived to those
blessed Abodes, where God and Jesus, Saints and Angels dwell; where being come,
with what unspeakable Delight will it contemplate that Scene of Things? When
all of a sudden it shall see it self surrounded with an infinite Splendour and
Brightness, so that which way soever it casts its Eyes, it is entertained with
new Objects of Wonder and Delight; then shall it say, as the Queen of Sheba did
of Solomon's Court, alas! How faint and dim, how short and imperfect were all
humane Conceits and Descriptions of this blessed Place! For though I have heard
great and mighty Things of it, yet now I find that not one Half of its real
Glory and Magnificence has ever been reported to me.

6 thly, And lastly, Everlasting Life includes the endless Duration of this
most blessed and happy State. Thus Joh. vi.27. he calls his Doctrine the meat
which endures unto everlasting Life, which the Son of Man shall give unto you;
and Verse. 40. he tells them that this was the will of his Father, that every
one that believes on him, might have everlasting Life; and Verse. 47. Verily
verily I say unto you, he that believes on me, has everlasting Life; and
Verse. 51, 54, 58. he promises them that upon their believing in him, they
should live for ever. But because Everlasting Life, and For ever, does in
Scripture sometimes signify a long, but not an endless Duration; therefore he
has taken Care to express this Article in such Words as must necessarily
denote an endless Duration of Bliss; for he not only tells them, Chap. vi.50.
that they who believed his Doctrine, should not die, but that whosoever lives,
and believes in him, shall never die, Joh. xi.26. yea, and not only so, but
that they should never see death, Joh. viii.51. that is, should never come
within Ken or Prospect of it: Nay, and Luke xx.36. he tells them, neither can
they die any more; for they are equal to the Angels. If then our future Life be
so everlasting as that it neither can nor shall be terminated by Death, it must
necessarily be a Life without End; whose Duration is parallel to Eternity. Now
what a mighty Addition must this needs make to the Joys of the Blessed, to
consider that they are such as shall never expire; when the Soul shall reflect
upon her happy State, and think thus with her self, O blessed, for ever be a
good God! I am as happy now as ever my Heart can hold; every Part of me is so
thronged with Joy, that I have no room for any more; and that which compleats
and crowns them all, is that they shall be renewed to all Eternity, and
Millions of Millions of Ages hence be as far from a period as they were the
first moment wherein I enjoyed them. For our Lives and our Happiness shall be
coeternal to one another, our God shall live for ever, and we shall live for
ever to enjoy him, and in the Enjoyment of such an infinite Good we need not
doubt to find Variety enough still to renew our Joys, and to keep them fresh
and flourishing for ever. For as we shall always know God, so we shall always
know him more and more, and every new Beauty that infinite Object discovers to
us will kindle a new Flame of Love, and that a new Rapture of Joy, and that a
new Desire of knowing and discovering more, and so for ever round again there
will be knowing and loving and rejoicing more and more to all Eternity. For so
immense will our Happiness be, that we shall need as well as desire an Eternity
to enjoy it fully, and after millions of Ages are spent in the Enjoyment of it,
we shall still renew our Fruition with the same fresh enravishing Pleasures as
when we first possessed and enjoyed it; for as new Pleasures will still present
themselves unto us, so when we have enjoyed them never so long we shall still
be at an infinite Distance from any End of our Enjoyment. So that our Happiness
consisting of an infinite Variety of Pleasures extended to an infinite
Duration, we shall neither be cloyed with the Repetition of it, nor tormented
with the Fear of losing it.

And now you see how vast and immense the Reward of our obediential Belief of
our Savior is; I need not tell you that it is a plain and apparent Instance of
God's great Love and good Will to the World; For it is indeed such a
transcendent Instance, as may justly astonish the whole Creation, and put both
Heaven and Earth into an Ecstasy to see the benevolent Father of the World
project such mighty Entertainments for such undeserving Children, and prepare
such a Heaven of boundless and endless Pleasure to treat such a Company of
wretched sinful Worms. O thou infinite Love and Goodness! How can we
sufficiently admire and praise thee, that from such a Depth of Sin and Misery
have projected to raise us to such an Height of Glory and Felicity? But this
will yet more evidently appear, if from the absolute Consideration of this
Reward we descend to the comparative; which was,

2. The second thing we proposed to discourse of, viz. to show how vast this
Reward is in Respect of the Condition or Consideration upon which it is
promised and proposed. And this I shall endeavor to make appear to you in
these seven Particulars: 1. The Condition is due, but the Reward is free and
arbitrary. 2. The Condition is no ways advantageous to God, but the Reward is
infinitely advantageous to us. 3. The Condition is small, and easy to be
performed; but the Reward is immense and boundless. 4. In performing the
Condition God operates more than we; but in receiving the Reward we only are
concerned. 5. The Condition is momentary and temporal, but the Reward is
eternal. 6. In the performance of the Condition, there are great Intermixtures
of Pleasure with our Labor, but in the Reward there is not the least
Intermixture of Misery with Happiness. 7. The Condition admits of Intermissions
of Labor, but in the Reward there are no Intermissions of Happiness.


1. The Condition is due, but the Reward is free and arbitrary. For God being
our Creator we ow all our Powers of Action to him; and from this absolute
Propriety that he has in our Powers, he derives an immutable Right to all the
possible Service we can render him; so that whilst he enjoins us nothing but
what is possible, he only requires what is his Due, and what we cannot withold
without a most injust Invasion of his Right and Property. For he being the
Supreme Proprietor of all our Powers and Faculties, must needs have an eternal
Right to employ and exercise them as he pleases; because by so doing he only
uses his own Goods to his own Ends and Purposes, which every Proprietor has an
unquestionable Right to do; so that to substract our Powers from his Use and
Service, is to embezzle our Masters Goods, and commit dow right Theft and
Robbery. Wherefore, since in the Condition of our Salvation he has required
nothing of us but what is possible for us to do, this he might have demanded as
a just Debt, without offering us any Reward for the Payment of it; but that he
should give us a Heaven only for giving him his Due, and bestow upon us for
paying what we owed him, infinitely more than the whole Debt amounts to, is an
Expression of Love beyond all Comparison. When he might have justly sent us
into this Theater to act what Part soever he pleased, have endeared our Duty to
us by nothing but its appendent Delights, and when we had done, remanded us
back into our Primitive Nonentity; yet that he should recompense the bare
Discharge of that Duty we own him with the Reward of such an immortal Bliss, is
such a stupendous Height of Goodness, as not only puzzles our Conceit, but
out-reaches our Wonder and Admiration.

2 dly, The Condition is no ways advantageous to God, but the Reward is
infinitely advantageous to us; for he is so infinitely happy in the Enjoyment
of himself and his own Perfections, that all the Services of Men and Angels can
make no Addition to his Felicity; which depends wholly upon the infinite
Goodness and Perfection of his own Nature, and is not derived either in whole
or in Part from the Tributes or Free Will Offerings of his Creatures. For can a
Man be profitable unto God, as he that is wise may be profitable unto himself?
Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that we are righteous? Or is it gain to him
that we make our ways perfect, Job. xxii.2, 3? No certainly; when he had
nothing but himself to contemplate and love, his Happiness was the same as it
is now among all the Praises and Services which he receives from the World of
Angels and of Men; and if they should revolt from him, or relapse into
Nonentity again, he would still remain the same most happy Being that now he
is, and ever was. For all true Happiness being founded in Perfection, it it is
impossible that any Being that is infinitely perfect in himself should become
either more or less happy by any Thing that happens from without him. So that
as to the Happiness of God, it is the same Thing whether we obey, or disobey
him; so that whatsoever Condition he imposes on us, our Performance of it is
but just like bringing Wax to a dying Father, which he requires not to enrich
himself, but only to seal away Fortunes to his Children. And that he imposes
this Condition on us rather than another, is not because it is most
advantageous to him, but because it is most conducive to our Welfare and
Happiness: So free and uninterested is his Love and Goodness to us, that upon
Considerations no ways advantageous to himself, he promises infinite Advantages
to us; for it is we reap all the Profit as well of the Condition as of the
Reward appendent to it, and he promises us Heaven upon Terms, that carry Heaven
in the Performance of them. For first the Condition perfects our Natures, and
then the Reward beatifies them; for there is nothing in the Condition of the
Christian Covenant but what our own Self-love rightly directed would oblige us
to; nothing but what tends to our good, and is highly conducive to our
Perfection and Happiness. So that whatsoever Advantages accrue either from the
Condition, or the Reward annexed to it, they all redound to our selves* So
infinitely bountiful is our blessed Master, that with vast Wages he hires his
Servants to a Work that is a noble Reward to it self; and courts them with the
Promise of Heaven to be kind and merciful to themselves. O thou boundless and
bottomless Love! What Tongue is able to express thy Beneficence, that have
prepared and promised a Heaven of endless and ravishing Joys and Pleasures only
to tempt and bribe thy Creatures to do what is good for themselves; and without
any Prospect of Self-advantage have obliged us to be our own Benefactors by
promising to reward us for being so, with a most glorious and blisful
Immortality?

3 dly, The Condition is small, and easy to be performed; but the Reward is
immense and boundless. For what does the Lord our God require of us, bot only
to act like Men, and follow the Prescriptions of Right Reason? Which, if there
had never been any Law given to the World, nor any Reward annexed to the
keeping it, would have prescribed to us to live soberly, righteously, and godly
in this present World; for prescinding from all Obligations of Law and
Conscience, to do thus becomes all reasonable Natures, and is much more for
their Interest and Happiness than the contrary. And is this so hard a Restraint
to be confined to do nothing but what becomes us, and withold from nothing
but counter-mining our own Happiness? But then, if we consider how our Duty is
sweetened over with Pleasure, encouraged with the Smiles of God, and backed with
the Approbations of our own Consciences; with what gentle Mitigations it is
required, with what puissant Motives it is enforced, and with what powerful
Grace it is assisted and promoted; we must needs acknowledge it to be a most
gracious, easy, and gentle Yoke. But if we measure it by the Vastness of the
Reward, I confess it looks like some great and mighty Thing. For if we value
God's Bounty by our own, we cannot but conclude that sure he would never have
made such vast Preparations for our Happiness, nor planted such a Paradise of
Pleasures to entertain us, but upon some mighty Condition to be performed on
our Part. And indeed had he imposed the hardest Condition in the World, sent us
to row in the Galleys, or dig in the Mines for a thousand Years together; such
a vast Reward would have been sufficient to have rendered it not only
tolerable, but easy and delightful. But that he should promise us such a
mighty Recompense as the Joys of an everlasting Heaven includes, a Recompense
as large as our utmost Capacities, and as lasting as our longest Duration; and
this upon no other Condition but our sincere Belief of, and Obedience to his
Gospel, whose Precepts are all natural and easy, and pregnant with unspeakable
Pleasure and Delight; is such a Prodigy of Goodness as we can never
sufficiently admire and adore: That merely for believing a Revelation, of whose
Truth we have such convincing Evidence, and practicing suitably to our Belief,
we should from wretched mortal Worms, be advanced to an equal Pitch of Bliss
and Glory with immortal Angels, and live as happily for ever as all the Joys of
Heaven can make us, is doubtless such an Instance of Love and Bounty as could
only proceed from infinite Goodness.

4 thly, In performing the Condition, God operates more than we; but in
receiving the Reward we only are concerned. For to our sincere Belief and
Obedience of the Gospel, it is plain, that God contributes much more than we;
for besides that he is the Author of all those Faculties by which we do believe
and obey him, of all those Evidences by which we are convinced of the Truth of
his Gospel, and of all those Motives by which we are animated in our Obedience
to it; besides all which, I say, he is also the Author of all that inward Grace
and Assistance by which our pious Endeavors are excited and crowned with a
blessed Success. And considering how much all these Things do operate upon our
Performance of the Gospel-Condition, it is not only true that without God's
Grace we should never have performed it, but also that in our Performance of
it, that is the main and principle Agent; and no Man ever yet became a hearty
Believer and Disciple of Jesus, but was much more beholding to the Grace of
God, than to his own Activity and Endeavor. And hence we are said to be
created in Christ Jesus unto good works, Ephesians. ii.10. not but that God exacts
the Concurrence of our Endeavors with his Grace, and that in the Performance
of the Gospel-condition as well as in any other Affair of our Lives. For it is
the Blessing of the Lord that makes Men rich as well as Good, and we may as
well expect that he should make us rich without Industry, as good without
Diligence and Endeavor; But when we have done our utmost, it is to the Grace of
God as to the principal Cause that all our good is to be attributed. But yet
though it is he that works this Condition in us, that is the Author and Finisher
of our Faith; yet the Reward does wholly redound to ourselves, as if we had
been the Authors and Finishers of all; and though he has the greatest Share in
the Work, yet he substracts nothing at all from the Wages, but pays us
infinitely more than the utmost Merit of the Work amounts to. He gives us
Faith, and then he crowns his own Gift with Glory, and Honor, and Immortality.
He sows and cultivates our Nature, that we may reap the Crop and Harvest. So
infinitely liberal is our blessed Master as to reward his Servants for his own
Work, to undergo the greatest Part of their Labor, and when it is done, to pay
them Ten Thousand Fold for it.

5 thly, The Condition is momentary and temporal, but the Reward is eternal. It
is but a little little while that the Labor of our Duty lasts; for Constancy
and Perseverance, will soon render it natural and easy; and if it did not, yet
Death will quickly put an end to all; and within these very few Days or Years
we shall see an everlasting Period of all the Pains of our Watchfulness, of all
the Severities of Mortification, and of all the Sorrows of Repentance; but then
the Reward abides to all Eternity, and lasts out to a never-ending Duration. So
that though we shall soon see an End of our Work, yet the Wages is so vast that
we shall be spending on it for ever; and Myriads of Myriads of Ages hence shall
be rejoicing in the Fruits of our present Labor and reaping the blisful
Effects of our Faith and Obedience to the latest Moment of Eternity. O thou
liberal Rewarder of Men! Who can sufficiently admire thy Goodness, that
remuneratest our short Pains with endless Pleasures, and exchangest with us an
Eternity of Happiness for the Labor and Service of a Moment? For when we are
arrived into that vast Eternity of Bliss, all the Pains we have taken in our
Voyage thither will hardly bear the Proportion of a single Unite to an infinite
Sum; for what are twenty or thirty Years, but a moment to Ten Thousand
Thousand? and what are Ten Thousand Years, but a moment to an endless Eternity?
So that methinks, when I consider that after Ten, or Twenty, or Thirty Years
Service, I shall be allowed an Eternity to spend in the most ravishing Joys and
Pleasures, and live as happily for ever, as God and an everlasting Heaven can
make me; the Bounties of my blessed Master appear in such a prodigious Bulk to
me, that I am even confounded at the Prospect of them; and all this Time I have
to spend in Religion, in Prayer and Watchfulness, in subduing my Passions and
Appetites, and contending with my own Inclinations seems nothing to me; but
like a little Rivulet, is swallowed up in that boundless and bottomless
Duration, where it loses it self, and is no more remembered by me.

6 thly, In the Performance of the Condition there are great Intermixtures of
Pleasure with our Labor; but in the Reward, there is not the least
Intermixture of Misery with Happiness. That Man must be very much unexperienced
in a Christian Life, who thinks it a melancholy, sower, and rigorous Thing; for
besides that, it freely indulges to us all the innocent Gratifications of our
Senses, and all the Refreshments of honest Mirth and moderate Recreation; it
has so many choice and peculiar Pleasures of its own, as are sufficient to
endear it unto all wise Men, though it had no other Reward to recommend it: For
all the Acts and Functions of it being most agreeable to humane Nature, must
needs be highly grateful to it. For what can be more agreeable to a reasonable
Nature, than to adore and love, to praise and confide in the Fountain of its
Being and Happiness? And being so agreeable, how can they but abound with
Pleasure and Delight? What can be more suitable to a sociable Nature than to be
kind and obliging, courteous and beneficent to all we converse with? and being
so suitable, how is it possible but it should be sweet and delightsome? In a
word, what can be more convenient to a Nature that is compounded of an immortal
Spirit and a mortal Body, than to keep the Body in Subjection to the Mind, and
Govern its Appetites and Passions by the Rules of Reason and Sobriety? and
being so convenient, what Content and Satisfaction must there needs accrue from
it? For the Pleasure of every Being consists in acting agreeably to its own
Nature; and therefore since to act religiously is so agreeable to the Nature of
Man, it is impossible but it must be pleasant, especially considering how much
it conduces to the Tranquillity of our Minds, and the Peace of our Consciences,
and the Advancement of our Interests in both Worlds: All which being
considered, I dare boldly affirm, that if there were no other Reward of a
religious Life, but only its own appendent Delights, yet this were enough to
recommend it unto any wise Man; and that there never was any Man whatsoever
that made a through Experiment of it, but found it far more pleasant and
agreeable to him, than the most jovial Course of Wickedness and Impiety. And
yet to this pleasant Life it is, that the good God does tempt and invite us by
the Promise of a Heaven of Pleasures; and though the Life he wooes us to has
Joy and Bliss enough in it to compensate all the Toil and Labor of it, yet to
oblige us hereunto, he has made it a most certain Passage to a Life of pure
and unmingled Bliss, that has not the least Alloy of Misery in it: For from
that most blissful Region all Pain and Sorrow, Trouble and Vexation, are
banished for evermore. There are no Winter-Frosts of Grief to nip or blast its
everlasting Spring of Joy; no Clouds to darken or overcast its Light; but we
shall know without Mistake, love without Jealousy, obey without Reluctance,
praise without Complaint or Murmuring, and rejoice for ever without Sighing or
Disturbance. Lord! what amazing Bounty is this, that thou should crown the
most pleasant Life upon Earth with a most pure and unmingled Life of Pleasures
in Heaven, and make one Paradise the Reward of another? How deeply art thou
concerned in our Welfare, that to oblige us to live happily here, have prepared
a Heaven of pure and endless Happiness to entertain us hereafter?

7 thly and lastly, The Condition admits of Intermissions of Labor; but in the
Reward there are no Intermissions of Happiness. The Performance of the
Condition does not so wholly take up our Lives, as to admit of no
Interruptions; for besides that it not only permits, but requires us to mind
our secular Business and Affairs; and is so far from interfering with the Work
of our Callings, that it promotes and furthers it; it does not so wholly
ingross our Time, as not to allow us a sufficient Season for our Rest and
Recreation; so that we may perform all that it includes or requires, without
breaking of a Nights Rest, or abridging our selves a Meals Meat, or retrenching
from our Mirth and Diversions, any further than Reason and Sobriety requires;
and consequently abstracted from the Work of our Callings; which though it be
included in this Condition, yet even our temporal Interest obliges us to
follow, it is by so much the smallest Portion of our Lives which we are obliged
to spend in the Exercise of our Religion. And if we would make but moderate
Retrenchments from that Time we spend either in doing nothing, or nothing to
the Purpose; and together with that reprieve those precious Moments we squander
away in serving and pampering of our Lusts; we might serve God faithfully every
Day, and yet have as much Time remaining to do our Business, and enjoy our
Pleasures as now: We might every Morning say our Prayers, renew our
Resolutions, and arm our selves with Considerations against the Temptations of
the Day; and every Night review the Actions of the Day, confess and lament the
Defects of them, and recommend our selves to God's Grace and Protection for the
future; and when all this is done, have as much Time as ever we had before to
mind our Affairs, and divert our selves. Nay, so far would this be from any
ways hindering our Business or Diversion, that the sweet Sense of having done
our Duty, would make us much more cheerful in the one, and give us a far
sweeter Relish of the other. So far is Religion from inslaving us to an
uninterrupted Toil and Labor, that it does not only allow us all the
Intermissions that our secular Business, Reflection, and Pleasure requires; but
also sweetens them to us, and renders them much more grateful. But as for the
Reward which Religion draws after it, that excludes all Intermissions of
Happiness. For in that most blissful State our Life will be all but one
continued Act of Joy, and to eternal Ages there shall not be one Moment wherein
we shall either be sensible of Pain, or insensible of Pleasure and Happiness.
For as our Happiness will always abound with fresh Pleasures, so our Faculties
will never be cloyed with the Enjoyment of them; for those Pleasures being
pure, rational, and spiritual, will be so far from spending and weakening our
Powers, that they will every Moment strengthen and improve them. So that
whereas our Pleasures here consisting in a vehement Motion, are very transient,
and quickly slip away, and we must rest a while before we can renew them, and
begin the Motion again; those heavenly Pleasures are such as will indeed most
vehemently affect and move, but never weary the Faculties of the Enjoyer. For
still the more we know the more we shall love; and the more we love, the more
we shall rejoice; and the more we rejoice, the more we shall know and love: And
so in this sweet but endless Circle, we shall move round for ever without
Weariness, and be so far from spending our Vigor, that every Moment of
Eternity we shall improve it by Exercise and Motion. So that as our Happiness
will always abound with new Pleasures without any Discontinuance or
Intermission, so our Faculties will always renew their Strength and Vigor by
Enjoyment. And as there will be no Pause between one Joy and another, but they
will come so thick upon us for ever, that the Follower will always tread on the
Foregoers Heels; so one will still make Room for another, and those that are
present will enlarge our Capacity to receive all those that are immediately to
follow. And thus shall we spend an Eternity without the least Intermission of
Joy and Pleasure; for we shall always know, and always love, and always praise
the Author of our Happiness; and always have a fresh Sense of his Goodness
soothing and ravishing our Hearts, and filling them with ineffable Joys,
without any Ceasing or Interruption. O blessed God! what an amazing
Demonstration is this of thy Love and Goodness to thy Creatures, that for a
Work in which there are so many Pauses and daily Intermissions of Labor, thou
should crown us with a Reward, that to all Eternity is one continued Scene of
Happiness without the least Gap or Interruption? So that whether you consider
this Reward absolutely, and in its self, or comparatively with the Condition
whereunto it is annexed, you see it is a most glorious Instance of God's
unspeakable Goodness toward us: And now I shall conclude this Argument with a
few practical Inferences from the whole.

I. I infer how much Reason we have to be contented and satisfied under all the
present Afflictions of this Life. For shall we receive so much good at the
Hands of God as Everlasting Life implies, and not be contented to receive some
Evil, when our good Father has provided for us a Crown of endless Bliss and
Glory hereafter? With what Conscience or Modesty can we complain of those
little paternal Castigations he inflicts on us here? especially considering
that the great Design of all his present Severities is to prepare and
discipline us for that heavenly State; that by all these dismal Providence he
is only training us up for a Crown; fitting, instructing and disposing us to
reign with him in Glory for ever? Can any Thing be unwelcom to us that is in
Order to so blessed an End? Can any Physic be nauseous or distastful that is
prescribed to recover us into such an happy Immortality? No doubtless; every
Thing that leads Heavenwards, though never so grievous, is a Blessing, and all
those kind Severities that tend to our eternal Welfare, are Favors for which
we are bound to praise and adore the Goodness of Heaven for ever. When
therefore we find our selves inclined to complain under our present Pressures
and Afflictions, let us lift up our Eyes to yonder blessed Regions, and
consider the Joys and Pleasures, the Crowns and Triumphs that do there await
us; and how necessary these bitter Trials are to prepare us for, and wast us to
them: And if this does not stop our Mouths, and silence our Complaints for
ever; nay, if it does not cause us to rejoice in our Tribulations, and to thank
God for them on our bendid Knees; if it does not make us cheerfully submit and
say, Ure, Seca, Vulnera, Lord! cut, or wound, or burn me; if thou see fit,
strip me of all my dearest Comforts; handle me as severely as thou please, so
I have my Fruit unto Holiness, and my end everlasting Life; we are infinitely
foolish and ungrateful. For it is but a little while e're all these Storms will
clear up into an everlasting Calm; e're all these dismal Clouds will vanish,
and an everlasting Day break forth upon us, whose Brightness shall never be
obscured with the least Spot or Relic of Darkness. And when that blessed Time
comes, Lord! how trifling and inconsiderable will all our present Griefs
appear? With what Contempt shall we reflect upon our present Cowardice and
meanness of Spirit, that would not bear without Murmuring with a few
Inconveniences on the Road to such an immortal Heaven of Pleasure? Wherefore if
our Voyage be not so pleasant as we would have it, yet let us remember it is not
long; we have but a short Days Sail to an Eternity of Happiness; and when once
we are landed on that blessed Shore, with what ravishing Content and
Satisfaction shall we look back on the rough and boisterous Seas we have past,
and for ever bless the Storms and Winds that drove us to that happy Port! Then
will the Remembrance of these light Afflictions serve only as a Toil and
Anti-mask to our Happiness, to set off its Joys, and render them more sweet and
ravishing. Let us therefore comfort our selves with these Things; and when at
any Time our Spirits are sinking under any worldly Trouble or Affliction,
consider that while we have a Heaven to hope for, we can never be miserable;
for so long as we are guarded with this mighty Hope, our Mind will be
impregnable against all foreign Events, and maugre all Afflictions from
without, its Serenity will shine as undisturbedly as the Lights of Pharos in
the midst of Storms and Tempests.

II. Hence I infer, what a vast deal of Reason we have to slight and contemn
this World. For it is plain, that we are born to infinitely greater Hopes than
any this World can propose to us, even to the Hopes of everlasting Life: And
being so, methinks our Ambition should soar as high as our Hopes, and disdain
such low and ignoble Quarries, as the Pleasures, and Profits, and Honors of
this Life. Certainly Sirs, we mistake the Scene of our Eternity, or imagine
that it is removed from Heaven to Earth; and so we are to enjoy our everlasting
Life below; or else we are most strangely besotted, who when we are born to
live for ever above in the most ravishing Glory and Happiness, can suffer our
selves to dote upon this World, and to be so strangely bewitched as we are by
its deluding Vanities. O! could we but stand a while in the Midway between
Heaven and Earth, and at one Prospect see the Glories of both, how faint and
dim would all the Splendors of this World appear to us in Comparison with those
above? How would they sneak and disappear in the Presence of that eternal
Brightness, and be forced to shroud their vanquished Glories, as Stars do when
the Sun appears? And whilst we interchangably turned our Eyes from one to
the other, with what Shame and Confusion should we reflect upon the wretched
grovelling Temper of our own Minds? what poor mean-spirited Creatures we are to
satisfy our selves with the impertinent Trifles of this World, when we have all
the Joys of an everlasting Heaven before us, and may, if we please, after a few
Moments Obedience be admitted into them, and enjoy them for evermore? Ah!
foolish Creatures that we are, thus to prefer a far Country, where we live on
nothing but Husks, before an everlasting Festivity, that is celebrated in our
Father's House! where the meanest Creature has Bread enough, and to spare: To
choose Nebuchadnezzar's Fate, and leave Crowns and Scepters, and live among the
salvage Herds of the Wilderness! Could the blessed Saints above divert so much
from their more happy Employments, as to look down a little from their Thrones
of Glory, and see how busy poor Mortals are in scrambling for this wretched
Pelf, which within a few Moments they must leave for ever; how they jostle, and
rencounter, defeat, defraud, and undermine one another; what a most ridiculous
Spectacle would it appear to them? with what Scorn would they look on it; or
rather, with what Pity, to see a Company of heaven-born Souls, capable of, and
designed for the same Glory and Happiness with themselves, grovelling like Swine
in Dirt and Mire; one priding it self in a gay Suit, a another hugging a Bag of
glistering Earth, a third stewing and dissolving it self in Luxury and
Voluptuousness, and all employed at that poor, and mean, and miserable Rate, as
might justly make these blessed Spirits ashamed to own their Kindred and
Alliance? To tell you truly and seriously my Thoughts, I cannot imagine, but if
when we are thus extravagantly concerned about the pitiful Trifles of this
World, the blessed Spirits do see and converse with us, it is a much more
ludicrous and ridiculous Sight in their Eyes, to see us thus sillily concerned
and employed, than it would be in us to see a Company of Boys with mighty Zeal
and Concern wrangling and crying, striving and scrambling for a Bag of
Cherry-stones. Wherefore in the Name of God, Sirs, let us not expose our selves
any longer to the just Derision of all the World, by our excessive Dotage upon
the trifling Vanities of this Life; but let us seriously consider that we are
all concerned in Matters of much higher Importance, even in the unspeakable
Felicity of an everlasting Life.

3 dly. Hence I infer how unreasonable it is for good Men to be afraid of
Dying, since just on the other side the Grave you see there is a State of endless
Bliss and Happiness prepared to receive and entertain them; so that to them
Death is but a dark Entry out of a Wilderness of Sorrow into a Paradise of
eternal Pleasure. And therefore if it be an unreasonable Thing for sick Men to
dread their Recovery, for Slaves to tremble at their Jubilee, or for Prisoners
to quake at the News of a Jail-delivery; how much more unreasonable is it for
good Men to be afraid of Death, which is but a momentary Passage from Sickness,
Labor, and Confinement to eternal Health, and Rest, and Liberty? For God's
sake consider, Sirs, what is there in this World that you have Reason to be
fond of, what in the other that you need be afraid of? Suppose that now your
Souls were on the Wing mounting upwards to the celestial Abodes, and that at
some convenient Stand between Heaven and Earth, from whence you might take a
Prospect of both, you were now making a Pause to survey and compare them with
one another; that having viewed over all the Glories above, and tasted the
beatifical Joys, and heard the ravishing Melodies of Angels, you were now
looking down again with your Minds filled with these glorious Ideas, upon this
miserable World, and that all in a View you beheld the vast Numbers of Men and
Women that at this Time are fainting for Want of Bread, of young Men that are
hewn down by the Sword of War, of Orphans that are weeping over their Fathers
Graves, of Mariners that are shrieking in a Storm, because their Keel dashes
against a Rock, or bulges under them; of People that are groaning upon
Sick-Beds, or racked with Agonies of Conscience; that are weeping with Want,
mad with Oppression, or desperate by too quick a Sense of a constant
Infelicity: Would you not, do you think, upon such a Review of both States be
infinitely glad that you are gone from hence, that you are out of the Noise and
Participation of so many Evils and Calamities? Would not the sight of the
Glories above and the Miseries beneath you make you a Thousand Times more
fearful of returning hither than ever you were of going hence? Yes doubtless it
would. Why then should not our Sense of the Misery here, and our Belief of the
Happiness there, produce the same Effect in us, make us willing to remove our
Quarters, and exchange this Wilderness for that Canaan? It Is true indeed, the
Passage from one to the other is commonly very painful and grievous; but what of
that? In other Cases we are willing enough to endure a present Pain in order to
a future Ease; and if a few mortal Pangs will work a perfect Cure on me, and
recover me into everlasting Bliss and Life, methinks the Hope of this blessed
Effect should be sufficient to sweeten and indear that Agony, and render it
easy and desirable. But alas! To die is to leave all our Acquaintance, to bid
adieu to our dearest Friends and Relations, to pass into an unknown State, to
converse with Strangers whose Laws and Customs we are not acquainted with; why
now all that looks sad in this is a very great mistake; for I verily hope that
I have more Friends and Acquaintance and Relatives in Heaven than I shall leave
behind me here on Earth, and if so, I do but go from worse Friends to better;
for one Friend there is worth a Thousand here in Respect of all those endearing
Accomplishments that render a Friend a Jewel. But if I die a good Man I shall
carry into Eternity with me the Genius and Temper of a glorified Spirit, and
that will recommend me to the Society of Heaven, and render the Spirits of
those just Men, whose Names I never heard of, as dear Friends to me in an
Instant as if they had been my ancient Cronies and Acquaintance. But why should
I grieve at parting with my Friends below, when I shall go to the best Friend I
have in all the World; to God my Father, to Jesus my Redeemer, and to the Holy
Ghost my constant Comforter and Assistant. And what though the State and the
Laws and Customs of it be in a great Measure unknown to me? Yet what I know is
infinitely desirable, from whence I may reasonably infer that what I know not
is so too; and if I have but the Temper of Heaven, I am sure I shall easily
comply with the heavenly Laws and Customs of it. So that in the whole, I
cannont imagine why any good Man that seriously believes the Doctrine of a
blessed Immortality, and has a just well-grounded Hope of being made Partaker
of it at the Expiration of this mortal Life, should be so loath to leave this
wretched World, and expire into that blessed Eternity. I do not deny, but the
Circumstances of our Affairs in this Life are many times such as may justly
excuse even a good Man's Willingness to die; some great Opportunities of doing
Good may present themselves, and invite him to stay a little longer; or his
having begun his Repentance late, or not having made a competent Provision for
his Family may for a Time justify his Unwillingness to depart; and render it
both excusable and reasonable. But unless it be in these excepted Cases,
methinks I can hardly reconcile our Hopes of Happiness with our Fear of Death.
For when I am verily persuaded that Death is only a narrow Stream running
between Time and Eternity, and I see my God and my Savior with Crowns of Glory
in their Hands beckoning to me from the farther Shore, and calling to me to
come over and receive those happy Recompenses of my Industry and Labor, that I
like a naked timorous Boy should stand shivering on this Bank of Time, as if I
were afraid to dip my Foot in that cold Stream of Fate, which as soon as I am
in I am past, and in the Twinkling of an Eye will land me on eternal Bliss, is
such an extravagant Inconsistency, as (if I did not feel it in me) I should
never believe I could be guilty of.

4 thly. And lastly, Hence I infer what a vast deal of Reason we have to be
diligent and industrious in Religion, since God has proposed such a vast
Reward to us to encourage and animate our Industry. How can we account any Work
hard, of which Heaven is the Wages? How can we faint in our Christian Race when
we see the Crown of Glory hanging over the Goal? Methinks this should be enough
to infuse Life and Spirit into the most crest-fallen Souls, to make Cripples
run, and to convert the most sneaking Coward into a bold and magnanimous Hero.
For how much Pains do we ordinarily take upon far less Hopes? in Hope of a
little transitory Wealth which we know we shall enjoy but a few years, and then
part with for ever, we thrust our selves into a perpetual Crowd and Tumult of
Business, where with vast Concern and Thoughtfulness, with eager and passionate
Prosecutions, with endless Brauls and Contentions, with jostling and
rencountring one another, we toil and weary our selves, and make our Lives a
constant Drudgery: And shall we flag when Heaven is the Object of our
Prosecutions, who are so active in the Pursuit of Trifles? Whenever therefore
we find our Endeavors in Religion begin to jade and droop, let us lift up our
Eyes to the Crown of Glory, and if we are capable of being moved by Objects of
the greatest Value, that must infuse new Vigor into us, and make us all Life
and Spirit, and Wing. For what though my Way lies up the Hill, and leads me
along through Thorns and Precipices; so that I am fain to sweat at every Step;
and every Ascent is a Toil to me: Yet when I am up, I am sure to be entertained
with such pleasant Gales and glorious Prospects, as will fully recompense all
my Toil in climbing thither. There with an over-joyed Heart I shall sit down
and bless my Labors: Blessed be you my bitter Agonies and sharp Conflicts, my
importunate Prayers, and well-spent Tears; for now I am fully repaid for you
all, and do reap ten thousand Times more Joys from you than ever I endured
Pains. For what are the Pains of a Moment to the Pleasures of an Eternity?
Wherefore hold out my Faith and Patience yet a little longer, and your Work
will soon be at an end; and after a few laborious Weekdays, you shall keep an
everlasting Sabbath. What though my Voyage lie through a stormy Sea, yet it is
to the Indies of Happiness; and a few Leagues farther lies the blessed Port,
where I shall be crowned as soon as I am landed. Go on therefore, O my Soul,
with thy utmost Courage and Alacrity; for let the Winds bluster, and the Waves
swell never so much, yet thou can not miscarry, unless thou will. Thou art
not like other Passengers left to the Mercy of Wind and Weather, but thy Fate
is in thy own Hands; and if thou will but have thy Fruit unto Holiness, thy End
shall be everlasting Life.

1 Epist. JOHN IV.19. We love him, because he first loved us.
I Have showed you in the former Discourses how indispensably necessary it is
that we should love God in Order to our being truly religious; and proved to
you at large, that of all Principles of Religion whatsoever this is the most
operative and effectual. And then to excite this heavenly Affection in you, I
have shown you that the Goodness of God is the principal Motive that engages
our Love to him. And now that I may more largely explain the Nature and
Measures of this Love as it is our Duty, and engage you to it by this grand
Motive of the divine Goodness, I have made choice of this Text, We love him,
because he first loved us.

The Greek Word, (...) here may as well be rendered subjunctively, to signify
what we ought to do, as indicatively for what we already do; and indeed it
seems more suitable to the Context to render it we should, or ought to love
him, than we love him. For in the former Verses the Apostle earnestly presses
Christians to love one another upon the Consideration of God's great love to
them; and then considering how naturally their Love to one another, would
follow upon their mutual Love to God, he concludes, that the most effectual
Course to oblige them to love one another, was to excite them to the Love of
God upon the Consideration of his great Love to them. For says he, Verse. 20.
If a Man say, I love God, and hates his Brother, he is a liar; because Light
it self is not more inseparable to the Sun than Brotherly-Love is to the Love
of God: So that unless we render (...), we should love him, as we shall
evacuate the Necessity of the Apostles Counsel, so we shall disturb the Order
and Method of his Argument. For if we render it Indicatively, We love him, it
will thence necessarily follow that we shall also love one another, and so
there would be no Need of the Apostles Counsel, and then the Words will be
wholly impertinent to the Argument; which, as I have showed, is to excite us to
the Love of God, and thereby to engage us to love one another; but what need he
excite us to do that which he himself confesses we did already? If therefore we
render the Word subjunctively, as it seems most reasonable we should, this will
be the Sense of the Text, We are bound in duty to love God, because he first
loved us; according to which Sense here is, First, a Duty, We ought to love
God. Secondly, a Reason of it, because he first loved us.


I. I begin with the Duty, We ought to love him. In handling of which I shall
do these two Things.

1. Show you what it is to love God. 2. In what Degrees and Measures we are
bound to love him. And in explaining what this Love of God is I shall show you,
First, Wherein the Being and Essence of it consists. Secondly, What are its
essential Chararacters and Properties.


1. Wherein the Being and Essence of our Love of God consists? To which I
answer in general, that this Love of God consists in a rational, fixed,
affecting Delight and Complacency in the divine Goodness and Perfections. But
that we may the better understand the Nature of this heavenly Virtue, and more
exactly distinguish it from those wretched Counterfeits that commonly usurp its
Name, and are too to often mistaken for it, it will be necessary to explain the
several Terms whereof its Definition is composed.

1. Therefore I say it is a Delight and Complacency. 2. It is a rational one. 3.
A fixed. 4. An affecting one. 5. It Is terminated on the divine Goodness and
Perfections.
1. The Love of God consists in Delight and Complacency. And indeed this is the
proper Act of Love, as it is distinguished from all other Passions. For we find
by experience, that the first Act of our Minds upon the Apprehension of a
lovely Object, is Delight and Complacency in the View or Contemplation of it;
and when any amiable Object presents it self to our Sense, or to our Minds, or
Fancies, it causes our Thoughts to pause and stay themselves a while upon it
till we have viewed it round about, and drawn its Picture in our Minds, and
when we have done, the very first Expression of our Love to it, is to be well
pleased with the Contemplation of it; and while we review it over and over, to
be sweetly ravished and delighted with the charming Prospect of its Beauty. And
from this prime and essential Act of Love arises all those consequent
Affections of Hope, Benevolence, and Desire of Fruition: For the reason why we
wish well to, hope for, or desire to enjoy any Object, is because we are
well-pleased with it, and do find a sweet Content and Satisfaction in that
Picture or Idea of it which we have drawn upon our own Minds. So that the very
Essence of Love, you see, consists in a Well-pleasedness arising from the
apprehended Goodness and Congruity of the Thing beloved; and it is merely by
Accident that there is any other Emotion intermingled with this grateful
Affection. For if it were not for the Want of what we love, if there were no
Distance between us and the Objects of our Affection, our Love would be all but
one pure continued Act of Complacency and Delight; for if all our Needs were
fully satisfied, we should love without either Desire or Hope, both which imply
Want and Absence from the Objects of our Love; which is a plain Evidence, that
Complacency is the very Essence of Love, since there may be Love without Hope,
or Desire, or any other Passion mingled with it; but without Complacency there
can be none. It Is true, the Degrees of Love's Complacencies are much greater in
the Fruition of its Objects, than they are in the Pursuit of them, but still
it is of the same Kind; for it is the Delight we take in an Object that makes us
desire to enjoy it; but in the Enjoyment our Desire expires into an higher
Degree of Delight and Satisfaction. For Desire and Delight are only the Wings
and Arms of Love, those for Pursuits, and these for Embraces; but it is the Arms
that give the Wings both Motion and Rest, the Delight we take in the Objects of
our Love, that both inflames and quenches our Desire. So that though in this
indigent State Hope and Desire are inseparable to our Love, yet that is by
Accident; but as for its Essence and Definition it wholly consists of Delight
and Complacency. And therefore if our Love of God has the common Notion of
Love in it, as questionless it has, it must necessarily consist in our being
well-pleased and delighted in the Beauty, and Goodness, and Perfection of his
Nature. And accordingly we find in Scripture that our Love to God and God's
Love to us is expressed by delighting in one another; so Prove. iii.12. For whom
the Lord loves, he corrects, even as a Father the Son in whom he delights,
i. e. whom he loves. So also our Love to God is expressed by delighting in him,
Psalm. xxxvii.4. Delight thy self also in the Lord; and he shall give thee the
desires of thine Heart.

2 ly. The Love of God is a rational Delight and Complacency in him; by which
it is distinguished from those sensible Emotions of bodily Passion which many
times are nothing else put the natural Effects of an overheated Fancy. For I
make no doubt but a Man may be wrapped even into an Ecstasy of sensible Delight
and Complacency in God; that is, upon an amiable Representation of God, his
Spirits may be made to flow in a sweet and placid Torrent to his Heart, and by
their nimble Motions about it to sooth and tickle it into a most sensible
Pleasure, till it opens and dilates its Orifices, and the grateful Flood breaks
in and drowns it in Delight and Ravishment. And yet in all this mighty Storm
and Commotion of Passion there may not be the least Spark of sincere Love to
God; For all this not only may be, but many times is nothing else but the mere
Mechanism and Natural Effect of a warm and vigorous Fancy, which being flushed
with such brisk and active Spirits as are most apt to be figured into amorous
Phantasms and Ideas, can with these without any Assistance from Reason raise
great Commotions of Joy in the Heart; especially where the Temper is soft, and
the Passions easy to be wrought upon. And of the Truth of this the Histories
of the Devotos of all Religions will furnish us with sufficient Experiments.
For even among the Turkish and Heathen Saints there are as notorious Instances
of these sweet Incomes and Manifestations, as among our own; and the same
sensitive Complacencies which ours too often mistake for the Sealings and
Witness of the Spirit, they frequently experience in their Communion with
Mahomet, Bacchus, and Apollo. So that to conclude that we love God from those
corporeal Passions, is very unsafe and dangerous; and we may almost as
certainly judge of the Hunger of our Souls after Righteousness by the Hunger of
our Bodies after Bread, as of the Love of our Souls to God by our bodily
Ravishments and Passions. For bodily Passion differs according to the Temper of
the Body; some Tempers are so soft and impressive, that the most frivolous
Fancy will affect them; others so hard and sturdy, that the greatest Reason
will hardly move them; and consequently Persons of this Temper, though they
should love God much more than the other, and have a much higher Esteem of, and
more rational Complacency in his divine Perfections; yet will have much less of
corporeal Passion intermingled with it. I do not deny, but even this sensitive
Passion, when prudently managed, may be of great Advantage to a rational Love;
for the Passions being soft and easy, and apt to follow the Motions of the
Soul, do naturally intend and quicken them, and render them more vigorous and
active; and we have very much Cause to bless God even for that sensitive Joy
and Complacency which accompanies our Love to him, since this, I doubt not, is
many times excited by his own blessed Spirit, to quicken and invigorate our
rational Affection, and render it more active and vivacious. But that which I
aim at is only this, if possible to beat Men off from measuring the Strength or
Weakness, the Truth or Falsehood of their Love to God by any corporeal Passion
whatsoever; since Men may, we see, and many times have a vehement Passion
without any Reason, and all those Ticklings and Ravishments of Heart which too
many Men mistake for the Love of God, are very often nothing else but the
necessary Effects of a chafed and overheated Fancy. But that which is really
the Love of God is always founded in a rational Conviction of the Beauty and
Goodness of his Nature, and proceeds from an high Esteem and profound
Veneration of his Perfections. For no Man loves God, but can give very good
Reason why he loves him; he is not moved to it by a Musical Tone, or a gaudy
Metaphor, or an unaccountable Impulse of Fancy; but by the real Charms and
Attractions of the divine Goodness and Perfections, which darting through his
Mind, like the Sunbeams through a Burning-glass, have kindled his Affections,
and made him love with infinite Reason; so that it is his Understanding that
inamours his Will, and that which makes him a Lover of God is the deep Sense of
his Reason, how much he deserves to be beloved. He has seriously considered
how lovely God is in himself, how kind and loving unto all his Creation, and
what particular Obligation God has laid upon him to return him Love for Love;
and this gives Fire to his Love, and affects his Will with Delight and
Complacency; and though perhaps he may not feel those passionate Soothings and
Expansions of Heart which sensitive Joy is wont to produce, yet he finds
himself highly pleased with God, and his Will acquiesces in the Thought of his
Goodness and Perfections with a Calm and even Complacency: And thus his Will is
inflamed with the purest Light of his Understanding, and his Love is nothing
else but the warm Reflection of his Reason. Thus Psalm. cxvi.1. I love the Lord,
says David, and then he goes on to enumerate the vast and important Reasons
why he loved him; because he has inclined his Ear, etc. And in the 1 Cor.
viii.3. If any Man love God, the same, i. e. God, is known of him; intimating
that all true Love of God is founded in the Knowledge of him.

3 dly, The Love of God is a fixed as well as rational Complacency in him, by
which I distinguish this heavenly Affection from those short and transitory
Fits of Love, that like Flashes of Lightning come and go, appear and vanish in
a Moment. For thus upon some affecting Providence, or passionate Representation
of the Divine Goodness, it is very ordinary for Men to be chafed into an
amorous Fit, and touched with very tender Resentments of the Loveliness and
Love of God; so that at present they seem to be in Raptures of Affection, and,
with the Spouse in the Canticles, to be wondrous sick of Love; but alas! It
commonly proves but a sudden Qualm, that after a Pang or two goes over, and so
they are well again immediately; for upon their next Encounter with Temptation,
or Intermixture with secular Affairs, their hot Love begins to languish, and
quickly dies into a cold Indifferency; and notwithstanding all the Reasons and
Obligations that they have to the contrary, their fickle Hearts unwind again,
and by Degrees decline and sink into their old habitual Aversation to God and
Goodness; which is a plain Evidence that that which at first looked like the
Love of God in them, was only a sudden Blush of Passion, and not the true
Complexion of their Souls. For when once a Man is brought to love God upon
Principles of Reason and Consideration, it is much more difficult to extinguish
this, than any Virtue whatsoever; because of all the Virtues of Religion this
is founded in the greatest Reason, and accompanied with the strongest Pleasure.
For Love it self consisting in Delight and Complacency, where the Object of it
is an infinite Good, there is not only infinite Reason to Love, but infinite
Occasion of Pleasure and Complacency. When therefore our Love of God is backed
with so much Reason, and sweetened with so much Pleasure, how is it possible we
should extinguish it without doing the greatest Violence to our selves? For I
am verily persuaded, that one of the hardest moral Changes that can be made
upon a rational Creature, is from a Lover to become an Enemy to God; for
wheresoever this heavenly Affection is, it sweetens and endears it self by its
own appendent Pleasures, which are in themselves a sufficient Counter-charm
against all Temptations to the contrary. So that when once it is kindled in the
Soul, like a subtle Flame 'twill by Degrees insinuate farther and farther, till
it has eaten into the Center of the Soul, and turned it all into its own
Substance. Wherefore this we may certainly conclude upon, that he who can
suddenly or easily entertain an Aversation to God and Goodness, did never truly
Love; for Love, says the Wise Man, is strong as Death, and many Waters cannot
quench it, Cant. viii.6, 7. Wheresoever it lights it clings, and can never be
torn away again without violent Spasms and Convulsions. So that whatsoever
Passion we may have for God, we can never conclude it to be hearty Love till it
fixes and settles in our Souls; till our Wills are habitually pleased with God,
and do entertain the Thoughts of his Love and Loveliness, with a constant
Complacency and Delight; and then we may venture to call it Love, and to
rejoice in the Nativity of this heavenly Flame within us.

4 thly, It Is an affecting Delight and Complacency in God; by which I
distinguish it from a mere Liking and naked Approbation. For God is a Being so
infinitely amiable and benevolent, that it is impossible almost for any
reasonable Creature to know him, and not like, and approve of him. But though
in all Approbation there is some Degree of Complacency, yet there is no Doubt
but a Man may approve of what he does not Love, and there is no Doubt but there
are many Men that do approve of God as the most glorious and excellent of
Beings, and the most worthy of Love and Veneration, who yet have not one Spark
of real Love toward him. For thus St. Paul, we find, when he was a Jew in
Religion, approved of the Law as holy, and just, and good, Romans vii.12. and
that in this Approbation of his there was some Degree of Complacency and
Delight, for says he, I delight in the Law of God according to the inward Man,
Verse. 22. but all this while he was very far from having any real Love and
Affection for it; for in the next Verse he tells us, that he had a Law in his
Members warring against the Law of his Mind; that is, he had an inward
Repugnancy and Aversation against this excellent Law, which his Reason did
approve of as holy and just and good; and no Degree of true Love could consist
with such an Aversation. And there is no doubt but most Men who have right
Conceptions of God, do in their Mind and Reason as much approve of, and delight
in the Perfection of his Nature, as St. Paul did in the Perfection of his Law;
and yet their Wills are as repugnant and averse to the Holiness and Purity of
the one, as St. Paul's then was to the Justice and Goodness of the other.
Wherefore to constitute us true Lovers of God, it is necessary that our
Approbation of, and Delight and Complacency in him should be such as does
powerfully affect our Wills and reconcile them to the Nature of God. For whilst
our Wills are averse to that immaculate Purity and Goodness which is so
inseparable to his Nature, it is impossible we should heartily love him; and
though in our Minds we may approve of him as a most glorious and excellent
Being, yet in our Hearts we shall still retain a secret Antipathy against him.
And I doubt not but the Devils themselves do so far approve of God, as to
acknowledge him altogether amiable and lovely; for if they do not, I am sure
they are very shallow Spectators; but yet we see this Approbation of theirs
accompanied with an inveterate Rancour and Enmity against him. And till our
Wills are so affected by our Reason as to consent and echo to its
Approbations, to take Complacency in that divine Purity which our Reason
acknowledges to be the Crown and Ornament of God; whilst we reverence him in
our Minds, we hate and despise him in our Affections. So that he only is a
Lover of God, whose Will is reconciled to true Goodness.

5 thly. And lastly, This Love must be terminated on the proper Goodness and
Perfections of God; and hereby I distinguish it from that Love which we too
commonly terminate upon a God of our own making. For it is very ordinary with
Men to set up Idols and false Representations of God in their Minds, and then
fall down and worship them: And it is no great Wonder if they are extremely
fond of these Idol-Divinities of their own making, since commonly they are
nothing else but the Pictures and Images of themselves. Thou thoughtst, says
God to those profligate Persons, that I was such a one as thy self, Psalm. l.21.
Men have always been prone to cast all their Ideas of God in the Mould of their
own Tempers, and to fashion the Divinity whom they Worship, according to the
Model of their own Inclinations. Thus Men of ungovernable and imperious Tempers
are apt to represent God in their own Likeness, a Being that governs himself
and others by a mere blind omnipotent Self-will, that wills Things merely
because he wills them, and is no way concerned to regulate his own Motions by
any antecedent Rules of Justice, Wisdom, or Goodness. So also Men of wrathful
and revengeful Tempers are apt to look upon God as a froward, furious, and
implacable Being, that is to be pleased or displeased with Trifles, that frowns
or smiles as the Humor takes him; that when the froward Fit is upon him
Breaths nothing but Revenge and Fury, and whose Love and Hatred is fickle and
mutable, and never constant to the same Reasons. And to name no more, thus Men
of fond and indulgent Natures are apt to represent God to themselves as one
that dotes invincibly on those who have once the Luck to be his Favorites, and
in Christ, at least will hug their very Deformities, and connive at their
greatest Treasons and Rebellions. And since these false Representations that
Men make of God are nothing but the Reflections of their own Images, in loving
him they only love themselves; and it is no wonder that they are more devoutly
affected toward such an imaginary Divinity than toward the true God himself
clothed with his own Attributes, and circled about with his own Rays of
unstained and immaculate Glory; since the former is nothing but their own
Shadow, which Narcissus-like they gaze upon and fall in love with. But
whatsoever Love we may bestow upon these false Representations it is not
terminated upon God, but on the Specter and Images of our Fancies, which have
nothing of God about them but the Name. Wherefore to constitute our Love truly
divine, it is necessary that it should respect God as he is in himself, and not
as he seems to be in these disfigured Idols of our own Fancies. We must blot
out of our Minds all these false Conceptions, which like the Ethiopian Idols,
are nothing but our own Resemblance, and portrait him in all those fair Ideas
wherein he has represented himself unto us; and when we have righted him in
our own Opinions, and formed such Notions of him as are agreeable to his native
Perfections, then we must love him for what we see in him, even for the Mercy
and Goodness, the Righteousness and Purity of his Nature. For unless we love
these his moral Perfections, which are indeed the only Objects of Love in him,
all our kind Pretenses are base Flatteries, and in stead of him we only Love a
Mock-God of our own making. And thus I have showed you at large wherein the
Essence of this heavenly Virtue, our Love of God consists. But because Things
are better understood by their essential Characters and Properties than by
their naked Essences, and we may much more easily discern whether we truly love
God or no by the former than by the latter,

2. I proceed in the next Place to show you what are the essential Properties
and Characters of our Love of God: And these are to be fetched from the Nature
of Love in general, the Properties whereof when it is determined on a Person,
are chiefly these four: 1. Benevolence to the Person beloved. 2. Desire of
enjoying him. 3. Imitation of his Perfections. 4. Conformity to his Will.


1. Benevolence is an essential Property of our Love of God; by which I do not
mean wishing of any additional Good or Happiness to God which yet he wants; for
that is Extravagance, to wish that a Being who is infinitely happy should be
more happy than he is; since his Happiness would not be infinite if it could
admit of Addition or Increase. By our Benevolence to God therefore I only mean
our hearty Desire that he may be pleased by our selves and others; that all his
Creation may conspire to serve and glorify him in that Method which he has
prescribed; and that his Will may be done upon Earth, as it is in Heaven. And
this must necessarily be the hearty Wish of every sincere Lover of God; and
when he sees himself defeated of his Wish by the wicked Lives and Manners of
Men; when he considers how God is offended every Day, how his Authority is
affronted, his Laws trampled on, his Name vilified and blasphemed by bold and
insolent Sinners, he cannot forbear grieving at it, to see him his Soul loves,
loaded with so many Indignities and Dishonours. For thus did David, that great
Lover of God; Rivers of tears run down mine Eyes, because Men keep not thy Law,
Psalm. cxix.136. So that what the brave Portia said to her dear Brutus (...),
that can every Lover of God say; Lord! Thou know that I sympathize in all
thy Pleasures and Displeasures; when thou art pleased, I rejoice; and when thou
art offended, I am grieved.

2 ly. Another Property of divine Love is an earnest Desire of enjoying God.
For so when we love a Friend, we desire to enjoy as much of him as we are able;
that is, we would fain be more intimately acquainted with him, we would love
him more, and be more beloved by him, and resemble him in all those amiable
Qualities for which we love and admire him. And thus if we have chosen God for
our Friend, we shall still be breathing after a more intimate Fruition of him;
our Thoughts will be often employed in the Contemplation of his Beauty and
Glory; and our Minds will be perpetually longing after a clearer Knowledge of,
and more intimate Acquaintance with him. We shall never think we love him
sufficiently; and never think we can do enough to endear our selves to his
Favor; but shall always feel in our selves both Want of Love to him, and Want
of Desert to be beloved by him. We shall incessantly covet more and more to
resemble him in those adorable Perfections for which we love him; that so if it
were possible, he might have the same Reason to love us, as we have to love
him. We shall earnestly hunger and thirst after Righteousness, and vehemently
wish that all those amiable Characters of Purity and Justice, Mercy and
Goodness, for which we do admire and love him, were more fairly imprinted on
our own Natures; that so by partaking of these Perfections, we may grow more
and more god-like, till we are arrived to a most perfect Resemblance and
Conformity of Natures with him. Thus to enjoy God must needs be the Desire of
every true and hearty Lover of him. And indeed this is the only Enjoyment we
are capable of; for we cannot enjoy God's Essence, because we cannot possess
it, it being neither communicated nor communicable; and therefore all that our
Enjoyment of him can include, is to know and love, and be beloved by him, and
to resemble him in those charming Beauties of Purity and Goodness which render
him so infinitely lovely; and it is essential to every faithful Lover of him
thus to desire to enjoy him.

3 ly. Imitation of his Perfections is another essential Property of Love to
him: and this is necessarily consequent to the former; for if we love God, it
is either for the good he does us, or for the Beauty and Loveliness of his
Nature. If we love him for the good he does us, we must needs be sensible that
it is a lovely Thing to do good, and this must strangely incline us to imitate
him in doing all the good we are able. If we love him for the Beauty and
Excellency of his Nature, we cannot but desire to be like him; because
whatsoever we esteem lovely in another, we desire to partake of out of love to
our selves; and if we desire to partake of what is lovely in another, that must
needs engage us to imitate him, since we have no other Way to partake of
another Excellencies but only by a constant Imitation of them. So that it is
impossible we should love God for the Beauty and Perfection of his Nature, and
not hearily desire to partake of it; and it is impossible we should heartily
desire to partake of it, and not endeavor to transcribe it by a constant and
vigorous Imitation. So that whatsoever good Reason we love God for, it must
necessarily terminate in our Imitation of those amiable Actions or Perfections
for which we love him; and therefore any Man to pretend to love God while he
acts contrary to the Reasons for which he loves him, is plainly to contradict
himself, and baffle his own Pretensions. For to say that I love God for doing
good, or for being just, holy, and benevolent, while I take no Care to do good
my self, but take Pleasure in Impurity, Injustice, or Incharitableness, is to
say that I love him for those Things which I plainly declare I do not love. If
therefore we heartily love God as we pretend to do, it will be visible in our
Imitation of him; for unless we endeavor to be pure as he is pure, and holy as
he is holy, and just and merciful as he is just and merciful; all our
Pretensions of Love to him are Cheats and fulsom Hypocrisy.

4 thly, and lastly. Compliance with the Will of God is another essential
Character and Property of our Love to him. For if we sincerely love a Person,
we must needs desire to please him, that so thereby we may endear our selves to
him; and if we really desire to please him, to be sure we shall readily comply
with his Will in whatsoever is just and reasonable. And hence the Scripture
makes our Obedience to the Will of God essential to our Love of him; For this,
says St. John, is the love of God, that we keep his Commandments, 1 John v.3.
and this is love, that we walk after his Commandments, 2 Epist. vi. If ye love
me, says our Savior, keep my Commandments, Joh. xiv.15. that is, give me this
Token that ye love me; for without this I can never believe that you have any
real Kindness for me whatsoever Pretensions you may make; for so Verse. 23. he
adds If any Man love me, he will keep my Commandments, intimating that between
our Love of, and Obedience to him, there is a necessary and inseparable
Connection. So that we may as soon be Men without Risibility, as Lovers of God
without sincere Submission to his Will. For Lovers have one Will and one Soul;
they conspire in the same Designs, and drive at the same Interests; their
Affections are perfect Vnizons, and do in the same Likes and Dislikes resound
and echo to one another; and so far as they love, there is such a perfect
Agreement between them that they seem mutually to lend and borrow Wills and
Souls with one another. And so if we love God, there will be a sweet Harmony
between our Wills and his, at least so far as we love him; for if we love him,
we shall love to please him, by complying in all Things with his heavenly Will,
and rejoice that we are able to do any thing that we are sure will be
acceptable in his Eyes, and certainly endear us to his most tender Affection.
Whilst therefore we live in wilful Disobedience and Opposition to his heavenly
Will, all our Pretenses of Love to him are rank Dissimulations, and like the
Kisses of Judas are only Prefaces to our succeeding Treasons and Rebellions.
And thus you see wherein the Essence of our Love to God consists, and what are
its essential Properties; by a serious Review of which you may easily conclude
whether in reality you are Lovers of God or no.

2. I now proceed to the next Enquiry, namely what Measures and Degrees of this
Love are Matter of indispensable Duty to us. For answer to which we must
consider, that this as well as all the other Virtues of Christianity are
required of us by a twofold Law; the first is the Law of Perfection, the second
is the Law of Sincerity; both of which it will be necessary for us to explain
before we can exactly determine what Degrees and Measures of Love to God are
Matter of indispensable Duty.

1. First therefore there is the Law of Perfection, which requires the utmost
Degrees of every Christian Virtue that in the several States and Periods of our
Lives we are capable of attaining. For thus we are enjoined, not only to do,
but to abound in the work of the Lord; not only to have Grace, but to grow in
it; to perfect holiness in the fear of God, and be perfect as our Father in
Heaven is perfect. And indeed the Nature of God is the only Standard of that
Perfection whereunto we must aspire, and we are still bound to be growing on
till we are infinitely holy; which, because our finite Natures can never arrive
to in any Period of Duration, therefore I doubt not but it will be our Duty to
be growing on eternally. So that this Law having prescribed no Limits to the
Degrees of our Growth in Virtue, has thereby cut out work enough to employ our
Faculties for ever. Not that we are Sinners against this Law so long as we are
short or defective of the utmost Degree of Perfection; for it requires of us no
more than what is within our present Possibility, and our Possibility increases
together with our Improvements. When we have but one Degree of Virtue, it is no
Sin against the Law of Perfection that we do not immediately leap to six or
seven; because it is not in our Power, and no Law can oblige a Man to that
which is impossible; but when we have acquired one Degree we have Power to
acquire a second, and when we have acquired that, we have Power to acquire a
third; and so on ad infinitum; and consequently our Obligation to be more and
more perfect, increases according to the Improvement of our Power. A Babe in
Christ, or Beginner in Religion has not the Strength and Power of a Man, that
is, of one that has made a considerable Progress; and consequently he is not
immediately obliged by this Law to the same Degree of Growth and Perfection;
but whatsoever Degree is within his Power in the different Periods of his
Growth and Progress, that he is actually and immediately obliged to, and while
he continues defective in it he sins against the Law of Perfection. So that in
short, this Law requires us to be in all Respects as good in the several Stages
of our Christian Progress as at present it is possible for us to be; and so far
as we fall short of any Attainment that is within our Power, we are guilty of
violating its righteous Obligation. It Is true, this Law does not oblige us
under the Pain of eternal Damnation; and indeed if it did, no Flesh could be
saved, since there never was any mere Man but might have possibly been better
than he was, had he been so diligent as to improve himself to the utmost Degree
of his Power. The proper Sanction therefore of this Law is this, that we should
actually do all the good, and acquire all the Degrees of Virtue that are at
present within our Power, under the Pain of losing some Degree of Happiness in
the other World, which otherwise we should have attained; which is no more than
what naturally follows upon all sinful Defects. For every sinful Defect is a
Privation of some Degree of Goodness, and Goodness is so essential to
Happiness, that there cannot be a Privation of the one without a Diminution of
the other. But besides those Defects of Happiness that are naturally consequent
to our Defects of Virtue, the Scripture plainly assures us that God himself
will substract from our Reward hereafter in Proportion to our moral Defects and
Nonimprovements in this Life; for he which sows sparingly, says the Apostle,
shall reap sparingly: And he which sows bountifully, shall reap also
bountifully, 2 Cor. ix.6. And Luke xix. our Savior by way of a Parable does
expressly teach us, that our Reward shall be apportioned to the Degrees of our
Improvement; for there he represents himself as a Master coming to take Account
of his Servants, among whom he had entrusted a Stock of Ten Pounds, giving
every one of them an equal Share; the first by an extraordinary Diligence had
improved his Pound into Ten, and he is rewarded accordingly with the Government
of ten Cities, Verse. 16, 17. The other had been faithful, though not altogether
so diligent, and by his one Pound had gained five, and proportionably is made
Lord of five Cities, Verse. 18, 19. By which he plainly declares that so much as
we come short of the utmost Improvement in Virtue, so much will he substract
from the utmost Degree of our Reward. So that in short the Sense of the Law of
Perfection is this, as thou would not incur the Forfeiture of some Degrees of
thy Happiness in the other Life, be sure to employ thy utmost Diligence in
improvlng thy self in every Grace and Virtue of Religion. But then

2 ly. There is the Law of Sincerity, which only requires the Being and Reality
of all Christian Graces and Virtues in us, together with the proper Acts and
Exercises of them according as we have Opportunity, and does no farther forbid
the Deficiency and Non-improvement of them than as it is gross and continued
and inconsistent with Sincerity. Now the Reality of these Christian Virtues in
us consists in the universal and prevalent Consent of our Wills to them, to
practice them as often as Occasion requires, and not wilfully to commit any
contrary Sin upon any Occasion whatsoever; and so long as this Consent
continues and prevails in our Practice, we are just in the Eye and Judgment of
the Law, whatsoever Weakness and Defects, Surprises and Inadvertencies we may
otherwise be guilty of. For he who has so submitted his Will to God as to
consent effectually without any Reserve to obey him, is evidently cordial and
sincere, though perhaps he may be weak and imperfect. For as he is sincerely
chaste, whose Will does prevalently Consent to the Law of Chastity; so he is
universally a virtuous Man, whose Will does prevalently Consent to the
universal Law of Virtue; because that very Consent of his includes the Being
and Reality of all Virtues, though not the utmost Degrees and Improvements of
them. This therefore is the utmost that the Law of Sincerity requires, that we
should universally and prevalently Consent to the Will of God so as not
wilfully to neglect any Duty which he has enjoined, and practice any Sin which
he has forbid; but though this be all it requires, yet this it exacts under
the severest Penalty in the World, even that of eternal Death and Condemnation;
only this Proviso it admits of, that if we do repent and amend, this dreadful
Obligation shall be null and void. So that the great Difference between the Law
of Perfection and the Law of Sincerity is only this, that the Penalty of the
later is much more Severe than that of the former; but the Duty of the former
is much more large and comprehensive than that of the later.

Having thus briefly explained to you these two Different Laws by which the
Love of God as well as all other Virtues are made our Duty, this I conceive
will be of very great Use in stating the due Bounds and Measures either of Love
or any other Virtue God requires of us: We must understand by what Laws it is
that he requires it, and what Measures of it those Laws do require. First
therefore, we will consider what Degree of Love to God is required by the Law
of Perfection. Secondly, what Degree of it is required by the Law of Sincerity.

1 st. What Degree of Love to God is required by the Law of Perfection? To
which I answer, that it requires all that Love which in the several Periods of
our Growth and Progress in Religion we are able to render him. For it is to be
considered that in this corrupt Estate, both our Understandings and Wills are
so darkened and depraved, that we do not apprehend the thousandth Part of those
Degrees of Loveliness that are in him, and if we did, yet our Affections are so
inveigled by these sensual Goods among which we are placed, that we are not
able to render him the thousandth Part of that Love, which those Degrees of
Loveliness we do apprehend in him do deserve. But there is no just Law can
exact of us beyond what we are able to perform; and therefore this Law of
Perfection being just and righteous, cannot be supposed to exact more Love to
God from us than we have Strength and Power (all our Circumstances considered)
to render unto him. So that he who does his utmost to understand, and affect
himself with the Beauty and Loveliness of God, and to substract his Love from
sensual Good, and terminate it on God, is a just and innocent Man in the
Judgment of the Law of Perfection. From whence it is evident first, that no Man
can be bound by any Law to Love God as much as he deserves to be beloved;
because he being infinitely lovely in himself is the adequate Object of an
infinite Love, which no finite Being is capable of. 2 ly. That no Man is bound
to understand how much he deserves to be beloved, because this is beyond the
Comprehension of any finite Understanding, especially of ours which are so
dim-sighted in their Apprehensions of spiritual and invisible Beings. 3 ly.
That in this State no Man is bound actually to love God so far as he apprehends
Reason to love him; this indeed we ought to endeavor after, but while we
continue in these Bodies it is impossible for us so absolutely to abstract our
Love from sense and sensual Things, as not to be in the least diverted by it
from loving him to that Degree in which we know he deserves to be beloved. It
is, I confess, our Imperfection that our Love to him is not proportionate to
our Apprehensions of his Loveliness: but besides this we have many other
Imperfections that are our Misery indeed, but not our Sin. For no Imperfection
is any farther our Sin than it is in our Power to correct it; and there is no
true Lover of God did ever attain to that Degree of Love as not to see great
Reason to wish that it were in his Power still to love him more; which is a
plain Evidence in every Period of this imperfect State that our Affections are
so entangled by these sensible Goods about us, that we are not able to raise
them to such a Degree of Love as is proportionate to our Apprehensions of his
Loveliness. 4 ly and lastly, That no Man is bound to love God in the several
Periods of his Growth and Progress in Religion with the same Degree of
Affection; for by the Law of Perfection a Man is always bound to love him as
much as he can, but in the Progress of our Religion we can love him much more
than in the Beginning. For the more we know of God, and the more our Affections
are disingaged from these sensual Goods, the more Power and Ability we have to
love him; and we are equally bound to love him as much as we can, when we have
ten Degrees of Power, as we are when we have but one; and consequently it is as
great an Offense against the Law of Perfection not to love him as much as we
can when we have more Power to love him, as it was when we had less. So that by
this Law we are always bound to love him as much as we are able, and to be
always augmenting our Ability of loving him, and always to love him more and
more as our Power and Ability increases; and under this sweet Obligation
perhaps we shall lie to all Eternity. For there being infinite Degrees of
Loveliness and Amability in God, our finite Understandings will need an
Infinity of Duration to discover them all, and it would be unreasonable for us
not to love him more, according as we discover more of the Beauty and
Loveliness of his Nature. It Is true, in this Life the Difficulty lies not so
much in discovering his Loveliness, as in affecting our Hearts with the Sense
of it, and in raising our gross and carnal Affections to a Love proportionate
to those Discoveries; and it is this that creates us so much Toil and Labor in
the Progress of our Obedience to the Law of Perfection; but when once we are
arrived into the blessed Regions of Immortality our Affection being perfectly
subdued to the Reason of our Minds, and dreined and clarified from all its
gross and carnal Love will as naturally flame out more and more toward God
upon every new Discovery of his Beauty, as Fire does when more combustible Fuel
is laid upon it; and so without any Toil or Difficulty, the more we know the
more we shall Love, and so more and more for ever. If therefore we would know
what Measures of Love to God we are obliged to by this Law of Perfection, the
Answer is easy, viz. that to all Eternity we are bound to love him as much as
we are able, and always to love him more and more as our Ability increases. And
this I take to be the Sense of that comprehensive Law of our Savior, Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with
all thy mind, and with all thy strength, Mar. 12.30. that is, thou shall employ
thy Faculties, thy Mind, thy Will, and thy Affections to the utmost of thy
Strength and Power in loving, delighting, and taking Complacency in the
Goodness, Beauty, and Perfections of God. But

2 ly. What Degree of Love to God is required by the Law of Sincerity, which is
the Law by which we must stand or fall for ever? So that the Sense of the
Enquiry is this, what Degree of Love to God is necessary to put us into a State
of Salvation, the indispensable Condition of our Salvation being nothing else
but our Obedience to this Law of Sincerity. Now as to this particular of our
Love of God there are two Things which this Law exacts of us; First, it
requires the Being and Existence of this heavenly Virtue in us, that is, it
requires not only that we should not hate God, or be indifferent between Love
and Hatred in our Affection to him, but that we should really, cordially, and
sincerely love him. And hence those eternal Glories and Beatitudes in which our
Salvation does consist, are said to be prepared by God for them that love him,
1 Cor. 2.9. which is a plain Evidence that it is one of the Conditions or
Qualifications upon which our Salvation does depend, and consequently an
indispensable Duty of the Law of Sincerity; and St. James expressly tells us,
that the Lord has promised the Crown of Life to them that love him, Ja. 1.12.
And therefore since that Law of Sincerity contains the Condition of that
Promise, it hence necessarily follows, that our Love to God is a Part of it,
since that Promise is made to those that love him. Nay, so necessary a Part of
that Law is this excellent Virtue, that the Apostle tells us, without this the
most virtuous Actions whatsoever are insignificant Ciphers in the Account of
God; for though, says he, I bestow all my Goods to feed the Poor, and though I
give my Body to be Burned, and have not Charity, it profits me nothing, 1
Cor. 13.3. where it is plain he takes Charity in the largest Sense for our Love
to God and one another. He therefore that does not really love God, who is not
heartily touched and affected with the Sense of his Goodness and Perfections
stands condemned by the Law of Sincerity; and without Repentance and Amendment
shall have no Part or Portion in the Kingdom of God. But then

Secondly, This Law of Sincerity requires such a Degree of Love to God, as
does, together with the other Motives of Christianity, effectually render us
obedient to his Will. For, as I have showed you, the Scripture every where
makes our keeping his Commandments the most essential Property of our Love of
him; for if a man love me, says our Savior, he will keep my Words, Joh.
14.23. And whosoever keeps his Word, says St. John, that is, his Commandments,
in him is the love of God perfected; that is, in him it is real, and cordial,
and sincere, 1 John 2.5. When therefore our Love to God has that Power over
us, as together with the other Motives of Christianity, to restrain us from the
wilful Omission of any known Duty, or Commission of any known Sin, it is then
perfected to that Degree which the Law of Sincerity exacts. But before we
dismiss this Argument, it will be necessary to give a more particular Account
of it.

1. Therefore, this Law of Sincerity requires that some Degree of true Love to
God should be intermingled with the other Parts of our Obedience to him;
because this, as I have shown you, is one great and essential Part of that
Obedience which it requires; and therefore if out of mere Fear of God we should
obey him in all other Instances, yet so long as we are defective in this, our
Obedience will be lame and partial, and want a great Part of that Intireness
which the Law of Sincerity exacts. For since it requires us to love God under
the same Penalty of eternal Death that it requires all its other Duties, we can
no more be saved by it without this Virtue than without Justice, Temperance and
Chastity; yea, considering how necessary this is both to quicken our Obedience
here, and qualify us for Happiness hereafter, we may much better spare any
Virtue of Religion than this of the Love of God. This therefore is
indispensably necessary, according to the Tenor of the Law of Sincerity, that
there should be some Degree of true Love to God intermingled with the other
Parts of our Obedience.

2 ly. This Law of Sincerity exacts of us only such a Degree of Love to God as,
in Conjunction with the other Motives of Christianity, is actually sufficient
to enforce our Obedience. It does not require us to love God in that heroic
Degree, as not to need any other Motive to engage us to obey his Will; for if
it did, no Man could be in a good State till he were able to obey God purely
for his own Sake, without any Respect either to those glorious Advantages he
promises, or those endless Torments he denounces; which requires such an ardent
Degree of Love to him as I doubt few good Men arrive to in this Life. I know
it is usually said by those that handle this Argument, that to love God above
all Things is the Degree of Love to which the Law of Sincerity obliges us; but
either this must be a Mistake, or no Man can be good till he is so perfect a
Lover of God as not to need any other Motive but that of his own Love to oblige
him to Obedience. For Men need no Motives to persuade them to choose what they
love best; and therefore if Men loved God above all, they would need no farther
Motives to persuade them to choose what he Wills and Commands against all
Persuasions to the contrary. If I love God above my self, I shall certainly
choose his Will before my own: If I love him above all my Pleasures, I shall
choose his Pleasures before my own; and it will be a needless Thing to propose
Motives to persuade me to do that which I like best, and choose that which I
love above all the World. So that whilst a Man has Need of Motives to persuade
him to choose God, and prefer his Will above all Temptations, it is apparent he
loves him not above all; and consequently according to this Doctrine cannot be
a good Man in the Judgment of the Law of Sincerity; which if it were true, I
doubt, the List of good Men would be reduced to a very small Number. Wherefore
since loving God above all is a high strain of Piety much above the low Estate
of sincere and true Goodness, to make it necessary to a good State must needs
be very dangerous, since it cannot but dishearten beginners in Religion, and
perplex their Consciences with needless and inextricable Scruples. I confess,
not to love God above all, who does so infinitely exceed all in Degrees of
Loveliness and Amability, is an Argument of great Imperfection, though not of
Insincerity; but if my Love to him be such, as that together with my Hope and
Fear excited by the other Motives of Religion, it effectually operates on my
Will, so as to win it to an universal prevalent Consent to the Will of God, I
know no Reason I have to judge severely of my main State, though I should be
conscious to my self that my Love singly and apart from those other Motives had
not Force enough in it to produce this happy Effect. This therefore I conceive
is the utmost Degree of Love to God that the Law of Sincerity exacts, that we
should so love him as by our Love, in Concurrence with the other Arguments of
Religion, to be effectually prevailed on to obey him.

3 ly. The Law of Sincerity exacts such a Degree of Love of us, as together
with those other Motives of Christianity is prevalent to sincere Obedience; and
in this it differs from the Law of Perfection, which requires such a Degree of
Love of us, as together with those other Motives is productive of perfect
unsinning Obedience. For, as I have showed you, the Law of Perfection requires
the utmost of our Possibility, and consequently that we should love God as much
as we can, and consider and apply to our selves the other Motives of Religion
as well and as closely as we are able, and then proceed upon the whole to serve
and obey God to the utmost of our Power and Ability; which if we do, we are
perfectly innocent and inculpable; unless you suppose, that a Man may be
blameworthy for not doing more than he can. But should the Law of Sincerity
exact thus much of us, I doubt it would exclude the best of Men out of the
State of Goodness and Salvation; for what Man is there that does always love
and obey God to the utmost of his present Possibility? Wherefore all that this
Law can be supposed to require of us, is only such a Degree of Love as is
requisite to render it a concurrent Cause of true sincere Obedience, that is to
say, such a Love as in Concurrence with those great Motives of Reward and
Punishment produces such an hearty Consent in us to the Will of God as will not
suffer us any longer to persist either in carelss or affected Ignorance of it,
or in known and wilful Disobedience to it; and there are no Infirmities or
Miscarriages whatsoever inconsistent with such a Degree of Love to God, but
what are also inconsistent with such a Consent to his heavenly Will. If
therefore we thus love God to the Purposes of a sincere Obedience, the Law of
Sincerity acquits us; and as for our Sins of Infirmity, Surprise, or
Inadvertency, we are accountable for them only to the Law of Perfection.

4 thly, And lastly, The Law of Sincerity requires such a Degree of Love to God
as together with those other Motives makes us not only sincere in our
Obedience, but also careful to improve it to further Degrees of Perfection. And
indeed this is necessarily included in the former; for if our Love of God
joined with the other Arguments of Religion has so far prevailed upon us as to
win us to a sincere Consent to his heavenly Will, we shall not only
industriously avoid the known and wilful Violations of it, but be very careful
to correct those Flaws and Imperfections that are intermixed with our Obedience
to it. It Is true, when there is nothing but slavish Fear at the Bottom of a
Man's Obedience, that must necessarily contract and shrink up the Sinews of his
Care and Endeavors, and render him exceeding narrow and stingy in the
Discharge of his Duty; for having no farther Aim than his own Security, he will
do no more than what is necessary to avoid the Danger that he stands in Fear
of; and if he can but escape those known and wilful Sins that laid waste his
Conscience, and exposed him to the Wrath of God, that is the utmost he desires
or aims at; but as for those Miscarriages and sinful Imperfections which do
only fall under the Cognizance of the Law of Perfection, he is not at all
concerned about them. But when our Fear is intermingled with such a Degree of
Love to God as the Law of Sincerity exacts, that will make us careful, not only
to avoid those known and willful Sins that divorse us from the Favor of God,
but also to indear our selves more and more to him by correcting even those
smaller Defects and Imperfections that do still adhere to our Duties and
Natures: For this is plain, that no Man can heartily love God that does not
more and more desire to be beloved by him; and that no Man can sincerely desire
to be more and more beloved by God, that does not honestly endeavor to render
himself more and more lovely in his Eyes; that is, to reform all those sinful
Defects and Imperfections which stain and blemish the Beauty of his Soul.
Whosoever therefore contents himself with this, not to be hated by God, did
never sincerely love him; and whosoever desires more than this, will as well be
careful to correct those smaller Imperfections which render him less beloved of
God, as to avoid those known and wilful Sins which do expose him to God's
Hatred. If therefore our Religion does not in some Measure improve our Natures,
if it does not render us more patient and humble, more charitable and heavenly
minded, it is a certain Sign that it is not acted by Love. For if after having
a long while continued in a Round of religious Duties we still return to the
same Point, and are in no Degree better than we were when we first began, it is
a plain Token that we do not heartily desire to be more beloved of God, and
consequently that we do not love him. So that in fine the Sum of all is this,
The Law of Perfection requires us to love God with all our Might and with all
our Strength, that is, as much as we are able in every Period of our Growth and
Progress in Religion; and by how much we love him less than we are able, by so
much less shall be the future Reward of our Love. But then for the Law of
Sincerity, that only requires of us such a Degree of Love to him as does
together with the other Motives of Religion effectually incline us to obey him
sincerely, and to endeavor to improve our Obedience into farther Degrees of
Perfection; and so long as we fall short of this we are bad Men, and the Wrath
of God abides upon us. And so I have done with the First Part of the Text, We
should or ought to love God.

2. I proceed now to the second Part, viz. the Reason why we ought to love him;
and that is, because he first loved us; which though it be but short in Words,
yet is extremely comprehensive in Sense, containing in it such puissant Motives
and endearing Obligations as cannot but affect us if we have any Spark of
Tenderness or Ingenuity remaining in us. For in this Argument or Reason these
six Things are employed; 1. That he began in Love to us. 2. That he began before
we could any Way deserve it. 3. That he began to love us when we deserved his
Hatred. 4. That he began when he foresaw he could never make any Advantage by
it. 5. He began to love us to such a Degree as to think nothing too dear or too
good for us. 6. That he so began to love us as to condescend by all the Arts of
Importunity to court us to accept his Love: All which are very powerful
Considerations to engage us to return him Love for Love.


1. He began in Love to us. Had he only engaged himself to re-love us
whenever we began to love him, and in the mean Time remained indifferent in
his Affection toward us, this would have been a mighty endearing Obligation.
For the great Majesty of Heaven to take Notice of the Loves of such poor Worms
as we, and much more to engage himself to repay them with a correspondent
Affection, is in it self a noble Expression of his great and generous Goodness;
but that he should not only take Notice of, and return our Love, but forestal
and anticipate it; that he should condescend to make the first Address and
Tender of Love to us, is such an Expression of Goodness as is sufficient to
inflame the most stupid and insensible Soul. For he that loves another lays an
Obligation upon him, and renders him extremely beholding; he lends him his
Heart and Soul which are much more valuable than Money, and he becomes his
Creditor and acquires a just Claim to be repaid with mutual Affection: For not
to repay Love for Love, is equally unjust and ungrateful. He therefore that
begins to love, does thereby render the Person beloved his Debtor, and acquires
a just Right to be Beloved by him again, though he should have no other
Pretense to, or Interest in his Affections, especially if he be one who is much
our Superior in all endearing Perfections and Accomplishments; because this
must needs render his Love more valuable, and consequently augment our
Obligation to relove him. When therefore the great God himself shall begin to
love us, who does so infinitely excel us in all Manner of amiable Perfections,
how deeply are we obliged and beholding to him? What infinite Sums of Love must
we owe him? If he had laid no other Obligation upon us, had neither made, nor
fed, nor clothed, nor provided for us; if he had no other Claim to our Love but
only this, that he first loved us; yet this is such as we cannot frustrate
without being extremely unjust and ungrateful. For he is so much aforehand in
Kindness with us, has so much gotten the start of us in Love, that we shall
never be able to overtake him. He loved us long before we had a Being, when we
existed only in his own Decree to make us Men, and to provide for our
Happiness; so that now we are so far behind-hand in Arrears of Love to him,
that we shall need, as well as have an Eternity to discharge them; and should
we from henceforth every Moment love him more and more to the longest imaginary
Period of Duration, yet we shall still owe him all that Eternity of Love that
was due before we began to love him. And shall we grudg to pay him a Mite to
whom we are indebted Millions? And is it not high Time for us to begin to love
him now, who has loved us so long already for nothing without the least Shadow
of Requital?

2 ly. He began to love us before we could any ways deserve it. For it is
impossible for a Creature that ows all to God, the Fountain of its Being, to
deserve any Thing at his Hands; because he has every Thing from him, and so
can render him nothing but what is his own already by an unalienable Propriety.
But the noblest and most acceptable Sacrifice that we are able to render unto
God is our hearty and unfeigned Love; and if it were possible for us any way to
deserve his Love, who is so much above us, and has such an absolute Dominion
over us, it would doubtless be Offering up our Souls to him inflamed with Love
and Affection; for it is this alone that consecrates all our Services, and
renders them valuable in the Eyes of God. If Love, like an universal Soul, be
not diffused throughout all our Religion, and does not act and animate every
Part of it, in God's Account all our demure Pretenses are nothing but the
lifeless Puppits and Images of true Religion; which though they may speak and
move and act like that which they represent and imitate, yet want that inward
Form and Principle that gives it Life and Motion; and to have nothing of
Religion but merely the Shape and Outside, is as bad, at least in God's
Account, as to have none at all. Since therefore it is Love that gives Worth and
Value to all our other Services, and renders them acceptable to God; it hence
necessarily follows, that it self is the most grateful Thing we can render to
him, and that when this is wanting, we are so far from being capable of
deserving his Love, that nothing we do can be pleasing or acceptable in his
Eyes. Wherefore since he loved us before we loved him, it is plain that it was
not our Desert, but his own Goodness that first endeared him to us; for when we
did not love him, we could have neither Form nor Comeliness to attract his Love;
our Love to him being the only Beauty that can render us amiable in his Eyes:
So that he could have no other Motive to incline him to love us, but only the
immense Benevolence of his own Nature. Since therefore he has loved me without
any Desert of mine, can I forbear to love him who has deserved so well of me?
If he had never expressed any Kindness toward me, yet I have infinite Reason
to love him, because of the infinite Loveliness of his Nature; but when I add
to this the unspeakable Love he bore me when I had neither Beauty to endear,
nor Desert to oblige him; what a tender Care he took of my Welfare, and how big
his Thoughts were with Designs of Kindness to me; I am not able to reflect upon
my Coldness and Indifference toward him without the greatest Shame and
Confusion; especially considering,

3 ly. That he began to love us when we deserved his Hatred. And indeed if we
consider the wretched Condition in which his Love found us when it first
addressed to us, and cast its gracious Eyes upon us; we shall find sufficient
Reason to wonder that it did not immediately convert into implacable Fury. For
when it first looked down on us from the Battlements of Heaven, it beheld us
wallowing in our Blood, all polluted and distained with the foulest Treasons
and Rebellions. It saw us unanimously engaged in an unnatural Conspiracy
against the blessed Author of our Beings, converting those very Faculties he
bestowed upon us into Weapons of Rebellion against him, and arming the Effects
of his Bounty against his Sovereign Authority. It beheld our Natures all
depraved and vitiated, our Faculties all disordered and confused, our Minds
surrounded with Egyptian Darkness, our Wills biased with wild and irregular
Inclinations, our Affections overgrown with monstrous and preternatural Lusts,
and all the beautiful Structure of our Natures most miserably disfigured and
deformed; and certainly one would have thought that such a loathsome Spectacle
as this might have been sufficient to extinguish his Love for ever, and stifle
all his tender Resentments toward us. But so invincible was his Kindness to
us, that all the Deformities we had superinduced upon our Natures, all our
Unworthiness to be beloved by him, all the rude Affronts and Indignities we had
offered, were not able so much as for one Moment to stop or divert the
impetuous Current of his Goodness. But in the midst of so many Reasons that he
had to hate us, he fixed his Love upon us; and notwithstanding the Continuance
of those Reasons does still persist to love us; and while we are abusing of his
Kindness, dishonouring his Name, and trampling on his Laws and Authority, he is
continually mindful and active to do us good, and does incessantly employ his
restless Thoughts, extend his watchful Eye, and exert his powerful Arm to
contrive, promote and procure our Happiness; as if he were resolved to be as
obstinate in Love, as we are in Unkindness, to contend with us for Victory,
and, if it be possible, to vanquish us with the Charms of an invincible
Kindness. And now methinks it should be impossible for any one that has but
the Reason of a Man to be so base and disingenuous, as not to be endeared by
such a victorious Love. O blessed God! do thou love me who have so many ways
deserved thy Hatred, and can I hate thee who have so infinitely merited my
Love? Have I not been long enough thine Enemy already, and have thou not been
long enough my Friend at last to thaw my obdurate Enmity, and melt me into a
reciprocal Kindness? Barbarous Heart! Can thou still withstand these puissant
Endearments of Almighty Love, that has so long repaid thee Smiles for
Affronts, and returned thee Favors for Provocations? For shame, if thou have
any Sense of Gratitude or Modesty in thee, be at last persuaded to hearken to
the Love of thy Maker, and to return him Love for Love.

4 thly. He began to love us when he could never reap the least Advantage to
himself by it. Had we been capable either of benefiting or injuring him, of
adding to, or substracting from his Happiness, his own Interest might have
obliged him to love us, or at least to have pretended Kindness to us, that so
he might the better obtain his Ends upon us, and engage us to contribute more
freely to his Happiness. But such a poor Design, as this, is inconsistent with
the Notion of a Divinity, which implies infinite Perfection, and consequently
infinite Happiness; and for him who is infinitely happy, to design a
Contribution of Happiness from his Creatures, implies a Contradiction; because
the very designing of a farther Happiness implies a present Want and
Insufficiency, which can have no Place in a Being that is infinitely happy
already. The Happiness of God therefore being so immense and secure that
nothing can be added to, or subtracted from it, it is impossible he should
love us, for any Self-interest or Advantage, it being out of the Reach of any
Power whatsoever, either to benefit or injure him; and his Love to us can have
no other Design but only our Happiness and Welfare. He his infinitely perfect
and happy in himself, and consequently cannot be supposed to love us for his
own Advantage, it being impossible that he who is infinitely happy in himself
should be capable of receiving any Advantage from any Thing without him; so
that there can be no other End of his Love, but only to render us like himself
completely perfect and happy. For when he first set his Heart upon us, and
chose us for his Favorites, he knew his own Happiness to be so immense and
stable, as that he could never need our Love or Services, either to add more to
it, or to continue and perpetuate it, which from Eternity to Eternity was, and
is, and always will be commensurate to the boundless Capacity of his Nature.
But such was his innate Goodness and Beneficence as would not permit him to be
happy alone, to content himself in a solitary Fruition of his own essential
Beatitudes; but to gratify the benign Inclinations of his Nature he must have
Companions in Happiness, upon whom he may diffuse his Goodness, and imprint his
own Bliss and Perfection: And 'twas only this frank and generous Motive that
first obliged him to cast an Eye of Love toward us. When we had neither Worth
to deserve, nor Power to requite his Kindness, then did his own Benignity
incline his Heart to love us, and to invite and receive us into a Participation
of his Happiness. He knew well enough that the most we were capable to do for
him was only to love and obey, to praise and honor and adore him; and that
when we had done all this, it would be impossible for him to reap the least
Advantage by it; that if we did love and obey him, the Profit would all redound
to our selves, and that if we did not, our selves only would fare the worse for
it; so that whether we did or no, it would be all one to him; his Happiness
would be still the same, without the least Addition or Substraction. And yet
when Things were in this Posture, when he had no Self-interest to serve upon
us, no Motive but his own Benignity to endear him to us, then did he begin to
love us, and to express the Earnings of his Heart and Bowels toward us. And
now how can we think of this, and not be affected with it? How can we any
longer avoid being captivated with the Thoughts of such a generous Kindness?
Consider, O my Soul, thy God gains nothing by all his Love to thee, but thou
gainest infinitely by thy Love to him; by loving him thou glorifiest thy self,
and crownest thy own Desires with Happiness. But he is not one jot the better
for loving, nor would he have been one jot the worse if he had never loved thee
at all; and yet out of pure generous Goodness he loves thee a thousand times
more than thou love thy self, or art ever able to love him; and can thou be
such a wretched Thing, so lost to all that is ingenuous and modest as not to
return him Love for Love?

5 thly. He began to love us to such a Degree, as to think nothing too dear, or
too good for us. Considering how little we deserve his Love, how much we have
deserved his Hatred, and how incapable we are to make him any valuable
Requital; it is sufficient Matter of Wonder that ever he could prevail with
himself to love us in the least Degree; but that in the midst of so many
Reasons to the contrary he should not only begin to love, but to be so liberal
of his Kindness to us, is Matter of just Astonishment. It was a mighty Kindness
in him to create us what we are, and make such a plentiful Provision for our
comfortable Subsistence here; for wheresoever we direct our Eyes, whether we
reflect them inwards upon our selves, we behold his Goodness to occupy and
penetrate the Root and Center of our Beings, and discern the lively Characters
of his Love in the incomparable Frame and Structure of our Natures; or whether
we extend them abroad toward the things about us, we may perceive our selves
like Fortunate Islands surrounded with an Ocean of Blessings, containing
whatsoever is necessary for our Sustenance, convenient for our Use, and
pleasant for our Enjoyment. And is it not wondrous Love in him to make such
liberal Provisions for such undeserving Guests? But this is the smallest Part
of his Kindness; for he has inspired us with immortal Minds, and Stamped them
with the most fair Impresses of his own Divinity, viz. a Knowledge of Truth,
and a Love of Goodness, and a forward Capacity of the highest Perfection, and
purest Happiness; and to fill and gratify these our noble Faculties and
Capacities he has prepared for us a Heaven of immortal Joys, and furnished it
with all the Delights that this our Heaven-born Mind is capable of; and lest we
should fall short of it, he has sent his blessed Son from Heaven, to reveal it
to us, and show us the Way thither; to die for our Sins, and obtain and ratify
the Promise of our Pardon, thereby to encourage us to return to our Duty and
Allegiance, without which we are incapable of ever enjoying that beatifical
State. And lest all this should not be sufficient, he is always present with us
to promote our Happiness; present, by his Providence to reclaim, by his Angels
to solicit us, and by his Holy Spirit to excite and cooperate with our
Endeavors: So extremely careful is he, not to be defeated of his kind
Intentions, to make us everlastingly happy. O Blessed God! To what a Degree
must thou love us, who think none of these Things too dear and good for us?
That do not think thy Son too good to redeem us, thy Spirit to Sanctify, thy
everlasting Heaven to Crown and Reward us? And now can our Hearts hold when we
think of this? Can we be cold and indifferent in the midst of such a vigorous
Flame? Good God! What are we made of? What senseless, stony, stupid Souls do we
carry about us, that can be Love-proof against so many Charms and Endearments;
that can listen to so many Wonders of Love with such unconcerned, such
unaffected Minds? Methinks if we had but the common Sense and Ingenuity of Men
in us, it would be impossible for us in the midst of so much Love, not to be
melted into a reciprocal Kindness.

6 thly And lastly, He so began to love us, as to condescend by all the Arts of
Importunity to court us to accept of his Love. That notwithstanding all our
Unworthiness, he should begin to love us, and that to so strange a Degree, is a
most amazing Instance of the infinite Benevolence of his Nature; but that he
should condescend to address himself to us, to court and woo us as he does to
accept of his Love, and to be as happy as he would have us, is enough to
astonish the most insensible Soul, and even to dissolve a Heart of Rock into
Love. For thus the Scripture in the most pathetick Strains describes the
Addresses of this great Lover of Souls, borrowing Metaphors to express his Love
to us, from all that is kind and loving in the Creation; even from the most
melting Passions in Mankind; from the Relentings of Fathers, and Yearnings of
Mothers Bowels toward their dearest Offspring. It paints him in all the
charming Postures of an imploring, beseeching, and importunate Lover, wooing
and entreating us to be happy, even with Tears of Pity in his Eyes, with Charms
of Love in his Mouth, and Tenders of Mercy in his Hands. And when with all the
Rhetoric of his Love he cannot prevail with us to live, it represents him
weeping at our Funerals, and like a tenderhearted Judge pronouncing our
Sentence with the Tears in his Eyes. By which Metaphorical Descriptions he
represents to us his infinite Concern for our Happiness; how much his Heart is
set upon it; and how hardly he can bear a Defeat in his kind and merciful
Intentions toward us. For what but an infinite Love could ever have made the
King of Heaven and Earth to stoop so low to his rebellious Subjects, as to
beseech them to lay down their Weapons of Hostility with which they can injure
none but themselves, and to listen to his Terms of Mercy, and accept of his
Crowns and everlasting Preferments? One would have thought it had been enough
for him barely to have told us how he loved us, how willing he was to Pardon
and Advance us; and that this had been enough for ever to recommend him to the
dearest Affections of his Creatures; but that he should moreover condescend to
supplicate our Acceptance, to beseech us not to spurn his Love, and frustrate
its Designs of Mercy to us; Lord, how can we think of this without being all
inflamed with Love to thee! It Is true, he does not come in Person to us,
because we are not able to bear the immediate Approaches of his Glory; but many
a Message of Love he has sent us transcribed from his very Heart. He sent his
Son from Heaven to us, and clothed him in our Natures, that therein we might be
capable of conversing freely with him; and all his Errand was to deliver a
Message of Love to the World, and to court and importune them to listen to, and
comply with it. And when he returned again to his Father, he instituted an
Order of Men to supply his Room, and in his Stead, to woo the World to be
happy. For we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us:
We pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5.20. So that
you are set upon the Throne, and not only Men, but God himself lies prostrate
before your Footstool beseeching you to lay down your Arms, and to be
reconciled to your best Friend that never did you the least Injury, unless that
be one that he has loved you better by a Thousand Degrees than ever you loved
your selves. And can we be such barbarous Wretches as not to listen to him when
he thus humbles himself before us, and even comes upon his Knees to us for
Reconciliation? How justly may the whole Creation be astonished to see the
great Majesty of Heaven condescend so low as to beseech and entreat a Company
of rude, disdainful Rebels, whom he could every Moment frown into Nothing, to
accept of his Love, and at last comply with Terms of Friendship? Who would ever
imagine, (but that sad Experience evinces the contrary,) that among reasonable
Beings there should be found such Monsters of Ingratitude, as to persist in
Enmity to God after he has thus humbled himself, and made so many lowly
Addresses only to court and woo us to be happy? And thus you see how many
puissant Motives to Love are comprehended in these few Words, because he first
loved us; which are such as nothing can ever be able to resist but a Heart that
is steeled with Impudence and Ingratitude. So that if after all these
Obligations which God has laid upon us we do not at last surrender up our
Hearts unto him, our Baseness and Ingratitude is such as nothing but our
eternal Ruin will be able to expiate. For when with all the Endearments of his
Loving kindness he finds he cannnot prevail on us to love him, the very
Consideration how much he has obliged us, and what unworthy Requitals we have
made him, will but incense him the more against us, till it has converted his
Kindness into implacable Fury; and when once the Heats of wronged Love take
Fire, and kindle into Wrath, it will be a quenchless Flame and everlasting
Burning. Wherefore in the Name of God, Sirs, let us endeavor to affect our
Souls with the Sense of this dear Love, to warm our Affections at this heavenly
Fire till it has insinuated it self into them, and converted them into its own
Substance. And that we may be succesful herein, let us take with us these
following Directions.

1. Let us season our Minds with good Opinions of God: For since it is his
Goodness that is the most immediate Object of our Love to him, whatsoever
Opinions do reflect upon that, or any way tend to cloud and disgrace it, must
necessarily Damp our Affection toward him. Whilst therefore we look upon God
as a mere arbitrary Being, as one that conducts all his Actions by a blind
Omnipotent Self-will, and governs the World and dispenses Rewards and
Punishments to his Creatures according to a certain fatal Decree, which he made
without Foresight or Consideration; as one that exacts Impossibilities of his
Subjects, commands the Lame to run, the Blind to see, and without ever enabling
them thereunto is resolved to damn them forever for Nonperformance: Whilst, I
say, we look upon God through such false Optics as these, they must needs
represent him exceeding unlovely in our Eyes. For though I doubt not but there
are many Men that love God heartily, notwithstanding they have entertained
these sower and ghastly Notions of him; yet I must seriously profess had I such
black Opinions of him, I should never be able heartily to love him, though I
were sure to be damned for ever for neglecting it. Wherefore, if we would
kindle in our Souls the Love of God, let us take Care, as much as in us lies,
to purge our Thoughts of all ill Opinions of him, and to represent him fairly
to our Minds what he truly is, and what the Scripture represents him to be,
viz. a most bountiful Benefactor unto all his Creation, and an universal Lover
of the Souls of Men; one that heartily desires our Welfare, and is always ready
to contribute to us whatsoever is necessary thereunto. Let us firmly persuade
our selves that he desires not our Ruin, but would have all Men to be saved,
and come to the knowledge of the Truth; that when he finally destroys any
particular Offender, it is in great Mercy to the Public; that he loves not
Punishment for its own Sake, and never inflicts it but for some gracious and
merciful End. These are such Thoughts of God as are truly worthy of him, and
infinitely apt to endear him to all considering Minds.

2 ly. Let us frequently consider and revolve in our Minds the numerous Reasons
and Engagements that we have to love him. For all Virtue whatsoever begins in
Consideration, and it being a rational Accomplishment, cannot be otherwise
acquired but only by Reason and Discourse, that is, by considering the Reasons
and pressing our selves with the Arguments upon which it is founded. And thus
we must do in the Case before us; if ever we would attain to a hearty Love of
God, we must be often entertaining our Thoughts with the Consideration of those
great Obligations he has laid upon us to love him; how deeply we are engaged
by all the Ties of Gratitude and Ingenuity to repay him in his own Coin, and to
return him Love for Love. Nor will it be sufficient to affect our Hearts with
the Sense of those Obligations, now and then to reflect a few slight and
transient Thoughts on them, but with holy David we must muse on till the Fire
Kindles; we must fix and stay our Thoughts upon the Consideration of God's
endearing Love to us, urge and press them again and again till we have wrought
and chafed them into our Souls, and a heavenly Warmth diffuses from them and
enflames our Hearts with a divine Affection. Wherefore let us frequently
revolve such Thoughts as these in our Minds; O my Soul! How infinitely art thou
obliged to love thy God, who has been such a tender Friend and liberal
Benefactor to thee, who loved thee before ever thou wast capable of thinking a
Thought of Love toward him; yea, and when thou did most justly deserve to be
excommunicated from his Favor for ever, and who had no other Aim in loving
thee, but to do thee good, and make thee happy, and thought nothing too good
for thee that could either promote or complete thy Happiness; but is so
importunately concerned for thee as to beseech and entreat thee not to reject
his Favors? And can thou be cold and insensible in the midst of so many
prevailing Endearments? Suppose that thy Fellow Creature had done for thee but
a thousandth Part of what thy God has done, and thou had repayed his
Kindness with nothing but Affronts and Indignities; would thou not call thy
self a thousand ungrateful Wretches, and acknowledge thy self infinitely
unworthy of his Favors? And is it less criminal to be ungrateful to God, than
to thy Fellow Creature? Suppose thou had a Friend that began to love thee as
soon as thou wast born, and had persisted to love thee, notwithstanding thou
had offered him a thousand Provocations to the contrary; that had done thee
all the good he was able, and constantly repaid thy Injuries with Favors:
Would not thy Conscience fly in thy Face, and all that is humane in thee
upbraid thy monstrous Baseness? And has not thy God obliged thee infinitely
more than the best Friend in the World? How then can thou excuse thy Coldness
and Indifference to him? Consider, O my Soul, the Eyes of all the spiritual
World are upon thee; Angels and Saints are looking down from their Thrones of
Glory to see how thou will acquit thy self under all these mighty Obligations,
which if any mortal Friend had laid them upon thee, and thou should have so
ill requited him, all the World would have hissed at thee for a Monster of
Ingratitude. And is it less infamous to be an ungrateful Wretch toward God,
than toward a mortal Friend? With what Confidence then will thou lift up thy
head among those blessed Spirits who have been Spectators of thy Actions, who
have seen thy foul Ingratitude toward thy best Friend, and must therefore
brand thee for an inglorious Wretch abandoned of the common Sense and Modesty
of humane Nature? And if after you have pressed you Souls with all this mighty
Weight of Love, you should be still to learn to re-love the blessed Author of
it, I know no other Expedient but to send you to the Brutes to be their
Scholars; to call for your Spaniels and bid them teach you, and by their kind
Returns of your Favors instruct your cold ungrateful Hearts, to make
proportionate Returns of Love to your dearest Lord and Master. Thus let us
frequently argue with our selves, and repeat these Considerations upon our
Minds; and certainly if we have any Sense of Obligations, they cannot fail of
warming and affecting our Hearts.

3 dly. Let us endeavor so much as in us lies to moderate our Affections to
the World. Love not the World, says St. John, neither the things that are in
the World. If any Man love the World, the love of the Father is not in him, 1
Epist. ii.15. that is, if we inordinately love and dote upon the World, if we
suffer its Pleasures, Profits, and Honors to creep into, to hamper and
inveagle our Affections into an excessive Delight and Complacency in them, that
will so forestal and prepossess us, that we shall find no Room for the Love of
God in our Souls: Our Hearts will be so soaked and moistened with sensual
Desires and Complacencies, that the pure Flame of divine Love will never be
able to take hold of, or kindle upon them. For whilst we immoderately dote upon
the World, that will so ingross our Thoughts, so perpetually importune our
Desires, that no Friend from Heaven will ever be able to come at us; no good
Thought or Consideration that comes to court and woo our Souls for God will
ever find Admittance to them; or if now and then they obtrude upon us, and
force themselves into our Minds, the World will be so buisy about us that we
shall not be long at Leisure to attend to them; but whilst they are addressing
to us and importuning our Affections, we shall feel a thousand Rival Thoughts
swarming and buzzing about us, and this will be holding, that pulling, the
other clasping it self about us and wooing us not to leave and forsake them.
And though between these Competitors for our Love, our Hearts may now and then
be a little wavering and irresolute; yet our fond Partiality to the World will
so vehemently incline and biass us, that we shall soon reject those divine
Thoughts that would so fain court us to a contrary Affection. Wherefore, if
ever we would acquire this noble and heavenly Virtue of divine Love, we must
endeavor as much as in us lies to wean and withdraw our selves from the World;
to rescue our selves from under it is Tyranny and Dominion, into our own Power,
that so we may be able to dispose of our Time, our Thoughts and Hearts, as
shall seem to us most fit and reasonable. For till we have recovered our Hearts
from the World into our own Disposal, how can we resign them to God? Before we
can give him our selves, we must be in our own Power, which no Man can be, so
long as he is inthralled to the World. Wherefore, if we would become hearty
Lovers of God, we must labor so much as in us lies to get such a Sovereignty
over our earthly Desires and Affections, as that whenever we are minded to
retire from the World and converse with God, we may be able to keep them off at
such a Distance as that they may not be able to intrude upon us, to mingle
themselves with our Contemplations, and divert our Eyes from the endearing
Prospect of his infinite Love and Loveliness. And then our Thoughts will stay
and dwell upon this ravishing Theme like Bees upon a sweet Flower, and never
rise till they have extracted thence the Honey of Canaan, the delicious Sweets
of heavenly Love and Complacency; then we shall muse on till the Fire burns,
and never take off our Eyes from God till we have gazed our selves into
Captivity to his Love and Beauty.

4 thly. If we would attain to the Love of God, we must endeavor, by the
constant Practice of what is agreeable to his Nature, to reconcile our Minds
and Tempers to it. For whilst our Minds are averse to the Perfections of his
Nature, to the Justice, Purity, and Goodness of it, the most powerful Motives
of his Love and Benevolence will never be able to beget in us an hearty
Complacencey in him. We may admire his Love to us, and be sometimes moved by
the consideration of it into mighty Transports of sensitive Passion; but it is
impossible we should ever attain to a fixed and permanent Delight in him till
we are reconciled to his Nature. For all true and constant Love is founded in a
Likeness of Natures; and therefore till we are in some Measure god-like, till
we are pure as he is pure, just as he is just, good and merciful as he is good
and merciful, we have not as yet so much as laid the Foundation of divine Love;
nay we are so far from that, that we are under a prevalent Repugnancy and
Antipathy to the divine Nature. Wherefore if ever we would be sincere and
hearty Lovers of God, we must resolve to betake our selves to the constant
Practice of all those eternal Laws of Goodness that are founded in his blessed
Nature; which if we do, and persist in our Resolution, we shall find the
Practice of them will by Degrees render them first tolerable, then easy, then
delightful, then natural to us. And when once the Laws of God's Nature are thus
transcribed and copyed into ours, when our Hearts and his stand bent the same
Way, and are for the main alike inclined and disposed; then we are prepared for
divine Love, made proper and convenient Fuel to receive that heavenly Flame.
For as when God sees himself in us, his Goodness, Purity and Holiness stamped
and impressed upon our Natures, he is inclined by his own Self-love to be
pleased with, and take Complacency in us; so when we come to see our selves in
God, to see all that in him for which we value our selves, and to see it all in
the utmost Perfection in him which is yet so imperfect in our selves; our own
Self-love will endear him to us and wing our Souls with an active vigorous Love
to him. Wherefore, if we would love God, let us live in the Practice of all
god-like Virtues till by accustoming our selves thereunto we have conquered our
own Repugnancies and Antipathies to his blessed Nature; and then our Hearts
will stand open to his Love, and we shall feel it enter into us, and insinuate
it self into our Wills and Affections, like a sprightful and active Flame, till
it has all inflamed them with Love, and converted them into its own Substance.

5 thly. And lastly, If we would acquire this heavenly Virtue, to all the
foregoing Directions, we must add constant and earnest Prayer to God For when
we have done all, it is most certain that without the Assistance of this Grace
we cannot love him; but if we do all, and then implore and Supplicate his
Assistance, we have as much Assurance of it, as the Promise of Truth it self
can give us. If therefore we have a hearty Mind to love him, we shall both do
our own Part toward it, and earnestly implore him to do his. For so when we
petition for our daily Bread, we do not say our Prayers, and then sit down with
our Hands in our Bosoms, expecting that Bread should drop from Heaven into our
Mouths; but we presently betake our selves to some honest Employment, and
therein diligently endeavor to obtain what we pray for. And the same Course we
shall take if we desire to love God with the same Sincerity as we desire Food:
We shall pray and endeavor, and endeavor and pray; we should be diligent in
doing what is in our Power, and be importunate with God to do what is only in
his. And certainly did we but know the Worth of this heavenly Virtue, this Soul
and Queen of all other Graces, we should count no Prayers, no Tears, no
Endeavors too much to purchase and obtain it. Did we but consider how useful
and delightful it is, how at once it entices and inlivens Men, what a powerful
Bias it claps upon their Hearts to incline them to their Duty, and with what
Joy and Cheerfulness it carries them through the greatest Difficulties, and
turns their Toils into Recreations; how it clears and smooths their
Countenance, revives and elevates their Hearts: Did Men, I say, but consider
this, they would give neither themselves nor Heaven Rest till they felt their
cold and slugish Souls inspired and animated with it. Wherefore to all our
Endeavors after it, let us join our earnest Prayers to God that he would
kindle our stupid Hearts, and touch our cold Affections with an outstretched
Ray from himself; that he would conquer our Repugnance to him, and represent
his Love and Beauty to our Souls in such affecting and attractive Forms as may
not fail to captivate our Hearts, and subdue our obstinate Wills that have so
long held out against all the Storms and Batteries of his endearing Goodness.
And if we thus pray, and thus endeavor, and persevere in both, we shall at
length most certainly feel this heavenly Grace springing up within us, and
growing on to Maturity by insensible Degrees, till at last it has gotten an
entire Possession of our Souls, and subdued all our Powers and Affections to
it is sweet and blessed Empire; And then we shall feel our selves acted in
Religion by a new Soul, and carried on through all its weary Stages with an
unspeakable Life and Vigor; then all our Duty will be naturalized to us, and
we shall do God's Will upon Earth with almost the same Cheerfulness and
Alacrity, as it is done by our blessed Brethren in Heaven. Which God of his
infinite Mercy grant: To whom be Honor, etc.

PSALM xi.7. For the Righteous Lord loves Righteousness.
BY Righteousness here some Expositors understand the Righteousness of
Punishment; because in the foregoing Verse it is said, upon the wicked he shall
rain snares, Fire and Brimstone, etc. and then it follows why he shall do it;
for the Righteous Lord loves Righteousness: But considering the whole; I
rather believe that by Righteousness here is meant Righteousness of Life and
Manners: For it seems more probable that the Text is a Reason of the two former
Verses, than of that immediately foregoing; but the whole that is asserted is
this, the Lord tries the Righteous; but the wicked and him that loves
Violence, his Soul hates. Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, etc. As if he
should have said; there is a vast Difference between Gods dealing with the
Righteous and the Wicked; for though sometimes he afflicts the Righteous, yet
it is only to prove and try them, and to render their Virtue more exemplary and
illustrious; but as for the Wicked, when he rains down Punishments on them, it
is out of a just Hatred and Indignation against them. And the Reason why he is
thus differently affected toward these different Persons is, because of the
different Affection he bears toward their contrary Qualifications; he loves
the Righteousness of the Righteous, and that makes him chasten them in love,
and for kind and merciful Ends and Purposes; but he hates the Wickedness of the
Wicked, and that makes him proceed against them with so much Wrath and
Severity. So that by Righteousness here he means that Goodness and Virtue which
is inherent in righteous Persons, is evident from what follows; the righteous
Lord loves righteousness, his countenance does behold the upright; that is, he
looks upon them with a most gracious and benevolent Aspect; which latter Words
being only a fuller Exemplification of the former, plainly show that by the
Righteousness mentioned in them is meant the Righteousness of righteous
Persons, and consequently that it does not signify the Righteousness of
Punishment, but the Righteousness of Manners: By which we are not to understand
that single Virtue of Honesty or Justice, but all the Virtues, or Virtue in the
general in its utmost Compass and Latitude. For so in the sacred Dialect it is
very usual to express the whole Duty of Man by Righteousness. So Prove. 14.34.
Righteousness exalteh a Nation, but Sin is a reproach to any People; where the
Opposition plainly implies that by Righteousness we are to understand all that
is contrary to Sin; that is, all that is contained within the Compass of our
Duty. So also Heb. 1.9. thou have loved Righteousness, and hated Iniquity;
where Righteousness being opposed to (...), or Transgression of the Law in
general, must according to the Rule of Opposition be understood in the same
Latitude to signify all Obedience to the Law in general. And indeed all our
Duty being a natural and eternal Due, either to God, our Neighbor, or our
selves, the whole may very well be expressed by Righteousness, the Performance
of every one of them being an Act of strict Justice, the Payment of a due Debt,
either to our selves or others. The Meaning therefore of the Words is this;
God, who himself is infinitely pure, and holy, and good, is a constant hearty
Lover of Purity and Goodness in others wheresoever he sees or finds it. In the
Management of which Argument I shall do these two Things: 1. Show you upon what
Principles and Reasons God is a Lover of Virtue and Goodness. 2. What
Indications he has given to the World that he is so.


1. I shall show you upon what Principles and Reasons God is a Lover of Virtue
and Goodness; and they are principally these Four.

1. He loves Righteousness, or Goodness as it is an essential Perfection of his
own Nature. 2. He loves it as it is the main Principle and Foundation of his
own Happiness. 3. He loves it as it is that which exalts all other Creatures
into his own Likeness and Resemblance. 4. He loves it as it is the Spring or
Cause from whence the highest Happiness of his most beloved Creatures is
derived.
1 st. God loves Righteousness, or Goodness as it is an essential Perfection of
his own Nature. For supposing God to be a reasonable Being, as all acknowledge
him to be who acknowledge him at all, he must be in all Respects most perfectly
reasonable, otherwise he would be deficient of that natural Perfection which
the very Notion and Idea of God implies; and if he be perfectly reasonable, he
must be supposed to govern himself, his Choices, Motions and Actions by the
truest, best, and purest Reason: And herein consists the perfect Holiness and
Righteousness which the Essence and Notion of God implies, in a perfect
Conformity of all his Choices and Actions to the eternal and infallible Reason
of his own Mind, in choosing to do every thing which right Reason requires, and
refusing to do any thing which it forbids. And this is so essential to God,
that to exclude it out of the Notion of him is in Effect to deny his Being, or
which is worse, to fancy him an Almighty blind Polyphemus, that has an Arm of
infinite Force, but no Eye in his Head to guide or direct it. When therefore we
submit all our Choices and Actions to the Conduct and Government of right
Reason, we stear our Course by Gods Compass, and live and move by the self-same
Rule whereby he governs himself, and all his Motions. And when we do what God
would have us, we are sure to do what right Reason requires, because we are
sure he would have us do nothing but what is agreeable with the infallible
Reason of his own Mind. When therefore we submit our Wills to God's, our Wills
and his are governed by the self-same Reason, even by the most perfect Reason
of his All-comprehending Mind, which never can deceive or be deceived. And when
our Wills, Affections and Inclinations are once reduced under the Government of
God's Reason, we are of the same Temper with God, because we are formed and
tempered by the same Reason; we are affected and inclined as he his, and are
made Partakers of his divine Nature; we are pure as he is pure, and holy as he
is holy, and do communicate with him in all that Righteousness and Goodness
which is the essential Glory and Perfection of his own Nature. So that Holiness
and Righteousness in us being only a Ray and Representation of God, it is no
more Wonder that he loves it than that he loves himself, it being nothing but
himself derived, his own Perfection copyed out and transcribed into our Temper
and Natures. Were the Sun a living Being, we cannot imagine but as he would be
infinitely pleased with his own inherent Brightness, so he would be greatly
delighted to behold that vast Sphere of Light which he diffuses round about
him; to see his own outstretch'd Rays shining through this Spacious World, and
glorifying with their quick Reflections all those dark and opaque Bodies that
are continually moving round about him. How then can we imagine that the living
God, who is infinitely glorious in Holiness himself, and loves himself
infinitely for being so, can without vast Delight and Satisfaction behold his
own Beauty, Light, and Purity, shining on the Face of his Creatures; that he
should not be enamoured with the Reflections of that which is the Brightness of
his own Being, and take infinite Complacency when he looks down from his
Throne, and beholds his Creatures gilded with his Rays, and glorified with his
own Glory? For if God love himself, he must love what is suitable to himself;
and consequently since himself is Righteous, he must love Righteousness, or
quarrel with the Perfection of his own Nature. And this Reason of his Love of
Righteousness is implied in the very Words, The righteous Lord loves
righteousness.

2 ly. He loves Righteousness and true Goodness, as it is the main Principle
and Foundation of his own Happiness. For if he were not just, and holy and
good, he would be a miserable Being, notwithstanding all his Power and
Knowledge; for though by these he might defend himself from all foreign Hurt or
Injury, yet could he not secure his own Content by them, or enjoy himself with
any Peace or Pleasure. For perfect Holiness, as I have showed you, consists in
an exact Conformity of Actions to the eternal Rules of Reason; but God having a
full and perfect Comprehension of the eternal Reasons of Things, could never be
satisfied with himself if he should act Unreasonably, because his Reason would
condemn his Practice, and his own Knowledge would libel and upbraid him. For
whenever he reflected on himself, his own All-seeing Eye would detect him, and
by unmasking the Deformity of his Actions would render him an inglorious
Spectacle to himself. How then could he enjoy himself, whilst in the Glass of
his own Omniscience he beheld himself so odiously Represented? What Content
could he take in his own Choices and Actions, whilst his own infallible Reason
disapproved them, and their Unreasonablness exposed them to the just Reproaches
of his own Mind? No certainly, should he any ways swerve in his own Choices,
Affections, or Actions from the eternal Reason of his own Mind, he would be so
far from being pleased with himself, that he would be his own eternal Torment;
and that infinite Reason which he himself cannot deceive or impose on, would so
Expose and Shame him, that whenever he reviewed himself he would be sure to
appear a most ghastly Spectacle in his own Eyes. That therefore which renders
him so infinitely happy in himself, is not so much the Power he has to defend
himself from foreign Hurts and Injuries, as the exact Agreement of all his
Motions and Actions with the all-comprehending Reason of his own Mind. He
always sees what is best, and what he so sees he always chooses and affects; and
this makes him perfectly satisfied with himself, and fills him with infinite
Joy and Complacency. When ever he surveys himself in the glorious Mirror of his
own Mind, he discerns nothing in himself but what is infinitely lovely and
amiable, nothing but what exactly corresponds with the fairest Idea of his own
infinite Reason; every Thing in him is as it should be, every Motion and every
Action so perfectly good and exactly reasonable, that his own all-seeing Eye
can discern no possible Degree of Perfection wanting in them; and this makes
him infinitely pleased with himself, infinitely joyed and contented in the
Prospect of his own Beauty and Glory. So that God's Holiness and Righteousness,
or which is the same Thing, the exact Agreement of his Choices and Actions with
the infallible Reason of his own Mind, being the Principle and eternal Spring
of his Happiness, it is no Wonder if he loves it wheresoever he finds it; for
how should he forbear being pleased and delighted with it, when he has such a
continued Experiment of the blessed Effects of it in his own Bosom; when he
feels himself made happy by it, and has every Moment a fresh Relish of the
Joys and Pleasures which result from it? Can he be so insensible of his own
Happiness as not to be enamoured with the blessed Cause of it? Or can the Tree
be indifferent to him, when the Fruit of it is so infinitely grateful? No
certainly, it is impossible but that the eternal Sense he has in himself of
the Joy, the Pleasure, the Bliss of being holy, should infinitely endear
Holiness to him, and engage his Soul in an everlasting Love of it.

3 dly. God loves Righteousness as it is an Improvement and Exaltation of his
Creatures into his own Likeness and Resemblance. Every Being that loves it
self, naturally affects, so far as it is able, to derive it self, to beget its
own Image and propagate its own Likeness and Resemblance; which is an immediate
Consequence of that Principle of Self-love that is in us, which inclines us to
increase and multiply our selves, and diffuse and spread our own Tempers and
Natures. And no Wonder then that God, who is the best of Beings, and whose Love
to himself is as infinite as his own Beauties and Perfections, should affect to
derive and communicate himself, to beget and propagate his own most amiable
Image in his Creatures. The infinite Love which he bears to himself cannot but
engage him to like and approve his own Likeness; and what he likes he must
needs be inclined to produce where it is not, and to love where it is. But now
Righteousness, being that moral Attribute which comprises all those Perfections
of his Nature, wherein the Beauty and Glory of it consists, is the only
Accomplishment that can render a Creature like him in that which renders him so
infinitely lovely in his own Eyes. As for Omnipotence, Omniscence, Eternity,
and Omnipresence, they are amiable only as they are crowned with infinite
Righteousness and Goodness, and abstracted from these they have nothing of Form
or Comeliness in them. That therefore which moulds us into a Resemblance of
God, and renders us like him in that which is the Beauty of all his other
Attributes, is Righteousness; and therefore this he must love if he love
himself, because it is his own Image: As for Power, and Knowledge, and length of
Duration, though we should partake of them with him to the highest Degree that
is possible for Creatures, yet we may be infinitely unlike him; for so the
Devils are, who yet are liberally endowed with these natural Perfections of the
Divinity; but the more they employ their Power and Knowledge to unrighteous
Purposes, the more ungodlike they are for being powerful and knowing; and then
only are Knowledge and Power god-like Perfections, when Righteousness and
Goodness is their Scope and Rule; for without these they are only the
Perfections of Devils; but good and righteous Devils are Contradictions in
Terms. Since therefore it is Righteousness only that can stamp us god-like
Creatures, God must needs love it out of that natural Inclination which he and
all other Beings have to propagate his own Likeness. For without Righteousness
no Creature can resemble him; and therefore if he love to be resembled, as he
must needs do, because he loves himself, he must love that which gives the
Resemblance; and this, and this only is Righteousness and true Goodness.

4 thly. And lastly. God loves Righteousness as it is the Spring or Cause from
whence the highest Happiness of his Creatures is derived. For he loves Beings
more or less according to their intrinsic Worth and Value; and doubtless of
all Orders of Beings there are none so valuable as the rational; and therefore
if he love these most, he cannot but be desirous of their Happiness; and if he
be, he cannot but love that which is the Spring and Cause of it, and this is
universal Righteousness. For the Foundation of our Happiness must necessarily
be laid in the Perfection of our Natures, and our Natures being rational the
Perfection of them must consist in a perfect Compliance of all their Powers and
Faculties with the eternal Rules of Reason, which is all one with universal
Righteousness. For doubtless the highest Perfection of reasonable Faculties is
to act most reasonably, and then they act most reasonably when they govern
themselves by the unchangable Laws of Righteousness. Righteousness therefore
being our Perfection as we are reasonable Beings must necessarily be the Spring
and Principle of our Happiness, and it is as impossible for us to be happy
without it as it is to be well in Sickness, or at Ease under Pain. For to the
Happiness of every Nature that is capable of being happy two Things are
requisite; First, that there be no disorder within it self; that its Parts and
Faculties be not distempered, nor their Vigor and Activity lessened and
abated: Secondly, that all it is Faculties be employed and exercised about such
Objects as are most grateful and suitable to their Natures; upon both which
Accounts Righteousness is most necessary to the Happiness of every reasonable.
Nature. For in the first Place, it is Righteousness that rectifies all their
Disorders, and reduces them to their native and most genuine Temper. No
reasonable Nature is well, and in Health, so long as it acts unreasonably and
unrighteously; it is Pulse beats disorderly while it beats either faster or
slower than Right Reason prescribes, while it acts either on this side or
beyond the Medium, in the Defect, or Excess of Virtue; and whilst it is thus
sick and distempered, it is impossible it should be happy. But now by acting
righteously it revives and grows well again; it throws off those unreasonable,
and consequently unnatural Inclinations that clogged and obstructed all its
regular Motions, and by Degrees recovers to the native Temper and Complexion
of a rational Nature; and when once it has perfectly discharged it self of all
those unreasonable and unrighteous Humors that disordered it, it will then
live in perfect Health and Ease, and all its languishing Faculties be restored
to their natural Vigor and Activity. And then secondly, as Righteousness
recovers us from all the Distempers of our Nature, so it imploys and exercises
our Faculties about such Objects as are most grateful and suitable to them. For
Truth and true Goodness are the only Objects that can gratify a reasonable
Nature acting reasonably; and about these does Righteousness naturally dispose
our Faculties to employ and exercise themselves; it disposes our Understandings
to contemplate upon, and our Wills to embrace and choose that God who is the
Fountain of all Truth and Goodness: For every Thing loves its own like, and
what it loves, it is inclined to think on. So that when we are righteous, as
God is, we shall naturally love him, because he is like us; and then our Love
to him will still incline our Thoughts to the Contemplation of his Beauty and
Glories, and so the more righteous we grow the more we shall love him, and the
more we love him the more our Understandings will be inclined to meditate upon
him, and so more and more till we arrive at that City of Vision where we shall
see him Face to Face, and be eternally ravished with the Love and Contemplation
of him. Thus Righteousness you see is the Spring and Cause of our Happiness,
and being so, he must needs love it, who above all things desires and sollicits
our Welfare: For he being perfectly happy from himself, cannot need our Misery
to augment his Happiness; and therefore cannot desire it; but on the contrary,
he must desire our Happiness out of that infinite Complacency and Delight which
he takes in his own, it being impossible that he whose Delight and Love is
always founded on the same Motives should delight in contrary Objects, in
different Subjects, in Happiness in himself, and Misery in his Creatures: And
if he desire our Happiness, as most certainly he does, how can he forbear to
love and take Complacency in that which contributes so much to it? Thus you see
upon what Reasons and Principles it is that God is so firm a Lover of
Righteousness.

2. I now proceed in the Second Place to show you what Indications he has
given the World of his steady Affection and Goodwill to Righteousness. Now
these, though they are many and almost infinite, may be reduced to Two general
Heads. 1 st. The natural Indications; 2 dly. The Supernatural ones: Of both
which I shall endeavor to give you some brief Account.

1. God has given us Sundry natural Indications of his Love of Righteousness;
all which I shall reduce to these Four Heads: 1. He has imprinted a Law upon
our Natures which approves of righteous Actions, and condemns their contraries.
2. He has endued our Minds with a grateful Sense of righteous Actions, and a
natural Horror of their contraries. 3. He has coupled good Effects to all
righteous Actions, and bad ones to their contraries. 4. He has implanted in us
natural Abodings of the future Reward of righteous Actions, and the future
Punishment of their contraries.


1 st. One Indication of God's Love of Righteousness is his imprinting a Law
upon our Natures which approves all righteous Actions, and disapproves their
contraries; and this Law is that natural Reason which is either connate with
our Understanding, or does immediately result from the righteous Use and
Exercise of it. For such is the Frame of our Understandings that whenever we
impartially reason about Things, we are forced to distinguish between Good and
Evil, and without offering infinite Violence to our Faculties we can never
persuade our selves, that to blaspheme God, or to reverence him, to lie or
speak Truth, to honor our Parents, or to scorn or despitefully use them, are
indifferent Things; for as soon as we open the Eye of our Reason, we
immediately discern such an essential Difference between them, as forces us to
condemn the One, and approve the Other: And hence we see that as for the great
Strokes of Unrighteousness, they have as much the universal Judgment of our
Reason against them, as any false Conclusion in the Mathematics; whereas the
Goodness of their contrary Virtues is as universally Acknowledged by us as the
Truth of any first Principle of Philosophy. God therefore having created us
with such a Faculty as does so necessarily pass such a contrary Judgment upon
righteous and unrighteous Actions, we must either say that he has made us
judge falsely or else acknowledge this Judgment to be his as well as the
Faculty that made it; and if it be, then it is a sufficient Indication of his
Love of Righteousness, that he has so framed our Faculties, that without
apparent Violence they cannot but approve of it. For whatsoever our Faculties
do naturally Speak, they are made to speak from the Author of Nature; they only
speak what he has Dictated to them, and so what they say he says, who has put
his Word into their Mouths, and has made them speak it. Our Faculties
therefore being God's Oracles, whatsoever they freely and naturally pronounce
is as much his Words as any outward Revelation. Since therefore they so
unanimously pronounce their Approbation of Righteousness, it is as plain a
Signification of God's Love and Approbation of it, as if he himself should
immediately pronounce it by a Voice from Heaven.

2 ly. Another Indication of God's Love of Righteousness, is his enduing our
Minds with a grateful Sense of righteous Actions, and a natural Horror of their
Contraries. We find that antecedently to all our Reasoning and Discourse, there
is something in our Natures to which Virtue is a grateful Thing, and its
Contraries very nauseous and loathsome; for thus before we are capable of
Reasoning our selves into any Pleasure or Displeasure, our Nature is rejoiced
at a kind or a just Action, either in our selves or others, before we can
speak, or are capable of being allured by Hope, or awed by Correction. We are
sensibly pleased when we see we have pleasured those that have obliged us, and
as sensibly grieved when we are conscious of having Grieved and Offended them.
We love to see those fare well whom we have seen deserve well, and when any
unjust Violence is offered them our Nature shrinks at and abhors it. We pity
and compassionate the Miserable, when we know not why, and are ready to offer
at their Relief, when we can give no Reason for it; which is a plain Evidence
that these Things proceed not merely either from our Education, or deliberate
Choices, but from some natural Instinct antecedent to both, and that in the
very Frame of our Nature there is implanted by the Author of it a Sympathy with
Virtue and an Antipathy to Vice. And hence it is, that in the Beginnings of Sin
our Nature is so shy of an evil Action, and does so startle and boggle at it;
that it approaches it with such a modest Coyness, and goes blushing to it like
a Virgin to an Adulterers Bed; that it passes into Sin with such Regret and
Reluctance, and looks back upon it with such Shame and Confusion; which in our
tender Years, when we are not as yet arrived to the Exercise of our
Understandings, cannot be supposed to proceed from Reason or Conscience, but
from some secret Instinct of Nature, which by these and such like Indications
declares it self violated and offended. And this plainly shows the mighty
Respect that God has to Righteousness, that he has woven into our Beings such
a grateful Sense of it, and such a Horror of its Contraries. For this natural
Sense was doubtless intended by God to be the first Guide of humane Nature,
that so when as yet it is not capable of following Reason and Conscience, it
might be led on to Righteousness by its own necessary Instincts; that these
might dispose us to our Duty, and keep us out of all wicked Prejudices, till we
come under the Conduct of our Reason; that so this may then lead us forward
with more Ease and Facility in the Paths of Righteousness. What a plain
Indication therefore is this of God's Love of Righteousness, that he has taken
so much Care to incline our Natures to it, that he has not only given us
reasonable Faculties that do naturally direct us to Righteousness, but has
also taken so much Care to lead us to it by Instinct, till we are grown up to
the Exercise of those Faculties, and are capable of being guided by them?

3 ly. Another Indication of God's Love of Righteousness is his coupling good
Effects to righteous Actions, and bad ones to their Contraries. For if we
consult the Consequents of humane Actions, we shall generally find that all
moral Good resolves into natural, in the Health and the Pleasure, the Credit
and Tranquillity of those that practice it. For so the first Great Mover in that
Course and Series of Things which he has established in the World, has
ordered and disposed it, that every Action which is morally Good, should
ordinarily tend to, and determine in some natural Benefit and Advantage; that
the good Government of every Passion should tend to the Tranquillity of our
Minds, and the due Regulation of every Appetite center in the Health and
Pleasure of our Bodies; that Abstinence and Humility, Honesty and Charity
should have happy Effects chained to them, that they should contribute to our
Good both private and public; and that their contrary Vices should be always
pregnant with some mischievous Inconvenience; that they should either untune
the Organs of our Reason, or impair the Vigor and Activity of our Tempers, or
imbroil the Peace and Tranquillity of our Minds, or invade the Commonweal of
Societies, which includes the Interest of each particular Member. Such contrary
Effects as these are as necessary to virtuous and vicious Actions in that
Course of Things which God has established, as Light is to the Sun, or Heat to
the Fire; by which he has plainly demonstrated how contrarily he is affected
to those contrary Causes. For by those natural Goods and Evils which are
appendent to humane Actions, he has plainly distinguished them into moral
Goods and Evils; and those good and bad Effects which he has annexed to them
are most sensible Marks of his Love of the one, and his Hatred of the other.
For to be sure he would never have made Righteousness the Cause of so much good
to us, if he had not loved it; nor Wickedness the Spring of so many Mischiefs
and Inconveniences, if he had not hated and abhorred it. The Effects of
Righteousness are ordinarily a Reward, and the Consequents of Sin a Punishment
to it self, and this by God's own Order and Disposal; and pray by what
Significations can a Lawgiver more effectually declare his Love and Hatred of
Actions than by rewarding and punishing them?

4 thly, And lastly. Another Indication of God's Love of Righteousness, is the
natural Presages and Abodings which he has implanted in our Natures of the
future Reward of righteous Actions, and the future Punishment of their
Contraries. That there are such Abodings as these in humane Nature is apparent
by this, that antecedently to all divine Revelation, Men of all Ages, Nations
and Religions have felt and experienced them; yea, and that it has been
experienced not only among the politer and more learned Nations, who may be
supposed to be persuaded of a future State by the probable Arguments of
Philosophy; but also among the most barbarous and uncultivated, who cannot be
supposed to have believed it upon Principles of Reason: For though some of them
have been so rude as to disband Society, and live like Beasts without Laws and
Government; yet have they not been able to extinguish these their natural Hopes
and Fears of future Rewards and Puishments; which is an unanswerable Evidence
how deeply the Sense of another World is imprinted upon humane Nature. And as
we have such a natural Sense of a future State as we cannot easily stifle, so
our Minds do naturally abode that we shall fare well or ill in it according as
we behave our selves righteously or unrighteously in this Life. When we do well
and reflect upon it, it leaves a delicious Farwell on our Minds; our Conscience
smiles and promises glorious Things that we shall reap from it, most happy and
blessed Fruits in the other World. And as the Sense of doing well does
naturally suggest to us the most ravishing Hopes and blisful Expectations, so
the sense of doing ill fills our Minds with sad and dire Presages; our
Conscience abodes us a black and woeful Eternity wherein we shall dearly pay for
our sinful Delights and Gratifications. And though for the present we can
divert and stifle this troublesome sense of our Natures, yet Naturam expellas
-- is true in this also; though we thrust off Nature with a Fork, yet 'twill
return again upon us; and a Fit of Sickness, a sudden Calamity, or a serious
Thought will soon awake and revive in it these black Prognostics of our future
Torment. And hence we generally find that bad Men are most afraid of Eternity,
when they are nearest to it, their Fear like all other natural Motions being
swiftest when it is nearest it is Center. For so Plato has observed (...), When
Men are near Death, or suppose themselves near it, there arises in them great
Fear and Thoughtfulness of a future State, which before they never thought of.
And that this springs not from Superstition but from Nature is evident by this,
that Atheists themselves who are most remote from Superstition, when they come
to die are rarely able to suppress this ominous Dread and Fear of another
World, but in despite of themselves are forced into those dismal Expectations
which before they laughed at: A clear Demonstration that these ill Abodings
spring from something within them that they cannot conquer, and that what their
Minds now speak is not so much the Sense of their Opinion as their Nature. And
this Language of Nature is a clear Expression of God's Love of Righteousness;
for the Voice of Nature is only the Voice of the God of Nature ecchoed and
rebounded; and to be sure whatever he imprints upon our Natures is the Sense
and Meaning of his own Heart, since his Veracity will not permit him to print
any Falsehood there. And since by these our natural Abodings the God of Nature
proposes to us a future Reward if we are righteous, and a future Punishment if
we are wicked, he has hereby as certainly declared to us how much he loves
Righteousness and hates the Contrary, as he can possibly do by the most express
Promise which he has made to reward the one, or Threatening to punish the
other. And thus you see what natural Indications and Discoveries God has made
of his unfeigned Love of Righteousness, which are such as without any
additional Revelation are sufficient to convince considering Men that God is a
most sincere and affectionate Lover of Righteousness and righteous Men, and
that if we will but unfeignedly submit our selves to the eternal Laws of
Goodness we shall thereby make our selves the best Friend who is a
never-failing Fountain of Goodness, and who will do us more good than all the
Beings in the World, should they conspire to be our Benefactors; and that on
the Contrary, if we persist in Sin and Unrighteousness we shall most certainly
provoke him to be our mortal Enemy, and render our selves eternally odious and
hateful in his Eyes; that his incensed Wrath will sooner or later break forth
upon us and prosecute us with eternal Vengeance, and that we can expect nothing
but black and dismal Issues while we are hated by him who is the Fountain of
all Love and Goodness. All this we may be sufficiently convinced of by
seriously attending to those natural Discoveries which God has made of his
Love of Righteousness. But yet because he saw Mankind so unattentive to the
Voice of their Natures, so unobservant of it is Language and Meaning as to run
headlong on, notwithstanding all it is Countermands, into the greatest Impiety
and Wickedness; he has been graciously pleased to add to these natural
Discoveries of his Love of Righteousness sundry great and eminent supernatural
ones; such as one would think were sufficient to rouse and awake the most
stupid and insensible Creatures into a serious Attention to them; all which are
reducible to these following Heads.

1. His conferring such great and miraculous Favors upon righteous Persons,
and inflicting such severe Judgments on the Wicked. 2. His making so many
Revelations to the World for the promoting of Righteousness, and
discountenancing of Sin. 3. His sending his own Son into the World to transact
such mighty Things, for the Encouragement of Righteousness, and discouragement
of Sin. 4. His promising such vast Rewards to us, upon Condition of our being
righteous, and denouncing such fearful Punishments against us in Case we do
neglect it. 5. His grantaing his blessed Spirit to us to excite us to, and
assist us in our Endeavors after Righteousness.
1. One supernatural Expression of God's Love of Righteousness is his
conferring great and miraculous Favors upon righteous Persons, and inflicting
severe Judgments upon the Wicked. And of this we have infinite Instances in the
several Ages of the World, there being scarce any History, either sacred or
profane, which abounds not with them; several of which both Blessings and
Judgments do as plainly evince themselves to be intended for Rewards and
Punishments, as if they had been attended with a Voice from Heaven declaring
the Reasons for which they were bestowed and inflicted. For how many famous
Instances have we of the miraculous Deliverances of Righteous Persons, who by
an invisible Hand have been rescued from the greatest Dangers, when in all
outward Appearance their Condition was hopeless and desperate; and of wonderful
Blessings that have happened to them, not only without, but contrary to all
secondary Causes? Of some that have been so eminently rewarded in Kind as that
the Good which they received was a most visible token of the Good which they
did; of others that have received the Blessings they asked whilst they were
praying for them, and obtained the Grant of them with such distinguishing
Circumstances as did plainly signify them to be the Answers and Returns of
their devout Desires? And so on the contrary, how many notable Examples are
there of such miraculous Judgments inflicted upon unrighteous Persons as have
either exceeded the Power of all secondary Causes, or else have been caused by
them contrary to their natural Tendency; of Men that have been punished in the
very Act of their Sin, and sometimes in the very Part by which they have
offended; that have had the Evil of their Sin retaliated upon them in a
correspondent Evil of Suffering, and been punished with those very Judgments
which they have imprecated on themselves in Justification of a Falsehood? Now
though in the ordinary Course of Things, that of the Wise Man is most true,
that we know neither love nor hatred, by any thing that is before us, because
ordinarily all things come alike to all, and there is one Event to the
Righteous and the Wicked, Eccles. ix.1, 2. yet when the Providence of God so
visibly steps out of it is ordinary Course, to bless the Righteous and punish
the Wicked, it is a plain Indication of his Love to the one, and his Hatred to
the other. For these irregular Providence have plain and visible Tokens of
God's Love and Anger imprinted on their Foreheads, and it would be Stupidity to
attribute them either to a blind Chance, or the necessary Revolutions of
secondary Causes, when they are stamped with such legible Characters of their
being designed and intended for Rewards and Punishments. For if these were
either casual or necessary, why should they not happen alike to all, as well as
ordinary Providence? Why should not there be as many Examples of the
miraculous Blessings and Deliverances of the Unrighteous, as there are of the
Righteous? Why should not as many Men have suffered as remarkably the Evils
which they have imprinted on themselves in attesting the Truth, as there have
in attesting Lies and Falsehoods? Why should so many have been struck dumb or
dead in the Act of Perjury, and not one that we ever heard of, suffer the like
Calamity in witnessing the Truth? In a word, why should so many bad Men have
suffered such Calamities as were plain Retaliations in Kind of their cruel and
unjust Actions, as Adonibezeck (for instance) did, in the cutting off his
Thumbs and great Toes, whilst so few, if any, for doing Justice upon others
have by any such casual and irregular Providence been exposed to the Evils they
inflicted? Since therefore in every Age of the World there have happened such
Goods to righteous Men as have the plainest Characters of divine Rewards upon
them, and such Evils to the Wicked as do evidently bespeak themselves intended
for divine Punishments, God has hereby sufficiently declared his Love of the
one, and his Hatred of the other. For by their Rewards and Punishments all
Lawgivers do declare their Love and Hatred of the Facts they are annexed to;
and therefore to be sure if the Supreme Law giver had not loved Righteousness
and hated the contrary, he would never have so eminently rewarded the one and
punished the other, as he has apparently done.

2 dly. Another Supernatural Indication of God's Love of Righteousness is his
making so many Revelations to the World for the promoting of Righteousness and
discountenancing of Sin. That God has made sundry Revelations to the World is
evident in Fact, because there are sundry Revelations which have been
sufficiently demonstrated by those miraculous Effects of the divine Power which
have accompanied the Ministration of them; such are those contained in the five
Books of Moses and the Prophets, which have been almost amply confirmed both by
the Miracles which were wrought by the inspired Authors of them; and by the
exact Accomplishments of the several Predictions contained in them; and such is
also that last and best Revelation contained in the New Testament, which both
by the Types and Predictions contained in the Law and the Prophets, and by the
infinite Miracles wrought by Jesus and his Followers, who were the immediate
Ministers of it; together with its own inherent Goodness; is so effectually
demonstrated divine, that no Man who weighs the Proof of it can suspect it,
unless he be infinitely prejudiced against it. Now if you consult these several
divine Revelations, you will plainly perceive that the main Drift and Design of
them is to promote Righteousness, and suppress whatsoever is contrary to it;
that the several Revelations made to Abraham and his Children were all but one
repeated Covenant of Righteousness; that the Law of Moses consisted partly of
ceremonious Rights, which were either intended for divine Hieroglyphics to
instruct the dull and stupid Jews in the Principles of inward Purity and
Goodness, or else for Types and sacred Figures of the holy Mysteries of the
Gospel; partly of Precepts of moral Righteousness, together with some few
prudential ones that were suitable to the Genius and Polity of that People; and
partly of such Promises and Threats as were most apt to oblige them to the
Practice of those righteous Precepts. As for the Prophets, the Substance of
their Revelations, was either Reprehensions of Sin, together with severe
Denunciations against it; or Invitations to Righteousness, together with
gracious Promises of Rewards to follow it; or Predictions of the Messiah, and
that everlasting Righteousness which should be introduced by him. And then as
for the Gospel, all the Duties of it consist either in Instances or Means of
Righteousness; and all the Doctrines of it are nothing else but powerful
Arguments and Motives to persuade us to the Practice of those Duties. Thus
Righteousness you see is the main Center to which all true Revelation tends,
the Mark at which the righteous Lord has continually levelled and directed it.
What a plain Demonstration therefore is this of the unfeigned Love and Respect
he bears it, that he did not think it sufficient to imprint a Law of
Righteousness upon our Natures, and stamp upon our Beings so many Indications
of his Love to it, but seeing us swerve and deviate from it has from time to
time by so many loud and reiterated Voices from Heaven invited and called us
back again; so that if he be cordial and sincere in what he says, (as it would
be absurd and impious to suspect the contrary,) we cannot doubt but he heartily
loves that which by so many immediate Revelations he has so earnestly
importuned us to embrace.

3 dly. Another supernatural Indication of God's Love of Righteousness is his
sending his own Son into the World to transact such mighty Things for the
Encouragement of it, and persuading Men to it. For to advance Righteousness was
the main Design of all those mighty Things which the Son of God did and
suffered in this World; the Design of all that holy and innocent Life which he
led was to propose to our Imitation a perfect Example of Righteousness, that so
treading our Way before us we might have not only the Line of his Precepts, but
also the Print of his Footsteps to direct us, and that by beholding so fair a
Draught of Righteousness drawn so exquisitely to the Life, and in every Part so
exactly answering to the sweetest and most amiable Ideas of it, we might be
both invited and instructed to copy and imitate it in our Actions. For what he
says of that illustrious Act of Charity and Humility, his washing his
Disciples Feet, is truly applicable to the whole Course of his Actions; For I
have given you an Example, that you should do as I have done unto you, Joh.
xiii.15. And as his Life was an Example of Righteousness, so his Death was a
most urgent Motive to it; for hereby he made Expiation for our Sins and
obtained an Act of Pardon and Indemnity for every Rebel that would lay down his
Arms and return to his Duty and Allegiance; and by obtaining this he has given
us infinite Encouragement to return, since if we do so, we have most ample
Assurance that we shall be received into Grace and Favor. And though I cannot
deny but if God had pleased he might have granted such an Act of Pardon to us
without the Consideration of Christ's Death and Sacrifice; yet I am sure, if he
had, it could never have been such an effectual Motive as it was to oblige us
to Righteousness for the future. For should he have granted us Pardon merely
upon our Repentance without any other Motive or Consideration, he would have
discovered so much seeming Easiness and Indulgence in such a Procedure, as
would have very much imboldened such disingenuous Creatures as we to presume
upon his Lenity, and turn his Grace into Wantonness. And if to prevent our
presuming upon his Lenity it was necessary that he should have some other
Motive to pardon us besides that of our Repentance, then it was no less
necessary that this other Motive should be such as did clearly argue and evince
his righteous Severity; for otherwise it would have no Force in it to prevent
our Presumption. And what Motive of Pardon could better evince his Severity
than the Suffering of some other in our Room, especially the Suffering of his
own Son, the greatest and dearest Person in the whole Creation? For not to be
moved to grant a public Pardon to us upon our hearty Repentance unless this
blessed Person would engage to die for us, whose infinite Greatness gave such
an inestimable Value to his Sufferings as rendered them adequate to what we had
deserved to suffer, was as great an Argument of his inflexible Severity against
Sin, as if he should have destroyed at one Blow the whole World of Sinners. So
that as he has expressed an infinite Mercy to us in admitting his own Son to
die for us, so in refusing to pardon us upon any less Motive than his precious
Death, he has expressed an infinite Hatred to our Sins; and so that very Death
which moved God to pardon us, moves us to stand in Awe of his Severity, the
Death of the Son of God upon which we are pardoned being the most terrible
Instance that ever was of the Desert of our Sin, and God's Displeasure against
it. Thus our blessed Lord has not only given us the greatest Encouragement by
procuring our Pardon to return from our Iniquities, but by procuring it in such
a formidable way he has given us the most dreadful Warning of God's Severity
against them. So that now we cannot think upon the Reason for which our past
Offenses are forgiven, without being vehemently moved to future Obedience. And
thus the main Design, you see, both of Christ's Life and Death, was to recall us
from Sin to the Practice of Righteousness: And hence he is said to have given
himself for us, to redeem us from all Iniquity, and to purify to himself a
peculiar people, zealous of good Works, Tit. ii.14. And then he arose again
from the Dead to confirm that righteous Doctrine which he had revealed to the
World, and visibly ascended into Heaven to give us an ocular Demonstration of
the heavenly Rewards of Righteousness; and there he now sits at the right Hand
of God, to assure us, that if we persevere in Righteousness, we shall be
continually befriended in the Court of Heaven through his all-powerful
Intercession; and has assured us that at the End of the World he will come to
Judgment, and faithfully distribute those Rewards and Punishments which here he
promised and threatened to righteous and unrighteous Persons. Thus the main
Drift, you see, of all these great Transactions of our Savior, was to advance
the Interest of Righteousness and true Goodness. What a mighty Evidence
therefore is this of God's great Love of Righteousness, that he should send his
own most blessed Son upon its Errand, to transact such mighty Things on its
Behalf? For by sending Christ into the World, and exposing him to Misery for
Righteousness Sake, he did in Effect declare that he valued the Interest of
Righteousness more than the present Happiness and Enjoyment of his most dearly
beloved and only begotten Son; and we may most certainly conclude, that had not
Righteousness been infinitely dear to him, he would never have authorized his
dearest Son to take such infinite Pains to promote it.

4 thly. Another supernatural Indication of God's Love of Righteousness is his
promising such vast Rewards to us upon it, and denouncing such fearful
Punishments against us if we despise and neglect it. For besides all those
temporal Rewards he has proposed to us if we seek the Kingdom of Heaven, and
the Righteousness thereof, he has erected a Heaven of immortal Joys and
Felicities to crown and entertan it; a Heaven that contains in it all the
Beatitudes that humane Nature is capable of, all that Truth that the most
capacious Mind can comprehend, and all that Good that the vastest Affections
can either crave or contain: In a word, a Heaven whose Blisses are all as large
as our immense Desires, and all as lasting as our immortal Beings: For it is a
Heaven which consists in an eternal Fruition of the Fountain of infinite Truth
and Goodness, whose everflowing Streams are abundantly sufficient to quench the
Thirst, and make glad the Heart of every Being that understands and loves. How
much therefore God loves Righteousness you may easily guess by these vast
Preparations he has made to entertain it. For he built Heaven on purpose to
lodge righteous Souls, and that they may see he thinks nothing too dear for
them, he is himself their Feast there as well as their Entertainer. He feeds
them with his own Perfections, and they live for ever as happily as their
Hearts can wish upon the Sight and Love and Imitation of his Beauties. So
vehemently is his Heart set upon Righteousness, that he will have every
righteous Soul dwell with him and live upon him, and partake of all those
heavenly Joys in which his own Beatitude consists. But as for Unrighteousness,
how much his Soul abhors it is evident by those dire Punishments he has
denounced against it, by those dark and dismal Abodes which he has condemned
unrighteous Souls to, to languish out a woeful Eternity, to burn in Flames there
that never consume, and be gnawn with Worms which never devour them; to be
scared and haunted with Devils without and Furies within, and perpetually
worried Day and Night without any Ease or Intermission with all the Horrors,
Griefs, and Vexations that an everlasting Hell imports. O thou merciful Father
of Beings! How could thou have found in thy Heart to condemn thy Creatures to
so wretched a State, had not their unrighteous Practices been infinitely odious
in thine Eyes? No certainly; the good God would never have made Hell for a
Trifle, for the sake of any Thing that his Nature could have endured or
dispensed with; nor would he ever have cast any unrighteous Creature into it,
were it not for the implacable Abhorrence he has to all Unrighteousness: And
therefore since he has not only made Hell, but warns us of, and threatens us
with it, we may be sure he infinitely abominates that for which he made and
threatens it; and consequently that he is infinitely concerned for the Cause
and Interest of Righteousness.

5 thly, And lastly. Another supernatural Indicaton of God's Love of
Righteousness is his granting his blessed Spirit to us to excite us to, and
assist us in our Endeavors after Righteousness. First he sent his Son to
propagate Righteousness by his Ministry, his Life and Death; and upon his
Return to Heaven he sent his Spirit to supply his Room, and carry on that dear
Design, of which his Son had already laid the Foundation. For in Christ's
personal Absence his Spirit acts in his Stead, and was sent down from the
Father by Virtue of his Intercession to be his Vicegerent in the World, to
promote and enlarge his heavenly Kingdom, to conquer our Hearts, and subdue our
stubborn Wills to the Obedience of his most righteous Laws. So that the Holy
Ghost does now preside in the Church as the supreme Minister and vicarous Power
of our Savior, and is continually employed even as our Savior himself was
whilst he abode upon Earth in driving on the Interest of Righteousness; for
hitherto tend all his secret Operations on the Minds of Men; this is the Reason
why he suggests so many good Thoughts, and by repeating them thick upon us,
keeps our Minds so fixed upon them, that so if possible he may recollect our
dispersed Minds that are continually wandering to and fro in this infinite Maze
of sensual Vanities, and engage them to attend to such Motives of Righteousness
as are most apt to excite them to wise and virtuous Resolutions. So that as in
the Beginnings of Christianity before Christian Motives to Righteousness were
believed, the Holy Spirit did operate more visibly and miraculously to confirm
and demonstrate the Truth of them; so now they being believed, and thereupon
the Necessity of such miraculous Operations superseded, his great Work is to
object and present them to our Minds, and fix our Thoughts upon them till they
have effected in us those good Resolutions for which they were designed and
intended: And how diligently he pursues this Work our own Experience certifies
and informs us: For how often do we find good Thoughts and Motions injected to
us we know not how nor whence; and how many times do these unexpected Thoughts
kindle holy Desires in us before we are aware? Which Desires being fed by a
fresh Supply of holy Motions and Suggestions are many times nourished into good
Resolutions, and these being still backed with those repeated Motions which do
frequently press with strong Importunity upon us, are at last perfected into
firm and lasting Principles of Action. Thus does the Holy Spirit continually
knock at the Door of our Souls, and solicit us with the greatest Earnestness
to sober and righteous Resolutions; and this is his constant Employment among
Men, and will be so to the End of the World; till Jesus, whose Vicegerent he
is, and whose Absence he supplies, returns in Person from Heaven to keep his
last and general Assizes upon Earth. And can we imagine that God would have all
this while employed his Holy Spirit in the Service of Righteousness, to drive
on its Interest and solicit its Cause, if it had not been infinitely dearer to
him? No certainly, he sets a greater Value on the Pains of his Son and Spirit,
than to busy them about a Trifle, to employ them so industriously as he has
done in an Affair which he had little or no Regard for. If his Heart had not
been extremely set upon it, he would have found out some other Employment for
those divine and illustrious Persons, and not have engaged them so
everlastingly as he has done in the Service and Ministry of Righteousness.

Having thus explained and proved the Proposition, That the Righteous Lord
loves Righteousness, I shall conclude with some few Inferences drawn from the
whole Argument.

1. From hence I infer that no Religion, or Proposition of Religion can be
true, that either directly or by true Consequence is an Enemy to Righteousness.
For all true Religion is from God; and therefore to be sure that cannot be true
which either directly or indirectly opposes that which God so dearly loves.
This therefore is a plain Conviction of the notorious Falsehood and Imposture of
Popery, that in all those Doctrins it has superinduced upon the common
Principles of Christianity, it is an open Enemy to Righteousness. As for
Instance, it is a common Principle of Christianity that God alone is to be
worshipped as the supreme Author and Fountain of our Beings, upon which the
Church of Rome has superstructed the Invocation of Saints and Angels, which
they perform in the same Words and with the same Address as they do the
Invocation of God himself. For though they pretend to pray to them only for
their Prayers, yet in their Public Offices they do not only beg their Prayers
to God for them, but also invocate them as sovereign Gods and independent
Disposers of the Mercies they pray for. Thus in the Hours of Sarum they implore
the Angels to direct their Thoughts and Words and Actions in the way of
Salvation, that so they may be able to fill up the Number of the Angelical
Orders, which by the Fall of Lucifer was diminished; to protect them from the
Devils, and comfort them when they are dying. Particularly, St. Michael they
beseech to be their Coat of Mail, St. Gabriel to be their Helmet, St. Raphael
to be their Shield, St. Vriel to be their Defender, St. Cherubim to be their
Health, St. Seraphim to be their Truth; and all the holy Angels and Archangels
to keep, protect and defend them, and bring them to eternal Life. And as for
Raphael, to whom they seem to bear a more particular Affection, they style him
the best Physician both of Body and Soul, and pray him to inlighten both their
spiritual and carnal Eyes. And then as for the Saints, they do as immediately
address to them in their Forms of Prayer for Sanctification, Pardon, temporal
and eternal Blessings, as they can possibly do to God himself; particularly the
Blessed Virgin they adorn with the most glorious Titles of God, and in her
Psalter address to her in the same Forms of Invocation which David uses in his
Psalms to God; they style Her the Lady Almighty, the Author of Mercy, the Queen
of infinite Majesty, and the Hope of all the World; praying that her Mercy may
lighten upon them, as they do put their trust in her; and a great deal more to
this Purpose. And as for Joseph her Husband they style him the Support of their
Lives, and the Pillar of the World; beseeching him with his Carpenters Ax (a
Tool fit only to work upon such wooden Souls) to hew down their Sins, that they
may be adopted Timber for the Palace of Heaven. In a word, in their present
Breviary they implore St. Peter to loose them by his Word from the Bonds of
Sin, and supplicate the Apostles, who by their Word (if the Prayer lies not) do
lock and unlock the Gates of Heaven, to loose them from all Sin by their
Command. They humbly entreat St. Genovesa to have pity on those that hope in
Her, to blot out their Sins, and send them Relief and Comfort; and implore St.
Sebastian to preserve their Country from the Plague, to preserve their Bodies,
and heal their Minds; and to win him thereunto, assure him that all their Hope
is in him. These and several other such like Instances there are of their
Prayers both to Angels and Saints, in which they do as immediately invoke them
both for temporal, spiritual and eternal Blessings as they can do God himself,
who is the sole Disposer of them. And is not this most palpable Unrighteousness
toward God, to strip him thus of his divine Prerogatives, and clothe his
Creatures in them before his Face? But against this black Charge Bellarmin has
a very quaint Salvo: When we say, says he, St. Peter have mercy upon me, or so;
we supply the Sense with this mental Construction, procure Mercy for me by thy
Prayers or Merits; which is a plain Confession that the Words are unwholesome in
themselves, and cannot be safely used without being corrected by a more honest
meaning; and that if the Votaries of that Church do not take Care to mend their
Public Prayesr with their private Meanings, they incur the Guilt, or at least
the Danger of Idolatry. For we cannot address more immediately in any Form of
Words to God for any Mercy, than they do in these to the Saints and Angels; and
therefore if they do not actually address to them as Gods, it is because they
construe those Forms into a different Sense from their most obvious meaning.
For when they say, Lord have mercy upon me, they may mean, with as little Force
to the Words, Procure me Mercy, O Lord, from St. Peter by thy Prayers and
Merits, as they do when they say, St. Peter have Mercy upon me, Procure me
Mercy from God, O St. Peter, by thy Prayers and Merits. And what a dreadful
Profanation is it of the divine Majesty to use such Forms of Address to God
and St. Peter, as do leave our Minds indifferent either to pray to St. Peter to
pray to God for us, or to pray to God to pray to St. Peter for us? Again, it is
a common Doctrine of Christianity, that our Savior has instituted the holy
Eucharist to be a Memorial of his Sufferings, and a Seal of that everlasting
Covenant which he purchased by them; upon which the Roman Church has
superstructed that monstrous Doctrine of Transubstantiation; which, besides the
disgrace it does to our holy Religion by Reason of those ridiculous Absurdities
and gross Contradictions it fastens upon it; it puts such an extravagant sense
upon the first Institution of this holy mystery, that if our Savior had really
meant it, 'twould have been enough to expose him to the general Scorn and
Derision of Mankind. For if when he first instituted it, he had really
pretended to convert the Sacramental Elements into the Substance of his own
Body and Blood, this must have been the Sense of his Words and Actions; these
outward Elements which but just now were made Bread and Wine, are now by my
Almighty Benediction converted into the Substance of my Body and Blood; this
very Body which sits here at the upper End of the Table, lies there under those
Species of Bread and Wine which you see upon it. My Head and Feet, and every
Part of me, are all entirely within every Crumb of that unleavened Bread; and
yet those several Crumbs, which do each contain my whole Body, contain not
several Bodies; and if you divide them into ten thousand Crumbs, and distribute
them into ten thousand different Places, yet in all those different Places I am
the same entire and undivided Body. And though as I sit here, you see I am at
least a Foot broad, and five or six Foot long, yet in those little Crumbs that
lie before you I am no bigger than a Pin's Head; and yet upon my honest Word I
am in all my Parts and Dimensions under the outward Species of every one of
them, and so am every whit as broad and thick and long in them, as I do now
appear in this visible Body. And as for my Blood which is at least two Gallons,
though it is all contained within the Veins and Vessels of this Body, yet it is
all at the same Time within that Cup, which I confess is hardly large enough to
contain the eighth Part of it: And though you Twelve shall every one drink his
share of it, yet every one shall drink it all, that is, out of this one Cup of
my Blood, which at most contains but a Quart, each Man of you Twelve shall
drink the whole two Gallons. But let not these Things astonish you, for now I
am doing yet stranger Things than these, and first I take my self (it being
supposed both by Papists and Protestants that Christ himself first eat and
drank those sacred Elements) that is, I take my Hands into my own Hands, and
put my Mouth into my own Mouth, and swallow down my Hands, and Mouth, and
Throat, and Stomach through my own Throat into my own Stomach; so that now my
whole Body is entirely within my Stomach, though the whole you see, except my
Stomach, is still entirely without it. And having thus eaten and drank up my
self, in the next Place I give my self to be eat and drank by every one of you.
And now while I am wholly buried within each of your Stomachs and my own, I
shall begin a sacred Hymn, and conclude with my Farewell Sermon. This, supposing
our Savior had intended a real Transubstantiation, had been the natural Sense,
or rather Nonsense of his Words and Actions in the first Institution of this
sacred Mystery. And what a most shameful Disgrace is it to the most righteous
Religion that ever was, to fasten such wild Extravagancies upon its great and
blessed Author? Certainly had Men set their Wits at work to burlesque the most
sacred Thing, and dress it up for Laughter and Derision, they could never have
invented a more ridiculous Disguise for it than this of Transubstantiation:
Besides all which, it introduces two notorious Pieces of Unrighteousness; the
first of which is a most gross and barbarous Piece of Idolatry, viz. their
adoring the consecrated Bread with the highest Species of divine Worship; which
if it be not Transubstantiated into the Body of Christ, as we are sure it is
not, unless our Senses lie, and Contradictions be true; they themselves confess
is as gross Idoatry as the Laplander's worshipping a red Cloth hung upon the Top
of a Spear. Now what monstrous Unrighteousness is this, for Men to rob God of
his Honor, and vest a senseless Piece of Bread with it; to advance the
Workmanship of a Baker into an Equality with God, and then adore, and then
devour it? The second Piece of Unrighteousness which this monstrous Figment
introduces, is the Half-Communion, in which the Christian World is most
unjustly robbed of one half of that Legacy which Christ bequeathed to us in his
last Will and Testament; which as Bellarmin tells us was done out of Reverence
to the Transubstantiated Wine, lest any Drop of it sticking upon Laymens
Beards should be spilt and profaned. But this Inconvenience, by the Cardinal's
Leave, might have otherwise been easily prevented by prohibiting all Laymen,
as they do their Priests, to receive the Sacrament with their Beards on. For I
am apt to think there is no good Christian but would have been better contented
to lose all his Beard than half the Sacrament. So that this Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, you see, has a most unrighteous Tendency both as it
disgraces the most righteous Religion, and introduces the most gross
Unrighteousness. Again, Thirdly, It Is a common Principle of Christianity that
true Repentance is indispensably necessary to the Salvation of Sinners; upon
which they have superstructed their Sacrament of Penance, which joined with
Absolution is of such Sovereign Virtue as to Transubstantiate a Sorrow
proceeding from the Fear of Hell, into true and saving Repentance: By which
Doctrine they have most directly superseded all the Obligations of
Righteousness. For what need I put my self to the Trouble of a holy and
righteous Life, when for allarming my self before I go to Confession into some
frightful Apprehensions of Hell, I can be dubbed a true Penitent, and receive
the Remission of my Sins? For now my old Score being all wiped off, I may Sin
on merrily on a new Account, and when I make my next Reckoning, it is but being
afraid of Hell again, and I am sure to receive a new Acquittance in full of all
Demands and Dues. And when I have spent all my Life in this Round and Circle of
Unrighteousnss, it is but sending for a Priest at my last Breath, confessing my
Sins, and dreading the Punishment of them, and with a few magical Words he
shall immediately conjure me to Heaven, or at least out of Danger of Hell. Once
more; it is a common Principle of Christianity that the Wages of Sin is eternal
Death; upon which they have introduced their Doctrins of Purgatory and
Indulgencies, which, like Simeon and Levi, Brethren in Iniquity, do both
conspire to render Righteousness a needless Thing. For by the Sacrament of
Penance the eternal Punishment of Hell is changed into the temporary one of
Purgatory, and by Indulgencies, especially plenary ones, the temporary
Punishment of Purgatory is wholly remitted, and extinguished; so that the first
lessens the Punishment of Sin, and the last annihilates it: And by this Means
are Sinners mightily imboldened to go on, being assured that upon the Sacrament
of Penance they shall commute Hell for Purgatory, and that upon plenary
Indulgence they shall exchange Purgatory for Heaven. Many other Instances of
this Nature might be given, but it would be endless to enumerate all those
unrighteous Principles with which their Casuistical Divinity abounds; the
Frauds and Falsifications, the Treasons and Murders, the Slanders and
Perjuries, which their Guides of Conscience do not only tolerate but commend;
For I will maintain that there is scarce any Villainy in Nature so notorious
which by the Principles of some or other of their allowed Casuists may not be
wholly vindicated, or at least extenuated into venial Crimes. So that
considering the whole Frame and Structure of the Popish Religion, I do most
seriously believe it to be one of the most effectual Engines to undermine and
tear up the Foundations of Righteousness that ever the Devil forged or made use
of; and were it not for those common Principles of Christianity that are
intermingled with it, and do allay, and sometimes I hope overpower the Venom of
it, I am verily persuaded that the Religion of Heathens would sooner make Men
righteous than that of Papists. For I do affirm that there is not one Principle
of pure Popery that is either a Rule of Righteousness or a Motive to it, but
contrariwise that the most of its Principles seem to have been purposely
calculated to affront Men's Reason, and debauch their Manners; and if so, then
we may easily guess whether this be a true Religion or no, which in all its
Parts is so repugnant to that which God most dearly loves.

2 dly. Hence I infer upon what Terms a Man may safely conclude that he is
beloved of God; for if he has that amiable Quality within him which is the
eternal Reason of God's Love, he may be sure he is beloved of him. If our Souls
be adorned with that Righteousness which the righteous Lord loves, we may
safely conclude that we are his Favorites, and shall never cease to be so
whilst we continue so adorned. For it is as impossible for God not to love
righteous Souls, as not to be righteous himself; for whilst he continues so,
his own Nature must needs incline him to love all those in whom he finds his
own most amiable Image and Resemblance. Let us not therefore persuade our
selves that we are beloved of God either upon any inward Whispers and
Suggestions, or upon any particular Marks and Signs of Grace; for both these
may abuse and deceive us, and flatter our Minds into false and groundless
Assurances. We may think it is the Spirit of God that whispers to us when all of
a sudden we feel our selves surprised with joyous and comfortable Thoughts,
and yet this may be nothing else but a Frisk of melancholy Vapors heated and
fermented by a feverish Humor. For those sudden Joys and Dejections, which
are so often interpreted the Incomes and Withdrawings of the Spirit of God, do
commonly proceed from no higher Cause than the Shiverings and Burnings of an
Ague; and I am very sure that Histerical Fits are very often mistaken for
spiritual Experiences; and that when Men have most confidently believed
themselves overshadowed by the Holy Ghost their Fancies have been only hagged
and ridden with the Enthusiastic Vapors of their own Spleen. And sometimes I
make no doubt but this sudden Flush of joyous Thoughts proceeds from a worse
Cause, even from the Suggestion of the Devil; who, though he has no immediate
Access to the Minds of Men, can yet doubtless act upon our Spirits and Humors,
and by their Means figure our Fancies into spritely Ideas, and tickle our
Hearts into a Rapture; And this Power of his we may reasonably suppose he is
ready enough to exert upon any mischievous Occasion, when he finds Men willing
to be deceived, and to rely upon ungrounded Confidences. Let us not therefore
build our Hopes of the divine Favor upon any such uncertain Foundations, but
impartially examine our selves whether we are really righteous; for unless we
are so, it is not more certain that God is righteous, than that these our
pretended spiritual Incomes and Inundations of Joy and Comfort, are either the
Freaks of our own Temper, or else the Injections of the Devil. For how can you
imagine that the God of all Righteousness and Truth can, without infinite
Violence to his own Nature, either love or pretend Love to an unrighteous Soul?
But then you will say, by what Signs and Tokens shall we know whether we are
righteous or no? To which I answer, that there is nothing can be a true Sign
and Token of Righteousness, which is distinct from Righteousness it self: For
Righteousness is its own Sign; and if any Man judges himself righteous by any
Mark which is not an Act or Instance of Righteousness, he deceives and abuses
his own Soul. But then we must have a Care that we do not argue from any one
particular Mark or Instance of Righteousness to our being righteous in general.
For you may as well argue that you are not blind because you hear well, or that
you are not deaf because you taste well, or that you have all your Senses,
because you have one; as that you are righteous in the general, because you are
so in this or that particular; and you may as reasonably conclude your self in
a State of Health, because you have a fresh Color, as that you are in a State
of Grace, because you have this or that particular Sign of it. Well, but then
how shall we resolve our selves in this most material Enquiry? Why do but
consider what it is to be righteous, and then reflect upon your own Motions,
and you will quickly feel whether you are righteous or no. Now to be righteous,
is in the general to intend righteously, and to act accordingly. If you ask
again how you shall know whether you so intend and act? I shall only answer,
that it is an unreasonable Question, and that you might as well ask me whether
you are hungry or thirsty; for you do as naturally feel the Motions of your
Souls as you do the Motions of your Bodies; and for you to ask another Man what
your own Intentions are, is to make him a Conjurer instead of a Casuist. Would
it not look extremely ridiculous for a Man to ask his Creditor, or Customer,
good Sir, how shall I know whether I intend to pay my Debts, or am sincerely
resolved not to overreach you? Should any Man ask me such a Question, I should
only bid him consult himself; and if then he suspected his own Honesty, I
should shrewdly suspect he had too much Reason for it. If you intend
righteously, you intend it knowingly; and if you knowingly intend it, you
cannot but know that you intend it. If you cannot know whether you intend and
act righteously, you cannot know how to do it; and if you cannot know how to do
it, you are not Subjects capable of Morality; but must of Necessity live and
act at Random, and blunder on like Travelers in the dark, without being able
to determine whether you go backward or forward. If therefore you would know
whether you are righteous Men or no, do not go about to perplex and entangle
your selves in the Wilderness of Signs and Tokens; for if you had a thousand
Signs of Grace, you can never safely conclude you are righteous, till upon an
impartial Review of your selves you do feel that you intend and act
righteously; and then, and not till then, you may build upon it that God loves
you. For God's Love is a constant and immutable Thing; and in this the
Constancy of it consists; not that it is always fixed upon the same Person, but
that it is unchangeably determined to the same Motive, and this Motive is
Righteousness. So that if he find this Motive in us, he will be sure to love us
so long as it continues; but if from Righteous we become Unrighteous, he must
either change in his Affection, or else cease to love us. For should he still
love on when the Reason is ceased for which he loved us, he must either love us
for no Reason, or for a Reason that is directly contrary to that for which he
loved us first; and consequently his Love must either be a blind Fondness, or
else a fickle and inconstant Passion. If therefore Righteousness be the Reason
that moves the righteous Lord to love, we grossly flatter and abuse our selves
if we presume that he loves us while we are unrighteous. Wherefore as we would
not ruin our selves with relying upon vain Hopes, Hopes that will sink
underneath us, and leave us eternally desperate and miserable; let us never
conclude that we are beloved of God till upon an impartial Trial of our selves
we can conclude that we are sincerely righteous.

3 dly. From hence I infer what grand Encouragement we have to be righteous,
for that God loves Righteousness is a plain Demonstration that it is the most
amiable thing in the World; and that it best deserves the Affections of all
rational Beings, since it has won his, who never loves but upon the best
Reason. And what a most glorious thing is it to be adorned with the best of
Beauties, which by such an invincible Charm endears the Heart of the most
glorious Being in the World? If there be so much Honor paid to a Beauty that
can smite and inslave an earthly Potentate, what is there due to that that can
constrain the God of Heaven and Earth to fall in love with us? For what higher
Mark can our Ambition aim at, than that of being beloved by the greatest and
most lovely Being? Doubtless to be God's Favorite and Image is the highest
Advancement that any Creature can aspire to; and were I born King of all the
Kings of the Earth, and had all their Crowns and Scepters at my Feet, I am sure
my Reason would tell me that to be beloved of God would be a greater Glory to
me than to be obeyed from Pole to Pole; and should I entertain a Thought of
exchanging the Honor of being a God-like Creature and the Favorite of Heaven
for the Crown and Empire of the World, my Conscience would tell me that I
degraded my self, and prostituted my own Glory; for next to that of being a God
my self, the highest Glory I can think of is to be a Friend to God, and this I
am sure to be as soon as ever I commence a righteous Man. And shall I stand so
much in my own Light, O foolish Creature that I am, as to refuse his Friendship
when I may have it on such reasonable Terms, and shall need no other Endearment
to introduce me into his Favor but only that of Righteousness? O thou most
excellent Beauty, with whose Charms the God of Heaven is inflamed! What shall I
do to make thee mine! How shall I obtain to be adorned with thy heavenly
Luster! I will go to the blessed Fountain from whence thou art derived, and
with a Heart hungring and thirsting after thee, beseech him to infuse thy
Streams into my Soul. I Will shun whatsoever is contrary to thee, and do
whatsoever thou command me, and never cease Writing after thy fair Copies
till I have transcribed thee into my Nature. And who would not, that sets any
Value upon the Glory of being dear to God? For besides the Honor of being his
Favorites, what an infinite Advantage may we expect to reap from it? For what
may we not promise our selves from the Grace and Favor of the great Sovereign
of Beings, who does whatsoever pleases him in both Worlds, and has the
absolute Disposal of all the Blessings that either Heaven or Earth affords?
Doubtless we may safely promise our selves every Thing both from below and
above that can either do us good here, or contribute to our Happiness
hereafter. For so the Psalmist tells us, that such is his Love of Righteousness
that he will give both Grace and Glory, and that no good Thing will he
withold from them that walk uprightly, Psalm. lxxxiv.11. Who would not then be
tempted to Righteousness upon the Prospect of being a Favorite of God, and of
the infinite Glory and Advantage which redounds from thence?

4 thly, And lastly. From hence I infer how inexcusable we are if we persist in
Sin after the many Discoveries which God has made to us of his Love of
Righteousness. Had we any Reason to suppose that God is indifferently affected
toward Righteousness and Sin, it would be a fair Excuse for unrighteous
Persons; for what great Matter would it be which of the two Contraries we
chose, if both were indifferent to God, who best understands the Worth and
Value of Things? But now when God has discovered such a zealous Concern for
Righteousness, and such an Abhorrence of its contrary, by so many clear
Indications both natural and supernatural, there is no Ground or Color for any
such Excuse. For now no Man can be excusably ignorant which way God's Heart is
inclined, and we must wilfully shut our Eyes if we do not discern which of the
two Contraries he would have us pursue; and therefore if notwithstanding this
we still persist in unrighteousness, we do in Effect declare that we regard not
God, and that we will do what we list let him will what he pleases; that in the
Conduct of our Actions we will have the sole Disposal of our selves, and are
resolved that God shall have nothing to do with us, and that we will not
concern our selves in any of our Choices or Actions whether he be pleased or
displeased with them: this is the plain Sense of our Perseverance in
Unrighteousness under all those clear Discoveries, which God has made of his
Aversion to it. Now how incusable is this, for a Creature to behave it self so
insolently toward the Author and Owner of its Being; to make him stand for a
Cipher in his own Creation, and to take no more Notice of him than if he were
the most impertinent and insignificant Being in the World? For now it is plain
that our unrighteous Doings proceed from our rude Contempt and Regardlesness of
his heavenly Will; we know well enough what he would have us do, but either we
do not think him worth the minding, or if we do, we are resolved to behave our
selves as if we did not. It Is true, he has not made as full a Discovery of his
Will to some as he has to others; but yet it is plain he has so sufficiently
discovered it to all, that none can pretend to the Excuse of Ignorance. For, as
for the Heathens, though they have no revealed Discoveries of it without them,
yet they have a Bible within them, the large and legible Bible of Nature which
lies continually open before them, and proposes to their View in fair and
distinct Characters the Notion of God, the Distinctions of Good and Evil, and
the eternal Laws of Righteousness; and therefore if notwithstanding this they
will be so regardless of its great and blessed Author, as either not to attend
to, or not comply with these natural Discoveries of his Will, what Excuse can
they make why they should not perish in their own Obstinacy? For as the Apostle
tells us, though they have not the Law, i. e. the revealed Law, yet they did
(or at least might have done) by nature the things contained in the Law; and
therefore as many of them as have sinned without this revealed Law, shall also
perish without it, that is, by the Sentence of the Law of Nature, Romans 2.12,
14. And then as for the Jews, besides those natural Indications of God's Love
of Righteousness which they had in common with the Heathen, they had sundry
supernatural ones; they had sundry great and notorious Examples of God's
rewarding righteous, and punishing wicked Men; and the outward Revelation of
the Law of Moses, the moral Part of which was a new Edition of the Law of
Nature, and did contain within the Rine and Letter of it, the most sublime and
spiritual Precepts of Righteousness; and the Ceremonial Part of which was,
(though an obscure) yet intelligible Representation of all those spiritual
Motives to Righteousness which Christianity contains. So that would they but
have attended either to the spiritual Sense of their Law, or to the Sermons of
their Prophets which very much cleared and explained it, they could not have
been ignorant either of any Part of their Duty, or of any considerable Motive
that was needful to press and engage them to it. If therefore notwithstanding
this they were so regardless of God as to take no Notice of those many sensible
Distinctions which his Providence had made between righteous and unrighteous
Men, in blessing the one and punishing the other, of which he gave them so many
signal Examples; if they had so little Reverence for his Authority, as neither
to mind his Law within, nor his Law without them, or if they minding the later,
were so extremely heedless as to rest in a mere Conformity to the Letter of it,
without ever attending to its spiritual Sense and Meaning; upon what reasonable
Pretense can their Stupidity be excused? But then lastly, as for us Christians,
we have not only all those natural Indications of God's Love of Righteousness
which the Heathens had, and all those supernatural ones which the Jews had; but
we have all these later with much greater Advantage than the Jews; for they are
all set before us in a clearer Light, and presented much more naked to our
View. For as they are proposed to us, they are neither wrapped up in mystical
Senses, nor clouded over with typical Representations; but laid before us in
the most plain and easy Propositions. The literal Sense of our Precepts of
Righteousness, and of all our Promises and Threats, is the mystical Sense of
theirs; and all those Christian Motives to Righteousness which were delivered
to them in dark Riddles and obscure and typical Adumbrations, are brought forth
to us from behind the Curtain, and proposed in plain and popular Articles of
Faith: So that if we still continue in Unrighteousness, we are of all Men in
the World the most inexcusable. The Heathens may plead against the Jews that
their Law of Nature was not so clear in its Precepts, nor yet so cogent in its
Motives as the Law of Moses was. The Jews may plead against us Christians that
their Law of Moses was neither so express in its Precepts, nor yet so
intelligible in its best and most powerful Motives; but as for us Christians we
have nothing at all to plead, but, by our own Obstinacy against the clearest
Discoveries both of our Dury and the Motives which oblige us to it, are
condemned to everlasting Silence. So that when at the last Tribunal it shall
appear that we have persisted in Unrighteousness, we must expect the Reproaches
of all the reasonable World; to be exploded and hissed at, not only by the
universal Choir of Saints and Angels, but by Jews and Gentiles, and by the
Devils themselves; who will all conspire with our own Consciences to second
that dreadful Sentence which shall then pass upon us, with the general
Acclamation of just and righteous art thou, O Lord, in all thy Ways. Wherefore
as we would not perish for ever without Pity or Excuse, let us be persuaded to
abandon all Unrighteousness and worldly Lusts, and to live soberly and
righteously, and godly in this present World; and then we may assure our selves
that the righteous Lord who loves Righteousness will love us also for the sake
of it, and express his Love to us in blessing and preserving us here, and
crowning us with Glory and Happiness hereafter. And this we beseech thee to
grant, O thou immutable Lover of Righteousness, even for Jesus Christ his sake;
To whom with thy self and thy eternal Spirit be ascribed by us, and all the
World; all Honor and Glory and Power from this time forth, and for evermore,
Amen.

FINIS.

