Dr. SCOTT's Thanksgiving Sermon Preached before the QUEEN The 22d of May.

A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN The 22d of May, 1692. Upon Occasion of the
late VICTORY OBTAINED BY Their Majesty's Fleet OVER THE FRENCH.

By JOHN SCOTT, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's.

Published by Her Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON; Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head in S. Paul's
Churchyard. M DC XC II.

A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN.
Psalm 50.14. Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto the most High.


IN the foregoing Verses the Psalmist (whether he were David or Asaph is
uncertain) introduces God as delivering his own Sense concerning the Ritual and
Ceremonial Religion of the Jews, upon which they so much valued themselves, and
laid such a mighty stress; v. 7. Hear O my people, and I will speak, O Israel,
and I will testify against thee; or I have something of high Moment to speak
to thee, I am God even thy God, that God who, under the Title of The Lord thy
God, brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, and gave thee the Moral Law
comprised in Ten Commandments. I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices and
burnt offerings to have been continually before me: I know thou art exact
enough in the observance of these my Ritual Commands, and therefore as to this
matter I do not blame thee; but this is not the thing I chiefly value and
esteem: It Is the observance of my Moral Laws, in which thou art extremely
defective, that I principally insist on; as for those Sacrifices with which
thou causest mine Altars continually to smoke, they are things with which (if I
needed 'em) I could supply my self from the Herds of a Thousand Hills which
thou know not, and which are all my own. And so he goes on to the Text,
upbraiding 'em with laying the whole stress of their Religion upon their exact
performance of the instituted Rites of it; which, tho it was their Duty, yet
the least part of it. And then comes, in the Text, to acquaint 'em what was the
main of their Religion, which he principally intended, and was most delighted
in, and wherein they were most remiss and negligent, Offer unto God
thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto the most High, i. e. If thou will bring me
an acceptable Sacrifice indeed, in the first place, bring me a truly thankful
Heart, that gratefully receives and acknowledges my Benefits; and in the next
place, perform to me those Vows and Promises of Repentance and Amendment, which
thou made to me in thy Affliction, when out of extreme want of the Benefits I
have since bestowed on thee, thou wast earnestly imploring 'em at my Hands.

I shall at present only treat of the first of these, Offer unto God
thanksgiving, which, according to the Sense I have given of the Text and
Coherence, is a Duty of far more value with God than any of the instituted
Rituals of Religion, as being one of those Moral and eternal Duties in which
the Main and Substance of Religion does consist. In handling this Argument
therefore, I shall endeavor these two Things,

First, To show you what this Duty is, and wherein it does consist,

Secondly, To show you that is a Moral Duty, or, which is the same thing, a
Duty enforced with eternal Reasons.

I. What this Duty of Thanksgiving is, and wherein it does consist. In general,
Thanksgiving consists in rendering to our Benefactors a cheerful acknowledgment
of the Benefits we have received at their Hands; and consequently, to offer
Thanksgiving to God, is freely, heartily, and cheerfully, to acknowledge and
recognize to him the manifold Favors and Benefits which with a most liberal
Hand he bestows upon us from time to time. In order to which, it is necessary
that we should diligently remark and attend to his Benefits, and not suffer 'em
to pass thorough our Minds like Birds thorough the Air without leaving any
Track or Path behind 'em; but that we should so curiously observe and take
notice of 'em, that every Footstep of 'em, if possible, may remain upon our
Memories in lively and lasting impressions: For tho we can no more count the
Benefits of God than we can the Moments of Eternity, and tho when ever we enter
into the recollection of 'em, we are like a man that is diving into the bottom
of the Sea, over whose Head the water runs insensibly, so as that neither he is
pressed with the weight of it, nor confounded with the number of the drops of
it, because he attempts not to cast 'em up, but concludes 'em innumerable; yet
there are many and many of the Benefits of God which lie so open to our
observation, being attended with such indearing and remarkable Circumstances,
as that without great stupidity, we cannot but take notice of 'em. And
therefore in order to our being truly thankful to God, it is requisite that
such as these should be drawn and imprinted upon our memories in strong and
lively Colors, not to be worn or washed out by Time or Chance, but to flourish
there, if possible, like the Pictures of the Graces in immortal Youth. And as
to our giving Thanks to God for his Benefits, as it is requisite that we should
so far as we are able, closely observe and remember 'em; so it is no less
requisite, that, by frequent reflections upon 'em, we should endeavor to raise
in our own Minds a just value and esteem of 'em, and thereby to affect our own
Hearts with a warm and vigorous Sense of the Divine Goodness, that
inexhaustible Fountain whence every good we receive is derived. And when with
the close consideration of the Favors and Benefits of God we have chafed our
own Souls into an affectionate feeling of his Goodness, we may then cry out
with David, My heart is ready, O Lord my, heart is ready, I will sing and give
praise. For the Requisites before mentioned, are only necessary Dispositions
and Preparations to Thanksgiving; they are only the tuning the Strings of the
musical Instrument, and setting it in order, for the Angelical Harmony to be
played on it: but the Thanksgiving itself consists in an affectionate
Acknowledgment to God, of the manifold Favors we have received at his hands,
together with all those gracious Circumstances, so far as we are able to
recollect them, with which they came attended: which Acknowledgment is to be
made either in express Words, in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, or by
recounting his Favors to him in mental Recognitions, which is to make melody in
our Hearts to the Lord. But because usually when the Heart is full, the Mouth
will overflow, therefore Thanksgiving in common Acceptance, signifies an oral
and verbal Acknowledgment of Gods Favors, arising from an inward and
affectionate Sense and Feeling of his Goodness toward us. And to crown all
this, and render our Thanksgiving substantial and real, it must be accompanied
with a hearty study and intention of Soul, to render unto God for his Favor,
all possible Compensation; to gratify him with our free and cheerful
Obedience, and more especially with our Charity and Beneficence, toward his
poor and indigent Creatures, whose Wants are the Briefs by which God authorizes
them to ask releif for his Sake, and to recieve it in his Name: He that gives
to the Poor, says the Wiseman, lends to the Lord; and consequently he that
gives not, refuses to lend to the Lord; which is inconsistent with any degree
of hearty Gratitude toward him. For how can he be truly thankful to God for
his Favors, who has no intention to render him any Compensation; and what
intention can he have to compensate God, who will not lend him a little Money or
a little Bread, when by the Mouths or Necessities of his Poor he craves it?
This Man complements God instead of thanking him, and only flatters him with
fained Lips, in hope thereby to obtain further Favors of him, without being at
all influenced by an ingenuous Sense of his Goodness, to make him any returns
for what he has already received. So that the full import of our Offering
Thanksgiving to God, is to render him an affectionate Acknowledgment of his
manifold Benefits, with an hearty intention to make him all the Compensation
for them we are able, by our constant and cheerful Obedience to his heavenly
Will, and readiness to repay him in works of Charity, according as our
Abilities and the Necessities of the Poor shall require it. And accordingly the
Psalmist himself thus explains this Duty: I will remember, says he, thy works
of old, and talk of thy doings: and elsewhere, My mouth shall praise thee with
joyful lips, when I remember thee upon my Bed and meditate on thee in the
night-watches, because thou have been my help. Here is his advertence to and
recollection of the Mercies of God toward him. And then he goes on, How
excellent is thy loving kindness, O God! how precious are thy thoughts unto me!
how great is the sum of them! if I should count them they are more than the
sand. Here is his high esteem and value of the divine Benefits; then he
proceeds, Because thy loving kindness is better than life, my lips shall praise
thee, my soul shall be filled as with marrow and fatness, my mouth shall praise
thee with joyful lips. Here is his affectionate sense of the divine Goodness
toward him: Then he breaks forth into raptures of Thanksgiving, I will sing of
the mercies of the Lord for ever, with my mouth will I make known his
faithfulness to all generations; I will speak of the glorious honor of thy
Majesty and of thy wondrous works; I will praise the name of the Lord with a
song, I will magnify him with Thanksgiving. And lastly, he closes all this
with a hearty design of rendering to God these best and noblest Compensations of
his Obedience and Charity; What shall I render unto the Lord for all his
benefits? And upon this Enquiry resolves, I will take the cup of salvation and
call upon the name of the Lord; I will pay my Vows unto the Lord, i. e. those
Vows of Sacrifice, and Alms of Fidelity and Obedience, which I made in my
Distress and Affliction. And thus you see what there is employed in this Duty of
Offering Thanksgiving unto God.

I proceed now in the second place, to show you that this is a Moral Duty, not
founded upon positive Will and Institution, as Sacrificing was, which therefore
could no longer oblige, than during the continuance of that positive Will; but
upon eternal and immutable Reasons, which no positive Will can ever cancel or
repeal: and this I doubt not will appear upon the following Considerations.

First, The Justice and Equality of it.

Secondly, The Pleasure and Delightfulness of it.

Thirdly, The Obligations it lays upon God to continue and repeat his Favors.

Fourthly, The great Aid and Furtherance it gives us in all our other Duties.

Fifthly, The mighty Relish it gives to all God's Favors and Benefits.

Sixthly, The great Support and Confirmation it affords our Faith and
Dependence upon God for the future.

I. Thankfulness to God is due to him in strict Justice and Equity, for the
Benefits God bestows upon us, are rather Loans than Gifts; because as he is
supreme Lord of the World, he retains an unalienable Propriety in every Good he
bestows; and upon that account he may justly demand of us whatsoever Homage or
Quit-rent he pleases; and certainly the least he can claim is our Gratitude,
from which we are so far from being released by the freeness of his Gifts, that
we are the more strictly obliged by it. For he who receives a Benefit, whether
it be from God or Man, owes more or less for it proportionably as the Benefit
is greater or less. Seeing therefore that a Benefit freely given is caeteris
paribus, much greater than a Benefit lent; it is certain, that the freer we have
it, the more we owe for it. Now as for the Benefits of God, they are not only in
themselves of greater value than what any other can give or lend us, but they
are also given us upon the most free, and noble, and generous Terms; for tho
when he bestows 'em upon us, he does not like other Doners give 'em away from
himself, but reserves his inherent Right in them, as Lord Paramount of all his
Creation; yet this Reservation of his is no damage to us, seeing we enjoy his
Gifts as amply and freely as if he had alienated to us his Right in 'em. Tho he
still continues Sovereign Lord of the Fee, and every thing we hold we hold as
his Tenants, by his Grant, and in his Right; yet the Quit-Rent he requires of
us (which is only our Gratitude, and which in Justice would have been due to
him, tho he should never have required it,) is not only so very small and easy
in it self, but also so highly advantageous to us, that instead of being
impoverished, we are enriched by the payment of it; so that our Tenure under
him is far better for us than if we were Freeholders, without any Condition at
all; the Condition of his Benefit being such as is so far from sinking the
value of 'em, as that it very much raises and enhanses 'em. So that as we stand
in Justice obliged to be grateful to all our Benefactors, (seeing every Benefit
deserves of us as much as it is worthy, and the smallest is worth our
Gratitude; so more especially to God, who not only gives us all the good Things
we enjoy, but takes care also to give 'em to us upon the most beneficial
Considerations, viz. That we Thankfully receive 'em. Which, if we duly perform,
will prove far more beneficical to us than all his other Benefits.

II. Consider the Pleasure and Delightfulness of this Duty. It is true, in
other parts of Devotion there is something that is Painful and Laborious to
Humane Nature: For so Prayer awakens in us a sorrowful Sense of Wants and
Imperfections, Confession excites in us sharp and dolorous Reflections upon our
Guilts and Miscarriages; but Thanksgiving has nothing in it but a warm and
vigorous sense of the mightiest Love and most indearing Goodness. For it is
only the overflow of a heart full of Love, the free sally and emission of a
Soul that is captivated and indeared by Kindness; and there is no Passion in
Humane Nature so sweet and ravishing as Love; especially while being heated
with the warm sense of the Kindness of its beloved, it boils over upon it in
Praise and Gratitude. And seeing our Thanksgiving lives upon Love and
Beneficence, and is al1 along nourished and maintained by it, the greater the
Love is upon which it feeds and the more the Beneficence, the richer its Fare
is, and the nobler its Entertainment. But where can our Gratitude find out a
Love comparably so great or productive of such ample Beneficence, as that of
Gods? Upon this inexhaustible Subject it may live for ever without any other
Supplies; and fare deliciously every moment to eternal Ages. For what more
delicious or comfortable thought can ever present itself to the mind of Man
than this, that the great Lord of the World, the good, the wise and mighty King
of Heaven and Earth, is our faithful, kind and munificent Friend; that his
Heart is always pregnant with Designs of Love to us, and that the great subject
of all his Contrivances is to do us good here, and to render us Glorious
hereafter? O were such thoughts as these but set home upon our hearts with
their full and due Emphasis, how would they even ravish and transport our
Souls! How would they convert all our Faculties into Concent and Harmony, and
even evaporate our Spirits in a Songs of Praise and Thanksgiving to him! And
whilst from a lively Sense of all these Wonders of his Love, we are offering up
to him our Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, O with what Triumph and Exultation of
Soul should we ascend in the flames of it! But, alas, we are, even the best of
us, in a great measure unacquainted with the Pleasure and Sweetness of this
heavenly Performance; and the reason is, because we have not a quick Sense and
lively Relish of the Divine Goodness upon which it terminates. Had we this
always present with us, we should feel so much Joy and Pleasure in
Thanksgiving, that it would be our Heaven upon Earth, our Meat and Drink, our
Business and Recreation, to breath up our Souls to God in Hymns of Praise, But
this we do all know, who know any thing of Religion, that to laud and magnify
the Lord, is the End for which we were born, and the Heaven for which we are
designed, and that when we are arrived to that vigorous sense of the Divine
Love that the blessed People of Heaven have attained, we shall need no other
either Employment or Pleasure to render us for ever happy, but only to sing
eternal Praises and Hallelujahs to our God, and to the Lamb that sits upon
the Throne; the vigorous Relish of whose unspeakable Goodness to us, will so
inflame our Love and animate our Gratitude, that to eternal Ages we shall be
never able to contain our selves from breaking forth into new Songs of Praise;
and then every new Song will still create a new Pleasure, and every new
Pleasure dictate a new Song, and so round again for ever. But these are things
too sublime for our short reach and cognizance, only at present let us but
consult the Experience of devout and grateful Souls about them, and this will
assure us, that there is nothing under Heaven so pleasant and delightsom as
from a warm and vigorous sense of the Love of God, to breath up our Souls to
him in Praise and Thanksgiving; that this gives such a Jubilee to the Mind,
such a sprightful Recreation to the Heart, as far exceeds the most studied and
artificial Pleasures of Epicurism. But for satisfaction in this point, we need
go no further than to our praiseful Psalmist, who tho he were a King, and had
all the Pleasures of a fruitful Kingdom at his beck and command, yet does upon
his own Experience advise, Praise the Lord, for the Lord is Good; sing praises
to his name, for it is pleasant: And elsewhere, Praise the Lord, for it is
good; to sing Praises to our God it is pleasant, and praise is comely. Seeing
therefore that Gratitude to God is so high a Pleasure, and such a grateful
Entertainment to the rational Soul, when it is duly disposed; this is such a
Motive to the Practice of it, as carries with it an eternal Force and
Obligation.

III. Gratitude to God mightily obliges him to continue and repeat his Favors
to us. For though God does not covet our Thanksgivings for himself, or out of
any prospect of Advantage they can bring him, he being so entirely happy in his
own Perfections, that neither the Praises of Angels can add any thing to him,
nor the Blasphemies of Devils subtract any thing from him; yet when he so
freely bestows his Benefits upon us, he expects the return of our Gratitude,
both as it is highly just and reasonable in itself, and vastly beneficial and
advantageous to us. For he being infinitely reasonable himself, and loving
himself infinitely for being so, he cannot for his own sake but love what is
fit and reasonable in others; and what he so justly loves in us, he justly
expects of us. It is highly displeasing to him to see us ungrateful to others,
as well as to himself; not that he sustains any Damage thereby; for how can he
be the worse for our Ingratitude to others? But the Ground of his Displeasure
is, to see reasonable Beings so grossly swerve from the Canon of right Reason
and Justice, and act so contrarily to the Laws of his Nature and their own. So
again he is as well pleased and delighted when he finds us thankful to our
other Benefactors, as when we are so to him; not that he can reap the least
Benefit or Advantage from the Thanks which we render to others; for how can he
be the better for that which he does not receive? But because the thing is just
and reasonable in itself, and because whatsoever is so is amiable and
delightsom in his Eyes: And as God expects our Gratitude for its own sake, as
it is in itself a most just, and comely, and reasonable thing; so does he also
expect it for our sake, as it is one of the most advantageous things we can do
for our selves. For by accustoming our selves to frequent Returns of
Thanksgiving to God, we shall by degrees a thankful Frame and Disposition of
Soul which (as I shall show by and by) will both influence us in all other
parts of our Duty with a mighty Cheerfulness and Alacrity of Spirit, and carry
us on through the most wearisom Stages of it with an indefatigable Vigor, and
also inhanse the value of the Divine Benefits, and render them more precious in
our esteem, and consequently more comfortable in our Enjoyment. When therefore
we receive the Benefits of God with a thankful Heart, he obtains both these
Ends upon us, which must needs lay a strong Obligation upon him to continue and
multiply them to us: When he shall see that his Favors are not sown upon a
barren Soil, but that they spring up in such Fruits as are most delightful to
himself and most beneficial to us, what a powerful Motive must this be to
engage him to sow them more abundantly? There is nothing does more oblige a
generous Benefactor than to see a good Use made of his Benefits; and the best
Use we can make of them, is to gratify him with them in such things as he most
delights in, and to improve to our utmost Advantage; which will render him so
far from repenting of his Favors, and resolving to withhold them for the
future, that it will be a mighty Gratification to himself to repeat and
increase them when ever any just Occasion requires it. And therefore seeing God
is the freest and most generous Benefactor in the World, we may depend upon it,
that if we make that good Use of his Benefits for which he designed them; if we
render him such grateful Returns for them as are truly delightful to him and
advantageous to our selves, he will be so far from stinting his hand to us for
the future, that he will rejoice over us to do us good, and be as highly
pleased to multiply his Benefits upon us, as we can be to receive them; in
short the greatest Obligation that can be laid upon a generous Goodness, such
as God's is, is to do good with his Benefits, and to fare well upon them, both
which a thankful Mind does to the highest Degree; and therefore such, and such
only, are the proper Soil for God to sow his Benefits in. Here they will grow
with vast Increase and Improvement, whereas in ungrateful Minds, they will
either be soon washed away in a stupid Oblivion of them, or soon wither away in
a sordid Neglect of them, or else spring up only into Weeds and Tares, into
Pride or Luxury, or vanity and vexation of Spirit. This therefore is an eternal
Reason why we should offer up our Thansgiving to God, because hereby we answer
the great Ends for which he showers his Benefits on us, and thereby lay a
powerful Obligation upon him to continue and increase 'em.

IV. Thankfulness to God does very much promote and facilitate the Practice of
Religion: For, as was shown before, all hearty Thanksgiving springs out of a
warm and vigorous Sense of Gods Goodness toward us, and as that naturally
flows into Praise and Thanksgiving, so this flows as naturally into a free and
cheerful Obedience. The more thankful we are for the Benefits of God, the more
sensible we shall still be of our Obligations to him; and the more sensible we
are of these, the more disposed we shall be to gratify him by our ready
Obedience to him. These things follow as naturally one another, as Heat follows
Fire, and as Burning follows Heat. He therefore who by frequent Acts of Praise
has acquired a thankful frame and disposition of Soul, has surmounted three
parts in four of all the Fatigue of Religion: For what can be too hard for a
Soul that is inspired with an active Sense of the Divine Goodness? This will
convert the most painful Duties into the most delightful Recreations, and prove
such an ever-flowing Fountain of Divine Rhetoric within us as will supersede
the necessity of any other Motives and Arguments. How can I do too much, cries
the grateful Soul, for so kind a God and so liberal a Benefactor? To his
boundless Goodness I owe all that I am, all that I have, and all that I hope
for; to him I am indebted for such stupendous Favors, as considering my
unworthiness of 'em, does not only puzzle my Conceit, but outreach my Wonder
and Admiration. And can I be so base as to reckon any thing too much in return
for such astonishing Kindnesses? I can give him back nothing but what I have
received of him; and if I should give him back my Life or the dearest Enjoyment
I have in the World, I should not give him the thousandth Part of what I have
received. What then shall I render unto the Lord for all his Benefits? Shall I
not cheerfully render him whatever he asks, tho it were greatly to my damage;
tho it were to strip my self of all the Comforts of my Life; to sacrifice my
Isaac to him; yea, my own Life and Being? And much more when he asks nothing of
me but what is fit and reasonable; nothing but what is profective of my Nature,
and conducive to my eternal Happiness: When he only requires me to sacrifice my
Lusts unto him; which are the shame and scandal of my Nature; to wash and be
clean; to deny all Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts; and to live soberly, and
righteously, and godly in this present World. O far be it from me to deny such
a bountiful Friend, such just and reasonable Demands. This is the constant
Sense of a truly grateful Soul. And being under the Influence of such moving
Oratory and Persuasion, with what Cheerfulness and Alacrity must she run the
ways of God's Commandments? How greedily must she catch at all Opportunities of
serving him? And how readily close with every Intimation of his Will, how
contrary soever to the Inclinations of Flesh and Blood? And instead of bogling
at the difficulties of Religion, O, how will such a Soul rejoice that she has
an opportunity in her Hands to express, by the readiness of her Obedience, the
grateful Sense she has of that Goodness to which she is so infinitely obliged?
Doubtless were our Hearts but touched with a quick Sense of the Goodness of
God, this would carry us triumphantly thorough all the Difficulties of our
Duty; and we should be so far for the future from complaining of the uneasiness
of our Yoke, that we should be ready to thank God upon our Knees, for putting
such a Test of Duty on us whereby we might have an opportunity to express our
Gratitude to him by the readiness of our Obedience. Seeing therefore that
Thanksgiving is so great a furtherance to us in the course of our Duty, to be
sure if we owe any thing to God, we must owe this to him by an eternal
Obligation.

V. Thanksgiving to God will render all his Favors to us more grateful and
acceptable to our selves. All Benefits are greater or lesser to us as they
stand higher or lower in our esteem and valuation. To enjoy the light of the
Sun is doubtless in itself a very great Benefit, but the commonness of it takes
off our heedless Minds from attending to it, and weighing it in the Balance of
a just Valuation, by reason of which it grows Cheap in our esteem, and we have
no taste or relish of the Pleasure and Comfort of it, but enjoy it year after
year with a perfect Unconcern and Indifferency. But if after a long Blindness
our Sight should be instantly restored to us, or we should of a sudden be
snatched up into the Light after a tedious Confinement to some dismal Dungeon, O
with what Rapture should we salute the Day, what Hymns should we sing to the
joyful Light? with what cheerful Thoughts would it inspire our Breasts, and
with what unspeakable Joy should we survey that glorious Scene of things which
it opens and discloses? and yet the benefit of Light is the same to all that
enjoy it; and if those who continually enjoy it, had maintained in their Minds
the same just esteem of it, as they have who are newly restored to it, they
would always enjoy it with the same Satisfaction: And the case is the same as
to all the other Benefits of God, of a great part of the Comfort whereof we
spoil and deprive our selves; for want of that grateful Sense and just Esteem
of them, which they merit and deserve; for a thankful Mind will make the utmost
of the Benefits it receives, and weigh them nicely by Grains and Scruples, and
consider them in all their endearing Circumstances, and take into its account
their most minute Appendages, to inhanse its own value and esteem of them. And
seeing it is our esteem of Benefits that raises or sinks our Enjoyment of them,
to be sure the higher we esteem the Benefits of God, the more we must enjoy
them. So that while unthankful Souls for want of a just estimate of the Favors
of God, do scarce enjoy the Tith of them, but whilst they feed on them are
dissatisfied with them, and like the most currish Animals, while they are
gnawing on their Prey, do grumble over it; those who are truly thankful feed
upon every Blessing with Joy and Content, and like the industrious Bees, having
sucked out all the Sweetness of the Flowers they live upon, go singing home
with it to their Hives. And I make no doubt but he who has a grateful Sense
and a just Esteem of the Goodness of God to him, enjoys with far more Comfort
even a Cup of fair Water and a Brown Morsel, than the fat ungrateful Glutton
does his studied and artificial Luxuries. Seeing therefore our Thankfulness to
God for his Benefits does so much heighten and improve our Enjoyment of them,
if it be eternally Reasonable that we should make the best of his Benefits,
this lays an eternal Obligation on us to be grateful to him.

VI. And lastly, Thankfulness to God gives a great support to our Hope and
Dependence on him for the future; for besides that, the very Sense and
Consciousness of the thankful Returns we have made him will encourage us to
hope, that that God who has found us grateful for what we have received, will
account himself obliged in Generosity, though not in Justice, to heap his
Favors on us more abundantly; the thankful Reception of past Favors being the
greatest Inducement to generous Benefactors, to bestow more and greater for the
future: besides this I say the very Recollection and Remembrance of the
manifold Favors of God which we have already received, and which our own
grateful Sense of them, will be sure to ingrave upon our Minds in the most
durable Characters, will prove a constant fund of happy Experience for our Hope
to live upon for the future; so that when ever we are reduced to strait and low
Circumstances, and are either pinched with the want of any necessary Good, or
are ready to despond of deliverance from any imminent Evil, the grateful
Remembrance we retain of past Instances of Gods Kindness to us, will be a
mighty Encouragement to our Faith and Hope securely to depend upon him for the
future. The Lord that delivered me, says David, out of the paw of the lion and
out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this
Philistian. Where you see he grounds his Dependence for one Deliverance, upon
his grateful Remembrance of another; and indeed there is no man in the World
can have that ample Experience of the Goodness of God, as he who makes constant
returns of Praise and Thanksgiving for it, such a Man, merely to improve his
Gratitude, will make it his Business curiously to animadvert upon every
Instance of the Divine Goodness, and to descant upon every Hint, Intimation,
and Circumstance of it, and treasure up every passage in everlasting
Remembrance. And seeing Experience is nothing but the Observation of things
treasured up in the Memory, he who best remembers the manifold Expressions of
Gods Goodness to him, and makes the strictest Observations upon them, must have
attained to the fullest and most intimate Experience of it; and when all is
done, there is nothing will create in us that sure Confidence in God and firm
Dependence upon him, as our own Experience of his Faithfulness and Goodness. If
I have a Friend whom in numerous Instances I have always found faithful, and
constant, and kind, I reckon I may rely upon him with almost the same Security
as I can rely upon my self and when in innumerable Instances I have always
found God my Friend, my generous, kind and faithful Friend, and I have all
these Instances of it fresh in my Memory, and under my Observation, this must
needs create in me a very secure Affiance in him, and carry up my Faith and
Hope into an high Plerophory. Thus Gratitude to God begets in us an ample
Experience of his Goodness, and that Experience begets in us a firm Dependence
upon him; so that if it be eternally reasonable that we should securely rely
upon God, by whose Power and Goodness we are supported in Being every moment of
our Existence; it is upon this account also eternally reasonable that we should
offer up our Thanksgivings to him.

To conclude all therefore, seeing our Obligations to this Duty are so great
and many, let us be persuaded to comply with them in our Practice. Certainly
never were any People more importunately invited hereunto than we are at this
time. It is not long since we were threatened with a Foreign Invasion, and had
too much cause to apprehend the Landing of a formidable Enemy on our Shoars; an
Enemy that by a thousand Barbarities, has proclaimed himself an implacable
Prosecutor of our Religion, and that wheresoever he goes carries Ruin and
Destruction along with him. But behold all of a sudden the melancholy Scene is
changed, and our dark Prospect is cleared up into a glorious Vision; for by a
wonderful Interposure of the Divine Providence, we are not only delivered from
the hands of our Enemies, but our Enemies are delivered into ours; their Naval
Force in which they so much gloried, and upon which their whole Success
depended, being, by the miraculous Blessing of God upon the good Conduct and
Bravery of ours, scattered and broken in a few Hours, and we not only
preserved, but crowned with one of the most glorious and signal Victories that
ever the Sea beheld; which considering our Circumstances, who have no other
Trench but the Ocean, no other Wall but our Navy round about us, is certainly
one of the most remarkable Instances of God's watchful Providence over us for
good, that even our own Hearts could have wished for: for how much the good
Providence of God has concerned it self in this whole Affair, is so remarkably
evident, that we cannot but discern it unless we wilfully shut our own Eyes.
For what a strange Concurrence was there of Events that are only in the
Disposal of God, the Stars in their Courses fought against Cicera; the Winds
and Storms for several Weeks were armed against one part of their Navy, by
which some were lost, others disabled, and all detained from joining with the
other part of it, which by contrary Winds was also detained from Engaging us,
till such time as our whole Force was united, and then God gave a Gale that
blew them on to their own Destruction. To all which is to be added, another
most considerable Instances of Gods good Providence toward us, viz. that a
wary Enemy, who always acts with the greatest Caution and most sagacious
Foresight, and who never yet fought without some considerable Advantage, should
be so stupendiously infatuated as to give us close Battle with a Strength so
much inferior to ours These are all the Lords doings, and they ought to be
mavelous in our Eyes; to excite our Gratitude and unite our Hearts and Lips
in Songs of Praise and Thanksgiving to him, that hereby we may engage our
Merciful God still to rejoice over us to do us good, and continue to bless
their Majesty's Arms with Glory and Success.

And in pursuance of this excellent Duty, let us all be persuaded frequently to
retire from our worldly Occasions into our own Thoughts, and there to recollect
the manifold Favors of God to us, to spread them before our Eyes in their full
breadth, and length, and depth, to turn them up and down upon our Thoughts and
survey them in all their Parts and Proportions, till by a thorough view and
consideration of their indearing Features and Lineaments our Hearts grow warm
with a grateful Sense of 'em, and then to pour out our Souls to God in Praises
and Thanksgivings; by the constant Practice of which we shall by degrees
acquire a thankful frame and disposition of Soul. And as we grow on and improve
in this heavenly Virtue, we shall feel so much Life and Spirit and Sweetness in
it, that we shall need no other Motive than that to oblige us to the Practice
of it, and our own Experience will convince us of a Truth; which now perhaps
seems a wild Paradox to us, viz. That to be sensible of Gods Benefits, and to
Meditate on his Goodness, to admire his Excellencies, and to celebrate his
Praises, is Heaven itself, the Life of Angels, the Quintessence of all Joy, and
in a word, the supreme Felicity of reasonable Beings. Wherefore to assist your
Endeavors, and carry on your Minds to this great and blessed Work, I shall
briefly propose to your Meditations a few grateful Considerations concerning
the Divine Benefits, and so conclude.

First, Consider the vast extent of God's Benefits, as to the Number of 'em.

Secondly, Their stupendous Greatness as, to the Degree and Value of 'em.

Thirdly, The generous Freeness of 'em on God's Part.

Fourthly, The great Immerit and Undeservedness of 'em on ours.

Fifthly, The condescending Manner of his bestowing 'em upon us.

First, Consider the vast extent of God's Benefits toward us, as to the Number
of 'em, which is so vastly great that we can no more count 'em than we can the
Motes in the Air or the Sands on the Seashoar: all that we can do is to reduce
'em under such Kinds and Orders as the Astronomers do the Stars under such
Constellations; but to count 'em singly one by one is a Task exceeds all
Arithmetic. In general, for every thing we are, for every thing we have or
ever have had or shall have, we are indebted to his Bounty. That we are Men and
not Worms, that we are not Stones or clods of Earth, utterly insensible of all
Good, and incapable of all Felicity; that we are inspired with immortal Minds
endowed with vast capacities of Happiness; that we have so many sensible Organs
capable of relishing such a vast variety of Pleasures; and that we have so many
suitable Pleasures round about us to treat and entertain 'em; that we have Life
and Motion, Health and Vigor, Sense and Perception, Reason and Understanding
to guide and govern 'em, is wholly to be ascribed to his Goodness, which
penetrates to the very Root and Center of our Beings. We move upon his Earth,
and do breath upon his Air; we drink of his Springs, and are fed from his
Granaries, and clothed from his Wardrobe; and in a word, every good Thing we
possess that is either necessary for our Subsistence, or convenient for our
Use, or pleasant for our Enjoyment, we derive from his inexhaustible Bounty;
which daily encompasses us round about like many Fortunate Islands with an
Ocean of Blessings, the single drops whereof (tho we are every moment of our
Lives sensibly refreshed with one or other of 'em) we can no more recount than
the endless Moments of Eternity. But if to these numberless Benefits of God
which we every day taste, and do sensibly relish and enjoy, we add that
numberless more of which we are not sensible, because they run under Ground in
invisible Channels, so that we neither see nor taste 'em, tho they do us a
world of good we know not how, and insensibly preserve us from a world of
Evils: We may well cry out with the Prophet David, Psalm 139.17, 18. How
precious are thy thoughts unto me, O God! i. e. thy kind and merciful Thoughts.
How great is the sum of 'em! If I should count 'em they are more in number than
the sand. Tho when I awake I am still with thee, i. e. recounting thy Favor
from Morning to Night, but after all can see no end of 'em.

Secondly, Consider the stupendous Greatness of the Benefits of God, as to the
Degree and Value of 'em. There are indeed various Degrees of Worth in the
Benefits of God, but the cheapest of 'em are those which the Divine Goodness
has prepared to serve our present Necessities, Conveniences, and Pleasures;
and yet a great part of these are of such an intrinsic Worth, that if the
plenty and commonness of 'em did not depress their value, we should esteem 'em
inestimable Treasures. How comfortable is the appearance of Day after the long
Nights under the Northern Pole? What precious Things are a Cup of fair Water or
a Morsel of brown Bread to such as are pinched with Hunger or parched with
Drought? And did we but value the smallest Benefits of God, while we enjoy 'em,
but according to the prices we our selves set upon 'em when we want 'em, it is
to be feared we should esteem 'em higher than we do now the greatest. But as
for those Benefits of God which concern our better Part and eternal Interest,
they are such as only an infinite Goodness can bestow; for what Goodness less
than Infinite could have prepared for us a Heaven of immortal Joys; Joys which
the holy Angels, yea, which God him self lives upon? What lesser Goodness could
send down the Son of God to us from the Bosom of his Father to assume our
Nature, and therein to make Expiation for our Sins; to Consecrate for us a new
and living Way through the Veil of his own Flesh into the heavenly Sanctuary,
and by the Light of his Doctrine and the Footsteps of his Example, to guide and
direct us thither. What less than the same Goodness could send down the Holy
Spirit to us to instruct and teach us, to persuade and admonish us, and thereby
to cultivate our rank and degenerous Natures, in which there is such strong
aversions to all the heavenly Enjoyments; and to render us fit for the glorious
Inheritance of the Saints in Light? In a word, what less than an infinite
Goodness could thus industriously employ the whole Sacred Trinity in
contriving, preparing, and accomplishing our everlasting Happiness, by such
amazing, such refined and expressive Methods of Mercy? For verily when I set my
self to consider the mighty Things which God has done to make us happy, I seem
to be looking down from some stupendous Precipice, whose height fills me with
a sacred horror, that turns my Head, confounds my Understanding, and almost
oversets my Reason, so that I am forced to cry out sometimes with the Psalmist,
Lord, what is man that thou art mindful of him, or the Son of man that thou
visitest him with such astonishing favor? And sometimes with S. Paul with a
little more variation, O the depth of the riches, of the goodness and bounty of
God! how unsearchable are his designs of mercy, and his ways of beneficence
past finding out!

Thirdly, Consider the generous Freedom of the Divine Benefits on God's part.
Even the noblest Benefactors among Men have great intermixtures of selfishness
with their Beneficence; for either they gratify their own Vanity with it, and
affectation of popular Applause, or they rid themselves of a troublesome
Importunity, or ease the yearning Bowels of their own Compassion, or hope to
secure themselves a firm and lasting Interest in those they do good to: and
even those who act from the nobler Principles of Religion, and do good in
submission to God, and in conformity to his Nature, are not so utterly divested
of these selfish Regards, but that they many times intermingle 'em even with
their purest Intentions, and even whilst they act upon those Religious
Principles, it is all along in prospect of their own everlasting Happiness.
Thus we poor Creatures even in our most pious and generous Beneficences are by
the sense of our own Want and Indigency continually biassed toward our own
Interest either temporal or eternal or both. But in God who wants nothing, but
is Self-sufficient and infinitely happy in his own infinite Perfections,
Matters are far otherwise; he seeks nothing without himself, because he wants
nothing, and so can have no Self-End in any Action ad extra; from all the
Benefits that he heaps upon us he can reap no other advantage but only the
satisfaction of doing Good, and the Gratification of the infinite Generosity of
his Nature. So that his own Action is his End, and he does good merely for
doing goods Sake. He is neither compelled to it by Necessity, nor obliged to it
by any other Law but that of his own Nature. He is neither wearied nor worried
into it either by our Importunity, or by any painful Sense he has of our
Misery. He is neither flattered by our Promises nor indeared by our Deserts,
nor bribed by any Prospect he has of future Advantage to himself, but being
absolute Master of his own Actions, and sole Counselor and Lawgiver to
himself; being the most perfectly independent and all sufficient Source of his
own Happiness; beyond which he cannot so much as desire, or expect, or hope,
being infallibly secure, that nothing which either we or any other Creature can
do either for or against him can either add to or subtract from his essential
Glory and Beatitude; being, all this I say, and a thousand Times more than all
this, from a most uninterested Bounty and pure good Will and generosity of
Nature; he delights to do us Good, heaps Benefit after Benefit upon us, for no
other end but to benefit us, and in plentiful Showers is continually pouring
down his Graces and Favors upon us, purely that he may profit and please us,
and if possible content and satisfy us, and render us happy both here and
hereafter. This is all the return he expects for his Benefits, and if he can
but do us good by them he has his end, and is gratified to the utmost of his
Expectations. O the boundless Freedom of the Goodness of God toward us, that
without any other aim but to do us good, lets forth itself in such plentiful
Effusions. How excellent is thy loving Kindness, O Lord, how indearing are thy
Favors! who can rehearse thy noble Acts! who can show forth all thy Praise! who
with such an unparalleled frankness and generosity of Soul art continually
multiplying thy Benefits upon us.

Fourthly, Consider the great Immerit and Undeservedness of Gods Benefits on
our parts, considering the number and greatness of Gods Mercies and Favors to
us. A Stranger to Mankind would be prone to imagine, that by our extraordinary
Services, we had laid some vast Obligation upon God, for which he esteemed
himself so deeply indebted to us, that nothing within the compass of an
infinite Goodness, could be too great a repayment; but God knows, the Case is
far otherwise, for instead of obliging him to be kind to us, we have so
ungratefully requited his Kindness, and our Carriage toward him has been so
froward and perverse under the most indearing expressions of his Goodness, that
were he not as infinite in Patience as he is in Justice and Power, we had long
since provoked him to extirpate the whole Race of us from the Face of the
Earth, and to consign us our Portion with our fellow-Rebels, the Devils, in
everlasting Horror and Despair: for instead of acknowledging his manifold
Favors by our dutiful Behavior, which is the most acceptable return we can
make of them, as if it had been as much our care to affront and provoke him, as
it is his to oblige us by perpetual Beneficence. We treat our own base Lusts,
which are the only things he hates, with his Mercies and Favors; we give his
Bread to our Glutrony, his Drink to our Intemperance, his Cloths to our Pride
and Vanity; he lends us Breath and we blaspheme him with it, he inspires us
with Wit and Understanding, and we expose and ridicule him with it; he gives us
Health and Strength and we employ it against him in Wantonness and Luxury. And
thus we basely sacrifice his Favors to the Devil; and tho we do not all of us
thus openly outrage him with his own Benefits, yet how few are there that
employ 'em to those good Ends and Purposes for which he designs and bestows
'em? How little good do we with 'em to others, And how little the better are we
for 'em our selves? How cold and indifferent are we upon the Receipt of 'em?
How slothful in the Improvement of 'em? How selfish in the Use and Enjoyment of
'em? And what lame and wretched returns do we commonly make of 'em? And yet for
all this, O wonder of Goodness! God is not at all a weary of doing good to us;
but does not only still continue to us his common and standing Benefits, such
as the Light and Heat of the Sun, the Fruits of the Earth, and the Comforts of
the Elements, together with a strong, and healthful, and vigorous Capacity of
Enjoying 'em, but also those peculiar Favors which respect our everlasting
well-Being, viz. The Instructions of his Word, and the Refreshments of his
Sacraments, and the Assistances of his Spirit; which by a Thousand invisible
Arts and Methods of Kindness which we take no notice of, but rather resist and
oppose, does still drive on the great Design of making us everlastingly Happy;
the consideration whereof, if we have any spark of Ingenuity in us, cannot but
inflame our Souls with Gratitude and Praise.

Fifthly, and Lastly, Consider the condescending Manner of God's bestowing his
Benefits upon us: For tho it be infinite Condescension in him to think of us,
who are placed so far beneath his Thoughts, who are but Worms crawling under
his Feet, and whom he can crush into nothing at his Pleasure; tho he Dwells on
high, as the Psalmist Truly and Emphatically expresses it, Infinitely Blessed
in his own native Glories and Perfections, and is an All sufficient Prospect
and Entertainment to himself; yet he not only humbles himself to behold the
things that are done in Heaven and earth, but also humbles himself to behold
even us, to provide for us, and to take as much care of us, as if our Concerns
were his own; nay he humbles himself so far as to treat as our Friend, as if we
stood upon the same level with him; and espouses our Interest as if it were his
own, and as if he could not be Happy without our being so; yea farther yet, he
treats us as if we were his Superiors; places us upon the Throne, as it were,
and himself at the Footstool, and entreats and supplicates to admit of his Love
and accept of his Favors; he sends Ambassadors of Peace to us, to sue for our
Amity, and to beseech us to be reconciled to him. O blessed God, what injury
did thou ever do us that thou should address to us for Reconciliation!
that we should sue to thee indeed, who have injured and affronted thee beyond
the Patience of any but a God to endure, is doubtless the most just and
reasonable Thing in the World: But that thou should sue to us who never
did any thing but Goodness to us, who have obliged us beyond all our
Capacities of repaying thee, who have been kind to us even to Wonder and
Astonishment: and this not only without our desert, but after our highest
Affronts, and notwithstanding our most disingenuous Provocations to the
contrary. O blessed God, what amazing Condescensions are these! For when after
all his kind Attempts to prevail upon our Obstinacy, gratefully to accept his
Favors, and by so doing to improve 'em to our own everlasting Advantage; he
finds we are incurably determined to the contrary; with what passionate
Regrets, and Yernings, and turning of Bowels, does he discharge us from his
paternal Care, and abandon us to the dire Effects of our own Folly? Such
wondrous Stoops of the divine Majesty would tempt one to think, and we not
demonstrably know the contrary, that God has as much need of us as we have of
his Favors, did that it is as much for his good that we should thankfully
receive 'em, as it is for ours that he should generously bestow 'em. But after
all this, we do most certainly know, if we know any thing of the Nature of God,
that it can be nothing but pure Goodness and Generosity of Nature that obliges
and determins him to these amazing Condescensions. Which if we weigh in the
balance of a just Consideration, together with the foregoing Motives, cannot
fail, if we have any spark either of Modesty, Ingenuity, or even Humanity
remaining in us, to determine us to follow the excellent Advice of the Psalmist
in the Text, Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto the most high.
Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and
Glory, Majesty and Dominion, from this time forth and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is lately Printed for Walter Kettilby, a Book entitled Mr. Milbourn's
Mysteries in Religion Vindicated; or the Filiation, Deity, and Satisfaction of
our Savior, asserted against Socinians and others, with occasional Reflections
on several late Pamphlets. 8o


