Geffery Mayor.
Martis vii. die September. 1686. Annoque Regni Regis Jacobi Secundi, Angliae,
etc. secundo.
THIS Court does desire Dr Scott to Print his Sermon Preached at Bow-Church on
Thursday last the second Instant (being the Day of Humiliation for the great
FIRE in London.) before the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Citizens of this City.

Wagstaffe.

Imprimatur.

Guil. Needham R. R. in Christo Patri ac Dno Dno Wilhelmo Archiepisc. Cantuar.
a sacris Domest.
Ex Aedib. Lambeth. Sept. 13. 1686.
A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable THE Lord Mayor, ALDERMEN, AND
Citizens of London; At the CHURCH of St Mary le Bow, September the Second, 1686.

BEING THE ANNIVERSARY FAST For the Dreadful Fire in the Year 1666.

By John Scott, D. D. Rector of St Peter's Poor, London.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop' s Head in S. Paul' s
Churchyard, and Thomas Horn at the South-end of the Royal Exchange, MDCLXXXVI.

JOHN V. 14. Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing come
unto thee.
THESE Words are the Advice of our Savior to the impotent man, whom he
miraculously cured after he had long waited to no purpose at the Pool of
Bethesda: And seriously when I consider the miserable state to which this
ancient City was reduced by the late stupendous Fire, and the since glorious
recovery of it out of its mighty heap of Ruins, it seems to me an exact emblem
of this poor Patient in my Text. With him, not long ago, it was reduced to a
wretched impotent condition; its goodly Piles lay bedridden in their own sad
Ruins, almost despairing of Recovery, and the utmost that humane Prudence
could hope, was that the next Age might see their Resurrection. But by the
miraculous courage and industry with which God inspired their former
Inhabitants, behold they are raised again within a few Years more Glorious and
Magnificent than ever; and we that saw their Desolations, and were almost ready
to give them over for irreparable, have lived to see them rise again in state
and splendor out of their Ashes. And now that our City is revived again, and
flourishes in perfect health and vigor, methinks I hear the God of Heaven
bespeak her, as our Savior did his recovered Patient in the Text, Go thy way,
and sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee. In which words you have,

I. A Caution, Sin no more. II. A twofold Reason of it, 1. Behold, thou art
made whole. 2. Lest a worse thing come unto thee.

I. I begin with the first of these, Sin no more. Which words plainly imply
that he had been a sinner heretofore; and that because he had so, therefore he
was reduced to that wretched impotent condition, that his disease was the
punishment of his fault, and the product of his own wickedness: for otherwise
he had no reason to take warning by it not to sin again; if his former
impotence had not been the effect of his sin, it could not have been urged as a
proper argument to persuade him to a future reformation. In this therefore the
strength of our Savior's Caution lies, The impotence under which thou did so
lately languish, and of which I have now recovered thee, was inflicted on thee
by God as a just retribution for thy wickedness; and therefore, since thou art
thus happily recovered, beware thou do not sin again, lest thou provoke him
by it to scourge thee more severely. So that the main design of this Caution,
is to convince us that those Evils and Calamities under which we suffer, are
some way or other occasioned by our sin. And indeed if we impartially survey
those numerous calamities which oppress the World, we shall find them generally
reducible to one of these three Heads. Either (1.) they are the natural Effects
of sin, Or (2.) the just Retributions of it, Or (3.) the necessary Antidotes
against it. Of each of these very briefly.

(1.) In the first place, Many of those evils and calamities under which we
suffer, are the natural Effects of Sin, and such it is possible was the disease
of which our Savior cured this impotent Patient, even the natural effect
either of his Intemperance, Wantonness, or immoderate Passion, which are the
natural causes of most of those diseases under which we languish. For either
they are intailed upon us by our Parents, who beget us usually in their own
likeness; and so having diseased themselves by their own Debauches, derive to
us their frail and crazy constitutions, and leave us Heirs of the woeful effects
of their own Intemperance and Lasciviousness: for so we commonly find the Stone
and Gout, Consumption and Catarrhs derived through many generations from the
vices of one wicked Progenitor, who to enjoy the pleasures of an intemperate
Draught, or the embraces of a rotten Whore, does many times entail a lingering
torment upon his Children, and his Childrens Children. Others, again, owe their
diseases to their own personal vices, and by abusing their Bodies to satisfy
their Lusts, convert them into walking Hospitals; they suck in Rheums and
Defluxions with their intemperate Draughts, and change the pleasure of a sober
and temperate life, for Fevers and the uneasiness of Debauches; they swallow
their Surfeits in their gluttonous Meals, and fill their Veins with flat and
sprightless humors, till by degrees they have turned their sickly Bodies into
mere Statues of Earth and Phlegm. And in a word, they wast themselves in their
insatiable wantonness, and sacrifice their strength to a beastly importunity,
and many times contract those noisome Diseases that make them putrify alive,
and even anticipate the uncleanness of the Grave. And as our bodily Diseases
are generally the natural effects of our Sin, so are most others of those
Calamities under which we groan. Thus Want and Poverty are usually the effects
either of our own Sloth or Prodigality, or else of the Fraud and Oppression of
those we deal with: and Wars and Devastations the natural products either of
the Ambition or Covetousness of those who are the Aggressors. Thus Sin, you
see, is the Pandora's Box, whence most of those swarms of Miseries issue that
sting and disturb the World; and indeed, the God of nature, to deter men from
Sin, has coupled Misery to it so inseparably, that whilst he continues things
in their natural course, we may as soon be men without being reasonable, as
sinful men without being miserable. Hence we find, That when he had tried all
the arts of Discipline on the obstinate Jews, and none were effectual, he at
last consigns them to the dire correction of their own Follies, Ier. 2 19.
Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy backsliding shall reprove thee.

(2.) Again, Secondly, Many of those Evils and Calamities under which we
suffer, are the just retributions of Sin. For besides those numerous Evils that
are naturally appendant unto wicked actions, there are sundry others under
which we suffer, that are the more immediate effects of the Divine Displeasure,
and are inflicted on us by God as the condign Punishments of our Rebellions
against him: and these are such as proceed not from any necessary causality in
the sinful actions themselves, but are wholly owing to the Providence of
Heaven, which either inflicts them immediately upon us, or else disposes second
Causes, contrary to their natural tendency, to come to the production of them;
such were the Drowning of the World, the Burning of Sodom and Gomorrha, the
Judgment of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and sundry other such like mentioned in
the Scripture. And though in sundry of those Judgments, which God inflicts
upon sinful men, his hand does not so visibly appear as it did in those; yet
sundry of them are impressed with such visible Characters of the Divine
Displeasure, that we have all the reason in the World to conclude them to be
the immediate effects of it. As when we see some great and unexpected Calamity
befall a Sinner in the very commission of a wicked Action; or when he is
punished in kind, and the Judgment inflicted on him bears an exact
correspondence with his Sin; or when upon the commission of some notorious
Villainy, some strange and extraordinary evil befalls him: in these and such like
cases, although it is possible they may be the effects of some casual
concurrence of second Causes; yet there being such plain indications of
designed Punishment in them, it would be very unreasonable to attribute them to
a mere blind and undesigning Chance. And therefore, although on the one hand it
argues an uncharitable and superstitious mind to attribute every calamity of
our Brother to the Righteous Judgment and Displeasure of God; yet on the other
hand, it is no less an argument of a stupid wretchless Soul, to attribute those
Evils to chance, on which there are such apparent symptoms of the Divine
Displeasure. And though there is no doubt but many of those evil Events that
befall us do merely result from the established course and order of necessary
Causes; yet there is no man that owns either a Providence or the truth of
Scripture, but must readily acknowledge, that in this established course of
things, God very often interposes, and for the rewarding of good and punishing
of bad men, so varies the courses of these secondary Causes, as to produce good
and evil by them, contrary to their natural series and tendencies. For should
he have limited himself to the Laws of Nature, and resolved to keep things on
for ever in one fatal unvariable course of motion, he must have tied up his
hands from rewarding and punishing, which are the principal acts of his
governing Providence; and consequently all his promises and threats of temporal
Blessings and Judgments, must have been perfectly null and insignificant. This
therefore must be acknowledged by all that have any sense of God and Religion,
That many of those Evils under which we suffer, are the just Judgments of God
in retribution for our Folly and Wickedness. But I see I must hasten.

(3.) And lastly, many of those Evils and Calamities we endure, are inflicted
as necessary Antidotes against Sin. For certainly, considering the degenerate
state of Humane Nature, the perverseness and disingenuity of the generality of
mankind, Afflictions and Calamities are as necessary to keep us within the
bounds of Sobriety, as Chains and Whips are to tame Madmen: And should the
great Governor of the World still indulge to us our wills, and accommodate all
Events to our desires, we should grow so extravagantly insolent, that 'twould
be impossible to keep us within any bounds or compass; and therefore, in
charity to us, he is many times forced to cross us, and to inflict less Evils
on us, to prevent greater. He sees, that if he should gratify our fond
Desires, 'twould be a cruel kindness to us, and hurt us more than ever it would
benefit us; 'twould damp our Piety, or carnalize our Spirits, swell our Pride,
or pamper our Luxury, give such a loose to our extravagant Passions, as would
in the end render us far more miserable than the want of what we desire can do.
And therefore, in mere pity to us, instead of giving us the good we ask for, he
sometimes inflicts the contrary evil: and as Physicians sometimes prick a Vein
in the Arm to prevent the suffocation of the Heart; so God many times afflicts
us to preserve us, diseases our Bodies to Antidote or Cure our Souls. So that
though those Evils which God inflicts upon us, are not always intended for
Punishments of our Sin, but sometimes for Preservatives against it: yet in this
case as well as the other, it is Sin that is the cause of it; it is this that
makes the evil necessary, and obliges God in mercy to inflict it upon us. He
knows the Sin will injure us much more than the evil he prescribes to prevent
it; and therefore being much more sollicitous for our safety than our ease, he
chooses rather to make us smart, than to suffer us to perish. But if it were
not for Sin, which is the worst of Diseases, he would have no need to Antidote
us with Affliction; nor does he so much delight to grieve the Children of Men,
as to afflict them for Afflictions sake. So that were it not for our Sin,
either actual or in prospect, we may be sure, he would neither punish, nor
afflict us. Thus Sin, you see, is the common Cause of Evil, the fruitful Womb
of all kinds of Mischief; for I doubt not but to one of these three Heads most
of the Miseries of Mankind may be reduced, that they are either the natural
Effects, the just Punishments, or the necessary Preservatives of Sin.

Hence therefore let us learn under all our Calamities to acknowledge our Sins
to be the cause of them, to trace up our Evils to their Fountain head, which we
shall find is in our own Bosoms. From hence spring all those wasting Wars,
those sweeping Plagues, those devouring Fires that make such devastations in
the World; from hence are laid those trains of Wild Fire that slaughter our
Friends, blow up our Houses, and scatter so many Ruins round about us. O!
would to God we would once be sensible of it, that we would every one smite
upon his own Thigh, and cry out, Lord, what have I done? what sparks have I
added to the common flame? what guilts have I contributed toward the filling
up the measure of England's Iniquities? But, alas! hitherto we have generally
taken a quite contrary course to this. When God's Judgments are upon us, we
confess that Sin is the cause of them indeed, but not ours by any means: It Is
the Sin of the City, cries the Country; it is the Sin of the Court, cries the
City; it is the Sin of this Party, cries one; it is the Sin of the other Party, cries
another. Thus the Judgments of God are sent from Tithing to Tithing, and no
Body will own them, though they call us all Fathers. Well, Sirs, we shall one
Day find, God grant it may not be too late first, that this is not the way to
prevent the incursions of the Divine Judgments. If ever we mean to put a stop
to God's Indignation against us, we must every one lay our Hands upon our own
Breasts, and lament his own Sin, and acknowledge his own share in the general
Provocation, and promise and engage our selves, that wherever we have done
amiss, we will do so no more: Which, if we wilfully refuse to do, though at
present we are made whole, yet we may certainly expect that a worse thing will
come upon us. And this brings me from the Caution to

II. The Reasons of it, which, as I told you, are two:

1. Thou art made whole. 2. Lest a worse thing come unto thee.
1. I begin with the first, Behold thou art made whole, therefore have a care
thou sinnest no more: let the mercy I have shown thee in curing thee of thy
Disease, have this blessed effect upon thee, to reclaim thee from thy Sins to a
life of Virtue and Purity. So that the sense of this Reason is this, That God's
mercy to us in recovering us from past Calamities, lays a great Obligation upon
us to reform and amend; but particularly it lays upon us this threefold
Obligation, (1.) The Obligation of Gratitude, (2.) of Justice, (3.) and lastly,
of Self-interest. Of each of these briefly.

(1.) God's mercy in restoring us from any past Calamity, obliges us in
gratitude to amend our lives. It Is doubtless one of the most palpable signs of
a base profligate Nature, not to be obliged by Favors: 'twould be an injury to
a Brute to call him ungrateful; that odious Epithete no Being can deserve, but
one that is degenerated into a Devil, that has broke through all that is modest
and ingenuous, that is tender and apprehensive in Humane Nature. But to sin on
against the mercies of our Deliverer, to take pleasure in provoking him, who
took pity on us in our low estate, and snatched us from the brink of ruin, is
doubtless the highest Baseness and Ingratitude: for whilst we persist in our
sinful courses, under the obligations of his Goodness, we render him the
greatest Evil for the greatest Good, and retort his Favors with the basest
Indignities. Whilst he is shielding us with his careful Providence, we smite
him with the Fist of Wickedness; and, like wretched Vipers, sting and wound
him, whilst he is cherishing us in his Bosom. And is this a suitable answer,
do we think, to the obligations he has laid upon us? O ungrateful Wretches that
we are, do we thus requite the Lord our God? With what confidence can we
pretend to any thing that is Modest and Ingenuous, while we thus persist to
return the Favors of our God with such insufferable Affronts and Indignities?
But then

(2.) Secondly, God's mercy in restoring us from any past Calamity, obliges us
in Justice to amend our lives; for by restoring us, he acquires a new right to
us. As he is the Author of our Beings, he has an unalienable right and
property in all the powers and faculties of our natures: but every time he
restores us from an approaching Ruin, he does, as it were, create us a new, he
gives us our Lives and Beings afresh, and thereby renews his Title to us; and
so many times as he preserves us, so many Lives and Beings he gives us: and
consequently, so many additional rights and properties he acquires in us. And
when he has so many ways entitled himself to us, by creating, preserving, and
restoring us, what monstrous injustice is it in us still to alienate our selves
from him, and list those powers and faculties into the service of his Enemies,
that are his by so many Titles? O unjust that we are, thus to fight against God
with his own Weapons, and affront his Authority with the effects of his Bounty!
for by persisting in Sin under his Preservations, we do not only rob him of our
selves, in whom he has such an unalienable Propriety, but also employ our
selves against him. We do not only purloin his Goods, but convert them into
instruments of Rebellion against him, than which there is nothing can be more
outragiously injurious. O wretched man, that very Tongue with which thou
blasphemest him, had e're this been silent for ever, had not he stretched out
his hand and restored thee. Those Eyes, through which thou shootest the noisome
Fireballs of thy Lust, had been e're this closed up in endless darkness, had
not he taken pity on thee, and snatched thee from the brinks of Ruin. Those
Members of thine, which thou imployest as Instruments of unrighteousness
against him, had now been rotting in a cold Grave, had not his tender mercy
preserved thee. And can thou be such a barbarous Wretch, as not only to deny
him the use of what he gives, but even to injure him with his own Gifts?
Consider, I beseech you, how heinously he must needs resent such monstrous
injustice and ingratitude. Hear but how he complains in a parallel case, Isa.
1. 2, 3. Hear O heavens, and give ear O earth, for the Lord has spoken, I have
brought up children, and they have rebelled against me. The ox knows his
owner, and the ass his masters crib, but Israel does not know, my people does
not consider. Ah sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity.

(3.) Thirdly and lastly, God's mercy in restoring us from past Calamities
obliges us in Self-interest to reform and amend. For if we do not answer the
end of God's deliverances, they will prove Curses instead of Benefits to us;
and what he intended for a favor, will convert into an aggravation of our sin
and punishment. The great end why God delivered us, was to win us by his
Goodness to forsake our sins, and give us space to repent of them: for so the
Apostle tells us, That the goodness and long-suffering of God leads us to
repentance, in Romans 2. 4. But if it does not lead us thither, it will leave us
in a far worse condition than it found us; i. e. 'twill leave us loaded with
much heavier guilt, and bound over to much sorer punishment. For he that sins
on under his Preservations, is only preserved to treasure up wrath against the
day of wrath, and to prepare more Fuel for his future Flames. So that, if he
still persist in his wickedness, it had been much better for him that God had
let him alone to perish under his affliction. For then he had past more
innocent into the other World, and suffered there a much cooler damnation:
Whereas now, whenever his wretched Ghost departs into Eternity, it will go
attended with a louder cry of guilts, with the cry of so many more wronged
mercies and abused preservations; which will most fearfully inhance her
Accounts, and inflame the Reckoning of her torments: so that when she comes
into the other World among those miserable Spirits, that were snatched away in
the common calamities from whence she was rescued and preserved, she will find
her self plunged into a condition so much more intolerable, that she will wish
a thousand times she had been snatched away with them, that so she might never
have had the opportunity to contract those guilts that are the woeful causes of
it. Wherefore, as we would not make the mercies of God the causes of our
misery, and turn our Preservations into Judgments; we are highly obliged upon
every recovery from past Judgments and Calamities, to reform and amend our
lives.

And now what remains, but that we seriously consider with our selves how much
we are concerned in this Argument. We of this Generation are a people whom God
has exercised with wondrous Judgments and Deliverances. We have many of us
lived to see the Bowels of our Native Country ripped up by an Unnatural War,
the righteous Cause of the Prince and Father of our Country oppressed by
prosperous Villainy; his innocent Blood, our Laws and Liberties and Religion
sacrificed to the lust of Rebels and Usurpers. And when we had long suffered
the consequent miseries and confusions, our merciful God took pity upon us, and
after a long Exile, and without the charge and smart of War and Bloodshed,
restored to us again the lawful Heir and Successor of our Crown, and, with him,
our Liberties and Religion. This, one would have thought, was enough to oblige
a people of any ingenuity, and to indear to us for ever the Author of such a
miraculous mercy. But when instead of being reclaimed by his Goodness we grew
worse and worse, his anger was kindled again against us, and in his sore
displeasure he breathed forth a destroying Pestilence upon us, that in a few
Months swept our Streets, unpeopled our Houses, and turned our Towns and Cities
into Golgotha's. But in the midst of so many Deaths we were preserved, and
under the Shield of that Providence were kept in safety, when ten thousand
Arrows flew about our ears. And could we possibly resist the powerful charms of
such an indearing, such a distinguishing kindness? Alas! Yes, we could, and
did, and were so far from being conquered by it, that we grew more obstinate
and rebellious. This incensed him against us anew, and with Firebrarnds in its
hands his vengeance came and kindled our Houses into a devouring flame, that
with wondrous fury did spread and enlarge it self from House to House, and from
Street to Street, till it had laid this famous Metropolis of our Nation in a
Heap of Ruins. But yet in the midst of Judgment, God remembered Mercy; and when
the unruly Element had baffled all our Arts, and triumphed over all our
resistance, God put a Bridle unto his mouth, and stopped him in his full
cariere: by which means a great part of us were preserved, and snatched as
Firebrarnds out of the Flame. And though many of us saw our Houses and Estates
buried in the Ruins it made; yet we have lived to see, and that within a few
years, the consumed Phoenix rise out of her Ashes in greater Glory and Luster
than ever. And now what have we rendered to the Lord for all these Mercies and
signal Preservations? O ungrateful that we are! We have turned his mercies into
wantonness, and fought against him with his own favors: We have spent those
lives which he has preserved to us, in grieving, provoking and dishonouring
him: We have turned those Houses he has restored to us, into open Stages of
pride and luxury: We have consumed those Estates which he has repaired, in
supplying our manifold rebellions against him. Thus with his own mercies we
have waged War with him. What then can we expect, but that he should disarm us
of those mercies which we have so foully mis-imployed, and thunder his
Judgments upon us to avenge our abuse of them? For if he cannot melt our
obstinacy with the Fire of Mercy; it is fit he should attempt to break it with
the Hammer of Judgment: and if when he has tried lighter Judgments, they will
not do; it is fit he should second them with greater and heavier. Which brings
me,

2. To the second Reason of the Caution in the Text, Lest a worse thing come
upon thee. i. e. Beware thou do not continue stubborn under thy past
Corrections, lest thou thereby provoke thy angry God to lay his hand yet
heavier upon thee, and to scourge thee with Scorpions instead of Rods. For it
is the usual method of the Divine Providence, when lesser Judgments prove
ineffectual, to second and enforce them with greater. Thus he threatens to deal
with Israel, Levit. 26. 21, 23, 24. And if ye walk contrary to me, and will not
hearken unto me, I will bring seven times more plagues upon you, according to
your sins. And if yet ye will not be reformed by these things, but walk
contrary to me, then will I walk contrary to you, and will punish ye yet seven
times more for your sins. And just as he threatened, so it came to pass: For as
they continued obstinate under God's Judgments; so he continued to plague them
sorer and sorer, till at last perceiving their Disease to be incurable, he cut
'em off, and utterly destroyed them. And in this method of punishing Sinners
gradually with sharper and sharper strokes, when they continue obstinate under
correction, there is a great deal of Reason and Wisdom. For (1.) Their
obstinacy swells and inhances their Guilt. (2.) It renders severe Punishments
necessary. And (3.) Those severer Punishments render their final Destruction
more inexcusable. Of each of these briefly.

(1.) God punishes men with heavier, when they continue obstinate under lighter
Judgments; because their Obstinacy is a greater aggravation of their Guilt. For
though our Reason indeed tells us, That Sin is the greatest and most dangerous
Evil in the World; yet Reason and Argument has not comparably that force to
persuade men, as their own Sense and Experience has: and they will be much
sooner persuaded of the reality of any evil, by feeling the smart of it, than
by a thousand dry Arguments against it. And therefore though it be a great
aggravation of our guilt, to sin against the clear convictions of our Reason;
yet it is a much greater, to sin against the sharp and dolorous perceptions of
our own Sense and Experience. But now, while the Judgments of God are upon men,
they feel the dire effects of their Sin; and therefore if notwithstanding this,
they still persist in it, they sin against their Sense, as well as their
Reason: which is, in effect, a plain defiance of God, and a daring him to do
his worst with us. For this in effect is the sense and interpretation of our
Obstinacy: O God, I know thou art angry with my Sins, by the dire effects I now
feel and experience; but be it known to thee, I despise thy Vengeance, and am
resolved to sin on bravely in despite of all the Judgments thou can arm
against me. And what greater aggravation of sin can there be, than to repeat it
with such a blasphemous contempt of the Most High? He is a daring Thief, we
say, that will venture to rob within sight of the Gallows; and he is as
insolent a Sinner, that dares sin on in the face of Judgment. It was looked
upon as a monstrous piece of contumacy in the Jews, that when God had only
forewarned them by the Prophet, Behold, I frame evil against you, and devise a
device against you; return ye now therefore every one from his evil way: they
returned this arrogant Answer, There is no hope, but we will walk every one
after his own devices, and we will do every one the imagination of his evil
heart, Jer. 18. 11, 12. But how much more arrogant would it have been, had the
Judgment which was only devising against them been actually executed upon them!
Such an Answer then had been a plain Declaration, That they were finally
resolved to stand it out against God to the last, and to take no Quarter at his
hands, though they perished for ever in their Rebellions. And when men's Guilts
are thus inhanced, it is fit their Punishment should be proportionable: for
otherwise they would be looked upon as things that happen to men without any
Providential Disposal. But now, by regularly proportioning the Evils of
Suffering to the Evils of Sin, and coupling lesser Evils with lesser Guilts,
and greater with greater, and so equally balancing and adjusting the Punishment
to the Fault; God makes his arm bare to us, and gives us a plain demonstration,
That the Evils we suffer are the Rods of his just displeasure.

(2.) God punishes men with heavier, when they continue obstinate under lighter
Judgments, because their obstinacy renders heavier Judgments necessary. For
Punishments being designed by God for our Cure and Recovery, it is necessary
they should be proportioned to the degree and strength of our Disease; and
consequently, when the Disease of our Sin is grown stronger and more malignant,
the remedy of our Punishment should be made sharper and more operative. For
when men are grown inveterately wicked, to attempt their reformation with
smaller Judgments, is to batter a Wall of Marble with a Pot-Gun. Such
obstinate Rebels must be stormed with the loudest Artillery of Heaven, before
they will listen to a Surrender. An Anvil will as soon yield to the Fillip of
our Finger, as a hardened Sinner relent under soft and gentle Corrections. He
must be alarmed with some rousing Judgment, and lashed till he bleeds again
under the Rods of the Almighty, or in all probability he will be undone for
ever. His Disease is inveterate, and not to be removed but by the strongest
Catharticks; and therefore to prescribe him a Course of gentle Physic, would
be to try Experiments upon him, and vex and disturb him to no purpose. God
therefore, to cure the folly and obstinacy of Sinners, is many times fain to
treat them with rigor and severity, when he finds the mild and gentle methods
of his Providence defeated by them. But first usually he tries the softer and
more grateful Remedies, being unwilling to grieve and afflict his Creatures,
when there is any other way to recover them. But when softer will not do, it is
Mercy in him to apply severer; and his last most commonly are the severest,
these being the Causticks, as it were, which he is fain to apply to our
Lethargick Souls, when no other means will awake and recover us.

(3.) And lastly, God punishes men with heavier, when they continue obstinate
under lighter Judgments, to render their final destruction more inexcusable if
they will not be reclaimed. For when God's Threats will not awake men, he usually
sends forth his smaller Judgments; which, like the Van-Couriers of an Army, are
to begin the Skirmish, before he falls on with his main Body to ruin and
destroy them. Which method he observes, out of great pity to his sinful
Creatures, whom he always threatens before he strikes, and always strikes
before he destroys, that so he may give them timely and effectual warning to
arm themselves by Repentance, to prevent their destruction: and accordingly the
first Judgment he lets off, he designs for a Warning Piece, to give notice of a
second, and the second of a third, and all of that ruining and exterminating
Judgment which brings up the Rear, and is to conclude the Tragedy. So that his
foregoing Judgments do still give notice of the following, and these of the
succeeding, and all of that final destruction in the War which closely pursues,
and, unless we repent, will at last overtake us. And when our designed
destruction approaches us step by step, and every succeeding Judgment brings it
nearer and nearer to us, so that we plainly see it coming on when it is yet at a
distance from us, and yet will not stand out of its way, but desperately meet,
dare and defy it; how can we charge God with being either unjust or unkind to
us, who has taken such an effectual course to warn us of, and retrieve us from
it? When he thus punished us more and more, as our Sin grew greater and
greater, this, one would have thought, might have been sufficient to terrify
us from our Sins; which, we plainly saw, were bringing such mischiefs upon us,
and to forewarn us of that gloomy and fatal issue that attended them. By all
which, God does abundantly manifest how extremely unwilling he is to destroy
us. But if after all, we will force him to it, Men and Angels must confess,
That he has been infinitely just and good to us, and that the guilt of our
blood lies upon our own heads.

And now if this be true, That when lesser Judgments will not reclaim men,
God's usual Method is to second them with greater; how much reason have we of
this Nation to expect and dread a succession of greater Judgments than those we
have hitherto felt; considering how much we have degenerated under our past
Corrections, and all along hardened our selves under the strokes of the
Almighty? I do not love to abode ill things; and did not our own Sins
prognosticate more mischief to us than any of those suspected Appearances that
fill our heads with so many fears and jealousies, I could easily secure my mind
of the continuance of our happiness under far more threatening apprehensions.
But, Alas! when I consider how obstinately we have persisted in our sinful
ways, in defiance both of the Mercies and Judgments of Heaven; how,
notwithstanding the advantage we have had of being better, as having been
baptized into the best Church, and educated in the purest Religion in the
World: a Religion that advances no Temporal Design, no invention to enrich or
aggrandize its Priests; that has no other Aim or Project but only that blessed
one of making men good here, and happy hereafter; that has no Arts of
Compremize between men's Lusts and Consciences, no Devices to supersede the
Eternal Obligations of Piety and Virtue, but binds 'em fast upon our
Consciences by all that we can hope or fear. When, I say, notwithstanding we
have had this advantage of being good, by being instituted in such a Religion
as this, I consider how we have grown worse and worse, as if we had resolved to
give the World an Experiment how bad it is possible for men to be under the most
effectual means of being good; I cannot but be fearful and jealous, That our
multiplying our Guilts will at length provoke God to multiply his Judgments
upon us. And O would to God, that for this reason we would all be jealous, that
we would ground our fears upon our Sins, and Incorrigibleness under the past
Judgments of God! then they would produce in us far different effects from what
they have hitherto done; then, instead of firing us with discontent against our
Governors, and exciting us to Faction, Sedition and Clamor, they would turn
all our animosities against our own wicked Lives; which are the Causes of all
the Evils that we feel or fear: then would our Fears and Jealousies improve
into Piety toward God, Loyalty toward our Prince, and Charity and Justice
toward one another, and render us constant to the Profession, and faithful as
to the Practice of our holy Religion. Which blessed Effects could they once
produce, then farewell to all Causes of Fears and Jealousies; then our God would
soon disperse all the Clouds that hang over us, with the light of his
Countenance, and render us a glorious, a happy and a prosperous people, and
crown us with Everlasting Glory and Happiness hereafter.

FINIS.
Books Written by the Reverend Doctor Scott, and Printed for W. Kettilby, and
T. Horn.
THE Christian Life, Part I. from its Beginning to its Consummation in Glory.
With Directions for private Devotions, and Forms of Prayer fitted to the
several states of Christians.

The Christian Life, Part II. Wherein the Fundamental Principles of Christian
Duty are Assigned, Explained and Proved. Vol. I.

The Christian Life, Part II. Wherein that Fundamental Principle of Christian
Duty, the Doctrine of our Savior's Mediation, is Explained and Proved. Vol. II.

A Sermon preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, etc. December. 16.
1683. on Proverbs xxiv. 21.

A Sermon preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, etc. July 26.
1685. being the Day of Thanksgiving for his Majesty's Victory over the Rebels;
On. 2 Samuel xviii. 28.

A Sermon preached at the Assizes held at Chelmsford in the County of Essex,
Aug. 31. 1685. on Romans xiii. 1.

A Sermon preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, etc. Sept. 2.
1686. being the Anniversary Fast for the dreadful Fire in the Year 1666. On
John v. 14.


