TO THE Truly Pious and Virtuous Mrs CROUN.
MADAM,
WHen you requested me to Publish this Discourse, I found you in that Mournful
condition, that 'twould have been a degree of Inhumanity not to have gratified
your desire: And therefore, though I was sufficiently sensible how much short I
had fain of both my Subjects, viz. that comfortable one of the Text, and that
sorrowful one of the Occasion; yet my Compassion overswayed my Reason, so that
I can plead no other excuse to the World for this very defective Publication,
but that I had not ill nature enough to resist the Importunate Tears of an
afflicted Friend, and a sorrowful Widow.

As for the Sermon, all I can say for it is this, That it Treats of a very
Noble Argument, and such as carries comfort enough with it to ease and relieve
the most dejected mind, and therefore is of all others the most fit and proper
for your Meditations; for there is no present affliction, no, not yours, can
cause you to suppose your self miserable, so long as you are within hope and
expectance of the blessed state of eternal life.

O, Good Madam, while you are making your Mournful descants on your dear Loss,
consider now and then, that you are Iourneying toward that blessed place,
where you will find infinite Myriads of better Friends, and dearer Lovers, than
that best of Husbands, whose Loss you bewail, and who love each other far more
and better even than you and he did* and have this peculiar advantage beyond
the happiest Lovers here, That they shall live an eternal life together, and to
everlasting Ages enjoy one another, without being ever interrupted in their
enjoyment, with the Melancholy prospect of being at last divided from each
others society and embraces. This, with all those other innumerable comforts
wherewith this fruitful Theme abounds, you will find the best Cordial in the
World for a drooping mind.

That therefore what I here present you may often put you in mind of Heaven,
and quicken your endeavors after it, and refresh your sorrowful heart with
the joyful prospect of it, is the earnest prayer of,

MADAM, Your most affectionate Friend, and faithful Servant, John Scott.

A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL, etc.
Matthew. 25.46. -- But the Righteous into life eternal.


IN the foregoing verses of this Chapter our Savior describes the process of
the day of Judgment, and the different Fates to which good and bad men (whom he
describes under the Characters of Sheep and Goats) shall then be sentenced and
consigned, and then he sums up the whole discourse in the words of the Text,
These, that is, the Goats, or the Wicked, of whom he had been discoursing in
the verses immediately preceding, These shall go away into everlasting
punishment, but the Righteous into life eternal; where by the Righteous we are
to understand the truly Pious, and Virtuous, that is, they who render to God,
to Men, and to themselves all that duty they owe in their respective Relations
and Circumstances: for all our Duties being Dues, our performance of them is
nothing but the discharging of our Debts, or being strictly Righteous in
rendering to God, and Men, and our selves, what we owe to each by an immutable
obligation: and hence the whole Duty of Man is in Scripture very often called
by the name of Righteousness, and those who comply with their whole Duty, are
frequently styled Righteous, because, to be Righteous, is to render to every
one his due, and to render every one his due, is the whole Duty of Man; so that
the meaning of the words is this, they who have been good Men in all their
respective Relations, and Circumstances, who have made it the business of their
lives to render to God all that Piety and Devotion, to their Neighbors all
that Justice and Charity, to themselves all that Sobriety and Temperance which
is due from them, both by the command of God, and the judgment of right reason,
they, as a reward of this their universal Righteousness, shall by this final
judgment be transmitted unto life eternal.

In the prosecution of which Argument, I shall endeavor these two things.
First, To show what is here meant by life eternal. Secondly, Wherein this
eternal life consists.

As for the first, By life here, is plainly meant happiness, for so it is very
usual with Scripture to express the blessings it promises to Men, whether they
be temporal or eternal. By life thus, the temporal Blessings promised in the
Old Testament, are frequently expressed by this Phrase, as you may see at your
leisure, Deuteronomy. 30.15.19. Lev. 18.5. Ezekiel. 20.21 and hence the Statutes of the
Mosaic Law are called the Statutes of life, Ezekiel. 33.15. and as the Temporal
Blessings in the Old Testament are commonly expressed by life, so are also
those Eternal Blessings of the future life promised in the New, so Matthew. 18.8.
Matthew. 19.17. John 3.36. and because these Blessings are not Temporal, but
Eternal, therefore that life by which they are expressed, is styled eternal and
everlasting, so 1 Timothy 1.10 Romans 6.22, 23. and that it is not called eternal
life, merely as it is a state of endless Being and Existence, is evident,
because Being, and Existence, are indifferent things, abstracted from the sense
of Happiness and Misery, but eternal life is proposed to us as a thing that is
infinitely desirable in it self, as being the Crown and Reward of all our
Obedience, for which reason it is called the Crown of Life, James 1.12. and
therefore the reason why they are expressed by life, is, because life is the
root of all our sense of pleasure, without which we are nothing else but lumps
of stupid and insensible flesh, incapable of perceiving either pleasure or
pain; so that all sensation being founded in life, and all pleasure being a
sweet and grateful sensation, by a very easy figure the natural effect and
operation of life is expressed by life it self, and indeed all the advantage of
living consists in living in a sense of pleasure, and therefore it has been
very much disputed among Philosophers, whether this Temporary state of ours, in
which there is so great an intermixture of pain with pleasure, does not better
deserve the name of Death, than Life; and those of them who thought it more
liable to Misery, than Happiness, affirmed it to be a state of death, and
stiffly maintained this Paradox, that at our birth we die into a worse state
than nonexistence, and at our death are born into a true and proper state of
life: but they who counted our present life to be intermixed with more pleasure
than misery, esteemed it a privilege deserving the name of life, which is an
argument that both placed all the privilege of living in those pleasant
perceptions that are founded in it: and thus according to the Scripture
Philospohy, to live as it imports advantage to us, is to live in the sense of
joy and pleasure: so Psalm. 22.26. The Meek shall eat and be satisfied, they
shall praise the Lord that seek him, your heart shall live for ever, that is,
rejoice for eve^ so also 1 These. 3.8. How properly therefore may the (...)
state of bliss be expressed by Life, since it is the proper scene of happiness,
where joy and pleasure do for ever abound, where there is an inexhau^^^ble
spring of pure unmingled delights, issuing forth in Rivers of Pleasure from
God's Right Hand for evermore? So that if there be any thing worthy of the name
of life, it is doubtless the blissfull state of those happy Souls, who live in a
continued sense of all those joys and comforts that an everlasting Heaven
imports.

I now pass on to the next thing proposed, which was to show wherein this
everlasting life consists. And here I do not pretend to give you a perfect Map
of all the Beatitudes of that Heavenly State, for that is a Task fit only for
an Angel, or a glorified Spirit; all I aim at, is to give you such an imperfect
account of it, as God has thought fit to impart to Mortals in the Scripture,
which though it fall infinitely short of the thing it self, yet is doubtless
the best and utmost that our narrow Capacities can bear. In short, therefore,
concerning this blessed State, God has revealed to us these fix things:

1. That it includes a most perfect freedom from evil and misery. So Rev. 7.16,
17. and hence also it is called a state of Rest, Heb. 4.9, 11. Rev. 14.13 all
which expressions plainly denote this state to be a perfect Sabbath and Jubilee
of Redemption from all evil and misery: for as soon as the Souls of good Men
depart out of this Corporeal State, in which they now live, they are
immediately released from all those bodily passions of hunger and thirst, and
pain and diseases, whereunto they are now liable by reason of their union with
the body; and having in a great measure conquered their Wills whilst they were
in the Body, and subdued them to the Will of God, they must immediately
commense into an high degree of perfection; for being freed from the
encumbrances of flesh and blood, from the importunities of body passion and
appetite, and the temptations of sensuality that do now continually solicit
them, they will be no longer liable to those irregularities of affection that
do here disturb the tranquillity of their minds; and so their actions and
affections being always regulated by their reason, their Consciences will be no
more bestormed with those terrors and affrightments [which nothing but the
sense of guilt can suggest to them] but enjoy a perpetual calm and serenity: so
that they being translated into an immortal condition, will be released from
all the sad accidents of Mortality, from pain and sickness, hunger and thirst,
from all corporeal passions and grievances and so no sensitive sorrow can
interpose between them and their happiness to disturb their fruition, or
interrupt the current of their Joys; and being translated into a state of
perfect purity and goodness, they will be also freed from all the sorrowful
appendages of a sinful condition, from dread and anxiety, from shame and
remorse, and from all the corroding anguish of a wounded spirit, and so they
will be liable neither to sensitive, nor rational trouble, and having nothing
either from within or without, to intermeddle with their Joys, and disturb the
scene of their happiness, they will be at perfect rest, and for ever enjoy a
most undisturbed repose. O blessed day, when I shall take my leave of sin and
misery for ever, and go to those calm and blissfull Regions, whence sighs and
tears, and sorrows, and pains are banished for evermore.

2. That it includes a most intimate enjoyment of God; for God being a rational
good, is no otherwise capable of being enjoyed by reasonable Beings, but by
knowing, loving, and resembling him; all which ways he has promised that we
shall enjoy him when are are arrived in that blissfull state. For as for the
knowledge of him, St. Paul tells us, that whereas we now see through a glass
darkly, we shall then see him face to face, etc. 1 Cor. 13.12. and St. John,
that we shall see him as he is, 1 John 3.2. which expressions must needs import
such a knowledge of him as is unspeakably more distinct and clear than any we
have in this present state. For then the Eyes of our Minds shall be so
invigourated, that we shall be able to look on the Sun without dazeling, to
contemplate the pure and immaculate glories of the Divinity, without being
confounded with its brightness, and our understanding shall be so exalted, that
we shall see more at every single view, than we do now in volumes of discourse,
and the most tedious trains of inference and deduction, and enjoying a most
perfect repose both from within and without, we shall have nothing to disturb
or divert our greedy contemplations; which having such an immense Prospect of
Truth and Glory round about them, shall still discover farther and farther, and
so entertain themselves with everlasting wonder and delight; for what an
infinite pleasure will that All-glorious object afford unto our raised minds,
which then shall no longer labor under the tedious difficulties of discourse,
but, like transparent Windows, shall have nothing to do but only to receive
the light which freely offers it self unto them, and shines for ever round
about them; when every new Discovery of God, and of the bottomless secrets and
mysteries of his Nature, shall enlarge our Capacities to discover more, and
still new discoveries shall freely offer themselves as fast as our minds are
enlarged to receive them. This doubtless will be a Recreation to our Souls,
infinitely transcending all that we can conceive or imagine of it; especially
considering that all our knowledge shall terminate in love, that sweet and
grateful passion, that sooths and ravishes the heart, and dissolves it into
joy and pleasure; for God being infinitely good and amiable, the more we know,
the more cause and reason we shall have to love him: when therefore we are
arrived to that degree of knowledge which the beatifical Vision implies, we
shall find our hearts inflamed with such a degree of love to him, as will issue
into unspeakable delight and satisfaction, and even overwhelm us with ecstasies
of joy and complacency. For if those Divine illapses, those more immediate
touches and sensations of God, which good men sometimes experience in this
life, do so affect and ravish them, that they are even forced into Triumphs and
Exaltations; how will they be rapt and transported in that state of vision,
when they shall see him so immediately, and love him so vehemently, and their
whole Soul shall be nothing else but one entire globe of light and love, all
irradiated and inflamed with the vision and beauty of the Fountain of Truth and
Goodness. But alas! as these joys are too big for mortal language to express,
so are they too strong for mortality to bear; and should we but for one day or
hour see God, and love him, as those glorified Spirits do, we should
questionless die of an ecstasie of pleasure, and our glad hearts being tickled
with such insupportable joys, by endeavoring to enlarge themselves to make
room for them all, would quickly stretch into a Rupture. But as our knowledge
of God shall terminate in the love of him, so both together shall terminate in
our resemblance of his perfections, for we having so immediate a prospect of
his beauties, and being so infinitely inamoured with them, with what
inexpressible vigor shall we set our selves to imitate, and transcribe them,
and our imitation being invigourated with a knowledge so clear, and a love so
vehement, can never fail of producing the desired resemblance; so that the more
we know God, the more we shall love him, and the more we know and love, the
more we shall imitate and resemble him; and then both our inward motions and
outward actions being all of them pure and perfect imitations of God, cannot
fail of producing a most glorious agreement between his Original, and our Copy;
so that whilst we interchangeably turn our Eyes to God and our selves, and
compare Grace with Grace, Beauty with Beauty, 'twill fill our minds with
unspeakable Content, to see how the Image answers to the Prototype. For if from
our love of God there must necessarily result to us such ineffable joy and
complacency, what a ravishing delight will it afford us, to see the signatures
of those Adorable Beauties, for which we love him, stamped and impressed upon
our own Natures, when the glory that shines about, and inflames us, shall shine
into us, and become our own; and those amiable Idea's of him which are
impressed upon our understanding, shall stamp our Wills and Affections with
their own resemblance. For so the Apostle tells us it shall be 1 John 3.2.
Lord, how must our Souls be enlarged and widened, to be able to contain all
those mighty joys that must necessarily spring from our fruition of thee; and
to what a degree of happiness shall we be advanced, when we shall be
entertained with all the delights that the enjoyment of such an infinite good
can afford us; and have hearts great enough to contain them all, without being
overcharged with their weight and number!

3. That it includes a most indearing fruition of our glorified Savior. And
this certainly is none of the smallest ingredients of that blissfull state,
that we shall be ever with our blessed Lord, as the Apostle expresses it, 1
These. 4.17. for herein it is evident, the same Apostle places one great
advantage of the future state, Phil. 1.23. and indeed it is impossible, but it
must be a vast addition to the happiness of all virtuous and greatfull Souls,
to see this their blessed Friend and Benefactor, who came down from the Bosom
of his Father, and for their sakes exposed himself to a miserable life and
death; to see him sitting at his Father's Right Hand, Crowned with Majesty and
Honor, surrounded with the whole Quire of Angels and Saints, like a Sun in the
midst of a circle of Stars, for lovers mutually partake of each others joys and
sorrows; and therefore as the lovers of Jesus, when they saw him hanging on the
Cross, covered with wounds and blood, with scorn and undeserved Infamy,
sympathized with him in all his sorrows, participated the shame of all his
Reproaches, felt every Pain and Agony he endured, echoed to every sigh and
groan he breathed; so when they behold him on the Throne of Heaven, shining
with Glory and Honor, and surrounded with infinite pleasures and delights,
they sympathize with him also in all his happiness, they rejoice in his joys,
exult in his glories, and triumph in his exaltation; so that his happiness is a
common bank, in which all the Inhabitants of Heaven have a share, and every joy
he feels strikes every heart throughout all the Assembly of his happy lovers:
for how can any grateful Soul forbear being ravished at the sight of his
happiness, when she considers how she was healed by his stripes, and glorified
by his Humiliation? But when this best Friend of Souls shall not only permit me
to see his Happiness, but also introduce me into it, when his blessed mouth
shall bid me welcome, and pronounce my Euge bone serve, Well done good and
profitable Servant, enter into thy Masters joys, what tongue can express the
Heaven of joy it must needs create in me! O blessed Jesu, how inconceivably
happy will that day be, when I, who am loaded with so many vast obligations to
love thee, shall be introduced into thy presence, to see thy glory, and
sympathize in thy joy, as thou did in my misery; to thank and praise thee
face to face for all those wonders of love with which thou have obliged me, and
to bear a part in that Heavenly Song, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to
receive power and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and
blessing, who have redeemed us unto God by thy blood, out of every Kindred, and
Tongue, and People, and Nations, Rev. 9.12.

4. Eternal life also includes a most delightful converse and society with
Angels, and glorified Spirits; for when we come to the City of the living God,
the Heavenly Jerusalem, the Apostle tells us what our Society will be there,
viz. The innumerable company of Angels, the general Assembly and Church of the
first born, God the judge of all the spirits of just men made perfect, and
Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, Heb. 12.22, 23, 24. As for our Society
with God and Jesus, you have already heard, and as for all the rest, it
consists of Angels, and the departed Spirits of good men, which being stripped of
all those imperfections which they carried about them during their abode in
these Earthly Tabernacles, have nothing remaining in them but what is Pure, and
Heavenly, and Divine, nothing of Folly or Error, reserve our disguize,
peevishness or dissimulation nothing but wisdom, and love, candor and
integrity, openness and freedom, and in a word nothing but what indears their
Conversation, and renders it unspeakably pleasant, profitable and obliging; for
their understandings are all light, and their wills and affections all virtue
and goodness, and as the one furnishes them with the best matter of
Conversation, so the other disposes them to the most obliging manner: for
though we know not the way in which they converse and communicate their
thoughts and minds to each other, yet there is no doubt but Souls can talk with
Souls, and mutually impress their thoughts upon each other, without these
Corporeal Organs, as well as with them; when therefore Souls, which have such
vast treasures of knowledge in their minds, and such ample perfections of
goodness in their wills, are linked together in Society, what an amiable
conversation must they enjoy with each other, when they have all the Philosophy
of God's Nature, Creation and Providence, all the Miracles of his love; and
Mysterious contrivances of his Wisdom lying open before them? What a noble,
fragrant, and boundless Field of Discourse have they to entertain each other,
and when their hearts are all united in the most perfect Charity, and their
affections mutually interlinked with the most obliging Graces, with what
freedom and confidence, with what unspeakable satisfaction and complacency must
they impart their noble thoughts to each other, and empty the rich treasures of
their knowledge into one another minds? for the Members of this blessed
Society being all of them both great Philosophers, and perfect Friends, there
can be nothing that is foolish or impertinent, false or erroneous on the one
hand, nothing that is peevish, or contentious, morose or offensive on the
other, intermingled with their Conversation, but Wisdom must be the sole
entertainment of it, and love and mutual endearments the welcome. O what a
blessed alteration therefore will there be in our Conversation when we leave
this wrangling and impertinent world, and associate our selves with that
glorious Assembly of wise and perfect Lovers! where we shall freely converse
with Angels and Archangels, with the Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles, and
with all those great and gallant Souls that were here Renowned for their Piety
and Goodness, and be familiarly entertained by them with all the deep
Philosophy of Heaven; where all those ineffable things which St. Paul saw and
heard in his rapture, shall be freely unfolded to us in the Colloquies of
Saints and Angels, and our minds shall be thoroughly initiated into all those
wondrous Mysteries which Eye never saw, nor Ear heard, and which never entered
into the heart of Man to conceive; and in a word, where we shall live in
perfect friendship, and love and be beloved with infinite ardour and sincerity,
and all our conversation with those blessed People shall be an everlasting
interchange of wise and holy indearments.

5. Eternal life also includes the glory and delightfulness of the place where
all these blessed things are enjoyed, for though the state of the blessed be
sufficiently glorious to transform the most dismal place into a Paradise, and
to create a Heaven of light and joy in the darkest Dungeon of Hell, yet such is
the goodness of God, as to prepare a place for us proportionably glorious to
this happy state, which according to the Scripture account is the highest
Heaven, or the upper and purer tracts of the Ether, where there is everlasting
day, and a perpetual calm and serenity; for so our Savior tells the Penitent
Thief, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, Luke 23.43. and where this
Paradise is, St. Paul informs us, 2. Cor. 12. for v. 2. he tells us of his
being rapt into the third Heaven, which in the 4 th v. he calls Paradise, where
he heard those ineffable words; now that by the third Heaven, he means the
uppermost, viz. the Heaven of Heavens, which is the Seat of God's glorious
Schechina, or special presence is evident by this, because according to the
Jewish Philosophy, to which he here alludes, Heaven was divided into three
Regions, viz. the Cloud-bearing, the Star-bearing, and the Angel bearing
Region, the last of which they called the third Heaven, in which they placed
the Throne of the Divine Majesty, and that by Paradise he means the same place,
is evident, because by this name the Jews, in whose language he speaks, were
wont to call the third Heaven; for so Rab. Menachem on Leviticus tells us, It
is apparent that the great reward of our Obedience is not to be enjoyed in this
life; Verum post dissolutionem justus adipiscitur regnum quod dicitur
Paradisus, fruiturque conspectu divino, i. e. But after death the just shall
arrive at the Kingdom which is called Paradise, and there enjoy the beatifical
Vision, and therefore is this Heavenly Region of Angels called by the name of
Paradise, in allusion to the Earthly Paradise of Eden, denoting to us, that as
that was the Garden of this lower world, as being a spot of ground abounding
with pleasures and delights beyond all other places; so this is the Garden of
the whole Creation, the most beautiful and delightful Region, within all the
vast spaces of the world; nor can we imagine it otherwise, considering that
it is the place which the great Monarch of the World has chosen above all
others for his Imperial Court and special Residence, and prepared to receive
the glorified Humane Nature of his only begotten Son, and to entertain his
Friends and Favorites for ever; for if these Out Rooms of the World are so
Royal and Magnificent, how infinitely splendid must we needs imagine the
Presence Chamber of the great King, whose presence like a glorious Sun,
irradiates and gilds it all over with a bright and everlasting day?

Although therefore the Scripture has no where given us a full description of
this blissfull place, because perhaps the glory of it is such as transcends all
humane expression; yet since God erected it on purpose to be the everlasting
Seat and Mansion of his Adopted Heirs of Glory, we have all the reason in the
world to conclude that he has exquisitely furnished it with all accommodations
requisite for a most happy and blissfull life, and that the House is every way
suitable to the entertainment: whenever therefore any pure and virtuous Soul
is released from this Cage of Mortality, away it flies under the Conduct and
Protection of good Angels through the Air and Ether beyond the firmament of
Stars, and never stops, till it is arrived at those blessed Abodes, on the top
of all the Heavens, where God and Jesus, and Saints, and Angels dwell. And O
with what unspeakable delight will it contemplate that new seen of things,
when as soon as it is entered into that bright Empire of eternal day, it sees it
self surrounded with infinite Splendour and Glory; so that which way soever it
casts its Eyes, it is entertained with new objects of wonder and delight, which
being such as will infinitely surpass its biggest expectations, will force it
to cry out as the Queen of Sheba did when she saw the Magnificence of Solomon's
Court, it was a true report indeed which I heard of this blessed place in the
world I came from, howbeit, now I am come, and mine Eyes have seen it, I am
sensible that not the half was told me, its glory and magnificence infinitely
exceeding the fame which I heard of it!

Sixthly and lastly, The complement of this Eternal life is, that it is
eternal; for so, John 6.27. Christ calls his Doctrine the meat which indures
unto eternal life, and in the 40 th v. he tells them, that 'twas his Father's
will, that they who believed on him should have everlasting life, but because
everlasting, and for ever does in Scripture sometimes denote a long but not an
endless duration, therefore he has taken care to express this Article in such
words as must necessarily denote an endless duration of bliss, for he has not
only told us in John 6.50. that they who believe his Doctrine shall not die,
but that whosoever lives and believes in him shall never die, John 11.26.
yea, and not only so, but that they shall never see death, John 8.51. i. e.
shall never come within the prospect or danger of dying; in Luke 20.36. he
tells them not only that they shall not, but that they cannot die any more, for
they are equal unto the Angels; now what a mighty addition must this make to
the joys of the blessed, that they are such as shall never expire, but endure
as long as God, and run parallel with Eternity, that ^hey are not measured by
moments or hours, by years or centuries, or myriads, or Indictions, but shall
run on in an everlasting flux of duration, every part whereof is equally,
because infinitely distant from a period? for when time like fire has devoured
all it can prey on, it shall at last die it self, and go out into Eternity, the
nature of which is such, as that after we have lived most blessedly Millions of
Millions of Ages, our Happiness shall be as far from an end as when it first
began, for our lives and our happiness shall be Coeternal, our God shall live
for ever, and we shall live for ever to enjoy him, and in the enjoyment of such
an infinite good we need not doubt to find variety enough still to renew our
pleasures, and keep them fresh and flourishing for ever; for as we shall always
know God, so we shall always know him more and more, and every new beauty that
Infinite Object discovers to us, like the diversified Refractions of the same
sparkling Diamond, shall yield our minds fresh pleasures for ever, and kindle a
new flame of love in us, and that a new rapture of joy, and that a new desire
of knowing and discovering more; and so continually round again, there will be
knowing, loving, and rejoicing more and more for ever, so that our happiness
will be so immense, as that we shall need, as well as have an Eternity to enjoy
it fully. Now what an unspeakable pleasure must it be for the happy Soul thus
to reflect upon her own condition! O blessed for ever be the good God, I am as
happy now as ever my heart can hold, every part of me is so thronged with joys,
that I have no room for any more, and that which completes and crowns 'em all
is, that they shall never, never end, but still flow on to everlasting ages;
and the farther they flow, the more they shall swell and increase. And now
having finished this short and imperfect description of this happy state of
eternal life, I shall conclude with some Inferences from the whole.

1. Hence I infer how much reason we have to be contented and satisfied under
all the present afflictions of this life. For shall we receive so much good at
the hands of God as everlasting life implies, and not be contented to receive
some evil? When our good Father has provided for us a Crown of endless bliss
and glory hereafter, with that conscience or modesty can we complain of these
little paternal castigations he inflicts on us here, especially considering,
that the great design of all his present severities is to prepare and
discipline us for that heavenly state, that by all these dismal Providence, he
is only training us up for a Crown, fitting, instructing and disposing us to
reign with himself in glory for ever? Can any thing be unwelcome to us that is
in order to so blessed an end? Can any Physic be nauseous or distasteful, that
is prescribed to recover us into such an happy immortality? No, doubtless every
thing that leads heavenwards, though never so grievous, is a blessing; and all
these kind severities, that tend to our eternal welfare, are favors for which
we are bound to praise and adore the goodness of Heaven for ever. When
therefore we find our selves inclined to complain under our present
afflictions, let us lift up our eyes to yonder blessed regions, and consider
the joys and triumphs, the crowns and pleasures that do there await us; and how
necessary these bitter trials are to prepare us for, and waft us to them; and
if this does not stop our mouths, and silence our complaints for ever, nay if
it does not cause us to rejoice in our tribulations, and thank God for them on
our bended knees, if it does not make us cheerfully submit, and say, Ure, seca,
vulnera, Lord, cut, or wound, or burn me if thou see fit, strip me of all my
dearest comforts, handle me as severely as thou please, so I may have but my
fruit unto holiness, and my end everlasting life: If, I say, we do not thus
acquiesce in our present sufferings, upon the consideration of that bliss they
tend to, we are infinitely foolish and ungrateful; for it is but a little while
ever all these storms will be composed into an everlasting calm, ever all these
dismal clouds will vanish, and an eternal day break forth upon us, whose
brightness shall never be obscured with the least spot or relic of darkness;
and when that blessed time comes, Lord, how trifling and inconsiderable will
all our present griefs appear! With that contempt shall we reflect upon our
present cowardice and meanness of spirit, that could not bear, without
murmuring, a few incoveniencies on the road to such an immortal heaven of
pleasures! Wherefore if our voyage be not so pleasant as we would have it, let
us remember it is not long, we have but a short days sail to an eternity of
happiness, and when once we are landed on that blessed shore, with what
ravishing content and satisfaction shall we look back on the rough and
boisterous Seas we have past, and for ever bless the storms and winds that
drove us to that happy port: then will the remembrance of these light
afflictions serve only as a Foil and Anti-mask to our happiness, to set off
its joys, and render them more sweet and ravishing. Let us therefore comfort
our selves with these things, and when at any time our spirits are sinking
under any worldly trouble, consider that while we have a Heaven to hope for, we
can never be miserable; for so long as we are fortified with this mighty hope,
our minds will be impregnable against all foreign events, and its peace and
comfort, maugre all afflictions from without, will shine as undisturbedly as
the lights of Pharos in the midst of storms and tempests.

2. Hence I infer what a vast deal of reason we have to slight and contemn this
world. For it is plain, that we are born to infinitely greater hopes than any
this world can afford us, even to the hopes of everlasting life; and being so,
methinks, our ambition should soar as high as our hopes, and disdain such low
and ignoble quarries as the pleasures, and profits, and honors of this life.
Certainly, Sirs, we mistake the scene of our eternity, or imagine it to be
removed from Heaven to Earth, or else we are most strangely besotted, who when
we are born to live for ever above, in the most ravishing glory and happiness,
can suffer our selves to dote upon this world, and to be so strangely bewitched
by its deluding vanities. O could we but stand awhile in the midway between
Heaven and Earth, and at one prospect see the glories of both; how faint and
dim would all the splendours of this world appear to us in comparison with
those above! how would they sneak and disappear in the presence of that eternal
brightness, and be forced to shroud their vanquished glories as Stars do when
the Sun appears! And whilst we interchangeably turned our eyes from one to
the other, with what shame and confusion should we reflect upon the wretched
grovelling temper of our own minds, what poor mean-spirited creatures we are to
satisfy our selves with the impertinent trifles of this world, while we have
all the joys of an everlasting Heaven before us; and may, if we please, after a
few moments obedience, be admitted into them, and enjoy them for evermore! O
foolish creatures that we are, thus to prefer a far Country, where we live on
nothing but husks, before the everlasting festivities of our Father's house,
where the meanest guest has bread enough and to spare! to choose
Nebuchadnezzar's fate, and leave Crowns and Sceptres, to live among the salvage
herds of the Wilderness; could but the blessed Saints above divert so much from
their more happy employments, as to look down a little from their Thrones of
Glory, and see how busy poor mortals are a scrambling for this wretched pelf,
which within a few moments they must leave for ever; how they justle and
rancounter, defeat, defraud and undermine one another; what a most ridiculous
spectacle would it appear to them! with what scorn would they look on it, or
rather with what pity, to see a company of heaven-born Souls, capable of, and
designed for the same degree of glory and happiness with themselves, grovelling
like Swine in dirt and mire! one priding it self in a gay suit, another hugging
a bag of glistering earth, a third stewing and dissolving it self in luxury and
voluptuousness, and all employed at that poor, and mean, and miserable rate, as
might justly make those blessed Spirits ashamed to own their kindred and
alliance with us. To tell you truly and seriously my thoughts, I cannot
imagine, but if when we are thus extravagantly concerned about the pitiful
trifles of this world, those blessed Spirits do indeed see and converse with
us; it is a much more ludicrous and ridiculous spectacle in their eyes, to see
us thus foolishly concerned and employed, than 'twould be in ours, to see a
company of boys with mighty zeal and concern wrangling and scrambling for a bag
of Cherry-stones: Wherefore in the Name of God, Sirs, let us not expose our
selves any longer to the just derision of all the world by our excessive dotage
upon the vanities of this life; but let us seriously consider that we are all
concerned in matters of much higher importance, even in the unspeakable
felicity of an everlasting life.

3. Hence I infer how unreasonable a thing it is for good men to be afraid of
dying, since just on the other side the Grave, ye see, there is a state of
endless bliss prepared to receive and entertain them; so that to them Death is
but a dark entry out of a Wilderness of sorrow, into a Paradise of eternal
pleasure; And therefore if it be an unreasonable thing for sick men to dread
their recovery, for Slaves to tremble at their Jubilee, or for Prisoners to
quake at the news of their Jail-deliver; how much more unreasonable is it for
good men to be afraid of Death, which is but a momentary passage from sickness
to eternal health, from labor to eternal rest, and from close confinement to
eternal liberty! For God's sake consider, Sirs; What is there in this world
that ye are so fond of it? what in the other, that ye are so afraid of it?
Suppose that now your Souls were on the wing, mounting toward the celestial
Abodes, and that at some convenient stand between Heaven and Earth, from whence
ye might take a prospect of both, ye were now making a pause to survey and
compare them with one another; that having viewed over all the glories above
you, tasted the beatifical joys, and heard the ravishing melodies of Angels; ye
were now looking down again, with your minds filled with those glorious Idea's
upon this miserable world, and that all in a view ye beheld the vast numbers of
men and women, that at this time are fainting for want of bread, of young men
that are hewn down by the sword, of Orphans that are weeping over the Graves
of their Fathers, of Mariners that are shrieking out in a storm, because their
Keel dashes against a Rock, or Bulges under them; of people that are groaning
upon sick beds, or wracked with agonies of conscience, that are weeping with
want, mad with oppression, or desperate with too quick a sense of a constant
infelicity; would ye not, do ye think, upon such a review of both states, be
infinitely glad that ye were gone from hence, that ye are out of the noise and
participation of so many evils and calamities? would not the sight of the
glories above, and of the miseries beneath, make you a thousand times more
fearful of returning hither, than ever ye were of going hence? Yes, doubtless
it would, why then should not our sense of the miseries here, and our belief of
the happiness there, produce the same effect in us; make us willing to remove
our quarters, and exchange this Wilderness for that Canaan? It Is true indeed,
the passage from one to the other is commonly very painful and grievous; but
what of that? in other cases we are willing enough to endure a present pain, in
order to a future ease; and if a few mortal pangs will work a perfect cure on
me, and recover me to everlasting health and life, methinks the hope of this
blessed effect should be sufficient to indear that agony, and render it easy
and desirable: But alas! to die, is to leave all our acquaintance, to bid adieu
to our dearest friends and relatives, to pass into an unknown state, to
converse with strangers, whose laws and customs we are not acquainted with: Why
now all that looks sad in this is a very great mistake; for I verily hope that
I have more friends and relatives in Heaven, than I shall leave behind me here
on Earth; and if so, I do but go from worse friends to better; for one friend
there is worth a thousand here, in respect of all those indearing
accomplishments, that render a friend a Jewel: But if I die a good man, I shall
carry into eternity with me the genius and temper of a glorified spirit, and
that will recommend me to all the society of Heaven, and render the spirits of
those just men, whose name I never heard of, as dear friends to me in an
instant, as if they had been may ancient Cronies and acquaintance: But why
should I grieve at parting with my friends below, when I shall go to the best
friends I have in all the world; to God my Father, to Jesus my Redeemer, to the
Holy Ghost my constant Comforter and Assistant? And what though that state, and
the laws and customs of it be in a great measure unknown to me? yet what I know
is infinitely desirable. From whence I may reasonably infer, that what I know
not is so too, and if I have but the temper of Heaven, I am sure I shall easily
comply with the heavenly laws and customs of it; so that in the whole, I cannot
imagine why any good man that seriously believes the doctrine of a blessed
immortality, and has a just well-grounded hope of being made partaker of it
when he dies, should be so loath to leave this wretched world. I do not deny but
the circumstances of our affairs in this life are many times such as may justly
excuse even a good man's unwillingness to die, some great opportunities of
doing good may present themselves, and invite him to stay a little longer, or
his having begun his repentance late, or not having made a competent provision
for his family, may for awhile justify his unwillingness to depart; but unless
it be in these excepted cafes, I can hardly reconcile our hopes of happiness,
with our fear of death. For when I am verily persuaded, that death is only a
narrow stream running between time and eternity, and I see my God and my
Savior with Crowns of Glory in their hands, beckoning to me from the farther
shore, calling to me to come over, and receive those happy recompenses of my
industry and labor, that I like a naked, timorous boy, should stand shivering
on this bank of time, as if I were afraid to dip my foot in the cold stream of
Fate, which as soon as I am in, I am past, and in the twinkling of an eye will
land me on eternal bliss; is such an extravagant inconsistency, as [if I did
not feel it in me] I should never believe I could be guilty of.

4. Fourthly and lastly, Hence I infer, what unspeakable encouragement we have
to endeavor after that Universal Righteousness, which intitles us to this
blessed state of eternal life; since God has proposed such a vast reward to
encourage and animate our industry, how can we account any work hard, of which
Heaven is the wages? how can we faint in our Christian race when we see the
Crown of Glory hang over the Goal? Methinks this should be enough to infuse
life and spirit into the most crest-fal'n Soul, to make Cripples run, and
convert the most sneaking Coward into a bold and magnanimous Hero. For how
much pains do we ordinarily take upon far less hopes? in hope of a little
transitory wealth, which we know we shall enjoy but a few years, and then part
with for ever; we thrust our selves into a perpetual crowd, and tumult of
businesses, where with vast concern and thoughtfulness, with eager and
passionate prosecutions, with endless brawls and contentions, with restless
justlings, and rancountring one another, we toil and weary out our selves, and
make our lives a constant drudgery; and shall we flag when Heaven is the object
of our prosecutions, who are so active in the pursuit of trifles? Whenever
therefore we find our endeavors in Religion begin to tire, and droop, let us
lift up our eyes to the Crown of Glory; and if we are capable of being moved by
objects of the greatest value, that must infuse new vigor into us, and make us
all life, and spirit, and wing; for what though my way lies up the hill, and
leads me along through thorns and precipices, so that I am fain to sweat at
every step, and every ascent is a new toil to me? yet when I am up, I am sure
to be entertained with such pleasant gales, and glorious prospects, as will
fully recompense all my labor in climbing thither, there with an over-joyed
heart I shall sit down and bless my toils; O blessed be ye my bitter agonies,
and sharp conflicts; for ever blessed be ye my importunate prayers, and
well-spent tears; for now I am fully repaid for you all, and do reap ten
thousand times more joys from you, than ever I endured pains: For what are the
pains of a moment, to the pleasures of an eternity? Wherefore hold out my faith
and patience yet a little longer, and your work will soon be at an end; and
after a few laborious weekdays, you shall keep an everlasting Sabbath. What
though my voyage lie through a stormy Sea, yet it is to the Indies of happiness,
and a few Leagues farther lies the blissfull Port, where I shall be Crowned as
soon as I am landed. Go on therefore, O my Soul, with thy utmost courage and
alacrity, for let the winds bluster, and the waves swell never so much, yet
thou can not miscarry unless thou will, thou art not like other passengers,
left to the mercy of wind and weather, but thy fate is in thy own hands; and if
thou will have but thy fruit unto holiness, thy end shall be everlasting life;
Which God of his infinite mercy grant, etc.

And so much shall suffice for the Text, I shall now only crave your patience,
while I speak a few words of the sorrowful occasion, viz. the Funeral of our
Deceased Brother Dr. Croun, who whilst he lived, was not only a Friend, but an
Ornament to the whole Race of Mankind, and whose breathless Carcass, to which
we are now rendering the last Offices of Friendship, was e'erwhilst the seat of
a mind so exalted, and a Nature so refined, as that had it but a few equals
scattered through the world, they might go far toward the retrieving the
forfeited reputation of our degenerate kind; for as for his Understanding, it
was a very learned University of Knowledge, wherein Languages, and Arts, and
Sciences flourished, and every thing almost was comprehended that deserves the
name of Learning, he was a general Scholar, as all his Learned Acquaintance
will testify, an accurate Linguist, an acute Mathematician, a well read
Historian, and a profound Philosopher, and in that laborious course he had run
through the whole Circle of Learning; he contented not himself with a slight
and cursory view of the several parts of it, but took a full prospect of them
all, and was aliquis in singulis, as well as in omnibus; and as for that
learned profession to which God's Providence determined, and his own Genius
more particularly addicted him; though I verily believe England abounds with as
many great and eminent Professors of it as ever any Age or Nation produced;
yet in this bright constellation Dr. Croun will be acknowledged by all that
know and understood him, a star of the first magnitude, for besides the deep
and accurate insight he had in the frame and structure of Humane Bodies, of
which he gave such abundant proof in his Learned Anatomical Lectures, besides
his large and comprehensive knowledge of the Virtues and Qualities of
Medicaments, and of the Natures and Symptoms of Diseases, the Theory of which
he had vastly cultivated and improved by a long, a curious, and well-digested
Experience; besides these things, I say, he was a very generous and careful
Practitioner, for though his Practice was very large among those of the better
Rank and Quality, yet his Ears were always open to the Cries and Complaints of
the Poor, to whom he always Administered with as much care and consideration
for Pity and for Charity sake, as ever he did to to the Rich for the most
generous reward sake; for the life of a Man was so dear and precious to him,
that he esteemed the very saving it to be a much greater reward than the
largest Fee, like the great Physician of Souls, he had a tender sympathy with
his Patients in all their Griefs and Diseases, and his own Natural Compassion
did so much interest him in their sorrows and dangers, that'twas a mighty ease
to himself to ease and relieve them, so that the Physician and the Patient
commonly languish'd and recovered together, and as his Skill and his Care were
equally great, so was his success answerable to both; for though he himself be
gone, yet he has left behind him many a living Monument of himself, who cannot
but acknowledge with Gratitude to his Memory, that under God they owe the
breath which they now draw, to the skill and experience of this great
Aesculapius. And as he had an excellent mind, so he had a lovely and amiable
temper, a temper in which there was nothing but what was highly indearing,
nothing that was stormy or tempestuous, rough or sower, imperious or insolent,
false or malicious, humorous or fantastic, but was altogether compounded of
the best and sweetest ingredients of kindness and benignity, of modesty and
humility, of courtesy and affability, and in a word, and every good thing that
good Nature implies; his passions were always sober, and his Appetites
temperate, his Conduct was very prudent, but yet very punctual and honest, his
Conversation was innocent and cheerful, and facetious, and his Carriage was
grave, but yet gentile and obliging. In short, he had all the Wit of a good
Poet, all the temper of a Philosopher, and all the good humor of a Well-bred
Gentleman. This he was in himself, we will now briefly consider him in his
several Relations, as he was a Creature, and so related to God. I have very
often heard him express a very serious and awful sense of the Divine Majesty,
and particularly upon his Deathbed not many hours before his departure, where
he heartily thanked God that he had well weighed and considered the course of
his life, and the final issues and events of his actions, and with a very
serious cheerfulness resigned up himself into God's hands and disposal,
professing himself to be very well content to live or dye, as God in his
Wisdom should think it most expedient, desiring me to pray with him and for
him. As he was a Husband -- Alas, the tears of his sorrowful Relict do but too
loudly proclaim how good, and how kind he was; and in such an indearing
Relation, what less could be expected from so good a nature: For here all his
natural sweetness and benignity, which ordinarily diffused it self through the
whole sphere of his activity, was contracted and united in one point or center,
and so was rendered more intense and vigorous by its union. The Holy Scripture
tells us, that the Husband and the Wife are one flesh; but here one would have
thought they had been one Soul too, for they had all the same likings and
dis-likings, the same joys and sorrows, the same pains and pleasures; such
perfect Unizons were their hearts, that whatever Note one struck, the other
ecchoed and resounded it; so that what the good Portia said to her dear Brutus,
this happy pair might have truly said to each other, (...), I am the partner of
thy fortunes, and have an equal share with thee in all that thou suffer or
enjoyest. As he was a Master, the lamentations of his Servants, for the share
they had in the loss of him, sufficiently demonstrates his great kindness and
goodness to them; his whole Family, which while he was well, did always wear
sprightly and cheerful looks, upon the sad news that there was no hope of his
recovery, was presently converted into a House of Mourning, and every
countenance was changed, as if they had all been sentenced to die with their
Master. Once more consider him as a Neighbor, he was public good to the place
where he lived; and like a rich field of Spices, he scattered his perfumes
throughout all the Neighborhood, where upon every call and invitation he was
ready to do good, and freely contributed his best skill and care, to all that
needed and requested it. Thus while he lived. Dr. Croun was a public good, and
a great and eminent Benefactour to the World; so that his loss is like the
breaking up of a Common treasury, in which we had all of us a share: and
accordingly ye see, that though his kindred and alliance was not very large,
yet by the lamentations that are made for him, one would think he had been the
Father of some very populous Tribe; for I dare say, that for these many years
there has not been seen a more sorrowful Funeral within the Walls of this
City than this we are now celebrating; and it is but fit and decent, that he who
while he lived, was a common friend to Mankind, should be attended to his Grave
with a common sorrow; and that we who survive him, and were so much beholding
to him, should now pay our debts to his Memory with our Tears; but if we would
be benefited by his Memory, as we were by his Life, let us remember his
excellent Virtues and Accomplishments so as to imitate and transcribe them to
follow his Example in all the good things he did; and if we knew any evil, to
shun and avoid it: by thus doing we shall convert his Memory into Medicine, and
render him as good a Physician to our Souls now he is dead, as he was to our
Bodies whilst he was living, and so improve our present loss into our
everlasting advantage. Which God of his infinite Mercy grant; to whom be
Honor, and Glory, and Power, and Majesty, and Dominion for ever, Amen.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THere is lately Printed a Sermon preached before the Lord Mayor, by the same
Author, on Prove. 24.21. And meddle not with them that are given to change.

There is also in the Press a Second Part of the Christian Life, by the same
Author, which will be suddenly published.


