A Scourge for a Fool: OR AN ANSWER TO A Late Scandalous Piece of Nonsense,
ENTITLED, A Hue and Cry after the Bishop of ELY.
IT was my Chance the other day, to meet with an Absurd Pamphlet, as void of
Wit as of Honesty, Entitled, A Hue and Cry after the B. of E -- and reading
the Title, my Curiosity led me to view the Paper it self; and having read it
over, I found it so full of Hyperbolous Slanders, Scurrilous Railings, Odious
Epithets, Base Aspertions, and in such a true Billingsgate Dialect, and
Alsatian Style, that I soon discovered the Author to be a true Son of Zantippe,
an accomplished Interloping Scribler, who fancies himself a more than ordinary
Wit; but I fancy the contrary; and am sure, whatever his Wit may be, he has no
more Honesty than he should have.

He first makes Proclamation, and tells you in no less than Eight the most
Odious Words that Malice could invent, that the B. of E. has lately withdrawn
himself, and is gone God knows whether: But if it be so, yet (under favor Mr.
Hue and Cry) it does not behove you to reflect upon him in such an Odious
manner; do you think (Reason guiding you) that a Man of his Birth, Education,
Learning and Parts, and which ought to be Esteemed by every considerate Man, a
Man of that Sacred Order, ought to be Scandalized by every Buffooning Scribler,
that understands no more in Divinity than a Horse does in Grammar; and who is
no deeper Learned than Esop's Fables; nor in Poetry than just to make a Ballad:
Such ill-minded Men as these swarm in the City, and their Actions are
intolerable.

Then he tells you, if any Body (in an Antic Deriding Method names several)
will bring the B. Alive to Justice, they shall have 5000 French Crowns Reward.
Indeed I admire he had the Modesty to stop here, and not cry Dead or Alive,
that somebody might have Murdered him and brought his Head; but being in haste
when he wrote the Hue and Cry, (as you know Men generally are) forgot to put
that word Dead into it. But first I would fain know by what Authority he
Published this Scandalous Pamphlet: And secondly, who will pay this 5000
Crowns? O Scandalum Magnatum! What Distractions are likely to be in a
Government, when such base Men thus odiously abuse the Members! What Divisions
may such Pamphlets cause, and what would not some Men do for Lucre sake!

In the next place, Least you should mistake the Person, he undertakes to
describe him to you in his proper Colors, which this Scandalous Scribler tells
you, are as Changeable as his Religion and Allegiance: And calls this Reverend
Prelate Grand Incendiary of Credulous Bigotism: And now, says the Crier, you
will see the Pretended Father of the Holy Word, transformed into a Bully of the
Sword.

And now let any Man, void of Partiality, judge whether these things be
sufferable in a Government: If he has offended, let him answer it himself to
the Government, who have Power to Examine and Punish Offenders according to
their Demerits; but let not such little Writers meddle with things of this
nature, (which are as far out of their Sphere as common Sense is) and not abuse
a Prelate with such unbeseeming Epithets, odious Names, and Rail at so
desperate a Rate, that it makes a Modest Man, or a Man that has common
Civility, blush to read it. I admire where this little Writer learned this
Character of the B. I am certain it is only a Devilish Invention of a Malicious
Mind, induced to do it, partly out of Envy, and partly for Gain; for I
Challenge this little Crier, and all the Men in England, to prove that the B.
ever changed his Religion, (as this Imposture affirms) for he was Born from his
Cradle, and is still, a Protestant of the Church of England; and I dare him,
and all his Brother Cryers about Town, to prove the contrary.

In the next place our Crier falls to Railing again, and calls the B.
Imposture, Shame to his Order, etc. and tells you, that you will find the B. in
the Habit of a Soldier, Armed Cap-a-pe, with Embroidered Coat, Fringed Scarf,
and Scarlet Feather, in this Equipage he tells you he was met upon the Road,
going to appear Propria Person in France. If it be so, I desire Mr. Hue and
Cry to let me know who met him in this Garb, at what Place and Time, and why
they did not Seize him, as a Revolter from the Government; but (because you
should mind the Man is a Scholar) he tells you he is gone in Propria Persona,
to St. Lewis and St. James. Indeed Mr. Hue you might have altered your Cry, and
told us the Bishop was met upon the Roadibus, upon a Horsibus, going for
Francibus, and so have told all your Tale in Latin.

Now comes a Description of his Phisiognomy, here he Spits his Venom again,
giving the most Odious Description of him that his Malice could invent, and in
a Parenthesis tells you, that the B. had on a Flaxen Perriwig: Monstrous
Hyperboler! see thy own words and Blush. And then he tells you the greatest
Improbability in the World, viz. That he loves to shelter himself under the
Wings of Tyranny and Popery. It is apparent that he is no Admirer of Popery, as
was evident when the late K. James sent him to the Tower; and I durst engage my
Life, that he would sooner loose his than turn Papist; but Malice never speaks
well.

Then this Crier sets up his Notes and says, That in Parliament time he was
commonly Crowding in the Court of Requests, or Lobby of the House of Lords,
Fawning on some Debauchee, or Atheistical Bravo. It is well known that the B.
was a Pious Man, and took as much Pains in Preaching, Expounding, etc. and used
it as frequently, and with as much Zeal and Care, and endeavored to promote
Religion as much as any Man in England; and yet our Reprobate Crier, would
insinuate that he was an Atheist.

And next he says, He was lately Chairman to a Club of Jacobites. O Villainous
Imposture! be ashamed of thy Actions, and Repent, least a worse Evil come upon
thee for thy Impiety: And all that I can imagine you are, is an Interloping
Buffoon, an Atheistical, Papistical, Anabaptistical, Non-Scholastical, Mystical
Ignoramus, that will Reform, Conform, Inform, or be of any Form for your
Interest; either learn more Wit and Honesty, or else leave off Scribbling, and
if you do not, I shall certainly Expose your Folly.

LONDON, Printed by G. Croom at the Blue Ball in Thames Street, for W. Rayner,
1691.


