Imprimatur,

G. Jane.

Aug. 18. 1676.

THE Life of God IN THE Soul of Man.

OR, The Nature and Exceliency of the Christian Religion; With the Method of
attaining the Happiness it proposes.

AND An Account of the Beginnings and Advances of a Spiritual Life.

In Two LETTERS written to Persons of Honor.

Ephesians. 4. 18. Alienated from the Life of God.

Gal. 2. 20. I am Crucified with Christ; Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me.

Romans 8. 14. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of
God.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Smith at the Angel near the Inner-Temple-Gate in
Fleet Street; And William Jacob at the Black-Swan next Bernards Inn in
Holbourn, 1677.

Preface.
THis Age groans under such a surcharge of new Books, that though the many good
ones lately published do much balance the great swarms of ill, or at least
needless ones; Yet all men complain of the unnecessary charge and trouble many
new Books put them to: the truth of it is, Printing is become a Trade, and the
Presses must be kept going, so that if it were but to shufle out an ill Book, a
man may be tempted to keep them at work.

And for Books of Devotion and Piety, we have seen so many excellent ones of
late in our own Language, that perhaps no Age or Language can show the like; in
these the Christian Religion is proposed in its own True and Natural Colors,
and rescued from those salse Representations many are apt to make of it: As if
it consisted either in External Performances, or in Mechanical Heats of the
Fancy, or in embracing some Opinions or Interests. It is and can be nothing
else but a Design to make us like God both in the Inward temper of our Minds,
and in our whole deportment and conversation. For this end did Christ both live
and dye; this he taught by his Discourses, and discovered in his Life. He died
that he might take away sin, not only or chiefly to procure our Pardon, which
was done by him for a further end; that a Universal Indemnity being offered
through his Death, all mankind might be thereby encouraged to enter into a
course of holy Obedience with all possible advantages, having the hopes of
Endless happiness, and the fears of Eternal miseries before them: having the
clearest Rule, and the most unblemished Example proposed to them; being also
sure of constant Inward supplies to support and strengthen their endeavors,
and an Unerring Providence to direct all things that concern them. Nor are
there any Precepts in this whole Doctrine, whose fitness and true excellency,
besides the Authority of the Lawgiver, has not been fully made good. And the
truth of the Principles of Natural Religion, and of the Revelation of the
Council of God in Scripture was never since Miracles ceased, demonstrated with
fuller and clearer evidence then in our Age, both for stopping the mouths of
all daring Hectors, and for silencing the secret doubtings of more Inquisitive
Minds. And though so grave a subject should have been rather prejudiced then
adorned by Artificial and forced strains of Wit or Eloquence, yet as our
Language was never chaster than now, so these Subjects have been handled with
all the proper decencies of easy Wit and good Language.

But after all this, into what a torrent of regrates and lamentations must me
break out, when we consider the Age we live in. For few do either believe or
reflect on those great things. And as if there were a general Conspiracy
against God and Religion, how does the greater part among us break loose from
all the ties and bonds of that Yoke that is light and casie, and inslave
themselves to many base and hurtful lusts and passions: And are not satisfied
with being as bad as they can be, but desire that all the world may esteem them
such, and glory in their shame; and inhance their guilt by turning factors for
hell, studying to corrupt all about them. This sad prospect must needs deeply
affect all that either truly love God, or have a tender compassion for the
Souls of Men, and will certainly set them to their secret mournings and
wrestlings with God to avert the heavy Judgments that seem to hang over our
heads; and that he may of his great mercy turn the hearts of the froward and
disobedient to the wisdom of the just.

And till God arise and bless his Gospel with more of this success, nothing
could be such an effectual Mean for convincing the World of the Truth and
Excellence of our most holy Faith, as that those who profess and embrace it did
walk in all the strictness of a most holy Innocent and Exemplary Life; keeping
the due mean between the affectation of morossness and hypocrisy, and the
levities of irreligion and folly. This is the only argument that is wanting to
convince the World of the truth of our Religion; all people are more wrought on
by lively Examples set before their eyes, than by any discourses or reasonings
how strong or convincing soever. The one is more easily apprehended, and leaves
a deeper Impression then the other, which does not prevail on us till by
frequent and serious reflections we be satisfied about them, and when we hear
any one speak well, we are not assured he thinks as he says, but do often
suspect he is showing his Wit or Eloquence to our cost, that he may persuade us
into some Opinions that may prove gainful to himself: but when we see a man
pursuing a constant course of holiness in the most painful Instances which do
most prejudice his Visible Interests, we have all reason to believe he is in
good earnest persuaded of those truths which engage him to such a Conversation.

After the Ages of Miracles, nothing prevailed so much on the World as the
exemplary Lives and the painful Martyrdoms of the Christians, which made all
sorts of people look with amazement on that Doctrine that wrought so powerfully
on all ranks, and did raise persons of the meanest Educations and Dispositions,
and of the weaker Sex and tenderer Age; to do and suffer beyond what their
greatest Heroes and most celebrated Philosophers had ever done. And in those
days the Apologists for the Christian Religion did appeal to the lives of the
Christians to prove their Doctrine holy, concluding that there could be nothing
but good in that Doctrine that made all its Votaries such. But alas! when we
write Apologies we must appeal from the Lives of most that pretend to be
Religious, to the Rules and Precepts of our most holy Faith, and must decline
the putting the trial of Christianity upon that issue; and though thanks be to
God there are beautiful and shining Instances of the power of Religion among
us, yet alas there be too few of them, and they lie hid in a vast mixture of
others that are naught.

The two great prejudices the Tribe of Libertines and Ruffians are hardened in
against Religion, are 1. that they do not see those that profess they believe
the truths of Religion, live like men that do so in good earnest: and I have
known them say, That did they believe the great God governed all humane
affairs, and did know all we do, and were to call us to an account for it, and
reward or punish accordingly in an endless and inchangeable state, they could
not live as the greater part of Christians do, but would presently renounce all
the vanities and follies of this World, and give themselves up wholly to a holy
and exact course of life. The other prejudice is, That for those in whose
deportment they find little to blame, yet they have great cause of suspecting
there is some hid design under it, which will break out when there is a fit
opportunity for it. And they conclude, that such persons are either secretly as
bad as others, only disguising it by a decenter deportment, or that all they do
is a force upon themselves for some secret end or other. And if there be some
on whom they can fasten neither of these (as it is hardly possible but one that
is resolved to possess himself with prejudices, will either find or pretend
some colors for them) then at last they judge such persons are moross and
sulien, and find either from the disposition of their Body or their Education
as much satisfaction in their sour gravity, as others do in all their wanton
and extravagant follies.

These prejudices, especially the first, must be discussed by real
Confutations, and the strict conduct of our lives, as well as our grave and
solemn devotions must show we are overruled by a strong belief of the
authority of that Law which governs our whole actions. Nor will our abstaining
from gross Immoralities be argument enough, since even decency may prevail so
far (though alas never so little as now when fools do so generally mock at the
shame and sense of sin, as if that were only the peevishness of a strict and
illiberal education) but we must abstain from all those things that are below
the gravity of a Christian, and strengthen a corrupt generation in their Vices.
What signifies endless gaming, especially when joined with so much avarice and
passion as accompany it generally, but that people know not to dispose of their
time, and therefore must play it away idly at best. What shall be said of those
constant crowds at Plays (especially when the Stage is so defiled with Atheism,
and all sorts of Immorality) but that so many persons know not how to fill up
so many hours of the day, and therefore this contrivance must serve to wast
them, and they must feed their eyes and ears with debauching objects, which
will either corrupt their Minds, or at least fill their Imaginations with very
unpleasant and hateful representations. As if there were not a sufficient
growth of ill thoughts ready to spring up within us, but this must be
cultivated and improved by Art. What are those perpetual visits in the giving
or receiving of which most spend the better half of the time in which they are
awake: And how trifling at best, but generally how hurtful the discourses that
pass in those visits are, I leave to those who live in them to declare. How
much time is spent in vain dressing, (not to mention those indecent Arts of
Painting, and other contrivances to corrupt the World) and all either to feed
vanity or kindle lust. And after all this, many that live in these things
desire to be thought good Christians, are constant to Church and frequent at
the Sacrament. What wonder then if our Libertines seeing such things in persons
that pass for very Religious, and having wit enough to discern that such a
deportment does not agree with the belief of an account to be made for all we
do, conclude they do not believe that, otherwise they would not behave
themselves as they do. Some failures now and then could not justify such an
Inference, but a habit and course of those things is an argument against the
reality of that belief which I confess I cannot answer.

But when we have got so far as to escape those things that are blameworthy,
it is far from being all we must aim at; it is not enough not to be ill; we
must be good, and express it in all the instances which our state of life and
circumstances call for. Doing good to all, forgeving injuries, comforting all
in trouble, supplying the necessities of the poor; but chiefly studying to
advance the good of all peoples souls as much as we can; improving whatever
Interest we have in any persons to this end of raising them to a sense of God
and another Life; The chief motive we offer to this, being the unaffected
strictness of our own deportment, which will make all our discourses have the
greater weight and force in them.

And for the other prejudices, it is true, there is no fence or security
against Jealousy, yet we ought carefully to avoid every thing may be an
occasion of it, as all secret converse with suspected persons, the doing any
thing that without sin we may forbear, which is singular, or may bring a
dis-esteem on others, or make us be observed or talked of: And in a word, to
shun all forced gestures, or modes of speech, and every thing that is not
native and genuine. For let men think what they will, nothing that is
constrained can ever become so natural, but it will appear loathsome and
affected to others: which must needs afford matter of jealousy and dis-esteem,
especially to all prying and Critical observers.

Were there many who did live thus, the Atheists would be more convinced, at
least more ashamed and out of countenance then the most learned Writings or
labored Sermons will ever make them: Especially if a spirit of Universal Love
and goodness did appear more among Christians, and those factions and
animosities were laid aside, which both weaken the inward vitals of holiness,
and expose them to the scorn of their Adversaries, and make them an easy prey
to every aggressor. There is scarce a more unaccountable thing to be imagined,
then to see a Company of Men professing that Religion, a great and main precept
whereof is mutual love, forbearance, gentleness of spirit, and Compassion to
all sorts of persons, and agreeing in all the essential parts of that Doctrine,
differing only in some less material and more disputable things, yet maintain
those differences with a Zeal so disproportioned to the value of them,
prosecuting all that disagree from them with all possible violence, or if they
want means to use outward force, with all bitterness of Spirit. This must needs
astonish every Impartial beholder, and raise great prejudices against those
persons Religious, as made up of Contradictions, professing love, but breaking
out in all the acts of hatred.

But the deep sense I have of these things has carried me too far, my design in
this Preface being only to Introduce the following Discourse, which was written
by a Pious and Learned Countreyman of mine, for the private use of a Noble
Friend of his, without the least design of making it more public. Others
seeing it, were much taken both with the Excellent purposes it contained, and
the great clearness and pleasantness of the Style, the natural Method and the
shortness of it, and desired it might be made a more public good. And knowing
some Interest I had with the Author, it was referred to me, whether it should
lie in a private Closet, or be let go abroad. I was not long in suspense,
having read it over, and the rather knowing so well as I do, that the Author
has written out nothing here but what he himself did well feel and know, and
therefore it being a Transcript of those divine Impressions that are upon his
own heart, I hope the Native and unforced genuineness of it will both more
delight and edify the Reader. I know those things have been often discoursed
with great advantages both of Reason, Wit and Eloquence, but the more Witnesses
that concur in sealing these Divine Truths with their Testimonies, the more
evidence is thereby given.

It was upon this account that the Author having seen a Letter written by a
Friend of his to a Person of great Honor, but of far greater Worth, of the
rise and progress of a Spiritual Life (wherein as there were many things which
he had not touched so in those things of which they both discourse, the harmony
was so great, that he believed they would mutually strengthen one another) was
earnest with his Friend that both might go abroad together, and the other
pressing him to let his Discourse be published, he would not yield to it unless
he granted the same consent for his.

And so the Reader has both, the one after the other, which he is desired to
peruse with some degrees of the same seriousness in which they were both
penned, and then it is presumed he will not repent him of his pains.

ERRATA.
P. 23. l. 4. for is read are. p. 76. l. 20, for but r. when. p. 81. l. ult,
after be r. as.

Page 5. l. 8 for love r. have. p 6. l. 19. put a point after it, p. 16. l. 7.
for Implored r. Employed. p. 19. l. 26. for Calumnies r. Calmness. p. 26. l. 5.
dele as and r. it after that. p. 29. l. 25. for forced r. formed. p. 59. for of
r. as.

The LIFE of GOD IN The SOUL of MAN.
My Dear Friend,
THis designation does give you The Occasion of this Discourse.
a Title to all the Endeavors whereby I can serve your Interests; and your
Pious Inclinations do so happily conspire with my Duty, that I shall not need
to step out of my road to gratify you; but I may at once perform an office of
Friendship, and discharge an exercise of my Function, since the advancing of
Virtue and Holiness (which I hope you make your greatest study) is the peculiar
business of my Employment: This therefore is the most proper instance wherein I
can vent my affection, and express my gratitude toward you, and I shall not
any longer delay the performance of what promise I made you to this purpose:
for though I know you are provided with better helps of this nature, then any I
can offer you; nor are you like to meet with any thing here which you knew not
before, yet I am hopeful, that what comes from one whom you are pleased to
honor with your Friendship, and which is more particularly designed for your
use, will be kindly accepted by you, and God's Providence perhaps may so direct
my thoughts, that something or other may prove useful to you. Nor shall I doubt
your pardon, if for moulding my discourse into the better frame, I lay a low
foundation, beginning with the Nature, and Properties of Religion, and all
along give such way to my thoughts in the prosecution of the subject, as may
bring me to say many things which were not necessary, did I only consider to
whom I am writing.

I cannot speak of Religion, but I Mistakes about Religion.
must regrate that among so many pretenders to it, so few understand what it
means; some placing it in the Understanding, in Orthodox Notions and Opinions,
and all the account they can give of their Religion, is that they are of this
or the other persuasion, and have joined themselves to one of those many Sects
whereinto Christendom is most unhappily divided: Others place it in the outward
man, in a constant course of external duties, and a model of performances, if
they live peaceably with their Neighbors, keep a temperate diet, observe the
returns of Worship, frequenting the Church, or their Closet, and sometimes
extend their hands to the relief of the Poor, they think they have sufficiently
acquitted themselves: Others again put all Religion in the affections, in
rapturous heats, and extatick devotion, and all they aim at, is to pray with
passion, and think of Heaven with pleasure, and to be affected with those
kind, and melting expressions wherewith they court their Savior, till they
persuade themselves that they are mightily in love with him, and from thence
assume a great confidence of their salvation, which they esteem the chief of
Christian Graces. Thus are these things which have any resemblance of Piety,
and at the best are but means for obtaining it, or particular exercises of it,
frequently mistaken for the whole of Religion: nay sometimes Wickedness and
Vice pretends to that name; I speak not now of those gross Impieties wherewith
the Heathens were wont to worship their Gods; there are but too many Christians
who would consecrate their vices, and hallow their corrupt affections, whose
rugged humor, and sullen pride must pass for Christian severity, whose fierce
wrath, and bitter rage against their enemies must be called holy zeal, whose
petulancy toward their Superiors, or rebellion against their Governors must
have the name of Christian courage and resolution.

But certainly Religion is quite another What Religion is.
thing, and they who are acquainted with it, will entertain far different
thoughts, and disdain all those shadows and false imitations of it: They know
by experience that true Religion is an Union of the Soul with God, a real
participation of the Divine Nature, the very Image of God drawn upon the Soul,
or in the Apostle's phrase, it is Christ formed within us. Briefly, I know not
how the nature of Religion can be more fully expressed than by calling it a
Divine Life; and under these terms I shall discourse of it, showing first how
it is called a Life, and then how it is termed Divine.

I choose to express it by the name Its Permanency and Stability.
of life, first because of its permanency and stability: Religion is not a
sudden start, or passion of the Mind, not though it should rise to the height
of a rapture, and seem to transport a man to extraordinary performances. There
are few but have convictions of the necessity of doing something for the
salvation of their Souls, which may push them forward some steps, with a great
deal of seeming have; but anon they flagg and give over; they were in hot mood,
but now they are cooled; they did shoot forth fresh and high, but are quickly
withered, because they had no root in themselves. These sudden fits may be
compared to the violent and convulsive motions of Bodies newly beheaded, caused
by the agitations of the animal spirits, after the Soul is departed, which
however violent and impetuous, can be of no long continuance; whereas the
motions of holy Souls are constant and regular, proceeding from a permanent,
and lively principle. It is true, this Divine life continues not always in
that same strength and vigor, but many times suffers sad decays, and holy men
find greater difficulty in resisting temptations, and less alacrity in the
performance of their duties; yet it is not quite extinguished, nor are they
abandoned to the power of these corrupt affections, which sway and overruled
the rest of the world. Its freedom and unconstrainedness.


Again, Religion may be designed by the name of Life, because it is an inward,
free, and self-moving principle, and those who have made progress in it, are
not acted only by external Motives, driven merely by threatenings, nor bribed by
promises, nor constrained by Laws; but are powerfully inclined to that which is
good, and delight in the performance of it: The love which a Pious man carries
to God, and goodness, is not so much by virtue of a Command enjoining him so to
do, as by a new Nature instructing and prompting him to it; nor does he pay his
devotions, as an unavoidable tribute only to appease the Divine Justice, or
quiet his clamorous Conscience; but those Religious exercises are the proper
emanations of the divine life, the natural employments of the new born Soul; he
prays and gives thanks, and repents, not only because these things are
commanded, but rather because he is sensible of his wants, and of the Divine
goodness, and of the folly and misery of a sinful life; his charity is not
forced, nor his alms extorted from him, his love makes him willing to give; and
though there were no outward obligation, his heart would devise liberal things:
injustice or intemperance, and all other vices, are as contrary to his temper,
and constitution, as the basest actions are to the most generous spirit, and
impudence and scurrility to those who are naturally modest: so that I may well
say with St. John, Whosoever 1 John 3. 9.
is born of God does not commit sin: for his seed remains in him, and he
cannot sin because he is born of God. Though holy and religious persons do much
eye the Law of God, and have a great regard unto it, yet is it not so much the
sanction of the Law, as its reasonableness, and purity and goodness which does
prevail with them; they account it excellent and desirable in its self, and
that in keeping of it there is great reward: and that Divine Love wherewith
they are acted, makes them become a Law unto themselves.

Quis legem det amantibus?
Major est amor lex ipse sibi.
For who can give a Law to those that love?
Love's a more powerful Law which does such persons move.
In a word, what our blessed Savior said of himself, is in some measure
applicable to his followers, that it is their meat and drink to do their
Father's Joh. 4. 34.
will: and as the natural appetite is carried out toward food, though we should
not reflect on the necessity of it for the preservation of our lives; so are
they carried with a natural and unforced propension toward that which is good
and commendable. It is true, external motives are many times of great use to
excite and stir up this inward principle, especially in its infancy and
weakness, when it is often so languid, that the man himself can scarce discern
it, hardly being able to move one step forward, but when he is pusht by his
hopes, or his fears, by the pressure of an affliction, or the sense of a mercy,
by the authority of the Law, or the persuasion of others: Now if such a person
be conscientious and uniform in his obedience, and earnestly groaning under the
sense of his dullness, and is desirous to perform his duties with more spirit,
and vigor: these are the first motions of the divine life, which though it be
faint, and weak, will surely be cherished by the influences of Heaven, and grow
unto greater maturity: but he who is utterly destitute of this inward
principle, and does not aspire unto it, but contents himself with those
performances whereunto he is prompted by Education or custom, by the fear of
Hell, or carnal notions of Heaven, can no more be accounted a religious person,
than a Puppit can be called a Man. This forced and artificial religion is
commonly heavy and languid, like the motion of a weight forced upward, it is
cold and spritless, like the uneasy compliance of a wife married against her
will, who carries dutifully toward the husband whom she does not love, out of
some sense of Virtue or Honor: Hence also this religion is scant and
niggardly, especially in those duties which do greatest violence to men's carnal
inclinations, and those slavish spirits will be sure to do no more, than is
absolutely required, it is a Law that compels them, and they will be loath to go
beyond what it stints them to, nay, they will ever be putting such glosses on
it, as may leave themselves the greatest liberty; whereas the Spirit of true
Religion is franck and liberal, far from such peevish and narrow reckoning; and
he who has given himself entirely unto God will never think he does too much
for him.

By this time I hope it does appear, Religion a Divine Principle.
that Religion is with a great deal of reason termed a Life or vital principle,
and that it is very necessary to distinguish betwixt it, and that obedience
which is constrained, and depends on external causes: I come next to give an
account why I designed it by the name of divine life, and so it may be called,
not only in regard of its fountain and original, having God for its Author, and
being wrought in the Souls of men by the power of his Holy Spirit; but also in
regard of its nature, Religion being a resemblance of the Divine perfections,
the Image of the Almighty shining in the Soul of Man: nay it is a real
participation of his Nature, it is a beam of the Eternal Light, a drop of that
Infinite Ocean of goodness, and they who are eudued with it, may be said to
have God dwelling in their Souls, and Christ formed within them.

Before I descend to a more particular What the Natural Life is.
consideration of that Divine Life wherein true Religion does consist, it will
perhaps be fit to speak a little of that natural or animal Life which prevails
in those who are strangers to the other: and by this I understand nothing else,
but our inclination and propension toward those things which are pleasing and
acceptable to Nature: or self-Love issuing forth and spreading it self into as
many branches as men have several appetites and inclinations: The root and
foundation of the animal life I reckon to be Sense taking it largely, as it is
opposed unto Faith, and imports our perception and resentment of things, that
are either grateful or troublesome unto us. Now those animal affections
considered in themselves, and as they are implanted in us by nature, are not
vicious or blameable; nay they are instances of the Wisdom of the Creator
furnishing his Creatures with such appetites as tend to the preservation and
welfare of their lives: these are instead of a Law unto the brute Beasts,
whereby they are directed toward the ends for which they were made; but Man
being made for higher purposes, and to be guided by more excellent Laws,
becomes guilty and criminal when he is so far transported by the inclinations
of this lower Life, as to violate his duty, or neglect the higher and more
noble designs of his creation: Our natural affections are not wholly to be
extirpated and destroyed, but only to be moderated and overruled by a
superior and more excellent principle: In a word, the difference betwixt a
religious and wicked man, is, that in the one the Divine life bears sway, in
the other the animal does prevail.

But it is strange to observe unto The different tendencies of the natural life.
what different courses this natural principle will sometimes carry those who
are wholly guided by it, according to the diverse circumstances that concur with
it to determine them: and the not considering this does frequently occasion
very dangerous mistakes, making men think well of themselves by reason of that
seeming difference which is betwixt them and others, whereas perhaps their
actions do all the while flow from one and the same original. If we consider
the natural temper, and constitution of men's Souls, we shall find some to be
airie, frolic and light, which makes their behavior extravagant and
ridiculous; whereas others are naturally serious and severe, and their whole
carriage composed into such gravity as gains them a great deal of Reverence and
Esteem: some are of an humurous, rugged, and morose temper, and can neither be
pleased themselves, nor endure that others should be so; but all are not born
under such sour and unhappy Stars, for some persons have a certain sweetness
and benignity rooted in their natures, and they find the greatest pleasure in
the endearments of Society, and the mutual complacency of Friends, and covet
nothing more than to have every body obliged to them: And it is well that
Nature has provided this complectional tenderness to supply the defect of true
charity in the world, and to incline men to do something for one another's
welfare. Again, in regard of Education some have never been taught to follow
any other rules, than those of Pleasure or Advantage; but others are so enured
to observe the strictest rules of decency and honor, and some instances of
Virtue, that they are hardly capable of doing any thing which they have been
accustomed to look upon as base and unworthy.

In fine, it is no small difference in the deportment of mere natural men that
does arise from the strength or weakness of their Wit or Judgment, and from
their care or negligence in using them: intemperance, and lust: injustice and
oppression, and all those other impieties which abound in the world, and render
it so miserable, are the issues of self-love, the effects of the animal life,
when it is neither overpowered by Religion, nor governed by natural reason; but
if it once take hold of reason, and get judgment and wit to be of its party, it
will many times disdain the grosser sort of vices, and spring up unto fair
imitations of Virtue and Goodness: if a man have but so much reason as to
consider the prejudice which intemperance and inordinate lust does bring unto
his health, his fortune and his reputation, self-love may suffice to restrain
him: and one may observe the rules of Moral Justice in dealing with others, as
the best way to secure his own interest, and maintain his credit in the world.
But this is not all, this natural principle by the help of reason may take a
higher flight, and come nigher the instances of Piety and Religion: it may
incline a man to the diligent study of Divine Truths: for why should not these
as well as other speculations be pleasant and grateful to curious and
inquisitive humors: it may make men zealous in maintaining and propagating such
opinions as they have espoused, and be very desirous that others should submit
unto their Judgment, and approve the choice of Religion, which themselves have
made: it may make them delight to hear and compose excellent discourses about
the matters of Religion; for Eloquence is very pleasant whatever be the
subject: nay some it may dispose to no small height of sensible devotion: the
glorious things that are spoken of Heaven may make even a carnal heart in love
with it: the Metaphors and Similitudes made use of in Scripture of Crowns and
Scepters, and Rivers of pleasure, etc. will easily affect a man's fancy, and
make him wish to be there, though he neither understand nor desire those
spiritual pleasures which are described and shadowed forth by these: and when
such a person comes to believe that Christ has purchased these glorious things
for him, he may feel a kind of tenderness and affection toward so great a
Benefactor, and imagine that he is mightily inamoured of him, and yet all the
while continue a stranger to the holy temper and spirit of the Blessed Jesus,
and so instead of a Deity he may embrace a cloud: and what hand the natural
constitution may have in the rapturous devotions of some melancholy persons,
has been excellently discovered of late by several Learned and Judicious Pens.

To conclude, there is nothing proper to make a man's life pleasant, or himself
eminent and conspicuous in the World, but this natural principle assisted by
Wit and Reason may prompt him to it: and tho I do not condemn these things in
themselves, yet it concerns us nearly to know and consider their nature, both
that we may keep within due bounds, and also that we may learn never to value
our selves, on the account of such seize, nor lay the stress of Religion
upon our natural appetites or performances.

It is now time to return to the consideration Wherein the Divine Life does
consist
of that Divine Life whereof I was discoursing before, that life which is hid
with Christ in God, and therefore has no glorious show or appearance in the
world, and to the natural spirit will seem a mean and insipid notion. As the
Animal life consists in that narrow and confined love which is terminated on
a man's self, and in his propension toward those things that are pleasing to
Nature; So the Divine Life stands in an universal and unbounded affection, and
in the mastery over our natural inclinations, that they may never be able to
betray us to those things which we know to be blamable: The root of the divine
life is Faith, the chief branches are Love to God, Charity to Man, Purity, and
Humility: For (as an Excellent Person has well observed) however these names
be common and vulgar, and make no extraordinary sound, yet do they carry such a
mighty sense, that the tongue of Man or Angel can pronounce nothing more
weighty or excellent. Faith has the same place in the Divine life which Sense
has in the natural, being indeed nothing else, but a kind of sense, or feeling
persuasion of Spiritual things: It extends it self unto all Divine Truths; but
in our lapsed estate, it has a peculiar relation to the declarations of God's
mercy and reconcileableness to Sinners through a Mediator, and therefore
receiving its denomination from that principal object is ordinarily termed,
Faith in Jesus Christ.

The Love of God is a delightful and affectionate sense of the Divine
perfections, which makes the Soul resign and sacrifice it self wholly unto him,
desiring above all things to please him, and delighting in nothing so much as
in fellowship and communion with him, and being ready to do or suffer any thing
for his sake, or at his pleasure: though this affection may have its first rise
from the Favors and Mercies of God toward our selves, yet does it in its
growth and progress transcend such particular considerations, and ground it
self on his infinite goodness manifested in all the Works of Creation and
Providence. A Soul thus possessed with Divine Love, must needs be enlarged
toward all Mankind in a sincere and unbounded, affection because of the
relation they carry unto God being his Creatures, and having something of his
Image stamped upon them: and this is that Charity I named as the second branch
of Religion, and under which all the parts of Justice, all the duty's we owe to
our Neighbor are eminently comprehended: for he who does truly love all the
world will be nearly concerned in the interests of every one, and so far from
wronging or injuring any person, that he will resent any evil that befalls to
others, as if it happened to himself.

By Purity, I understand a due abstractedness from the body, and mastery over
the inferior appetites: or such a temper and disposition of mind, as makes a
man despise and abstain from all pleasures and delights of sense or fancy which
are sinful in themselves, or tend to extinguish or lessen our relish of more
divine and intellectual pleasures, which does also infer a resoluteness to
undergo all those hardships he may meet with in the performance of his duty: so
that not only Chastity and Temperance, but also Christian Courage and
Magnanimity may come under this head.

Humility imports a deep sense of our own meanness, with a hearty and
affectionate acknowledgment of our owing all that we are to the Divine Bounty,
which is always accompanied with a profound submission to the Will of God, and
great deadness toward the glory of the world, and applause of men.

These are the highest Perfections that either Men or Angels are capable of,
the very foundation of Heaven laid in the Soul, and he who has attained them
needs not desire to pry into the hidden Rolls of God's Decrees, or search the
Volumes of Heaven to know what is determined about his everlasting condition,
but he may find a Copy of God's Thoughts concerning him written in his own
breast: his love to God may give him assurance of God's favor to him, and
those beginnings of happiness which he feels in the conformity of the powers of
his Soul to the Nature of God, and compliance with his Will, is a sure pledge
that his felicity shall be perfected, and continued unto all Eternity: And it
is not without reason that one said, I had rather see the real impressions of a
Godlike Nature upon my own Soul, then have a Vision from Heaven, or an Angel
sent to tell me that my name were enrolled in the Book of Life.

When we have said all that we can, Religion better understood by actions, than
by words.
the secret Mysteries of a new Nature, and Divine Life can never be
sufficiently expressed, language and words cannot reach them; nor can they be
truly understood but by those Souls that are enkindled within, and awakened
unto the sense and relish of Spiritual things, There is a spirit in man, and
the inspiration of the Almighty gives this understanding: The power and life
of Religion may be better expressed in actions than in words, because actions
are more lively things, and do better represent the inward principle whence
they proceed, and therefore we may take the best measure of those gracious
indowments, from the deportment of those in whom they reside, especially as
they are perfectly exemplified in the holy life of our Blessed Savior, a main
part of whose business in this world was to teach by his practice what he did
require of others, and to make his own conversation an exact resemblance of
those unparalleled Rules which he prescribed: So that if ever true Goodness was
visible to mortal eyes, it was then when his presence did beautify and
illustrate this lower world.

That sincere and devout Affection Divine Love exemplified in our Savior.
wherewith his Blessed Soul did constantly burn toward his Heavenly Father, did
express it self in an entire resignation to his Will, it was this was his very
meat to do the will, and finish the work of him that sent him; this was the
exercise of his Childhood, and the constant employment of his riper age; he
spared no travail or pains while he was about his Father's business, but took
His Diligence in doing Gods Will.
such infinite Content and Satisfaction in the performance of it, that when
being faint and weary with his Journey he rested him on Jacob's Well, and
entreated a drink of the Samaritane Woman, the success of his Conference with
her, and the accession that was made to the Kingdom of God, filled his Mind
with such delight, as seemed to have redounded to his very Body, refreshing his
spirits, and making him forget the thirst whereof he complained before, and
refuse the meat which he had sent the Disciples to buy: Nor was he less patient
and submissive His Patience in bearing it.
in suffering the Will of God, then diligent in doing of it: he endured the
sharpest Afflictions, and extremest Miseries that ever were inflicted on any
mortal, without a-repining thought, or discontented word: for tho he was far
from a stupid insensibility, or a fantastic or Stoical obstinacy, and had as
quick a sense of pain as other men, and the deepest apprehension of what he was
to suffer in his Soul (as his Bloody Sweat, and the sore amazement and sorrow
which he professed do abundantly declare) yet did he entirely submit to that
severe dispensation of Providence, and willingly acquiesced in it.

And he prayed to God, that if it were possible (or as one of the Evangelists
has, if he were willing) that Cup might be removed; yet he gently added,
nevertheless not my will but thine be done. Of what strange importance are the
expressions, Joh. 12. 27. where he first acknowledges the anguish of his
spirit ( Now is my Soul troubled) which would seem to produce a kind of
demurre, ( And what shall I say,) and then he goes to deprecate his Sufferings,
( Father, save me from this hour;) which he had no sooner uttered, but he does,
as it were, on second thoughts recall it in these words, But for this cause
came I into the world; and concludes, Father glorify thy Name. Now we must not
look on this as any levity, or blameable weakness in the Blessed Jesus, he knew
all along what he was to suffer, and did most resolutely undergo it; but it
shows ns the unconceiveable weight and pressure that he was to bear, which
being so afflicting and contrary to Nature, he could not think of without
terror; yet considering the Will of God, and the glory which was to redound to
him from thence, he was not only content but desirous to suffer it.

Another instance of his Love to God, His constant Devotion.
was his delight in conversing with him by Prayer, which made him frequently
retire himself from the world, and with the greatest Devotion and Pleasure
spend whole Nights in that Heavenly Exercise, though he had no sins to confess,
and but few secular Interests to pray for; which alas! are almost the only
things that are wont to drive us to our devotions: nay, we may say his whole
Life was a kind of Prayer, a constant course of Communion with God: if the
Sacrifice was not always offering, yet was the fire still kept alive: nor was
ever the Blessed Jesus surprised with that dullness or tepidity of spirit which
we must many times wrestle with, before we can be fit for the exercise of
devotion.

In the second place I should speak His Charity to men.
of his Love and Charity toward men; but he who would express it, must
transcribe the History of the Gospel, and comment upon it, for scarce any thing
is recorded to have been done or spoken by him which was not designed for the
good and advantage of some one or other; all his Miraculous Works were
instances of his Goodness as well as his Power, and they benefited those on
whom they were wrought, as well as they amazed the beholders. His Charity was
not confined to his Kindred, or Relations; nor was all his kindness swallowed
up in the endearments of that peculiar friendship which he carried toward the
beloved Disciple, but every one was his Friend who obeyed his holy Commands,
Joh. 15. 4. and whosoever did the will of his Father, the same was to him as
his Brother, and Sister and Mother.

Never was any unwelcom to him who came with an honest intention, nor did he
deny any request which tended to the good of those that asked it: So what was
spoken of that Roman Emperor, whom for his goodness they called the Darling of
Mankind, was really performed by him, that never any departed from him with a
heavy countenance, except that rich Youth, Mark 10. who was sorry to hear that
the Kingdom of Heaven stood at so high a rate, and that he could not save his
Soul and his Money too; and certainly it troubled our Savior to see that when
a price was in his hand to get wisdom, yet he had no heart to it; the ingenuity
that appeared in his first address, had already procured some kindness for him;
for it is said, And Jesus beholding him loved him: But must he for his sake cut
out a new way to Heaven, and alter the nature of things which make it
impossible that a covetous man should be happy?

And what shall I speak of his meekness, who could encounter the monstrous
ingratitude and dissimulation of that miscreant who betrayed him, in no harsher
terms then these, Judas betrayest thou the Son of Man with a Kiss? What further
evidence could we desire of his fervent and unbounded Charity, then that he
willingly laid down his life even for his most bitter Enemies, and mingling his
Prayers with his Blood, besought the Father that his Death might not be laid to
their charge, but might become the means of Eternal Life to those very persons
who procured it?

The Third Branch of the Divine His Purity.
Life is Purity, which, as I said, consists in a neglect of worldly enjoyments
and accommodations, and a resolute enduring of all such troubles as we meet
with in the doing of our duty: Now surely if ever any person was wholly dead to
all the pleasures of the natural Life, it was the Blessed Jesus, who seldom
tasted them when they came in his way; but never stepped out of his road to seek
them: though he allowed others the comforts of Wedlock, and honored Marriage
with his Presence, yet he chose the severity of a Virgin Life, and never knew
the Nuptial Bed: and though at the same time he supplied the want of Wine with
a Miracle, yet he would not work one for the relief of his own hunger in the
Wilderness: So Gracious and Divine was the temper of his Soul in allowing to
others such lawful gratifications as himself thought good to abstain from, and
supplying not only their more extreme and pressing necessities, but also their
smaller and less considerable wants. We many times hear of our Savior's sighs,
and groans, and tears; but never that he laughed, and but once that he rejoiced
in spirit; so that through his whole Life he did exactly answer that Character
given of him by the Prophet of old, That he was a man of sorrows, and
acquainted with griefs: Nor were the troubles and disaccommodations of his Life
rather his fate than choice, for never did there any appear on the Stage of the
World with greater advantages to have raised himself to the highest secular
felicity: he who could convene such a prodigious number of Fishes into his
Disciples Net: and at another time received that tribute from a Fish which he
was to pay to the Temple, might easily have made himself the richest Person in
the world; nay without any money he could have maintained an Army powerful
enough to have Justled Caesar out of his Throne, having oftener than once fed
Seven Thousand with a few loaves and small fishes: but to show how small esteem
he had of all the Enjoyments in the world, he choosed to live in so poor and
mean a condition, that though the Foxes had holes, and the Birds of the Air had
nests, yet he who was Lord and Heir of all things, had not whereon to lay his
head: He did not frequent the Courts of Princes, nor affect the acquaintance
and converse of great Ones, but being reputed the Son of a Carpenter, he had
Fishermen, and such other poor people for his Companions, and lived at such a
rate as suited with the meanness of that quality.

And thus I am brought unawares to speak of his Humility, the last branch His
Humility.
of the Divine Life, wherein he was a most Eminent Pattern to us, that we might
learn of him to be meek and lowly in heart: I shall not now speak of that
infinite condescension of the Eternal Son of God, in taking our Nature upon
him; but only reflect on our Savior's lowly and humble deportment while he was
in the world. He had none of those sins and imperfections; which may justly
humble the best of men; but he was so entirely swallowed up with a deep sense
of the infinite Perfections of God, that he appeared as nothing in his own
eyes, I mean in so far as he was a Creature. He considered those Eminent
Perfections which shined in his Blessed Soul as not his own but the gifts of
God; and therefore assumed nothing to himself for them, but with the
profoundest humility renounced all pretenses to them: hence did he refuse that
ordinary compellation of Good Master, when addressed to his humane Nature by
one who it seems was ignorant of his Divinity: Why call thou me Good (says
he) there is none good, but God only. As if he had said, The goodness of any
creature (and such only thou take me to be) is not worthy to be named or
taken notice of, it is God alone who is originally and essentially Good. He
never made use of his Miraculous Power for vanity or ostentation; he would not
gratify the curiosity of the Jews with a sign from Heaven, some Prodigious
appearance in the Air: nor would he follow the advice of his Countrymen and
Kindred, who would have had all his great Works performed in the eyes of the
World for gaining him the greater fame; but when his Charity had prompted him
to the relief of the miserable, his humility made him many times enjoin the
concealment of the Miracle; and when the glory of God, and the design for which
he came unto the world, required the publication of them, he ascribed the
honor of all to his Father, telling them, That of himself he was able to do
nothing.

I cannot insist on all the instances of Humility in his deportment toward
men: his withdrawing himself when they would have made him a King, his
subjection not only to his Blessed Mother, but to her husband during his
younger years, and his submission to all the indignities and affronts, which
his rude and malicious Enemies did put upon him, the history of his holy Life
recorded by those who conversed with him, is full of such passages as these:
and indeed the serious and attentive study of it, is the best way to get right
measures of humility, and all the other parts of Religion, which I have been
endeavoring to describe.

But now that I may lessen your trouble of reading a long Letter by making some
pauses in it; Let me here subjoyn a Prayer that might be proper when one who
had formerly entertained some false notions of Religion, begins to discover
what it is.

A Prayer.
INfinite and Eternal Majesty, Author and Fountain of Being and Blessedness,
how little do we poor sinful Creatures know of Thee, or the way to serve and
please Thee? We talk of Religion and pretend unto it; but alas! how few are
there that know and consider what it means? how easily do we mistake the
affections of our Nature, and issues of selflove, for those Divine Graces which
alone can render us acceptable in thy sight? It may justly grieve me to
consider, that I should have wandered so long, and contented my self so often
with vain shadows and false images of Piety and Religion: yet I cannot but
acknowledge and adore thy goodness, who have been pleased in some measure to
open mine eyes, and let me see, what it is at which I ought to aim: I rejoice
to consider what mighty improvements my Nature is capable of, and what a Divine
temper of spirit does shine in those whom thou art pleased to choose, and
causest to approach unto thee. Blessed be thine Infinite Mercy who sent thine
own Son to dwell among men, and instruct them by his Example as well as his
Laws, giving them a perfect Pattern of what they ought to be. O that the Holy
Life of the Blessed Jesus may be always in my thoughts, and before mine eyes,
till I receive a deep sense and impression of those Excellent Graces that
shined so eminently in him, and let me never remit my endeavors till that new
and Divine Nature prevail in my Soul, and Christ be formed within me.

ANd now, my dear Friend, having The Excellency and advantage of Religion.
discovered the nature of True Religion, before I proceed any further, it will
not perhaps be unfit to fix our Meditations a little on the Excellency and
advantages of it, that we may be excited to the more vigorous and diligent
prosecution of those Methods whereby we may attain so great a felicity. But
alas! what words shall we find to express that inward satisfaction, those
hidden pleasures which can never be rightly understood, but by those holy Souls
who feel them? a stranger intermeddleth not Prove. 14. 10.
with their joy. Holiness is the right temper, the vigorous and healthful
constitution of the Soul: its faculties had formerly been enfeebled, and
disordered so that they could not exerce their natural functions: it had
wearied it self with endless tossings, and rollings, and was never able to find
any rest: now that distemper is removed, and it feels it self well, there is a
due harmony in its faculties, and a sprightly vigor possesses every part: the
understanding can discern what is good, and the will can cleave unto it, the
affections are not tied to the motions of Sense, and the influence of External
objects; but they are stirred by more Divine impressions, are touched by a
sense of invisible things.

Let us descend, if you please, into The Excellency of Divine Love.
a nearer and more particular view of Religion in those several branches of it
which were named before: let us consider that love and affection wherewith holy
Souls are united to God, that we may see what Excellency and Felicity is
involved in it. Love is that powerful and prevalent passion, by which all the
faculties and inclinations of the Soul are determined, and on which both its
perfection and happiness does depend. The worth and excellency of a Soul is to
be measured by the object of its love: he who loves mean and fordid things,
does thereby become base and vile; but a noble and well-placed affection does
advance and improve the spirit unto a confirmity with the perfections which it
loves: The images of these do frequently present themselves unto the Mind, and
by a secret force and energie insinuate into the very constitution of the Soul,
and mould and fashion it unto their own likeness: Hence we may see how easily
Lovers or Friends do slide unto the imitation of the person whom they affect,
and how even before they are aware, they begin to resemble them, not only in
the more considerable instances of their deportment, but also in their voice
and gesture, and that which we call their mien and air; and certainly we should
as well transcribe the virtues and inward beauties of the Soul, if they were
the object and motive of our love: but now as all the Creatures we converse
with have their mixture and alloy, we are always in hazard to be sullied, and
corrupted by placing our affection on them: Passion does easily blind our eyes,
that we first approve, and then imitate the things that are blameable in them:
The true way to improve and ennoble our Souls, is by fixing our love on the
Divine Perfections, that we may have them always before us, and derive an
impression of them on our selves, and beholding with open face as in a glass
the glory of the Lord, we may be changed into the same Image from glory to
glory: he who with a generous and holy ambition had raised his eyes toward that
uncreated Beauty and Goodness, and fixed his affection there, is quite of
another spirit, a more excellent and heroic temper than the rest of the world,
and cannot but infinitely disdain all mean and unworthy things, will not
entertain any low or base thoughts, which might disparage his high and noble
pretensions. Love is the greatest and most excellent thing we are masters of,
and therefore it is folly and baseness to bestow it unworthily; it is indeed
the only thing we can call our own, other things may be taken from us by
violence, but none can ravish our love; if any thing else be counted ours, by
giving our love, we give all, in so far as we make over our hearts and wills,
by which we possess our other enjoyments: it is not possible to refuse him any
thing, to whom by love we have given our selves; nay since it is the privilege
of gifts to receive their value from the mind of the giver, and not to be
measured by the event, but by the desire; he who loves may in some sense be
said not only to bestow all that he has, but all things else which may make
the beloved person happy, since he does heartily wish them, and would really
give them, if they were in his power: in which sense it is that one makes bold
to say, That Divine Love does in a manner give God unto himself, by the
complacency it takes in the happiness and perfection of his Nature: But though
this may seem too big an expression, certainly love is the worthiest Present we
can offer unto God, and it is extremely debased when we bestow it another way.

When this affection is misplaced, it does often vent it self, in such
expressions, as point at its genuine and proper object, and insinuate where it
ought to be placed: The flattering and blasphemous terms of adoration, wherein
men do sometimes express their Passion, are the language of that affection
which was made and designed for God: as he who is accustomed to speak to some
great Person, does perhaps unawares accost another with those Titles he was
wont to give to him: But certainly that Passion which accounts its object a
Deity, ought to be bestowed on him who is really so: Those unlimited
submissions, which would debase the Soul, if directed to any other, will exalt
and ennoble it, when placed here: those chains and cords of love are infinitely
more glorious than liberty it self; this slavery is more noble than all the
Empires in the World.

Again, as Divine Love does advance The Advantages of Divine Love.
and elevate the Soul, so it is that alone which can make it happy: the highest
and most ravishing pleasures, the most soiid and substantial delights, the
humane Nature is capable of, are those which arise from the endearments of a
well-placed and successful affection. That which imbitters Love, and makes it
ordinarily a very troublesome and hurtful Passion, is the placing it on those
who have not worth enough to deserve it, or affection and gratitude to requite
it, or whose absence may deprive us of the pleasure of their converse, or their
miseries occasion our trouble: To all these Evils are they exposed, whose chief
and supreme affection is placed on Creatures like themselves; but the Love of
God delivers us from them all.

First, I say, Love must needs be miserable, The worth of the Object.
and full of trouble and disquietude, when there is not worth and excellency
enough in the Object to answer the vastness of its capacity: so eager and
violent a Passion cannot but fret and torment the spirit, when it finds not
wherewith to satisfy its cravings; and indeed so large and unbounded is its
nature, that it must be extremely pinched, and straightened, when confined to any
Creature: nothing below an Infinite Good can afford it room to stretch it self,
and exerce its activity and vigor: what is a little skin-deep beauty or some
small degrees of goodness to match or satisfy a Passion which was made for
God, designed to embrace an Infinite Good: No wonder Lovers do so hardly suffer
any Rival, and do not desire that others should approve their passion by
imitating it: they know the scantness and narrowness of the good which they
love, that it cannot suffice two, being in effect too little for one: Hence
Love which is strong as death occasioneth Jealousy which is cruel as the
grave, the coals whereof, are coals of fire, which has a most violent flame.

But Divine Love has no mixture of this gall: when once the Soul is fixed on
that Supreme and All-sufficient Good, it finds so much perfection and goodness,
as does not only answer and satisfy its affection, but master and overpower
it too: it finds all its love to be too faint and languid for such a noble
object, and is only sorry that it can command no more, it wishes for the
Flammes of a Seraph, and longs for the time when it shall be wholly melted and
dissolved into love: and because it can do so little it self, it desires the
assistance of the whole Creation, that Angels and Men would concur with it in
the admiration and love of those Infinite Perfections.

Again, Love is accompanied with The certainty to be beloved again.
trouble, when it misseth a suitable return of affection: Love is the most
valuable thing we can bestow, and by giving it, we do in effect give all that
we have; and therefore it must needs be afflicting to find so great a gift
despised, that the Present which one has made of his whole Heart, cannot
prevail to obtain any favor for him: Perfect love is a kind of
self-dereliction, a wandering out of our selves, it is a kind of voluntary
death, wherein the lover dies to himself, and all his own interests, not
thinking of them, nor caring for them any more, and minding nothing but how he
may please and gratify the party whom he loves: thus is he quite undone unless
he meet with reciprocal affection, he neglects himself, and the other has no
regard to him; but if he be beloved, he is revived, as it were, and lives in
the soul and care of the person whom he loves, and now he begins to mind his
own concernments, not so much because they are his, as because the beloved is
pleased to own an interest in them: he becomes dear unto himself, because he is
so unto the other.

But why should I enlarge in so known a matter, nothing can be more clear than
that the happiness of Love depends on the return it meets with; and herein the
Divine Lover has unspeakably the advantage, having placed his affection on him
whose Nature is Love, whose Goodness is as Infinite as his Being, whose Mercy
prevented us, when we were his enemies, therefore cannot choose but embrace us,
when we are become his friends: it is utterly impossible that God should hide
his Face, and deny his Love to a Soul wholly devoted to him, and which desires
nothing so much as to serve and please him: he cannot disdain his own Image,
nor the heart in which it is engraven: Love is all the tribute which we can pay
him, and it is the Sacrifice which he will not despise.

Another thing which disturbs the The Presence of the beloved person.
pleasure of Love, and renders it a miserable and disquiet Passion, is absence
and separation from those we love: it is not without a sensible affliction that
friends do part, though for some little time, it is sad to be deprived of that
society which is so delightful, our life becomes tedious, being spent in an
impatient expectation of the happy hour wherein we may meet again: but if death
have made the separation, as sometime or other it must, this occasions a grief
scarce to be parallelled by all the misfortunes of humane life, and wherein we
pay dear enough for the comforts of our friendship. But O how happy are those
who have placed their love on him who can never be absent from them: they need
but to open their eyes, and they shall every where behold the traces of his
Presence and Glory, and converse with him whom their Soul loves; and this
makes the darkest Prison, or wildest Desert, not only supportable; but
delightful to them.

In fine, a Lover is miserable if the That Divine Love makes us partake in an
infinite happiness.
person whom he loves be so: They who have made an exchange of hearts by love,
get thereby an interest in one another happiness and misery: and this makes
Love a troublesome Passion, when placed on Earth. The most fortunate person
has grief enough to mar the tranquillity of his friend, and it is hard to
hold out, when we are attacked on all hands, and suffer not only in our own
person, but in another. But if God were the Object of our Love, we should
share in an infinite happiness without any mixture, or possibility of
diminution: we should rejoice to behold the Glory of God, and receive comfort
and pleasure from all the Praises wherewith Men and Angels do Extol him: It
should delight us beyond all expression to consider, that the Beloved of our
Souls is infinitely happy in himself, and that all his Enemies cannot shake or
unsettle his Throne: That our God is in the Heavens, and does whatsoever he
pleases.

Behold on what sure foundations his happiness is built, whose Soul is
possessed with Divine Love, whose will is transformed into the Will of God, and
whose greatest desire is that his Maker should be pleased: O the peace, the
rest, the satisfaction that attends such a temper of mind!

What an infinite pleasure must it He that loves God finds sweetness in every
dispensation.
needs be, thus as it were to lose our selves in him, and being swallowed up in
the overcoming sense of his goodness, to offer our selves a living Sacrifice
always ascending unto him in flammes of love: never does a Soul know what a
solid Joy and substantial pleasure is, till once being weary of it self, it
renounce all propriety, give it self fully up unto the Author of its being, and
feel it self become a hallowed and devoted thing, and can say from an inward
sense and feeling, My Beloved is mine, (I account all his interest mine own)
and I am his: I am content to be any thing for him, and care not for my self,
but that I may serve him,) a person molded unto this temper, would find
pleasure in all the dispensations of Providence: Temporal Enjoyments would have
another relish, when he should taste the Divine Goodness in them, and consider
them as tokens of Love sent by his dearest Lord and Maker: And chastisements
though they be not joyful but grievous, would hereby lose their sting, the rod
as well as the staff would comfort him: he would snatch a kiss from the hand
that were smiting him, and gather sweetness from that severity: nay he would
rejoice that though God did not the will of such a worthless and foolish
creature as himself, yet he did his own Will, and accomplished his own designs,
which are infinitely more holy and wise.

The Exercises of Religion which to The duties of Religion are delightful to
him.
others are insipid and tedious, do yield the highest pleasure and delight to
Souls possessed with Divine Love: they rejoice when they are called to go up to
the house of the Lord, that they may see his power and his glory, as they have
Psalm. 63. 2.
formerly seen it in his Sanctuary: They never think themselves so happy, as
when, having retired from the world, and gotten free from the noise and hurry
of affairs, and silenced all their clamorous passions, those troublesome guests
within, they have placed themselves in the presence of God, and entertain
Fellowship and Communion with him: they delight to adore his Perfections, and
recount his Favors, and to protest their affection to him, and tell him a
thousand times that they love him, to lay out their troubles or wants before
him, and disburthen their hearts in his Bosom: Repentance it self is a
delightful exercise when it flows from the principle of love, there is a
secret sweetness which accompanies those tears of remofse, those meltings and
relentings of a Soul returning unto God, and regrating its former unkindness:
The heightened endearments of Lovers newly reconciled after some estrangements
of their affections, are a very imperfect shadow and resemblance of this.

The severities of a holy Life, and that constant watch which we are obliged to
keep over our hearts and ways, are very troublesome to those who are only ruled
and acted by an External Law, and have no law in their Minds inclining them to
the performance of their duty; but where Divine Love possesses the Soul, it
stands as Sentinel to keep out every thing that may offend the Beloved, and
does disdainfully repulse those temptations which assault it: it complyeth
cheerfully, not only with explicit Commands, but with the most secret Notices
of the Beloved's pleasure, and is ingenious in discovering what will be most
grateful and acceptable unto him: it makes Mortification and Selfdenial almost
change their harsh and dreadful names, and become easy, sweet and delightful
things.

But I find this part of my Letter swell bigger than I designed, (indeed who
would not be tempted to dwell on so pleasant a Theme) I shall endeavor to
compensate it by brevity in the other Points.

The next Branch of the Divine Life, The Excellency of Charity.
is an Universal Charity and Love: The Excellency of this Grace will be easily
acknowledged; for what can be more noble and generous than a Heart enlarged to
embrace the whole World, whose wishes and designs are levelled at the good and
welfare of the Universe, which considers every man's interest as it is own? He
who loves his Neighbor as himself, can never entertain any base or injurious
thought, or be wanting in expressions of bounty: he had rather suffer a
thousand wrongs, than be guilty of one; and never accounts himself happy, but
when some one or other has been benefited by him: the malice or ingratitude of
men is not able to resist his love; he overlooks their injuries, and pities
their folly, and overcomes their evil with good, and never designs any other
revenge against his most bitter and malicious Enemies, than to put all the
obligations he can upon them, whether they will or not: Is it any wonder that
such a Person be reverenced and admired, and accounted the Darling of Mankind?
This inward goodness and benignity of spirit reflects a certain sweetness and
serenity upon the very countenance, and makes it amiable and lovely: it
inspireth the Soul with a noble resolution and courage, and makes it capable of
enterprising and effectuating the highest things: Those Heroic Actions which
we are wont to read with admiration, have for the most part been the effects of
the Love of ones Country, or of particular Friendships, and certainly a more
extensive and universal affection, must be much more powerful and efficacious.

Again, as Charity flows from a Noble The Pleasure that attends it.
and Excellent temper; so it is accompanied with the greatest Satisfaction and
Pleasure: it delights the Soul to feel it self thus enlarged, and to be
delivered from those disquieting as well as deforming Passions, Malice, Hatred,
and Envy; and become Gentle, Sweet, and Benign: had I my choice of all things
that might tend to my present felicity, I would pitch upon this, To have my
heart possessed with the greatest kindness and affection toward all men in the
World, I am sure this would make me partake in all the happiness of others,
their inward endowments and outward prosperity, every thing that did benefit
and advantage them, would afford me comfort and pleasure: and though I should
frequently meet with occasions of grief and compassion, yet there is a
sweetness in commiseration which makes it infinitely more desirable than a
stupid insensibility: and the consideration of that Infinite Goodness and
Wisdom which governs the world, might repress any excessive trouble for
particular Calamities that happen in it: and the hopes or possibility of men's
after-happiness, might moderate their sorrow for their present misfortunes.
Certainly next to the love and enjoyment of God, that ardent Charity and
affection wherewith blessed Souls do embrace one another, is justly to be
reckoned as the greatest felicity of those Regions above, and did it
universally prevail in the world, it would anticipate that blessedness, and
make us taste of the Joys of Heaven upon Earth.

That which I named as a Third The Excellency of Purity.
Branch of Religion was Purity, and you may remember I described it to consist
in a contempt of sensual Pleasures, and resoluteness to undergo those troubles
and pains we may meet with in the performance of our duty: Now the naming of
this may suffice to recommend it as a most Noble and Excellent Quality: There
is no slavery so base as that whereby a man becomes drudge to his own Lusts;
nor any Victory so glorious as that which is obtained over them: Never can that
person be capable of any thing that is Noble and Worthy, who is sunk in the
gross and feculent pleasures of Sense, or bewitched with the light and airy
gratifications of fancy; but the Religious Soul is of a more Sublime and Divine
temper, it knows it was made for higher things, and scorns to step aside one
foot out of the ways of Holiness, for the obtaining of any of these.

And this Purity is accompanied The Delight it affords.
with a great deal of Pleasure: whatsoever defiles the Soul, disturbs it too;
all impure delights have a sting in them, and leave smart and trouble behind
them: Excess and Intemperance, and all inordinate Lusts, are so much Enemies to
the health of the Body, and the interests of this present life, that a little
consideration might oblige any rational man to forbear them on that very score:
And if the Religious person go higher, and do not only abstain from noxious
pleasures; but neglect those that are innocent, this is not to be looked upon
as any violent and uneasy restraint, but as the effect of better choice, that
their Minds are taken up in the pursuit of more sublime and refined delights,
so that they cannot be concerned in these: any person that is engaged in a
violent and passionate affection, will easily forget his ordinary
gratifications, will be little curious about his diet, or his bodily ease, or
the Divertisements he was wonted to delight in: No wonder then if Souls
overpowered with Divine Love despise inferior pleasures, and be almost ready
to grudge the Body its necessary attendance for the common accommodations of
life, judging all these impertinent to their main happiness, and those higher
enjoyments they are pursuing. As for the hardships they may meet with, they
rejoice in them, as opportunities to exercise and testify their affection: and
since they are able to do so little for God, they are glad of the honor to
suffer for him.

The last Branch of Religion is Humility; The Excellency of Humility.
and however to vulgar and carnal eyes this may appear an abject, base and
despicable quality, yet really the Soul of man is not capable of an higher and
more noble endowment: It is a silly ignorance that begets pride, but Humility
arises from a nearer acquaintance with excellent things, which keeps men from
doting on trifles, or admiring themselves because of some petty seize:
Noble and well Educated Souls have no such high opinion of Riches, Beauty,
Strength, and other such like advantages, as to value themselves for them, or
despise those that want them: and as for inward worth and real goodness, the
sense they have of the Divine Perfections, makes them think very meanly of any
thing they have hitherto attained, and be still endeavoring to surmount
themselves, and make nearer approaches to those infinite Excellencies which
they admire.

I know not what thoughts people may have of Humility, but I see almost every
person pretending unto it, and shunning such expressions and actions as may
make them be accounted arrogant and presumptuous, so that those who are most
desirous of praise, will be loath to commend themselves. What are all those
complements and modes of Civility so frequent in our ordinary converse, but so
many protestations of our esteem of others, and the low thoughts we have of our
selves? And must not that Humility be a noble and excellent endowment, when the
very shadows of it are accounted so necessary a part of good breeding.

Again, this Grace is accompanied The pleasure and sweetness of an humble
temper.
with a great deal of happiness and tranquillity: the proud and arrogant person
is a trouble to all that converse with him, but most of all unto himself: every
thing is enough to vex him; but scarce any thing sufficient to content and
please him: he is ready to quarrel with every thing that falls out, as if he
himself were such a considerable person, that God Almighty should do every
thing to gratify him, and all the Creatures of Heaven and Earth should wait
upon him, and obey his will: The leaves of high Trees do shake with every blast
of wind; and every breath, every evil word will disquiet and torment an
arrogant man: but the humble person has the advantage when he is despised,
that none can think more meanly of him, than he does of himself, and therefore
he is not troubled at the matter, but can easily bear those reproaches which
wound the other to the Soul: and withal as he is less affected with injuries,
so indeed he is less obnoxious unto them: Contention which comes of Pride
betrays a man into a thousand inconveniences, which those of a meek and lowly
temper are seldom meeting with: True and genuine humility begets both a
veneration and love among all, wise and discerning persons, while Pride
defeateth it is own design, and depriveth a man of that honor it makes him
pretend to.

But as the chief Exercises of Humility are those which relate unto Almighty
God, so these are accompanied with the greatest satisfaction and sweetness; it
is impossible to express the great pleasure and delight which Religious persons
feel in the lowest prostrations of their Soul before God, when having a deep
sense of the Divine Majesty and Glory, they sink (if I may so speak) unto the
very bottom of their beings, and vanish and disappear in the presence of God,
by a serious and affectionate acknowledgment of their own nothingness, and the
shortness and imperfections of all their seize, when they understand the
full sense and emphasis of the Psalmist's exclamation, Lord, what is Man? and
can utter it with the same affection: neither did ever any haughty and
ambitious person receive the praises and applauses of men with so much
pleasure, as the humble and religious do renounce them, Not unto us, O Lord,
not unto us, but unto thy Name give glory, etc.

Thus I have spoken something of the Excellencies and Advantage of Religion in
it is several Branches; but should be very injurious to the Subject, did I
pretend to have given any perfect account of it. Let us acquaint our selves
with it, My dear Friend, Let us acquaint our selves with it, and experience
will teach us more than all that ever has been spoken or written concerning
it. But if we may suppose the Soul to be already awakened unto some longing
desires after so great a Blessedness, it will be good to give them vent, and
suffer them to issue forth in some such aspirations as these,

A Prayer.
GOod God! what a mighty felicity is this to which we are called? How
graciously have thou joined our Duty and Happiness together, and prescribed
that for our work, the performance whereof is a great reward? And shall such
silly worms be advanced to so great a height? Will Thou allow us to raise our
eyes to Thee? Will thou admit and accept our affection? Shall we receive the
impression of thy Divine Excellencies by beholding and admiring them, and
partake of thy infinite Blessedness and Glory, by loving Thoe, and rejoicing in
them? O the happiness of those Souls that have broken the fetters of Self-love,
and dis-intangl'd their affection from every narrow and particular good, whose
Understanding; are enlightened by thy Holy Spirit, and their wills enlarged to
the extent of thine, who love thee above all things, and all Mankind for thy
sake! I am persuaded, O God, I am persuaded that I can never be happy, till my
carnal and corrupt affections be mortified, and the pride and vanity of my
spirit be subdued, and till I come seriously to despise the world, and think
nothing of my self. But O when shall it once be? O when will Thou come unto me,
and satisfy my Soul with thy likeness, making me holy as thou art holy, even
in all manner of conversation? Have thou given me a prospect of so great a
felicity, and will thou not bring me unto it? Have thou excited these desires
in my Soul, and will thou not also satisfy them? O teach me to do thy Will,
for thou art my God, thy Spirit is good, lead me unto the Land of Uprightness.
Quicken me, O Lord, for thy Names sake, and perfect that which concerns me:
Thy Mercy, O Lord, endures for ever, forsake not the works of thine own hands.

I Have hitherto considered wherein The despondent Thoughts of some newly
awakened to a right sense of things.
True Religion does consist, and how desirable a thing it is; but when one sees
how infinitely distant the common temper and frame of men is from it, he may
perhaps be ready to despond, and give over and think it utterly impossible to
be attained: he may sit down in sadness, and bemoan himself and say in the
anguish and bitterness of his spirit, They are happy indeed whose Souls are
awakened unto the Divine Life, who are thus renewed in the spirit of their
minds; but alas! I am quite of another constitution, and am not able to
effectuate so mighty a change: if outward observances could have done the
business, I might have hoped to acquit my self by diligence and care; but since
nothing but a new Nature can serve the turn, what am I able to do? I could
bestow all my Goods in Oblations to God, or Alms to the Poor, but cannot
command that Love and Charity, without which this expense would profit me
nothing: This gift of God cannot be Act. 8. 20.
purchased with money: if a man should give all the substance of his house for
love it would utterly be Cant: 8. 7.
contemned: I could pine and macerate my body, and undergo many hardships and
troubles, but I cannot get all my corruptions starved, nor my affections wholly
weaned from Earthly things: there is still some worldly desires lurking in my
heart, and those vanities that I have shut out of doors, are always getting in
by the windows. I am many times convinced of my own meanness, of the weakness
of my body, and the far greater weakness of my Soul; but this does rather beget
indignation and discontent, than true humility in my spirit: and though I
should come to think meanly of my self, yet I cannot endure that others should
think so too. In a word, when I reflect on my highest and most specious
seize, I have reason to suspect that they are all but the effects of
Nature, the issues of Selflove acting under several disguises: and this
principle is so powerful and so deeply rooted in me, that I can never hope to
be delivered from the dominion of it: I may toss and turn as a door on the
hinges, but can never get clear off, or be quite unhinged of Self, which is
still the center of all my motions: So that all the advantage I can draw from
the discovery of Religion, is but to see at a huge distance that felicity which
I am not able to reach; like a man in a shipwreck, who discerns the Land, and
envies the happiness of those who are there; but thinks it impossible for
himself to get ashoare.

These, I say, or such like desponding The unreasonableness of these Fears.
Thoughts may arise in the Minds of those persons who begin to conceive
somewhat more of the Nature and Excellency of Religion than before: they have
spied the Land, and seen that it is exceeding good, that it flows with milk
and honey; but they find they have the Children of Anak to grapple with, many
powerful lusts and corruptions to overcome, and they fear they shall never
prevail against them. But why should we give way to such discouraging
suggestions? why should we entertain such unreasonable fears, which damp our
spirits and weaken our hands, and augment the difficulties of our way? Let us
encourage our selves, my dear Friend, let us encourage our selves with those
mighty aids we are to expect in this Spiritual Warfare, for greater is he that
is for us, then all that can rise up against us; The Eternal God is our refuge,
and underneath Deuteronomy. 33. 27.
are the Everlasting Arms. Let us be strong in the Lord, and the power of his
might, for he it is that shall tread down our Enemies: God has a tender regard
unto the Souls of men, and is infinitely willing to promove their welfare: he
has condescended to our weakness, and declared with an Oath, that he has no
pleasure in our destruction: There is no such thing as despite or envy lodged
in the Bosom of that ever Blessed Being, whose Name and Nature is Love. He
created us at first in a happy condition; and now when we are fallen from it,
he has laid help upon One that is Mighty to Psalm. 89. 19.
Save, has committed the Care of our Souls to no meaner Person than the
Eternal Son of his Love; It is he that is the Captain of our Salvation: and
what Enemies can be too strong for us, when we are fighting under his Banners.
Did not the Son of God come down from the Bosom of his Father and pitch his
Tabernacle amongst the Sons of Men, that he might recover and propagate the
Divine Life, and restore the Image of God in their Souls: All the Mighty Works
which he performed, all the Sad Afflictions which he sustained had this for
their scope and design, for this did he labor and toil, for this did he bleed
and dye: He was with child, he was in pain, and has Esaias 26. ver. 19.
he brought forth nothing but wind, has he wrought no deliverance in the
Earth? Shall he not see of the travel of his Soul? Esaias 53. ver. 11.
Certainly it is impossible that this Great Contrivance of Heaven should prove
abortive, that such a mighty undertaking should fail and miscarry: It has
already been effectual for the Salvation of many Thousands, who were once as
far from the Kingdom of Heaven as we can suppose our selves to be, and our High
Priest continues Heb. 7. 24, 25.
for ever, and is able to save then to the uttermost that come unto God by him:
He is tender and compassionate, he knows our infirmities, and had experience
of our temptations, A bruised reed will Matthew. 12. 20.
he not break, and a smoking flax will he not quench, till he send forth
Judgment unto victory. He has sent out his Holy Spirit, whose sweet but
powerful breathings are still moving up and down in the World, to quicken and
revive the Souls of men, and awaken them unto the Sense and feeling of those
Divine things for which they were made, and is ready to assist such weak and
languishing Creatures as we are in our Essay's toward holiness and felicity:
and when once it has taken hold of a Soul, and kindled in it the smallest
spark of Divine Love, it will be sure to preserve and cherish, and bring it
forth into a flame, which many waters shall not quench, neither Cant. 8 7.
shall the floods be able to drown it: when ever this day begins to dawn, and
the Day Star to arise in the heart, it 2 Pet. 1. 19.
will easily dispel the powers of darkness, and make ignorance and folly, and
all the corrupt and selfish affections of men flee away as fast before it as
the shades of the Night, when the Sun comes out of his Chambers: for the path
of the Just is as the shining light Prove. 4. 18.
which shines more and more unto the perfect day: They shall go on from
strength Psalm 84 7.
to strength, till every one of them appear before God in Sion.

Why should we think it impossible that True Goodness and Universal Love should
ever come to sway and prevail in our Souls? Is not this their Primitive state
and condition, their native and genuine constitution as they came first from
the hands of their Maker. Sin and corruption are but usurpers, and though they
have long kept the possession, yet from the beginning it was not so. That
inordinate Selflove which one would think were rooted in our very being, and
interwoven with the constitution of our Nature, is nevertheless of foreign
extraction, and had no place at all in the state of integrity: we have still so
much reason left us to condemn it: our Understandings are easily convinced that
we ought to be wholly devoted to him from whom we have our being, and to love
him infinitely more than our selves, who is infinitely better than we, and our
wills would readily comply with this, if they were not disordered and put out
of tune: and is not he who made our Souls able to rectify and mend them again?
Shall we not be able by his assistance to vanquish and expel those violent
intruders, and turn unto flight the Arms of Heb. 11. 34.
the Aliens.

No sooner shall we take up Arms in this holy War, but we shall have all the
Saints on Earth, and all the Angels in Heaven engaged on our party: the holy
Church throughout the World is daily interceding with God for the success of
all such endeavors, and doubtless those heavenly Hosts above are nearly
concerned in the Interests of Religion, and infinitely desirous to see the
Divine Life thriving and prevailing in this inferior World; and that the Will
of God may be done by us on Earth, as it is done by themselves in Heaven; and
may we not then encourage our selves as the Prophet did his Servant, when he
showed him the Horses and Chariors of fire, Fear not, for they that be with us
are more then they 2 King 6. 16, 17.
that be against us.

Away then with all perplexing fears We must do what we can, and depend on the
Divine assistance. I Chron. 22. 16.
and desponding thoughts: to undertake vigorously, and rely confidently on the
Divine assistance is more than half the conquest: Let us arise and be doing,
and the Lord will be with us. It is true Religion in the Souls of men is the
immediate work of God, and all our natural endeavors can neither produce it
alone, nor merit those supernatural aids by which it must be wrought: The Holy
Ghost must come upon us, and the power of the Highest must overshadow us,
before that holy thing can be begotten and Christ be formed in us: but yet we
must not expect that this whole work should be done without any concurring
endeavors of ours: we must not lie loitering in the ditch and wait till
Omnipotence pull us from thence: no, no, we must bestir our selves and actuate
these powers which we have already received: We must put forth our selves in
our utmost capacities, and then we may hope that our Labor shall not be in 1
Cor. 15. 58.
vain in the Lord. All the art and industry of Man cannot form the smallest
herb, or make a stalk of Corn to grow in the field; it is the energy of Nature,
and the influences of Heaven which produce this effect; it is God who causes
the grass to grow, and herb Psalm. 104. 14.
for the service of man; and yet no body will say that the Labors of the
Husbandman are useless or unnecessary: So likewise the humane Soul is
immediately created by God; it is he who both forms and enliveneth the child,
and yet he has appointed the Marriage Bed as the ordinary mean for the
propagation of Mankind. Though there must intervene a stroke of Omnipotence to
effectuate this mighty change in our Souls; yet ought we to do what we can to
fit and prepare our selves, for we must break up our fallow ground and root out
the weeds, Jer. 4. 3.
and pull up the thorns, that so we may be the more ready to receive the Seeds
of Grace and the Dew of Heaven. It is true, God has been found of some who
sought him not; he has cast himself in their way who were quite out of his; he
has laid hold upon them, and stopped their course on a sudden; for so was S.
Paul converted in his Journey to Damascus: but certainly this is not God's
ordinary method of dealing with men, though he has not tied himself to means,
yet he has tied us to the use of them; and we have never more reason to expect
the Divine assistance, but when we are doing our utmost endeavors. It shall
therefore be my next work to show what course we ought to take for attaining
that blessed temper I have hitherto described. But here if in delivering my own
thoughts, I shall chance to differ any thing from what is or may be said by
others in this matter, I would not be therefore thought to contradict and
oppose them, more than Physicians do when they prescribe several Remedies for
the same Disease, which perhaps are all useful and good: Every one may propose
the Method which he judges most proper and convenient, but he does not thereby
pretend that the Cure can never be effectuated, unless that be exactly
observed: I doubt it has occasioned much unnecessary disquietude to some holy
persons, that they have not found such a regular and orderly transaction in
their Souls, as they have seen described in Books; that they have not passed
through all those steps and stages of Conversion, which some, who perhaps have
felt them in themselves, have too peremptorily prescribed unto others: God has
several ways of dealing with the Souls of men, and it suffices if the work be
accomplished, whatever the Methods have been.

Again, Though in proposing Directions, I must follow that order which the
nature of things shall lead to; yet I do not mean that the same method should
be so punctually observed in the practice; as if the later Rules were never to
be heeded till some considerable time have been spent in practicing the former:
The Directions I intend be mutually conducive one to another, and are all to be
performed as occasion shall serve, and we find our selves enabled to perform
them.

But now that I may detain you no We must shun all manner of Sin.
longer, if we desire to have our Souls molded to this holy frame, to become
partakers of the Divine Nature, and have Christ formed in our hearts, we must
seriously resolve and carefully endeavor to evite and abandon all Vicious and
Sinful practices. There can be no Treaty of Peace, till once we lay down these
weapons of Rebellion wherewith we fight against Heaven: nor can we expect to
have our distempers cured, if we be daily feeding on poison: Every wilful sin,
gives a mortal wound to the Soul, and puts it at a greater distance from God
and goodness; and we can never hope to have our hearts purified from corrupt
affections, unless we cleanse our hands from vicious actions. Now in this case
we cannot excuse our selves by the pretense of impossibility; for sure our
outward man is some way in our power, we have some command of our feet and
hands, and tongue, nay and of our thoughts and fancies too, at least so far as
to divert them from impure and sinful objects, and to turn our Mind another
way: and we should find this power and authority much strengthened and advanced,
if we were careful to manage and exercise it. Mean while I acknowledge our
corruptions are so strong, and our temptations so many, that it will require a
great deal of steadfastness and resolution, of watchfulness and care to
preserve our selves even in this degree of Innocence and Purity.

And first let us inform our selves We must know what things are sinful.
well, what those Sins are from which we ought to abstain. And here we must not
take our measures from the Maxims of the World, or the practices of those whom
in charity we account good men: most people have very light apprehensions of
these things, and are not sensible of any fault unless it be gross and
flagitious, and scarce reckon any so great as that which they call Preciseness:
and those who are more serious, do many times allow them selves too great
latitude and freedom: Alas! how much Pride and Vanity, and Passion, and Humor,
how much weakness and folly and sin does every day bewray it self in their
converse and behavior: It may be they are humbled for it, and striving against
it, and are daily gaining some ground; but then the progress is so small, and
their failings so many, that we had need to choose an exacter Pattern. Every
one of us must answer for himself, and the practices of others will never
warrant and secure us: It is the highest folly to regulate our Actions by any
other standard, than that by which they must be Judged: If ever we would
cleanse our way, Psalm. 119. 9.
it must be by taking heed thereto according to the Word of God: and that Word
which is quick and powerful, and sharper then any edged sword, piercing even to
Heb. 4. 12.
the dividing assunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is
a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart, will certainly discover
many things to be sinful and heinous, which pass for very innocent in the eyes
of the World: Let us therefore imitate the Psalmist, who says, Concerning the
Psalm. 17. 4.
works of men, by the words of thy lips, I have kept my self from the path of
the destroyer. Let us acquaint our selves well, with the strict and holy Laws
of our Religion: Let us consider the Discourses of our Blessed Savior,
(especially that Divine Sermon on the Mount) and the Writings of his holy
Apostles, where an ingenuous and unbyassed Mind may clearly discern those
limits and bounds by which our actions ought to be confined. And then let us
never look upon any Sin as light and inconsiderable; but be fully persuaded,
that the smallest is infinitely heinous in the sight of God, and prejudicial to
the Souls of Men; and that if we had the right sense of things, we would be
deeply affected with the least Irregularities, than now we are with the
greatest Crimes.

But now amongst those things which We must resist the Temptations to Sin, by
considering the Evils they will draw on us.
we discover to be sinful, there will be some, unto which, through the
disposition of our Nature, or long custom, or the indearments of pleasure, we
are so much wedded, that it will be like the cutting off the right hand, or
pulling out the right eye, to abandon them. But must we therefore sit down and
wait till all difficulties be over, and every temptation be gone: this were to
imitate the fool in the Poet, who stood the whole day at the River side till
all the water should run by. We must not indulge our inclinations, as we do
little Children, till they grow weary of the thing they are unwilling to let
go: We must not continue our sinful practices in hope that the Divine Grace
will one day overpower our spirits, and make us hate them for their own
deformity.

Let us suppose the worst, that we are utterly destitute of any Supernatural
Principle, and want that taste by which we should discern and abhor perverse
things; yet sure we are capable of some considerations which may be of force to
persuade us to this reformation of our lives: If the inward deformity and
heinous nature of Sin cannot affect us; at least we may be frighted by those
dreadful consequences that attend it: That same selfish principle which pusheth
us forward unto the pursuit of sinful Pleasures, will make us loath to buy them
at the rate of everlasting misery: Thus we may encounter Self-love with its own
weapons, and employ one natural inclination for repressing the exorbitancies of
another. Let us therefore accustom our selves to consider seriously what a
fearful thing it must needs be to irritate and offend that infinite Being on
whom we hang and depend every moment, who needs but to withdraw his Mercies to
make us miserable; or his assistance to make us nothing: Let us frequently
remember the shortness and uncertainty of our lives, and how that after we have
taken a few turns more in the World, and conversed a little longer amongst men,
we must all go down unto the dark and silent graves, and carry nothing along
but anguish and regret of all our Sinful enjoyments, and then think what horror
must needs seize the guilty Soul, to find it self naked and all alone before
the Severe and Impartial Judge of the world, to render an exact account not
only of its more important and considerable transactions; but of every word
that the Tongue has uttered, and the swiftest and most secret thought that
ever passed through the Mind. Let us sometimes represent unto our selves the
terrors of that dreadful day, when the foundations of the Earth shall be
shaken, 2 Pet. 3. 10.
and the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall
melt with fervent heat, and the present frame of Nature be dissolved, and our
Eyes shall see the Blessed Jesus who came once into the World in all Humility
to visit us, to purchase pardon for us, and beseech us to accept of it, now
appearing in the Majesty of his glory, and descending from Heaven in a flaming
fire to take vengeance on those that have despised his Mercy, and perished in
rebellion against him: when all the hidden things of darkness shall 1 Cor. 4. 5.
be brought to light, and the counsels of the heart shall be made manifest:
when those secret impurities and subtle frauds whereof the World did never
suspect us, shall be exposed and laid open to Public view, and many thousand
actions which we never dreamed to be sinful, or else had altogether forgotten,
shall be charged home upon our Consciences with such evident convictions of
guilt, that we shall neither be able to deny nor excuse them. Then shall all
the Angels in Heaven, and all the Saints that ever lived on the Earth approve
that dreadful Sentence which shall be passed on wicked men, and those who
perhaps did love and esteem them when they lived in the World, shall look upon
them with indignation and abhorrence, and never make one request for their
deliverance. Let us consider the Eternal punishments of damned Souls which are
shadowed forth in Scripture by Metaphors taken from those things that are most
terrible and grievous in the World, and yet all does not suffice to conveigh
unto our Minds any full apprehension of them: when we have joined together the
importance of all these expressions, and added unto them whatever our fancy can
conceive of Misery and Torment, we must still remember that all this comes
infinitely short of the truth and the reality of the thing.

It Is true, this is a sad and melancholy subject, there is anguish and horror
in the consideration of it; but sure it must be infinitely more dreadful to
endure it; and such thoughts as these may be very useful to fright us from the
courses that would lead us thither, how fond soever we may be of sinful
pleasures, the fear of Hell would make us abstain: our most forward
inclinations will startle and give back when pressed with that Question in the
Prophet, Who amongst us shall dwell with Isa. 33. 14.
everlasting burnings.

To this very purpose it is that the terrors of another World are so frequently
represented in holy Writ, and that in such terms as are most proper to affect
and influence a carnal Mind: These fears can never suffice to make any person
truly good; but certainly they may restrain us from much Evil, and have often
made way for more ingenuous and kindly impressions.

But it will not suffice to consider We must keep a constant watch over our
selves.
those things once and again, nor to form resolutions of abandoning our sins,
unless we maintain a constant guard, and be continually watching against them.
Sometimes the Mind is awakened to see the dismal consequences of a Vicious
life, and straight we are resolved to reform: but alas! it presently falls
asleep, and we lose that prospect which we had of things, and then temptations
take the advantage, they solicit and importune us continually, and so do
frequently engage our consent before we are aware. It is the folly and ruin of
most people that they live at adventure, and take part in every thing that
comes in their way, seldom considering what they are about to say or do: If we
would have our resolution take effect, we must take heed unto our ways, and set
a watch unto the door of our lips, and examine the motions that arise in our
heart, cause them tell us whence they come, and whither they go; whether it be
Pride or Passion, or any corrupt and vicious humor that prompteth us to any
design, and whether God will be offended, or any body harmed by it. And if we
have no time for long reasonings, let us at least turn our eyes toward God, and
place our selves in his Presence to ask his leave and approbation for what we
do: Let us consider our selves under the All-seeing Eye of that Divine Majesty,
as in the midst of an infinite Globe of light, which compasses us about both
behind and before, and pierces to the innermost corners of our Soul: the Sense
and remembrance of the Divine Presence, is the most ready and effectual mean,
both to discover what is unlawful, and to restrain us from it: There are some
things a person could have a shift to palliate or defend, and yet he dares not
look Almighty God in the face and adventure upon them. If we look into him we
shall be lightened; if we set him always before us, he will guide us by his
Eye, and instruct us in the way wherein we ought to walk.

This Care and Watchfulness over We must often examine our Actions.
our Actions, must be seconded by frequent and serious reflections upon them,
not only that we may obtain the Divine Mercy and Pardon for our Sins, by an
humble and sorrowful acknowledgment of them; but also that we may reinforce and
strengthen our resolutions, and learn to decline or resist the temptations, by
which we have been formerly foiled. It is an advice worthy of a Christian,
though it did first drop from a Heathen Pen; That before we betake our selves
to rest, we renew and examine all the passages of the day, that we may have the
comfort of what we have done aright, and may redress what we find to have been
amiss, and make the shipwracks of one day be as marks to direct our course in
another. This may be called the very art of Virtuous living, and would
contribute wonderfully to advance our reformation, and preserve our innocence.
But withal we must not forget to implore the Divine assistance, especially
against those Sins that do most easily beset us: and though it be supposed that
our hearts are not yet molded unto that Spiritual frame, which should render
our Devotions acceptable, yet methinks such considerations as have been
proposed to deter us from Sin, may also stir us up to some natural seriousness,
and make our Prayers against it as earnest at least, as they are wont to be
against other Calamities: and I doubt not God who hears the cry of the
Ravens, will have some regard even to such Petitions as proceed from those
natural Passions which himself has implanted in us: besides that those Prayers
against Sin will be powerful engagements on our selves to excite us to
watchfulness and care, and common ingenuity will make us ashamed to relapse
unto those faults, which we have lately regrated before God, and against which
we have begged his assistance.

Thus are we to make the first essay It is fit to restrain our selves in many
lawful things.
for recovering the Divine Life, by restraining the natural inclinations that
they break not out into sinful practices: but now I must add, that Christian
Prudence will teach us to abstain from gratifications that are not simply
unlawful, and that not only, that we may secure our innocence, which would be
in continual hazard, if we should strain our liberty to the utmost point, and
be always walking on the Marches, but also that hereby we may weaken the forces
of Nature, and teach our appetites to obey; we must do with our selves as
prudent Parents with their Children, who cross their wills in many little
indifferent things, to make them manageable and submissive in more considerable
instances: he who would mortify the pride and vanity of his spirit, should
stop his ears to the most deserved praises, and sometimes forbear his just
vindication, from the Censures and aspersions of others, especially if they
reflect only upon his prudence and conduct, and not on his Virtue and
Innocence: He who would check a vindictive humor, would do well to deny
himself the Satisfaction of representing unto others the Injuries which he has
sustained; and if we would so take heed to our ways, that we sin not with our
tongue, we must accustom our selves much to solitude and silence, and
sometimes with the Psalmist Hold our peace even from good, till once we have
gotten some command of that unruly member. Thus, I say, we may bind up our
natural inclinations, and make our appetites more moderate in their cravings,
by accustoming them to frequent refusals: but it is not enough to have them
under violence, and restraint.

Our next Essay must be to wean We must strive to put our selves out of love
with the World.
our affections from created things, and all the delights and entertainments of
the lower life, which sink and depress the Souls of men, and retard their
motions toward God and Heaven: And this we must do by possessing our Minds with
a deep persuasion of the vanity and emptiness of worldly enjoyments. This is an
ordinary theme, and every body can make declamations upon it; but alas! how few
understand and believe what they say: These Notions float in our Brains, and
come sliding off our Tongues, but we have no deep impression of them on our
spirits, we feel not the truth which we pretend to believe: We can tell that
all the glory and splendor, all the pleasures and enjoyments of the World, are
vanity and nothing; and yet these nothings take up all our thoughts, and
ingross all our affections, they stifle the better inclinations of our Soul,
and inveigle us into many a Sin: it may be in a sober mood, we give them the
slight, and resolve to be no longer deluded with them; but these thoughts
seldom outlive the next temptation, the vanities which we have shut out at the
door get in at a postern: there are still some pretensions, some hopes that
flatter us; and after we have been frustrated a thousand times, we must
continually be repeating the experiment: The leaft difference of circumstances
is enough to delude us, and make us expect that satisfaction in one thing,
which we have missed in another: but could we once get clearly off, and come to
a real and serious contempt of worldly things, this were a very considerable
advancement in our way: The Soul of Man is of a vigorous and active nature, and
has in it a raging and unextinguishable thirst, an immaterial kind of fire,
always catching at some object or other, in conjunction wherewith it thinks to
be happy; and were it once rent from the World, and all the bewitching
enjoyments under the Sun, it would quickly search after some higher and more
excellent Object, to satisfy its ardent, and importunate cravings, and being
no longer dazel'd with glistering vanities, would fix on that Supreme and
All-sufficient Good, where it should discover such beauty and sweetness as
would charm and overpower all its affections: The love of the World, and the
love of God, are like the scales of a balance, as the one falls, the other
does rise: when our natural inclinations prosper, and the creature is exalted
in our Soul, Religion is faint, and does languish; but when earthly objects
wither away, and lose their beauty, and the Soul begins to cool and flagg in
its prosecution of them, then the seeds of Grace take root, and the Divine Life
begins to flourish and prevail. It does therefore nearly concern us to convince
our selves of the emptiness and vanity of Creature-enjoyments, and reason our
heart out of love of them: let us Seriously consider all that our Reason or our
Faith, our own Experience, or the observation of others can suggest to this
effect. Let us ponder the matter over and over, and fix our thoughts on this
truth, till we become really persuaded of it: amidst all our pursuits and
designs, let us stop and ask our selves, For what end is all this? At what do I
aim? Can the gross and muddy pleasures of Sense, or a heap of white or yellow
Earth, or the esteem and affection of silly creatures like my self satisfy a
rational and immortal Soul? Have I not tried these things already? Will they
have a higher relish, and yield me more contentment to morrow than yesterday,
or the next year than they did the last? There may be some little difference
betwixt that which I am now pursuing, and that which I enjoyed before; but sure
my former Enjoyments did show as pleasant, and promise as fair before I
attained them: like the Rainbow they looked very glorious at a distance, but
when I approached, I found nothing but emptiness and vapor. O what a poor thing
should the life of man be, if it were capable of no higher enjoyments!

I cannot insist on this subject, and there is the less need when I remember to
whom I am writing. Yes (my dear Friend) you have had as great Experience of the
emptiness and vanity of humane things, and have at present as few worldly
engagements as any that I know: I have sometimes reflected on those passages of
your life wherewith you have been pleased to acquaint me: and methinks through
all I can discern a design of the Divine Providence to wean your affections
from every thing here below: The Trials you have had of those things which the
World dotes upon; has taught you to despise them, and you have found by
experience that neither the endowments of Nature, nor the advantages of Fortune
are sufficient for happiness: that every Rose has its thorn, and there may be
a Worm at the root of the fairest Gourd, some secret and undiscerned grief
which may make a person deserve the pity of those who perhaps do admire or envy
their supposed felicity: If any earthly comforts have got too much of your
heart, I think they have been your Relations and Friends, and the dearest of
those are removed out of the World, so that you must raise your Mind toward
Heaven, when you would think upon them: Thus God has provided that your heart
may be loosed from the World, and he may not have any Rival in your affection,
which I have always observed to be so large and unbounded, so noble and
dis-interessed, that no inferior object can answer or deserve it.

When we have got our corruptions We must do those outward Actions that are
commanded.
restrained, and our natural appetites and inclinations toward worldly things
in some measure subdued, we must proceed to such exercises as have a more
immediate tendance to excite and awaken the Divine Life: And first let us
endeavor conscientiously to perform those duties which Religion does require,
and whereunto it would incline us if it did prevail in our Souls: If we cannot
get our inward disposition presently changed, let us study at least to regulate
our outward deportment: if our hearts be not yet inflamed with Divine Love, let
us however own our alleagiance to that infinite Majesty, by attending his
Service, and listening to his Word, by speaking reverently of his Name, and
praising his goodness, and exhorting others to serve and obey him: if we want
that charity and those bowels of compassion which we ought to have toward our
Neighbors, yet must we not omit any occasion of doing them good: If our hearts
be haughty and proud, we must nevertheless study a modest and humble
Deportment: These external performances are of little value in themselves, yet
may they help us forward to better things: The Apostle indeed tells us, that
bodily exercise profits little; but he seems not to affirm that it is
altogether useless, it is always good to be doing what we can, for then God is
wont to pity our weakness, and assist our feeble endeavors: and when true
Charity and Humility and other Graces of the Divine Spirit come to take root in
our Souls, they will actuate themselves more freely and with the less
difficulty that we have been accustomed to express them in our outward
conversations. Nor need we fear the imputation of hypocrisy, tho our actions
do thus somewhat outrun our affections, seeing they do still proceed from a
sense of our Duty, and our Design is not to appear better then we are, but that
we may really become so.

But as inward acts have a more immediate We must endeavor to form internal
Acts of Devotion, Charity, etc.
influence on the Soul to mould it to a right temper and frame; so ought we to
be most frequent and sedulous in the exercise of those. Let us be often lifting
up our hearts toward God; and if we do not say that we love him above all
things, let us at least acknowledge that it is our Duty and would be our
Happiness so to do: Let us regrate the dishonor done unto him by foolish and
sinful men, and applaud the Praises and Adorations that are given him by that
Blessed and Glorious Company above: Let us resign and yield our selves up unto
him a thousand times to be governed by his Laws, and disposed upon at his
pleasure: and though our stubborn hearts should start back and refuse, yet let
us tell him we are convinced that his Will is always Just and Good, and
therefore desire him to do with us whatsoever he pleases whether we will or
not. And so, for begetting in us an universal Charity toward men, we must be
frequently putting up wishes for their happiness, and blessing every person
that we see; and when we have done any thing for the relief of the miserable,
we may second it with earnest desires that God would take care of them, and
deliver them out of all their distresses.

Thus should we exercise our selves unto godliness, and when we are employing
the powers that we have, the Spirit of God is wont to strike in, and elevate
these acts of our Soul beyond the pitch of Nature, and give them a Divine
impression: and after the frequent reiteration of these we will find our selves
more inclined unto them, they flowing with greater freedom and ease.

I shall mention but two other Means Consideration a great instrument of
Religion.
for begetting that Holy and Divine temper of spirit, which is the Subject of
the present Discourse: And the first is a Deep and Serious Consideration of the
Truths of our Religion, and that both as to the certainty and importance of
them. The assent which is ordinarily given to Divine Truths is very faint and
languid, very weak and uneffectual, flowing only from a blind inclination to
follow that Religion which is in the fashion, or a lazy indifferency and
unconcernedness whether things be so or not: Men are unwilling to quarrel with
the Religion of their Country, and since all their Neighbors are Christians,
they are content to be so too: but they are seldom at the pains to consider
the evidences of those Truths, or to ponder the importance and tendency of
them: and thence it is that they have so little influence on their affections
and practice: Those spriteless and paralitick thoughts (as one does rightly
term them) are not able to move the will, and direct the hand. We must
therefore endeavor to work up our Minds to a Serious belief and full
persuasion of Divine Truths, unto a Sense and feeling of Spiritual things: Our
thoughts must dwell upon them till we be both convinced of them, and deeply
affected with them: Let us urge forward our spirits, and make them approach the
invisible World, and fix our Mind upon immaterial things, till we clearly
perceive that these are no Dreams, nay that all things are Dreams and Shadows
besides them: When we look about us and behold the beauty and magnificence of
this goodly frame, the order and harmony of the whole Creation, let our
thoughts from thence take their flight toward that Omnipotent Wisdom and
Goodness which did at first produce, and does ftill establish and uphold the
same: When we reflect upon our selves, let us consider that we are not a mere
piece of Organized matter, a curious and well-contrived Engine, that there is
more in us then flesh, and blood, and bones, even a Divine sparkle, capable to
know, and love, and enjoy our Maker; and tho it be now exceedingly clogged with
its dull and lumpish companion, yet ere long it shall be delivered, and can
subsist without the body, as well as that can do without the Clothes which we
throw off at our pleasure. Let us often withdraw our thoughts from this Earth,
this Scene of Misery and folly and sin, and raise them toward that more vast
and glorious World, whose Innocent and Blessed Inhabitants solace themselves
Eternally in the Divine Presence, and know no other passion, but an unmixed
Joy, and an unbounded Love: and then consider how the blessed Son of God came
down to this lower World to live among us and dye for us, that he might bring
us to a portion of the same felicity; and think how he has overcome the
sharpness of death, and opened the Kingdom of Heaven to all Believers, and is
now set down on the right hand of Majesty on high, and yet is not Heb. 1. 3.
the less mindful of us, but receives our Prayers, and presents them unto
his Father, and is daily visiting his Church with the Influences of his Spirit,
as the Sun reaches us with his Beams.

The Serious and frequent considerarion of these and such other Divine To beget
Divine Love, we must consider the excellency of the Divine Nature.
Truths, is the most proper Method to beget that lively Faith which is the
Foundation of Religion, the spring and root of the Divine Life. Let me further
suggest some particular subjects of Meditation for producing the Several
branches of it. And first to inflame our Souls with the love of God, let us
consider the excellency of his Nature, and his Love and Kindness toward us. It
is little we know of the Divine Perfections, and yet that little may suffice to
fill our Souls with admiration and Love, to ravish our affections as well as to
raise our Wonder, for we are not merely Creatures of Sense that we should be
incapable of any other affection but that which enters by the Eyes: The
character of any excellent Person whom we have never seen will many times
engage our Hearts, and make us hugely concerued in all his adventures: and what
is it I pray you that engages us so much to those with whom we converse? I
cannot think that it is merely the color of their face, or their comely
proportions, else we should fall in Love with statues and pictures, and
flowers: these outward accomplishments may a little delight the Eye, but would
never be able to prevail so much on the Heart, if they did not represent some
vital Perfection: we either see or apprehend some greatness of mind or vigor of
Spirit, or sweetness of disposition, some sprightliness or Wisdom or Goodness
which charms our spirit and commands our Love: now these perfections are not
obvious to the Sight, the Eyes can only discern the signs and effects of them:
and if it be the understanding that directs the affection, and vital
perfections prevail with it, certainly the excellency's of the Divine Nature
(the Traces whereof we cannot but discover in every thing we behold) would not
fail to engage our Hearts if we did seriously view and regard them: shall we
not be Infinitely more transported with that Almighty Wisdom and Goodness which
fills the Universe, and displays it self in all the parts of the creation,
which establishes the Frame of Nature, and turns the mighty Wheels of
Providence, and keeps the World from disorder and ruin; then with the faint
rays of the same perfections which we meet with in our fellowcreatures? Shall
we dote on the scattered pieces of a rude and imperfect picture, and never be
affected with the original beauty? This were an unaccountable stupidity and
blindness: whatever we find lovely in a friend or in a Saint ought not to
engross but to Elevate our affection: we should conclude with our selves, that
if there be so much sweetness in a drop, there must be Infinitely more in the
Fountain; if there be so much splendour in a ray, what must the Sun be in its
Glory?

Nor can we pretend the remoteness of the object, as if God were at too great a
distance for our converse or our Love: he is not far from every one of us, for
in him we live and move and Act. 17. 27.
have our being: we cannot open our Eyes, but we must behold some vestige of
his Glory, and we cannot turn them toward him, but we shall be sure to find his
intent upon us, waiting as it were to catch a look ready to intertain the most
intimate fellowship and communion with us. Let us therefore endeavor to raise
our minds to the clearest conceptions of the Divine Nature: Let us consider all
that his works do declare or his Word does discover of him unto us, and let us
especially contemplate that visible representation of him which was made in our
own Nature by his Son; who was the brightness of his Glory, and the express
Heb. 1. 3.
Image of his Person, and who appeared in the World to discover at once what
God is, and what we ought to be: Let us represent him unto our minds as we find
him described in the Gospel; and there we shall behold the Perfections of the
Divine Nature though covered with the vail of humane Infirmities: and when we
have framed unto our selves the clearest Notion that we can of a Being Infinite
in Power, in Wisdom, and Goodness, the Author and Fountain of all Perfections,
let us fix the Eyes of our Soul upon it, Lam. 3. 31.
that our Eyes may affect our Heart, and while we are Musing the fire will
Psalm. 39. 3.
burn.

Especially if hereunto we add the We should meditate on his Goodness and Love.
consideration of Gods Favor and Good Will toward us: nothing is more
Powerful to engage our affection then to find that we are beloved: expressions
of Kindness are always pleasing and acceptable unto us, though the person
should be otherways mean and contemptible: but to have the love of one who is
altogether lovely, to know that the Glorious Majesty of Heaven has any regard
unto us, how must it astonish and delight us, how must it overcome our Spirits,
and melt our Hearts, and put our whole Soul unto a Flame. Now as the Word of
God is full of the expressions of his Love toward Man, so all his Works do
loudly proclaim it: he gave us our being, and by preserving us in it, does
renew the donation every moment: he has placed us in a rich and well furnished
World, and liberally provided for all our necessities: he raineth down
blessings from Heaven upon us, and causes the Earth to bring forth our
provision: he gives us our Food and Raiment, and while we are spending the
productions of one year, he is preparing for us against another: he sweetneth
our lives with innumerable comforts, and gratifieth every faculty with suitable
objects: The Eye of his Providence is always upon us, and he watches for our
safety when we are fast a sleep, neither minding him, nor our selves. But least
we should think these Testimonles of his kindness less considerable because
they are the easy issues of his Omnipotent Power, and do not put him into any
trouble or pain, he has taken a more wonderful Method to endear himself to us:
he has testified his affection to us, by suffering as well as by doing; and
because he could not suffer in his own Nature, he assumed ours: The Eternal Son
of God, did cloth himself with the Infirmities of our flesh, and left the
company of those Innocent and Blessed Spirits, who knew well how to Love and
adore him, that he might dwell among Men, and wrestle with the obstinacy of
that rebellious race, to reduce them to their Alleagiance and felicity and then
to offer himself up as a Sacrifice and Propitiation for them. I remember one of
the Poets has an Ingenious fancy to Express the Passion wherewith he found
himself overcome after a long resistance, that the god of Love had shot all his
Golden arrows at him, but could never pierce his Heart, till at length he put
himself unto the bow and darted himself straight into his breast: Methinks this
does some way adumbrate Gods Method of dealing with Men: he had long contended
with a stubborn World, and thrown down many a blessing upon them, and when all
his other gifts could not prevail, he at last made a Gift of himself, to
testify his affection, and conciliate theirs. The account which we have of our
Saviors Life in the Gospel does all along present us with the story of his
Love, all the pains that he took and the troubles that he endured were the
wonderful effects and uncontrollable evidences of it. But O that last, that
dismal Scene! Is it possible to remember it and question his kindness, or deny
him ours? Here here it is (my dear Friend) that we should fix our most serious
and solemn thoughts, that Christ may dwell in our Hearts by Faith, Ephesians. 3. 17,
18, 19.
and we may be rooted and grounded in Love, comprehending with all the Saints
what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height: and knowing the Love of
Christ which passes knowledge, that so we may be filled with all the fullness
of God.

We ought also frequently to reflect on those particular Tokens of Favor and
Love, which God has bestowed on our selves, how long he has born with our
follies and sins, and waited to be gracious unto us, wrestling, as it were,
with the stubbornness of our hearts, and essaying every method to reclaim us:
We should keep a register in our Minds of all the eminent Blessings and
Deliverances we have met with, some whereof have been so conveyed that we might
clearly perceive they were not the issues of chance, but the gracious effects
of the Divine Favor, and the signal returns of our Prayers. Nor ought we to
imbitter the thoughts of these things with any harsh or unworthy suspicion, as
if they were designed on purpose to enhaunce our guilt, and heighten our
eternal Damnation, No, no, my Friend, God is Love, and he has no pleasure in
the ruin of his Creatures: if they abuse his goodness, and turn his grace into
wantonness, and thereby plunge themselves into the greater depth of guilt and
misery, this is the effect of their obstinate wickedness, and not the design of
those benefits which he bestows.

If these considerations had once begotten in our hearts a real Love and
Affection toward Almighty God, that will easily lead us unto the other
Branches of Religion, and therefore I shall need say the less unto them.

We shall find our hearts enlarged in To beget Charity, we must remember that
all men are nearly related unto God.
Charity toward men, by considering the relation wherein they stand unto God,
and the impresses of his Image which are stamped upon them. They are not only
his Creatures, the workmanship of his hands, but such of whom he takes special
care, and for whom he has a very dear and tender regard, having laid the
designs of their happiness before the foundations of the World, and being
willing to live and converse with them to all the Ages of Eternity: The meanest
and most contemptible person whom we behold is the offspring of Heaven, one of
the Children of the Most High; and however unworthily he might behave himself
of that relation, so long as God has not abdicated and disowned him by a final
Sentence, he will have us to acknowledge him as one of his, and as such to
embrace him with a sincere and cordial affection. You know what a great
concernment we are wont to have for those that do any ways belong to the
person whom we love, how gladly we lay hold on every opportunity to gratify
the Child or Servant of a Friend; and sure our Love toward God would as
naturally spring forth in Charity toward men, did we mind the interest that he
is pleased to take in them, and consider that every Soul is dearer unto him,
than all the material World; and that he did not account the Blood of his Son
too great a price for their Redemption.

Again, as all men stand in a near relation That they carry his Image upon them.
to God, so they have still so much of his Image stamped on them, as may oblige
and excite us to love them: In some this Image is more Eminent and conspicuous,
and we can discern the Lovely Treats of Wisdom and Goodness; and though in
others it be miserably sullied and defaced, yet is it not altogether razed,
some lineaments at least do still remain: All men are endued with Rational and
Immortal Souls, with Understanding and Wills capable of the highest and most
excellent things; and if they be at present disordered and put out of tune by
wickedness and folly, this may indeed move our compassion, but ought not in
reason to extinguish our Love. When we see a person of a rugged humor and
perverse disposition, full of Malice and Dissimulation, very foolish and very
proud; it is hard to fall in love with an object that presents it self unto us
under an Idea so little grateful and lovely: but when we shall consider these
evil qualities as the Diseases and Distempers of a Soul which in it self is
capable of all that wisdom and goodness wherewith the best of Saints have ever
been adorned, and which may one day come to be raised unto such heights of
perfection as shall render it a fit companion for the holy Angels, this will
turn our aversion into pity, and make us behold him with such resentments, as
we should have when we did look on a beautiful body that were mangled with
wounds, or disfigured by some loathsome disease; and however we hate the vices,
we shall not cease to love the man.

In the next place for purifying our To beget Purity, we should consider the
Dignity of our Nature.
Souls, and dis-intangling our affections from the Pleasures and Enjoyments of
this lower life, let us frequently ponder the excellency and dignity of our
Nature, and what a shameful and unworthy thing it is for so noble and divine a
Creature as the Soul of Man, to be sunk and immersed in brutish and sensual
Lusts, or amused with airy and fantastical delights, and so to lose the relish
of solid and spiritual pleasures, that the Beast should be fed and pampered,
and the Man and the Christian be starved in us. Did we but mind who we are, and
for what we were made, this would teach us in a right sense to reverence and
stand in awe of our selves, it would beget a holy modesty and shamefacedness,
and make us very shy and reserved in the use of the most innocent and allowable
pleasures.

It will be very effectual to the same We should meditate often on the Joys of
Heaven.
purpose, that we frequently raise our Minds toward Heaven, and represent to
our thoughts those Joys that are at God's right hand, those pleasures that 1 John 3. 3.
endure for evermore; for every man that has this hope in him purifieth
himself even as he is pure. If our Heavenly Country be much in our thoughts, it
will make us as strangers and pilgrims to abstain from fleshly lusts which war
against the Soul, and keep our selves unspotted in this world, that we may be
fit for the enjoyments and felicities of the other. But then we must see that
our Notions of Heaven be not gross and carnal, that we dream not of a Mohammedan
Paradise, nor rest on those Metaphors and Similitudes by which these joys are
sometimes represented, for this might perhaps have a quite contrary effect, it
might entangle us further in carnal affections, and we should be ready to
indulge our selves a very liberal foretaste of those pleasures wherein we had
placed our everlasting felicity: but when we come once to conceive aright of
those Pure and Spiritual pleasures, when the happiness we propose to our selves
is from the sight and love and enjoyment of God, and our minds are filled with
the hopes and forethoughts of that Blessed Estate, O how mean and contemptible
will all things here below appear in our eyes? with what disdain will we reject
the gross and muddy pleasures, that would deprive us of those Celestial
enjoyments, or any way unfit and indispose us for them.

The last Branch of Religion is Humility, Humility arises from the
consideration of our failings.
and sure we can never want matter of consideration for begetting it: all our
wickednesses and imperfections, all our follies and our sins may help to pull
down that fond and overweening conceit which we are apt to entertain of our
selves. That which makes any body esteem us, is their knowledge or apprehension
of some little good, and their ignorance of a great deal of evil that may be in
us: were they thoroughly acquainted with us, they would quickly change their
opinion: The thoughts that pass in our heart in the best and most serious day
of our life being exposed unto public view, would render us either hateful or
ridiculous: and now however we conceal our failings from one another, yet sure
we are conscious to them our selves, and some serious reflections upon them,
would much qualify and allay the vanity of our spirits: Thus holy Men have
come really to think worse of themselves, than of any other person in the
world: not but that they knew that gross and scandalous Vices are in their
nature more heinous than the surprisals of tentation and infirmity; but because
they were much more intent on their own miscarriages, than on those of their
Neighbors, and did consider all the aggravations of the one, and every thing
that might be supposed to diminish and alleviate the other.

But it is well observed by a Pious Thoughts of God, give us the lowest
thoughts of our selves.
Writer, That the deepest and most pure Humility does not so much arise from
the consideration of our own faults, and defects, as from a calm and quiet
Contemplation of the Divine Purity and Goodness: Our spots never appear so
clearly, as when we place them before this Infinite Light; and we never seem
less in our own eyes, than when we look down upon our selves from on high: O
how little, how nothing do all those shadows of perfection then appear for
which we are wont to value our selves! That humility which comes from a view
of our own sinfulness and misery, is more turbulent and boisterous; but the
other lays us full as low, and wants nothing but that anguish and vexation
wherewith our Souls are apt to boil when they are the nearest object of our
thoughts.

There remains yet another Mean for Prayer another Instrument of Religion.
begetting a Holy and Religious disposition in the Soul, and that is fervent
and hearty Prayer. Holiness is the Gift of God, indeed the greatest gift he
does bestow, or we are capable to receive, and he has promised his holy Spirit
to those that ask it of him: in Prayer we make the nearest approaches unto God,
and lie open to the influences of Heaven: Then it is that the Sun of
Righteousness does visit us with directest rays, and dissipateth our darkness
and imprinteth his Image on our Souls. I cannot now insist on the advantages of
this exercise, or the dispositions wherewith it ought to be performed; and
there is no need I should, there being so many Books that Treat on this
subject: I shall only tell you, That as there is one sort of Prayer wherein we
make use of the voice which is necessary in public, and may sometimes have its
own advantages in private, and another wherein though we utter no sound, The
advantages of mental Prayer.
yet we conceive the expressions and form the words, as it were, in our Mind,
(which I presume is most commonly used in private devotion) so there is a third
and more sublime kind of prayer, wherein the Soul takes a higher flight, and
having collected all its forces by long and serious Meditation, it darteth it
self (so to speak) toward God in sighs and groans and thoughts too big for
expression: As when after a deep Contemplation of the Divine Perfections
appearing in all his Works of Wonder, it addresseth it self unto him in the
profoundest adoration of his Majesty and Glory: or when after sad reflections
on its vileness and miscarriages, it prostrates it self before him with the
greatest confusion and sorrow, not daring to lift up its eyes, or utter one
word in his presence: or when having well considered the beauty of holiness,
and the unspeakable felicity of those that are truly good, it pants after
God, and sends up such vigorous and ardent desires as no words should be
sufficient to express, continuing and repeating each of these acts as long as
it finds it self upheld by the force and impulse of the previous Meditation.

This mental Prayer is of all other the most effectual to purify the Soul, and
dispose it unto a holy and religious temper, and may be termed the great Secret
of Devotion, and one of the most powerful instruments of the Divine Life: and
it may be the Apostle has a peculiar respect unto it when he says, that the
Spirit helps our infirmities, making intercession for us, with groanings that
cannot be uttered, or, as the Original may bear, that cannot be worded: Yet I
do not so recommend this sort of Prayer, as to supersede the use of the other:
for we have so many several things to pray for, and every petition of this
nature, requires so much time, and so great an intention of spirit, that it
were not easy therein to overtake them all: to say nothing that the deep sighs
and heavings of the heart which are wont to accompany it, are something
oppressive to Nature, and make it hard to continue long in them: But certainly
a few of those inward aspirations will do more than a great many fluent and
melting expressions.

Thus (my dear Friend) I have briefly proposed the Method which I judge proper
for moulding the Soul unto a Religion is to be advanced by the same means by
which it is begun, The use of the Holy Sacrament.
holy frame; and the same means which serve to beget this Divine Temper, must
still be practiced for strengthening and advancing it: and therefore I shall
recommend but one more for that purpose, and it is the frequent and
conscientious use of that holy Sacrament, which is peculiarly appointed to
nourish and increase the Spiritual Life, when once it is begotten in the Soul:
All the Instruments of Religion do meet together in this Ordinance; and while
we address our selves unto it, we are put to practice all the Rules which were
mentioned before: Then it is, that we make the severest Survey of our Actions,
and lay the strictest Obligations on our selves: Then are our Minds raised to
the highest contempt of the World, and every Grace does exercise it self with
the greatest activity and vigor: all the subjects of Contemplation do there
present themselves unto us with the greatest advantage; and then, if ever, does
the Soul make its most powerful Sally's toward Heaven, and assault it with a
holy and acceptable force. And certainly the neglect or careless performance of
this Duty, is one of the chief causes that bedwarfs our Religion, and makes us
continue of so low a size.

But it is time I should put a close to this tedious Letter, which is grown to
a far greater bulk then at first I intended: If these poor Papers can do you
the smallest service, I shall think my self very happy in this Undertaking; at
least I am hopeful you will kindly accept the Sincere Endeavors of a Person
who would fain acquit himself of some part of that which he owes you.

A Prayer.
AND now, O most gracious God, Father and Fountain of Mercy and Goodness, who
have blessed us with the Knowledge of our Happiness, and the way that leads
unto it, excite in our Souls such ardent desires after the one, as may put us
forth to the diligent prosecution of the other: Let us neither presume of our
own strength, nor distrust thy Divine Assistance; but while we are doing our
utmost endeavors, teach us still to depend on Thee for the success. Open our
Eyes, O God, and teach us out of thy Law: Bless us with an exact and tender
sense of our duty, and a taste to discern perverse things: O that our ways
were directed to keep thy Statutes, then shall we not be ashamed when we have
respect unto all thy Commandments: Possess our hearts with a generous and holy
disdain of all those poor enjoyments which this World holds out to allure us,
that they may never be able to inveigle our Affections, or betray us unto any
Sin: Turn away our eyes from beholding vanity, and quicken thou us in thy Law.
Fill our Souls with such a deep sense and full persuasion of those great Truths
which Thou have revealed in the Gospel, as may influence and regulate our whole
Conversation, and that the life which we henceforth live in the flesh, we may
live through Faith in the Son of God. O that the infinite Perfections of thy
Blessed Nature, and the astonishing Expressions of thy Goodness and Love, may
conquer and overpower our hearts, that they may be constantly arising toward
Thee in flames of Devoutest Affection, and enlarging themselves in Sincere and
Cordial Love toward all the World for thy sake: and that we may cleanse our
selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in thy
fear, without which we can never hope to behold and enjoy Thee. Finally, O God,
grant that the consideration of what thou art, and what we our selves are, may
both humble and lay us low before Thee, and also stir up in us the strongest
and most ardent aspirations toward Thee. We desire to resign and give up our
selves to the Conduct of thy Holy Spirit: lead us in thy Truth and teach us,
for thou art the God of our Salvation: Guide us with thy Counsel, and
afterward receive us unto Glory: for the Merits and Intercession of thy
Blessed Son our Savior. Amen.

FINIS.
AN ACCOUNT OF THE BEGINNINGS and ADVANCES OF A Spiritual Life. Written at the
Desire of M. L. V. R.

