Hooker Mayor.

Cur. specialis tent Mercurii vo. die November. 1673. Annoque Reg. Car. sec.
Angl. etc. XXVo.

It was Ordered by this Court, That Mr. Scot be desired to print his Sermon,
this day preached at the Guild Hall Chapel, before the Lord Mayor, and
Aldermen of this City.

Wagstaffe.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Right Honorable THE Lord Mayor, AND COURT of
ALDERMEN; At Guild Hall Chapel, upon the 5th of November, 1673. IN
Commemoration of ENGLANDS Deliverance from the Gunpowder Treason.

By John Scott Minister of St. Thomas's in Southwark.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Tailor, at the Hand and Bible in the New Buildings on
London Bridge, 1673.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY To the Right Honorable Sir William Hooker, Lord Mayor
of London, and to the Right Honorable the Court of Aldermen.
Right Honorable,
THough I esteem my self as much as I deserve, and perhaps a little more, yet I
thank God I was never yet so partial to my self, or fond of my own Conceptions,
as to think the Publication of them an Act of Charity, either to the world, or
to the Bookseller; and as for this Discourse, I assure you, had not you had a
better opinion of it then I; I should have been so charitabl as to have kept it
within doors, and not to have exposed it to the open Air, in which I have known
many wiser discourses to have gotten their bane; but I shall not be so
unmannerly as to control your opinion, which yet I doubt had not been so
favorable to me, had not your Judgments been bribed by your Zeal to the
Protestant Religion, against the Adversary whereof this discourse was designed,
perhaps the Protestant Reader, who is unacquainted with the transactions of the
last 600 years, may think I have been too severe upon the Roman Religion,
charging it with such bloody Principles, and Practices: to which I shall say no
more then this; that if I have falsified its Character, or represented it
fouler than it is: let me endure the shame, and punishment of a common
Calumniator; but if I have drawn it according to its own natural Features, and
Complexions; it is not my fault that it appears deformed, and if it be as bad
as it is represented, it makes invectives enough against it self, and carries
its Satyrs in its own bosom: But what I have said of it is all matter of Fact,
which I have proved by the testimony of their own Authors, who cannot be
supposed to be false witnesses against themselves, and if, after this, any one
should be so obstinate as to suspect me of forgery; let him peruse the
Martyrologies of the six last Centuries, and compare them with the bloodiest of
all the ten Pesecutions: and I doubt not but he will be of my opinion, viz.
that Domitian and Dioclesian were but puny Persecutors, and Bunglers in cruelty
compared with the infallible Cutthroats of the Apostolical Chair.

Having thus accounted for the honesty of this discourse; I have no more to say
for it, but only this; that however it may succeed, it was well intended; and
if it prove any way instrumental to alay the un-Christian heats, and
Animosities among us, to promote the peace of the Church, and the interest of
the Protestant Religion, I have my design: and though I should be defeated in
this, it will be some satisfaction to me, that I have honored my self before
the world by this address, and testified by my ready compliance with your
commands how really I am,

RIGHT HONORABLE Your most humble and Faithful Servant John Scott.

A Sermon Preached before the Right Honorable the LORD MAYOR and Court of
Aldermen, November. 1673.
Luke 9. 56. For the son of man came not to destroy men's lives, but to save
them.
IT is the glory of the Christian Religion, that it has conquered the World,
and triumphed over all that opposed it, without any other weapon but its own
victorious Beauty, and reasonableness: had it been Proclaimed by the mouths of
Canon, or marched like Paracelsus his Demon, upon the pummel of the Sword: it
had been Rivalled by sundry successful Impostures; and the Alcheron it self
would have compared Victories with it: but in this it has the preeminence of
all the Religions that ever were, that it achieved its Conquest without Scrib
or Sword, without the aid of Worldly Force, or Policy: that by its own native
Light, it Vanquished the Ignorance and Prejudice of the World; and by pure dint
of Reason, subdued men's minds to its Impire: for 'twas not by Racks and
Tortures, that it Converted Infidels, and Convinced Heretics; but by Reason,
and Miracles; and till it began to be sophisticated with temporal interests,
and designs, it taught its followers only to endure, but not to inflict
Persecutions: for this was their language in the purer Ages, Non est
Religionis, cogere Religionem, quae suscipi debet sponte, non vi, as Tertull.
expresses it. Religion presses no man to her service, and disdains to have any
Followers, but Volunteers; but when once its Followers began to bend it to
their interest, and make it the Solicitor of their temporal designs, to break
into Parties, and imbarque their own Reputation, and in the success of those
disputable Opinions, that distinguished them, then according as they had the
luck to succeed in their Disputes, and the favor of the Emperors, they began
to solicit, and arm the temporal power against their Adversaries; in which bad
practice, they imitated those, whom in all other things they did condemn;
namely the Arrians the Circumcellians, and Donatists, who were the first
Christians that either persuaded, or practiced persecution; and yet for a long
while so abhorrent it was from the temper of Christians, that Vrsatus, and
Ithrius, two otherwise Catholic Bishops, for persuading Maximus to destroy the
Priscillianists, were branded by their Brethren with an infamous Character, and
sharply reproved by the good Bishop of Trevers, who plainly tells them, Sulp.
Sev. Hist. lib. p. 152.
Satis, superque sufficere ut Episcopali sententia haeretico Judicati Ecclesijs
pellerentur: novum est, and inauditum nefas: ut causam Ecclesiae Judex seculi
judicaret: It is sufficient that Heriticks be banished by the Church as
Outlaws, from the Communion of Christians: but it is a now and unheard of
wickedness, that a Cause of Religion should be judged and punished at a secular
Tribunal; and yet this was above 370 years after Christ: but as the Churches
fortunes grew better, and her Sons grew worse, and some of her Fathers worst of
all: so Persecution and Tyranny prevailed in Christendom, till at last it was
baptized, into the name of Zeal, and enthroned among the graces of Religion:
for if we look into the History of the Roman Church, we shall find Persecution
first Preached from the Infallible Chair: the Popes whereof growing great, and
proud, and impatient of contradiction, began first to murmr against the
Tollerations of the Novatians, which being a great eyesore to those haughty
Prelates, as soon as they had gotten power into their hands, they rooted them
out by Force and Violence, but yet they had not so far abandoned all their
natural sense of mercy and goodness, as to proceed to bloodshed, till the
Divine Right of Fire and Faggot was invented by St. Dominick, that rabbid and
furious Incendiary, by whose instigation the Albigenses were wasted by a
dreadful War, and 180 of them burnt to death, because they would not abjure
their Religion: which horrid butchery was acted by the Commission of Pope
Innocent the third, Antinin. pars 3. Tit. 19. cap. 1.
who to encourage it, granted a plenary pardon and indulgence to the
Executioners, and now like Lybian Tigers, having tasted Blood, they thirst
insatiably for more; and instead of Pastors turn Buttchers to the Flock of
Christ, by their repeated Cruelties, converting that Church into an infamous
Slaughterhouse of Christians, which was once so famous a Seminary of Martyrs;
and for these 600 years bleeding, has been the only Remedy those Spiritual
Mountebancks have prescribed, to cure the Diseased Church; and this has been
cried up as their great Catholicon; witness the infinite Slaughters they have
acted and instigated in Italy Bohemia, the upper and lower Germany: witness the
Spanish Inquisition, where the Holy Fathers confute Heretics with Racks and
Gibbets; witness the Parisian Massacre, where our Religion was consuted only
with Skenes, and Daggers, witness the Marian days, wherein the Roman Faith was
defended so gloriously against all Arguments, with only that Dreadful Text,
Recant or Burn: and if all this be not enough, witness that Horrid Power Plot,
the Prevention of which we now Commemorate; a Villainy so Foul and Monstrous, as
was never Paralleled either in Fiction or History; and compared with which,
the most Tragic Scenes of Melancholy Poets, and dismal Phantasms of Despairing
Souls, are but all Comic Tales, Subjects of Sport and Laughter: a Tragedy so
deep and bloody, that certainly had the most barbarous Canibal in America been
hired to act it, the very thought of it must have startled him into an Agony;
and he could not but have relented, considering thus with himself; I am now
giving Fire to a Train, which at one blow will Ruin a whole Kingdom, tear in
pieces its King and Princes, and scatter their Members in the Air, strew its
Fields with the Limbs and Quarters of its slaughtered Nobles and Gentry, fill
its Streets with the Threns and Lamentations of woeful Mothers, the shrieks and
out cries of desolate Wives and Children, shake its goodly Temples, and Royal
Palaces into ruins, and in one moment lay all its glory in the dust: and yet
[O tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askalon!] All these
Cruelties were designed under the livery of the most merciful Jesus, and this
Cannibals feast of Fellow Christians blood prepared to entertain the Father of
Mercies, and the Prince of Love; as if they like the Heathens Demons, fed
their hungry Nostrils with the Niderous reeks and steams of humane sacrifices:
Thus by degrees you see Persecution is imbodyed into the Romish Religion; and
when Heresy is the Disease, Ruin is the only Remedy: A sure one indeed; but O
how heavenly wide of those mild prescriptions of the great Physician of souls!
who being urged by his own Disciples to revenge himself upon a company of rude
and obstinate Scismaticks, solemnly professes, that he came not to destroy men's
lives, but to save them. The occasion of which words was an affront which the
Samaritans had offered to our blessed Savior; who being notorious Scismaticks,
and professed enemies to the Jews, that worshipped at Jerusalem, refused to
entertain our Savior for one night; perceiving he was a Jew, and so of a
contrary Religion to themselves, upon which James and John moved with great
indignation, to see their blessed Master so unworthily treated, request him,
that after the example of Elias, they might call for fire from Heaven to
destroy them: but he no way approving their motion, severely rebukes them for
it, and plainly tells them, that they knew not what spirit they were of; as
much as if he should have said; if you will needs imitate that Legal zelotick
spirit Elias acted by; whatever you pretend, you act not like my Disciples,
whose spirit and genius ought to be more tender and merciful; and therefore,
though these Samaritans are of a different Sect* and Religion, and will not
embrace me, nor my Doctrine; yet far be it from me to destroy them; for this is
quite contrary both to my temper, and the design of my coming; which is not to
destroy men's lives, but to save them. So that you see the plain scope of the
words is this; That to destroy men's lives upon the score of Religion, is a
practice contraty to the Spirit of Christ, and the design of his Religion.
Before I proceed to the proof of this Proposition, I shall briefly endeavor to
state, and restrain it within its just bounds and limits: and they are these
four.

First, That it is not to be understood of any Religion, that is in its own
nature wicked and immoral: for if a man's Religion teaches Vice, or directly
patronizeth it, his Vice is not the less punishable, because his Religion
prompted him to it. Indeed if he keep his wicked Opinion to himself, it cannot
be punished, because it cannot be known; but if he persuade others to it, or
practice it himself; it becomes matter of fact, and is as punishable as the
crime is it persuades to: for the great Rules of Virtue and Good Life, are so
clear and perspicuous, that a man cannot be ignorant of them, without being
faulty: and therefore if a man embrace a wicked Opinion, and act or spread it,
the matter of fact is justly punishable, according to the proportion of its
malignity. And indeed if wicked actions were to be excused upon the score of
Conscience, or Opinion, Religion would be made a Sanctuary for all the
villainies in the world; and there is no crime so monstrous, but would make a
shift to shelter it self from punishment under the protection of Conscience.

Secondly, And more particularly, that the Proposition is not to be understood
of such Opinions, as either directly, or in their immediate consequents,
undermine the foundations of Government: for Government being indispensably
necessary to the well-being of the world, men ought to know that that can be no
good Religion which teaches Doctrines, whose consequents destroy it; and
therefore its just and reasonable it should be rooted out, as a dangerous post,
and nuisance to the public interest; and the necessity of the thing, will
justify the lawfulness of it: For were Princes bound to tolerate ungovernable
principles, they must be Kings no longer than they can get leave to reign, from
the humor or conscience of each hot-brained Opinionists; and all their
Authority must be dependant upon the little capricio's of every peevish Zealot;
the consequents of which must be the dissolution of Government, and that an
inlet to all disorder and confusion: and therefore those that under a pretense
of Religion propagate such principles, are justly accountable for all the
consequent inconveniences, and punishable accordingly.

Thirdly, That the Proposition is not be understood of our practice, but of our
Judgments and Opinions: for every man has a natural Right, as he is a
Rationable creature, to judge for himself; and to punish any one for so doing,
is the greatest tyranny in the world; it being an exercise of dominion over the
minds of men, which are subject only to the Empire of God; but as for our
practice, that is liable to the restraints of humane Laws; and that as well in
Sacred, as in Civil Affairs; they cannot indeed oblige us to do what God has
forbidden us, because his, being the supreme Authority, ought to take place
against all the countermands of any inferior power whatsoever: but then there
are a world of things which remain in a state of indifferency, and are left
undetermined both by the natural, and positive Laws of God: and these are all
liable to the commands and determinations of humane Authority, and are the
proper matter of Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws; to the extent of whose
jurisdiction, there can be no other restraint, than only the countermand of a
Superior Authority; and therefore if there be nothing antecedently evil
enjoined by the Laws, whether Civil, or Ecclesiastical, we are bound to obey
them; and if we do not, we are justly punishable for our disobedience. Indeed
if we believe the thing enjoined to be evil, though it be not, we ought not to
do it, in obedience to the Supreme Authority of God, which we believe has
forbidden it: but yet if we mistake, and the thing be not evil, but in its own
nature indifferent, we are justly punishable for the not doing it, because our
mistake alters not the nature of the thing; if it be indifferent, it is a
proper object of humane Laws, whether we think it so or no, and as such may
justly be imposed; and the imposition being just, our not obeying it must needs
be justly punishable. In this extremity therefore we have no other redress, but
to seek information, and get our mistaken consciences better instructed; and if
when we have done all, we cannot alter our Opinion, our meek and patient
submission to the penalty, will be our excuse before the Tribunal of God.

Fourthly, And lastly, that the Proposition is not to be understood of our
making a public profession of our Opinions, so as to disturb the Peace of the
Church with them, so long as men are humble and modest in their dissent, and do
not go about to advance their Opinions into Factions, and to divide and rend
the Church in the propagation of them, I see no reason why they should be
punished, and persecuted for them; but if men openly profess their dissent, to
the prejudice of the public Peace and Intrest, and dote so much upon their own
conceits, as to fancy them necessary for all the rest of Mankind, and
consequently go about to vex their neighbors, provoke their Rulers, and
unsetttle the Government for the propagation of them: if through an
inconsiderate Zeal for their own notions, they should be active and industrious
to make a Party against the Church, and withdraw others from her communion,
they are offenders to the publck Peace, and as such are justly liable to
punishment: for they ought to consider, that unless their Opinion be of greater
moment than the Churches Peace, it ought to vail, and give way to it, and that
there are no Opinions weighty enough to balance the Churches Peace, whose
contraries do not undermine Christianity it self, and utterly defeat the ends
of Christian Society: for everyman is obliged, by virtue of being in Society,
to do his utmost to preserve the honor and intrest of it, and to join in all
acts of it, so far as they tend thereunto; and dissent from every thing which
tends to the apparent ruin of that Society. Now the main end of Christian
Society, being the honor of God, and the salvation of souls: the primary
reason of men's entering into Churches, or Christian Societies, is to advance
these ends, and to join in all acts of the Society they are listed into, so far
as they tend to the advancement of them; but if any thing be required of us
directly repugnant to these ends, we are bound to manifest and declare our
dissent from them, and if for so doing we are (...) cast out of the particular
Christian Society; by so doing, and suffering, we preserve our communion with
the Catholic Society of Christians; but if I am never so much persuaded that
such a practice or Article of the Church is an error; yet if it be not such an
error as does defeat the great ends of Christian Society, I am bound either to
keep my parswasion to my self, or at least not to disturb the Peace of the
Church in my endeavors to propagate it to others; because, next to the honor
of God, and the salvation of souls, the Churches Peace is to be valued above
all things whatsoever; and therefore is not to be disturbed for the sake of
every little error, and trifling Opinion: It is sufficient that we are allowed
the liberty of opining, and are not deprived of our natural right of judging
for our selves; and we ought not to complain, though we should be restrained by
Laws and penalties, from making Parties against the Church, and propagating our
little Opinions into Factions; since if we will not restrain our selves,
without such a restriction, it is impossible there should be any Peace among
Christian Societies; every hot-brained Opinionist will be making a Party for
himself; and every differing Opinion will grow into a Sect; and so there will
be continual dividing and subdividing, till the Christian world be crumbled
into as many Churches, as there are Opinions; and as many Opinions as there are
men: for whilst every one is zealously propagating his little Opinion, no man
will let his Brother be quiet: this man will be ready to burst till he has
vented himself; and the other will be as impatient till he has contradicted
what he has said: and whilst both are thus zealous to proselite each other,
neither will be content with a single conquest; but the public must be
disturbed, and by the Zeal of the contending Parties, rent into infinite Sects
and Divisions; so that you see it is indispensibly necessary, that there should
be some restraint, though not upon men's Opinions, yet upon their public
profession of them, since without it, the Church will be inevitably exposed to
perpetual tumults and disturbances. Having thus stated and bounded the
Proposition, you see the plain meaning of it is this, That it is contrary to
the Spirit of Christ, and the genius of Christianity, to destroy or persecute
men for mere Opinions, or errors in Religion: that it is so, I shall endeavor
to prove from these following Instances.

I. It is contrary to that tenderness and compassion which Christianity
requires of us: For our Religion enjoins us to sympathize with the miserable;
and not to add afflictions to the afflicted; and therefore fallibility being
the natural imperfection, and unhappiness of humane understandings, the errors
of them should rather be the subject of our pity, than our revenge: for it is as
much out of our power, not to err, as not to be sick or die: and we may as
reasonably punish a man for not being immortal, as for not being infallible:
for the seeds of fallibility are sown in the nature of our understandings, as
well as those of mortality in the temper of our bodies: and we can no more
avoid being mistaken in all instances than we can prevent the consumption of
our radical moisture: all we can do is to endeavor not to err: to stand as
fast as we can in the center of Truth; but if when we have done so, we should
reel on either hand toward the circumference of error; we have done our duty,
and were not bound not to be mistaken: for no obligation can reach a man's
conscience, if it be impossible; we cannot be bound to do more than our best;
to have the understanding of an Angel, or to be infallible; for these are
things that are not within the sphere of our choice, and therefore are no
matters of Law, or subjects of rewards and punishments: It Is true, error is
many times occasioned by a corrupt byas in the will; and men's understandings
are frequently misled by their lusts; and then indeed the error has a guilt
derived to it from that evil principle to which it owes its original: but if we
see men honest in their lives, we are bound to think them so in their errors
too; and if their errors be only innocent mistakes, what an inhumanity is it
to persecute them for that which is their misery only, and not their sin! who
but a Barbarian would cut a man's throat, for being poor, or blind, or lame? and
is it not altogether as barbarous, and cruel to destroy a man for that, which
is the poverty, and blindness, and lameness of his understanding? what is this,
but to lay load upon load; to trample upon the prostrate, and heap miseries on
the miserable? Suppose that a different education, different Books and company,
have cast thy Brothers understanding into a different figure from thine; is it
reasonable that therefore thou should persecute and destroy him? or rather
is it not as unreasonable, as if thou should cut off his head, because he
has a dimple upon his chin, or a mould on his cheeks, or some line in his face
that renders him unlike thee? suppose he has the ill luck to believe some
Proposition, which to you and I seems wild, absurd and unreasonable, must we
presently beat out his Opinion with his brains, because the poor soul was so
unfortunate as to be misled by education, and imposed upon by Authority and
Custom, which we see do so often cheat the honestest minds; and like a mighty
whirlpool, having once sucked a man in, do keep his head under water, and make
it almost impossible for him to emerge, or recover himself? How can such a
piece of cruelty, do ye think, consist with the tenderness and compassion which
our Religion enjoins.

II. It is destructive of the union and harmony among Christians, which the
Christian Religion requires: for certainly the design of Christianity is not to
reconcile men's notions, or to beget in the world an universal harmony in
systems of orthodox Opinions; which considering the frame of humane nature, the
infinite variety of men's ages and complexions, and the different sizes of our
understandings, would be, I doubt, as vain a project, as to attempt to build a
Castle in the Air nor indeed is it necessary that men should be all of one
Opinion, any more than that all should be of one humor and temper: for as in
these, Divine Providence has made a great diversity, in which there is both
beauty, and convenience: so perhaps for the same reason it has contrived
variety of Opinions, in which if there were an universal harmony, mankind would
be at a loss for subjects of discourse, and so be deprived of a great part of
the pleasures of conversation. The union therefore which our Religion does so
studiously design, and zealously promote, is that of hearts and affections, and
this, I doubt not, might well enough consist with different Opinions, were they
but managed with that Humility, Modesty, and Charity which becomes Christians:
were we but so modest, as to propose our Opinions calmly, or to keep them to
our selves; so humble as not to overvalue our own notions, and fancy them
necessary for all the rest of mankind; so Charitable, as to allow our Brethren a
liberty of Opining, and not to Damn and Persecute them, because their Brains
are of a different Figure from ours; I cannot imagine why difference in Opinions
should more disturb the Church, than difference in Faces; for such a demeanor
one toward another would infallibly keep our Charity alive, which when all is
done, is the strongest ligament of Christian Society, and the surest band of
the Communion of Saints; for this will twine and clasp our souls together, and
tie us one to another by the heart strings: But the destroying men's lives upon
the score of their Opinions, is the most effectual way in the world to supplant
Charity. For how is it possible, considering the passions of humane nature,
that the Persecuted Party should love their Persecutors, whom they see armed
with Fire and Faggot to destroy them? and when once they hate them (as they
will soon do when they (...) them) their passion will immediately provoke their
Reason to damn and censure them, which is the only means that Persecuted People
have a stay to the stomach of their hungry Vengeance, till they have power, and
opportunity to glut it in the blood of their Persecutors: and if in the
revolution of things, the Persecuted should get above their Persecutors, what
can be expected, but that to preserve themselves, they will destroy them from
whom they can expect nothing but destruction, should another revolution mount
them uppermost again; and so Christendom will be made a Cockpit of Cruelties,
and as often as men's understandings are deceived, and abused; so often there
will be new Executions and Massacres, which must therefore needs be the more
cruel and unmerciful, because they are so Consecrated with a pretense of
Religion: for when Religion, which should be the Antidote of our Cruelty,
proves its greatest Incentive, it must needs run on the faster into mischief,
by how much that which stopped its course before, drives it on with the greater
violence; so that by Persecuting men upon the score of Opinion, we do what in
us lies, to banish Charity out of the World; and in the room of that Love and
Union, which our Religion injoyns, to introduce nothing but Rage, Revenge, and
Cruelty; and to make Christendom more Barbarous th^^ America.

III. It Is contrary to that method which Christianity prescribes us for the
Convincing Deceived, and Eronious Persons (...) for the only Remedy our Holy
Religion prescribes (...) the Cure of Error, is Charity, and Forbearance Piety
and Reason; for the sense and Spirit of (...) is described in these excellent
words of St. Paul, 2 Timothy 2. 24. The Servants of the Lord must not strive, but
be gentle unto all men; in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves;
if God peradventure will give them Repentance to the acknowledging the Truth.
So that unless we can torture men without striving with them, and meekly
instruct them by cutting their throats, its evident by this Text, we must
either not persecute men, or quit the title of being the servants of God. So
also the same Apostle in Gal. 6. 1. Brethren, if any man be overtaken with an
error, ye that are spiritual restore such a one in the spirit of meekness. And
sure there is some difference between destroying, and restoring a man; between
the halter, and the spirit of meekness. It Is true indeed, the procedure of the
Gospel was more severe and rigorous against wicked and obstinate Heretics; but
then it was not for their Opinions barely: but for the wickedness of their
Opinions, and obstinate perseverance in them, to the disturbance of the
Churches Peace; both which I have showed you are excepted cases: but yet as the
Gospel was a great deal tenderer of making Heretics, than the Church of Rome
is; so was it also a great deal gentler in punishing them; for its utmost
severity against them was excommunication, which at the worst did not destroy
men's souls; but only consigned them to that sad portion they had deserved, and
should have received independantly from the Churches censure; but the primary
design of it was to scare them into a lober mind; which if it obtained, it
proceeded no further (...) that in its own nature it was medicinal; and though
it was a distastful and uneasy potion, by reason it gave the Devil possession
of their bodies, to torture and afflict them; yet in it self 'twas wholesome,
and restorative, and did no man hurt, unless he would himself; but if he would
be obstinate in his wickedness, notwithstanding he felt the woeful effects of
it, he might thank himself for all that followed, it being his own obstinacy
that actuated the Judgment, and gave a sting to it. but to destroy a man's life
is as strange a way to cure him of his Errors, as cutting off his head is to
cure him of the Toothach; for the only way to reduce him, is to persuade his
understanding, which we shall hardly do by beating out his Brains; it is true
indeed, corporal punishments may make a man dissemble his Opinion, and profess
contrary to his Conscience and Judgment; but they have no more Virtue in them
to inform his Conscience, or rectify his Judgment than syllogisms, or
demonstrations have, to cure him of the Stone or Strangury, and therefore what
ever he may pretend, he cannot think his Opinion truer or falser, because you
threaten to wrack and torture him for it, for such premises can infer, no
conclusion but only that of his life, so whilst you attempt by such rough
arguments to force him into your Opinion; you may perhaps vanquish his Courage,
but you will never alter his Judgment; and if you make him a Hypocrite, and
terrify him into a Profession of what he does not believe; instead of erecting
a Trophe to God, you shall but build a Monument for the Devil: And as
Persecution is a bad remedy for Errors, so it is a worse Antidote against it;
for if you consult Ecclesiastical history you will find, that Fire and Faggot
has made more Heretics, than it ever destroyed, witness the Priscillianists,
who as Sulpitius tells us, were so far from being suppressed by the death of
Priscillian, that they were more confirmed by it, and grew much more numerous;
and it is the complaint of one of the Italian Inquisitors, that he had found
after 40 years experience, Ger. Busdrag. Epist. ad C^rdid. Pisar.
wherein they had destroyed above 100000 Heretics; they were so far from being
suppressed or weakened, that they were much more strengthened and increased.
For there is a popular pity that follows all persons in misery, which breeds
likeness of affection, and that very often likeness in Opinion; and so much the
rather, because he that Persecutes another for his Opinion, gives the multitude
reason to suspect, that that is the best argument he can urge against it:
whereas on the contrary, he that dies for his Opinion, and seals it with his
Blood, confirms it with the most popular argument in the world; for although
[as one says] laying a wager be an argument of confidence, rather then of
truth; yet when a man stakes his life and soul, it argues at least, that he is
resigned, and Honest, and Charitable, and Noble; and this among weak people
will more advance his Opinion then reason, and demonstration: So by persecuting
of Error, we do what in us lies to Canonize it; and by Crowning of it with the
glory of Martyrdom; we take an effectual course to increase the number of its
Voterys.

IV. And lastly, It is contrary to that care, and tender regard of Truth, which
Christianity injoyns us; for in many instances there is so near a resemblance
between Truth and Error, that our purblind reason can hardly distinguish
between them; and therefore if Error were left to the Persecutions of such
fallible creatures as we, Truth would be exposed to inevitable danger; for if
you set a blind man to weed your Garden; you must expect that sometimes he will
pull up flowers instead of weeds: and if we that are so prone to err, should be
authorized to root up Error, 'twould be impossible but we should sometimes
mistake, and root up Truth instead of Error; and therefore our Savior
considering this, has reserved that power in his own hands, as you may see at
large in Matthew. 13. 24. etc. Another Parable put he forth unto them, saying,
The Kingdom of Heaven is likened unto a man that sows good seed in his field,
and while men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares among his wheat, and went
away: upon which this man's servants ask him, in the 28 verse, if they should go
and gather up the tares; to which he answers him, nay, lest while ye gather up
the tares, ye root up also the wheat with them: let both grow together until
the Harvest. By the field here, all men agree, we are to understand the Church,
and by the seed sown in it, that of the pure and sound doctrines of Religion;
so that all the difficulty of the Parable, lies in understanding what is meant
by the tares, and what by the not gathering the tares: By the the tares, must
be meant either persons of wicked lives, or of false and evil Opinions; and by
the not gathering these tares, must be understood, either the not cutting them
off by the Temporal sword, or the not excommunicating, and cutting them off by
the Spiritual sword; but by the tares, cannot be meant persons of wicked lives,
for then the Text would forbid the punishment of evil doers; by not gathering
the tares, cannot be meant the not cutting them off by the Spiritual sword, for
then the Text would forbid the Church to excommunicate either wicked livers, or
obstinate Heretics: And therefore of necessity by the tares, must be meant
persons of evil Opinions; and by the not gathering them, the not destroying
them by the Temporal sword, and this Interpretation is very much favored, by
the reason that is given of the Prohibition, least ye also root up the wheat
with them; as if he should have said, as for external wickednesses, I freely
leave them to the lash of humane Judicatures; the rectitude or obliquity of
them being far more discernable, then of inward speculations, and Opinions; but
I will by no means trust you with the punishment of Errors; least through
interest, passion, or mistake, you should exterminate the Truth with it, for
you being so fallible, and apt to err, it is impossible but sometimes you must
miss the mark; mistake the wheat for tares, and hit the Truth, though you aim
at Error. Having thus showed you how contrary it is to the spirit, and genius
of Christianity, to destroy men's lives, upon the score of mere Opinion, or
Religion; I shall now conclude what I have said, with one inference from the
whole.

Use, From hence I infer, the Antichristian tyranny of the Church of Rome, who
has fleshed her self with so many slaughters, and dyed her Garments so deep in
the blood of Christians, upon no other score, but only their differing from
her, in some (at least) disputable, and harmless Opinions; because upon her
bare word they could not believe propositions, which to them seemed contrary to
sense, and reason, and Scripture and their Faith had not stomach enough, to
digest the most fulsome absurdities and swallow the grossest contradictions:
Blessed Jesu! that ever a Church pretending to be thy Spouse, should be so
forgetful of thy mercies, as to spill the blood of so many thousands of
Christians, upon no other account, but because they could not believe her
absolution such a Philosophers Stone, as to turn attrition into effectual
Repentance; and a few words of a Priest, such a powerful charm, as to conjure a
man to Heaven in an instant: and because thou have made holiness the sole
condition of eternal life, durst not depend upon confraternities, stations, and
priviledge-Altars, Agnus Dei's, little offices, amulets, and such like hallowed
baubles, because they could not worship Images, and pray to God, and Saints in
the same form of words, and durst not run from Scripture, to uncertain
traditions, and from ancient traditions, unto new pretenses; from reasonable
services, into blind devotions; from believing the necessity of inward acts of
piety, and devotion, into a dangerous temptation of resting upon the Opus
Operatum, the mere numbering of so many Beads, and saying of so many prayers!
that ever Christians should be destroyed by Christians, for not believing all
those monstrous absurdities, which transubstantiation implies, that Christ's
body may be in a thousand places at the same time; that it may stay in a place
while it is going from it, be both in, and out of the same place, in the same
moment; that it may come from Heaven to Earth, and yet never stir out of
Heaven, nor be any where in the way between; that his whole body is in each
crumb of each consecrated wafer, and that without being lessened, all its parts
are crowded up into one single attom, and lie all within the compass of a Pin's
head, though it be 4 foot long; that though it be whole and entire in every
crumb, and there be 10000 of these crumbs in 10000 distant places; yet does it
not multiply into 10000 bodies, but still remains one and the same: now what
greater tyranny can there be, than to destroy and massacre men for not
believing such a mass of palpable contradictions? and yet for these, and such
like causes it is that Rome has so often washed her barbarous hands in
Protestant blood; imbroiled the Christian world, and by the terror of her
awful thunderbolts, scared Subjects into Rebellion against their lawful
Sovereigns, and Sovereigns into persecution of their natural Subjects: of the
truth of which I could give you a thousand foreign instances; but in compliance
with the time and occasion, I shall rather choose to confine my self at home: to
destroy men's lives upon the score of Religion, was a practice never known in
England, till the time of Henry the 4th; who being an Usurper, and so liable to
many enemies, both foreign and domestic; sought to endear the Pope to him, who
was then moderator of Christendom, by sending him, as a token of his love and
duty, the blood of his enemies: and for many years after this was the yearly
sacrifice our English Monarks were fain to offer up to the Roman Idol; and
whenever through their own weakness, they either feared, or were forced to
flatter him; they had no other way to appease the angry Demon, but by causing
their children to pass through the fire to him, and glutting his thirsty
vengeance with their blood: but when afterward our English Monarchs threw off
the Roman yoke, and would no longer be the Popes Leeches; he immediately
issues out his Bulls, and excommunications to alarm their subjects into a
Rebellion against them: for immediately upon Queen Elizabeth's coming to the
Throne, Pope Paul the 4th. refuses to acknowledge her, pretending this Crown
to be a fee of the Papacy, and that therefore it was audaciously done of her,
to assume it without his leave; and because she would not turn out immediately,
when her great Landlord had given her such fair warning, Pope Pius the 5th.
takes out a Writ of Ejectment, issues out his Bull, and deposes her; in which
he thus expresserh himself, Volumus, and jubemus ut adversus Elizabetham
Angliae Reginam subditi arma capessant; it is our will and command that the
Subjects of England take up Arms against their Queen: upon which followed the
Northern Rebellion, and sundry private attempts of the Papists, to murder her:
Afterward Pope Gregory the 15th. having two Bastards to provide for, one of
his own, and another of the Emperors, he bestowed the Kingdom of England upon
the one, and that of Ireland upon the other; but neither of these prevailing,
Sixtus the 5th. curses her afresh, and publishes a crusade against her; and
bequeaths the whole right of her Dominions to Philip the 2d. King of Spain; but
when neither the Popes bounty, nor the blessings of his successors, nor the
Spanish Arms, nor Italian Arts, could prevail against God's providence, which
till the end of her days pitched its tents about her. Pope Clement the 8th.
seeing there was no other remedy, resolved to let her go like a Heretic as she
was, and to take more care that another Heretic might not succeed her; for
which end he sent over two Breves into England; one to the Clergy, and another
to the Laity; commanding them not to suffer any but a Catholic, though never
so near in blood to succeed her; the design of which was to exclude King James,
who was the sole Heir apparent to the Crown; upon which the Papists endeavored
to their utmost, to prevent his coming in, and afterward to throw him out
again; and when neither took effect, at last they resolve to send him to Heaven
with a vengeance, by a blow of Gunpowder; which was a villainy so black and
odious, that the Romanists themselves do blush to own it: And indeed, were it
not so apparent from the confessions of the Traitors themselves; who
acknowledged the Jesuits to be their Conspirators, that egged them on by their
pernicious counsels; swore them to secrecy by the holy Trinity, and gave them
the Sacrament upon it, that they should neither withdraw themseves from, nor
discover it to others without common consent: I say, were it not for these, and
a thousand other notorious circumstances, one would have thought it impossible
such a hellish design could ever have been acted under the wing and patronage
of the best Religion that ever was: but he that shall consider the bloody
principles with which the Roman Church has sophisticated Christianity, must
needs confess that there is no wickedness so horrid, of which her Religion will
not make her capable; for it is decreed by the Lateran Council, that in case any
Prince be a favourer of Heretics, the Pope shall discharge his Subjects from
their allegiance, and give away his Kingdom to some Catholic, who upon rooting
out those Heretics, shall possess it without contradiction: and it is the
general Doctrine of her most celebrated Divines, that the Pope has power to
depose Kings at his pleasure; and this Father Parsons determines to be a point
of Faith, to believe it is in the Popes power to depose Heretical Princes; and
that subjects are upon their being declared heretical, thereby absolved from
all duty of obedience to him; ^hil^p 1 edict. Elizab p. 149.
and this Bellarmin proves at large, by giving us sundry examples of Popes, who
have deposed Kings and Emperors; as of Gregory the second, who deprived the
Emperor Leo of a great part of his Dominions, because he opopposed the worship
of Images; of Pope Zacherie who deposed Childerick of France; of Gregory the
7th who deposed Henry the 4th Emperor of Germany; of Innocent the 3d, who
deposed the Emperor Otho the 4th; De Rom, Pont. lib. ^5. c. 8^.
of Innocent the 4th, who deposed Frederick the 2d, and Clement the 6th, who
also deposed Lewis the 6th, and so at last gravely concludes; that because they
had done so, they might do so still; as if wickedness were sanctified by wicked
Examples. So also Gregory de Valentia affirms, that an Heretical Prince may by
the Popes Sentence be deprived of his Life, T^m. 3. in Thom, dil. 1. q. 1^. p.
^.
Estate, and Sovereignty. But beyond all these are those Traitorous positions
of Mariana the Spanish Jesuit; who affirms, That it is not only Lawful to kill
a King upon the Popes S^ntance; but also upon the Verdict of a few Learned
Doctors: and discoursing pro and con of the most convenient way of doing it, at
last determines Prisoning to be the most Orthodox and Catholic. And if we look
into the Histories of these last 600 years, De Reg. Inst. l. 1. c. 6.
we shall find their practice has made a bloody Comment on their Doctrines;
for in those days when Excommunications from Rome were so terrible, and all
things shrunk at the flash of those Thunders; it was the ordinary Recreation of
those insolent Prelates, to play at Football with the Crowns of Princes, and
trample on the Necks of Emperors: as the Fredericks, the Henry's, the Lodovici,
Bavari, found by woeful experience, who were abandoned of their Subjects, their
Kindred, their Allies, their own Children; were trodden under foot, deposed from
their Empires, defamed as Heretics, and chased like Raskals. These goodly
Mirrours one would think were sufficient to warn all Christian Princes to shake
off the Yoke that for so many ages has galed the Necks of their Ancestors. But
if after so many woeful Examples, there should remain any doubt of the Tyrannick
Cruelties of Rome, let us Remember that pair of Royal Sacrifices the two last
Henry's of France, both barbarously murdered by the Popes Executioners: the
First by the hand of a Friar, Orat. Sixth. 5th. Prited at Paris 1589.
whose Villainy was commended by Pope Sixtus the 5th in an Oration to his
Cardinals; wherein he compares the Fact with the Incarnation and Resurrection
of Christ: and the Friars Virtue and Courage, and servent Love to God, to that
of Judith, and Eliazar, in the Maccabees. Blessed God! what wickedness will
these men stick at the head of whose Religion Cannonizeth Regicide, and
Christians murder a meritorious Virtue? and why should the Papists be ashamed
to own the Powder Treason, [which though it may compare with the blackest
Inte^^gues of Hell, and was foul enough to bring the Devil himself into
disgrace] yet was warranted by the Principles of their bloody Religion? But
it is an old Maxim of the Roman Politics, never to own an unsuccessful Villainy;
and without doubt had not the Parisian Massacre taken effect, in which 30000
Protestants were slaughtered in one night, the Papists would have as loudly
disclaimed that, as now they do the Powder Treason: but it being successful,
the news of it at Rome, as their own Thuanus tells us, Thuan. Hist. lib. 53.
was welcomed with Public Festivals, bonfires, and Tryumphs; the Pope himself
congratulating the Inhumane cruelty of the French King, commending the Faith of
those bloody Wretches, whose hands were imbrewed in the Slaughter, and
distributing his Paternal Blessings among them: And without all controversy
had Faux and Catesby been but as successful as they, their Faith had been as
much praised, and their Persons as much blessed; and the Fifth of November had
been as high a Festival in the Roman Calender, as it is now in the English.
Thus if you trace the Romish Religion in all her late Progresses, you will find
that her way has lead all along through a wilderness of Confusion, and a Red
Sea of Blood: and though now she exercises less Cruelties in the World, than
formerly; yet her Will is the same, her Principles the same, her Documents of
Cutting Throats the same, though blessed be God her Power and Interest is
abated: For now a days, Princes are grown too stout to kiss his Holiness's Toe,
to hold his Stirrup, and run like Lacquies at his heels: Those Golden Days are
gone, and he that was wont to Command, is fain to Entreat his own Children; and
as an Ingenious Author has observed, whilst Princes can stand upon their own
legs, they may go their own pace, as fast and as slow as they please; but
should any misfortune throw them upon all four, we shall soon see his Holiness
get up and Ride them what pace he pleases: and being bestrid by such a furious
Jehu, to be sure they will want neither Whip nor Spur to make them as swift to
shed blood as ever. For thus at present, the French King may allow his Hugonots
what liberty he pleases, and his Holiness is fain to sit still, and be silent;
being kept in aw by that Puissant Monarch, whose Cannon Bullets, are grown too
strong for his Thunderbolts: But the Case was otherwise with Charles the 9th,
who being weakened by Faction, and impoverished by civil Broils, was in a
manner necessitated to that Infamous Butchery at Paris, to appease the Pope,
and prevent the Excommunication he threatened him, unless he speedily destroyed
the Hugonots with Fire and Sword: And indeed the Pope is bound both by their
Councels, and Canons to destroy Heretics, if he can; and which is all one, to
Excommunicate their Favorers: for this is decreed in the 4th Lateran Council,
that all Heretics should be Excommunicated, and then delivered up to the lash
of the Secular Powers: but if the Prince, or Secular Power being Required, and
Admonished by the Church, do not endeavor to their utmost, to exterminate, and
destroy these Heretics, he shall be presently Excommunicated by the
Metropolitan or Archbishop; and if within a year he does not amend, his
obstinacy shall be signified to the Pope, Vt ex tunc ipse Vasallos ab ejus
fidelitate denuntiet absolutos, Conc. Lat. 4. c. 3.
etc. That from that time the Pope may denounce his Subjects absolved from
their Allegiance to him: Collect. diverse. constit pars 3. p. 72.
and Gregory the 13th, in that famous Bull of his, Entitled Literae processus
lectae die Coenae Domini, Excommunicates, all Hussites Wiclivites, Zuinglians,
Calvinists, Hugonots, and other Heretics, together with their Concealers, and
Favorers, and in general all those which desend them; so that according to
this Bull, a Child cannot conceal his Parents, nor a Prince Rescue his Subjecte
from the Popes Bloodhounds, under the Penalty of Excommunication. And Pope
Julius the 3d in another Bull, has determined, De Vita Ignati. l. 3. c 21. p.
335.
That if any man examine the Doctrines of the Pope, by the Rule of Gods Word,
and seeing it is different, chance to contradict it, he shall be rooted out
with Fire and Sword. Was not this a precious Vicar, do you think, thus to doom
men to slaughter, for not believing his own unreasonable dictates, before the
infallible Oracles of God himself? And yet these Bulls of the Popes, with the
rest of their Decretals, Extravagants and Clementines, are all inserted in the
body of the Canon Law of the Church of Rome, and so are made as good and
current Popery as ever was coined in the Council of Trent: and now, after all
this, me thinks it is impossible we should be so besorted, as to trust to the
cruel courtesies of Rome, whose Religion breaths nothing but blood and
slaughter. The cry indeed of the Roman Factors among us, is nothing but
Toleration, and liberty of Conscience; and since the Laws have proscribed them
for their Treasonous Practices, and for swearing themselves Vassals to the
Pope, whose countermands (if they are faithful to their own Principles) must
evacuate all their obligations to their natural Prince; What Tragical
Exclamations do they make against Persecution? as if they meant to have the
monopoly of it, that no body might persecute but themselves; and though in the
Popish Dominions, they are as fell and rabbid as so many Lybean Tigers, yet no
sooner do they set foot upon the English shores, but as if there were an
Enchantment in the soil, the Wolves turn Sheep immediately, or at least
disguise themselves in Sheeps clothing: but if ever these sweet and merciful
Gentlemen get into the Saddle again, we shall soon find them in another note,
and Persecution will be zeal again, and Racks and Gibbets Catholic Arguments,
and there will be no way to illuminate the understandings of us Heretics, like
the light of a flaming Fagget: For how can we expect it should be otherwise,
when we reflect upon what is past, when the Marian days are yet within our
prospect? and it is not half an Age ago since Ireland swam in Protestant blood,
which was spilt by the instigation of some of these fawning Hypocrites, who now
declaim forsooth for liberty of conscience, and defy persecution and all its
works: But this pretense, its evident, is only a copy of their countenances,
and without all controversy the bottom of their design is only to persuade us
to let them grow till they are strong enough to cut our throats; for it is the
subtilty of these Harpys never to show their talons till they have their prey
within their reach: but if what they pretend were Real, Why do they not allow
what they plead for, and indulg that liberty to dissenters abroad, which here
they crave for themselves? Why do they not as much exclaim against the Spanish
Inquision, which has been confirmed by so many Bulls of their own Popes, as
they do against the English Laws, and condemn the barbarous cruelties of the
one, as well as the milder severities of the other! for till they do so, we
have reason to believe that it is not against Persecution they exclaim, but
against being persecuted. But in the mean time, how can we expect that they
should be merciful to our bodies, whose Religion damns our souls? or that if
ever they get uppermost, [which God prevent:] they that are so uncharitable
now, as to shut us out of Heaven; should be so charitable then, as not to drive
us out of the world! For this is a Maxim founded upon the experience of all
Ages, That that Religion which damns us when it is weak, will burn us when it
is able.

Wherefore, since God in his mercy has delivered us from the Romish Tyranny;
let us with thankful hearts extol and praise his goodness, and take heed for
the future, least by our divisions, or apostacies we return again unto that
yoke of bondage; and since the Emissaries of Rome are now so busily pursuing
their old Maxim, Divide, and Impera, and blowing the coals of our divisions, in
hope at last to warm their hands at our flames; O that we would now study the
ways of peace, and reconciliation! and not like the miserable Jews, fall out
among our selves, while the Roman is at our Gates; for all the time we are
contending in the Ship, our Enemy is boring a hole in the bottom; and while we
are fomenting our unhappy differences, and tearing our own wounds wider, the
Priest and Jesuit are at work in our Doublets; who ever since their
Gunpowder-Treason was defeated, have been strewing trains of Wildfire among
our selves, to make us our own Executioners, and blow us up by our own hands:
For what else has been their business among us, but only to raise sects and
factions, and sow discords, and Divisions in the Church of England, which they
know is the only Bulwork of the Protestant Religion among us. O would to God we
would once heartily attempt to countermine them! as we might yet easily do.
Would we but once lay aside our unchristian passions, and prejudices, and study
mutual compliances, and prefer Religion before a Faction, and abate some little
Punctilioes to the soberer, and more governable Dissenters: These things if
they might obtain amongst us, would yet undoubtedly secure us against all the
attempts of our Adversaries, and Render their most hopeful design; desperate,
and unseasable: but if we will be deaf to all the Arguments which our common
Interests, and dangers suggest to us; if we will still squander into Sects and
Parties, and nothing will serve our turns but the Ruin of that poor Church
which for so many years has been the Shelter, and Sanctuary of the Protestant
Religion: The time may come perhaps, when we may dearly repent of our own
Follies, and remember, with tears in our eyes, that we had once an opportunity
to be happy. Let me therefore beseech you, even by all that love you bear to
the Protestant Religion, to your own safety, and to the lives, and souls of
your Posterity; to lay aside all Faction, Bitterness, and Animosity; lest by
your unchristian Divisions, you open the Floodgates of Popery on your selves,
and out a gap to let in the Stygian Lake of Ignorance, Idolatry, Superstition,
and Blood: which God of his Infinite Mercy avert. To whom be Honor, and Glory,
and Power, and Dominion, For ever.

FINIS.
There is lately Printed, a Sermon, Preached before the Honorable the Military
Company at St. Clements Danes July. 25. 1673. by the same Author: And are to be
Sold by T. Tailor at the Hand and Bible on London Bridge.


