A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF Sir JOHN BVCKWORTH, At the Parish Church
of St. PETER's le POOR IN BROADSTREET, December 29. 1687.

By JOHN SCOTT, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard; and Thomas Horn, at the South-Entrance of the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill, 1688.

IMPRIMATUR.

Guil. Needham. Jan. 10. 1687.

TO MY Lady Buckworth.
MADAM,
IN Obedience to Your Desires, I here present You with the Discourse I
delivered at the Funeral of Your Excellent Husband, and my never to be
forgotten Friend. And indeed considering how little there is in it, I have no
other Apology to make for the Publication of it, but that I could not without
some degree of Incivility refuse it, being urged with the concurrent Requests
of Your Ladyship, and the rest of those my worthy Friends his dearest
Relatives. Not that I altogether despair of its having some good Influence upon
Sober and Attentive Readers. There are some Thoughts in it which are apt enough
to Inspire considering Minds with good Affections and Resolutions. The Text, I
am sure, contains excellent Sense in it, and the Argument is mighty Serious and
Momentous: and how meanly soever I have managed it, some honest Reader, I hope,
may from hence take occasion to supply my defects out of his own Meditations,
and so to improve it to his everlasting Advantage. And as for Your Ladyship, I
hope the perusal of it, instead of reviving Your Sorrows for Your Dear Loss,
may be some way Instrumental to Animate You with a firm and vigorous
Resolution, to pursue that Blessed State, wherein This, and all Your other
Losses here, will ere long be abundantly repaired in a most joyous and
everlasting Fruition. And This, MADAM, is my hearty Prayers as well as my hope;
who am,

Your Ladyships Obliged and Faithful Servant, JOHN SCOTT.

ECCLESIAST. xi. 8. But if a man live many years, and rejoice in them all; yet
let him remember the days of darkness, for they shall be many.
I Shall not trouble you with the various rendrings of these words; which (with
a very little difference) do all amount to the same sense; viz. That supposing
it should be a man's good fortune to live very long, and exceeding happy in
this world; yet he ought to have great care that the Joys of this Life, do not
so wholly take up and ingross his thoughts, as to make him forget those days of
darkness, which must ere long succeed this delightsome Sunshine; which days
will be many more, and of much longer continuance than the longest Life of
happiness we can promise our selves in this World. So that all the difficulty
in these words, is, what we are to understand by the days of Darkness, which
are here opposed to a long Life of Joy and Rejoicing in this World? And this
difficulty will be easily resolved, by considering the foregoing Verse; Truly
the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing to the Eye to behold the Sun; upon
which it follows, But if a man live many Years, i. e. supposing he should for
many Years enjoy this pleasant spectacle of the light of the Sun, yet let him
remember those days of Darkness, wherein his Eyes shall behold the Sun and
Light no more, wherein he shall be laid up in a dark and silent Grave, whence
the light of the Sun is excluded, and where the sight of the Eyes is
extinguished; or as he expresses it in the Third Verse of the next Chapter,
wherein those that look out at the windows are darkened: So that we shall have
neither visible Objects, nor visive Organs; but be buried out of sight in deep
darkness and insensibility. By the days of Darkness therefore is evidently
meant all that space of time between our Death and our Resurrection, wherein
our Bodies shall lie mouldering in a dark Grave, utterly insensible of Good or
Evil, till by the powerful call of God they shall at length be roused up out of
this fatal slumber, into a state of Everlasting Life and Activity: And these
days, says he, shall be many, though they shall not run out to an infinite
duration, but at length conclude in a general Resurrection, yet they shall be
many, many more in all probability, than any man now alive can hope to live in
this World.

The words thus explained resolve into this sense, That how long and happily
soever men live in this World, they ought to entertain their thoughts with
frequent remembrances and considerations of their approaching Mortality. Which
is a duty so obvious to the Consciences of all men, as being founded on the
plainest and most conspicuous Reasons, that the men of all Ages, and Nations,
and Religions, have owned, and acknowledged it. Thus the Heathen Philosophers
teach, That our lives ought to be a Constant Meditation of Death; and that even
in our most pleasant, and healthful moments, we ought to look upon our selves
as Borderers upon Eternity; That we should still take care to mingle our
delights with the sad remembrances of our Mortality, and not suffer the Joys of
this Life to divert our Thoughts from that impending Fate, which ere long will
set an Everlasting period both to Them and That. But the necessity of
entertaining our minds with frequent Remembrances of our Latter end, is founded
upon far more powerful motives than a company of fine Sentences, and pretty
Sayings of Philosophers. For

First, It is necessary to moderate our Affections to the World.

Secondly, It is necessary to allay the Gaiety and Vanity of our minds.

Thirdly, It is necessary to put us upon improving our present enjoyments to
the best purposes.

Fourthly, It is necessary to fore-arm our minds against the Terrors of Death.

Fifthly, It is necessary to excite and quicken us in our preparations for
Eternity.

I. It Is necessary to moderate our Affections to the world; while we are
encompassed round with the pleasures and delights of this world, they commonly
so ingross our minds, that we shut our eyes against all futurities, and are
impatient to think of any thing to come, unless it be the continuance of this
happy scene of things which is at present before us; with which continuance we
are exceeding apt to flatter our selves, that so thereby we may heighten the
gust of our present enjoyments; to which the consideration of their leaving us,
or our leaving them, would be apt to give a very ungrateful farewell: and when
our thoughts are wholly intent upon these present goods; and upon the prospect
of their continuance, our affections must necessarily run out toward them with
an immoderate ardour and greediness. For now our flattering Imaginations
represent them to us as standing and permanent things, as a kind of immortal
heaven upon earth; and accordingly our affections pursue and embrace them as
the best of goods; and are for dwelling upon them, and building Tabernacles in
them, there to make their final abode, as in their highest and ultimate
happiness. Now there is no more effectual way to rouse men's minds out of this
flattering Dream of happiness, (from which if they persist in it, the dire
experience of a woeful Eternity will ere long awake them) than frequently to
entertain their minds with the thoughts of their departure hence. For when I
set my self seriously to think of my dying hour, that fairly represents to my
deluded mind, the true state and condition of all worldly happiness. Here I
plainly see that I am Tenant at will to a thousand contingencies, in every one
of whose power it is to turn me out of the World, and out of my Happiness
together, every moment of my life; and that when I have erected this childish
Castle of Cards, and housed my self in it, as in an imaginary Fortress of
impregnable security; it is in the power of every puff of wind to blow it down
about my ears, and bury me in its ruins. In every serious prospect of my
Mortality, I behold all my worldly enjoyments, which promised me such mountains
of happiness, standing round my deathbed, mocking at all my foolish hopes, and
exposing my baffled expectations to scorn and derision; and whilst in the
anguish of my Soul I cry out to them, O ye helpless impotent things, what are
now become of all your boasted comforts? you that promised to be a heaven upon
earth to me, why do not ye now help me in this my last Extremity? why do not ye
quench my raging Thirst? why do not ye cool my feverish Blood? why do not ye
ease my laboring Heart, and quiet my convulsed and tormented Bowels? All the
Answer they return is this, Alas poor deluded fool! it is not in us to relieve
or succor thee. But what will ye then forsake and abandon me, and shall I have
nothing left of all the mighty goods you promised, but only a Grave, a Coffin
and a Windingsheet? Alas, poor deceived wretch, we leave not thee, but thou
must leave us; being summoned away by a fatal power, which we can neither bribe
nor resist: thy body must go down into a cold dark Grave, and there lie utterly
insensible till the Resurrection; thy Soul must pass into the Region of
Spirits, whither we are not permitted to follow thee, and where thou will have
nothing to live upon to all Eternity, but only the Graces and Virtues of thy
own mind. Farewell then ye Treacherous Cheats and Impostors; that promised so
much, and now perform so little; miserable Comforters are ye all, and
Physicians of no value. Such thoughts as these the remembrance of our Mortality
will be frequently suggesting to us; and if such thoughts do not cool and allay
the heat of our Affections to the world, we are incurably fond of being
deceived and abused by it.

II. Frequently to remember our departure hence, is very necessary to allay the
Vanity and Gaiety of our own minds; whilst we are encompassed with the
delights of this World, our minds are generally too frolic and jovial to admit
of any serious impressions: and if at any time any good thoughts come in to
visit us, (as those two Angels did Lot in Sodom) to warn us of the dire Fate
that hangs over us, our Affections, like the drunken Sodomites, are presently
all in an uproar, and will never be quiet, till those unwelcome guests be
thrown out that disturb our Riots, and mingle harsh Discords with our jovial
Airs: and so long as we continue in this light vain temper, there is nothing
will be grateful to us but frothy mirth, or loose company, or gay Ideas of our
selves, and of our own Wit, or Wealth, or Beauty, or Finery. And thus we shall
fool away our Lives in perpetual Vanity and Impertinence; in rolling about from
Vanity to Vanity, and never be Serious, till we are forced to it by some woeful
experience. But now to fix such a Roving and Volatile temper, and thereby to
render it accessible and hospitable to wise and good Thoughts, I know nothing
more necessary than the frequent Remembrance of our Mortality: for as for the
future Worlds of endless Joy and Torment, though they are in themselves the
most serious things in the World; yet being both Future and Invisible, Vain and
Sensual Minds are not so capable of apprehending them with that degree of
certainty that is necessary to render them affecting and prevalent: But that we
must die, we are all as certain of as of our present Existence; and therefore
this, if any thing, must move and affect us. If therefore together with those
gay Idea's that possess our Minds, we would ever and anon mingle that of our
Mortality, that would soon reduce our squandered Thoughts, and make us Serious
in despite of our teeth. As for instance, when in thy night Thoughts thou art
priding thy self in the Pomp and Splendour of thy outward condition, think thus
with thy self, Alas, within a little while this Bed which now is as gay, and as
soft as the Sleep, and the Sins it entertains, must be my Deathbed; here I
must lie a languishing sad Corpse, which nothing in all this World can help or
ease: so that though now I should go on to add House to House, and Lands to
Lands, even till I am become the Lord of all my Horizon; yet in that sad Hour
all these will no more be able to relieve me, than the Landscape of them upon my
Walls, or my Hangings: then I may as successfully go to my Pictures, and try to
entertain my Mirth and Luxuries with them, or to recreate my Ear with
hearkening after painted sounds, or to gratify my Palate with the Image of a
Feast; as to give my self any ease or content with these gay things I am now so
proud of. And when at length I have groaned away my fleeting Breath, I must be
removed from all my company and attendance into a dark, lonely and desolate
hole of Earth, where all my present Pomp must expire, and be overcast with
Everlasting Darkness. Again, when in the Morning thou art entertaining thy
Vanity with thy Beauty, thy Wit, or thy fine Clothes, think thus with thy self,
Alas, fond Soul, all these gay objects of thy Pride, must ere long convert to
Rottenness and Corruption; that curled Forehead must be bedewed with clammy
Sweats; those sprightly Eyes must wax as dim as a sullied Mirror; that charming
Voice must grow as weak as the faint Echoes of a distant Valley; and all those
Lilies and Roses on thy Cheeks must wither into the paleness of Death, and
shroud themselves in the horrors of the Grave. Again, when in the Afternoon
thou have been entertaining thy self with Mirth, or Sport, or Luxury, go down
into the Charnel-house, and there survey a while the numerous Trophies of
victorious Death: In these ghastly Mirrors thou beholdest the true Resemblance
of thy future State: forty years ago that naked Skull was covered like thine,
with a thick fleece of curled and comely Locks; those empty holes were filled
with Eyes that looked as charmingly as thine; those hollow Pits were blanched
with Cheeks that were as smooth and amiable as thine; that grinning Mouth did
smile as gracefully, and speak as fluently as thine; and a few days hence thou
must be Rotting into just such another spectacle: And forty years hence perhaps
here may thy naked Ribs be found mingled with these scattered Bones; and then
should another take up thy bald Skull, as thou do this, he will find it
dressed in all the self-same horrors of this Deaths-Head; with its Nose sunk,
its Jaws gaping, its Mouth grinning, and Worms crawling in those empty holes
wherein now thy Eyes roll to and fro in Amorous glances; and a Toad perhaps
ingendring in that Brain that is now so full of sprightly Thoughts, and gay
Idea's. If with these, or such like Considerations of our Mortality, we would
now and then entertain our selves, they would by degrees wear off the Levity
and Vanity of our Minds, and compose us into such a degree of Seriousness, as
is necessary to qualify us for those Divine and Religious Considerations,
without which we can never expect either to be made good men here, or happy men
hereafter.

III. That we should frequently remember our Mortality, in the midst of our
most happy Circumstances here, is highly necessary to put us upon improving our
present enjoyments to the best purposes, considering what use the generality of
Men make of the Enjoyments of this World, It is really a great question,
Whether it would not be much better for them, even in respect of this Life, to
be without them, than with them. For either they shrivel them into
miserableness, or melt them into Luxury. The former of which impoverishes, and
the latter diseases them. For if the former be the effect of a man's prosperous
condition, it increases his needs; because before, he needed only what he had
not; but now he needs both what he has not, and what he has. His covetous
desires treating him as the Faulkner does his Hawk, still luring him off from
what he has seized, to fly at new Game, and never permitting him to prey upon
his own Quarry. And if the latter be the effect of his prosperity, that is, if
it melts him into Luxury, it thereby wastes his Health, to be sure, and
commonly his Estate too; and so whereas it found him Poor and Well, it leaves
him Poor and Diseased. And whereas it at first took him up from the Plough, it
at last sets him down at the Hospital. And in general, while he is possessed of
it, it only bloats and swells him; makes him proud and insolent, griping and
oppressive; pampers and inrages his Lust, and stretches out his Desires into an
insatiable Boulimy; sticks his Mind full of cares, and his Conscience of
guilts: And by all these woeful effects, inflames his Reckoning with God, and
treasures up wrath for him against the day of wrath. All which arises from the
want of a frequent Remembrance of our Mortality. For did we but often ruminate
upon this, that it is but a very little while that we have to enjoy the
Comforts of this Life, and that within a very few years, yea, perhaps a few
days, we shall be stripped of them all, and be sent as Nakedly out of this World
as ever we came in; and when we are gone hence, of all the Goods that we have
left behind us, we shall have nothing to live upon to Eternity, but only the
Good that we did with them, the Necessities that we Relieved, the Oppressions
that we Eased, the Nakedness that we Clothed, and the Hunger that we Satisfied:
these indeed will follow after us, and feed us with content and happiness to
eternal Ages. But if we are destitute of these, we shall ere long be Shipped off
from all our present enjoyments, and be Landed in another World, upon a strange
Inhospitable Shore, and there be left miserable poor Wretches, without so much
as one drop of the Comforts we now enjoy to satisfy our Tormenting desires, or
to quench our still raging Thirst after happiness: Then we shall Wish a
thousand and a thousand times over, that instead of gratifying our Luxuries
with the mispence of our Wealth, or feeding our insatiate Avarice with the
continual increase of it, we had by doing works of Piety and Charity with it,
made our selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that so when we
failed, they might receive us into everlasting habitations, and there entertain
us with pleasure and delight for ever. Well then, seeing that ere it be long we
must leave all these our present possessions behind us; it highly concerns us,
while we enjoy them, to do all the Good that we are able with them: and seeing
we are allowed to carry nothing of them but the Good we do with them along with
us, to enrich and maintain us in our Eternal condition; by doing Good with our
Wealth, we shall Convert and Proselyte it, and make that an Offering which
others make an Idol; we shall make this Earth Tributary to Heaven, and in a
much nobler Sense than the new Systeme of Astronomy teaches, advance it into a
Star, and a Celestial Body: by this we shall transmit it into the Eternal
World, as it were, by Bill of Exchange, there to be repaid us, Ten Thousand
fold in Glory and Honor and Immortality, and Ten Thousand Ages hence we shall
be enricht with the product of it, and receive a vast revenue of Happiness from
it for ever. Suppose now that you were a Merchant in a far Country, where you
were allowed for an uncertain time the benefit of free Trade and Commerce, in
order to your gaining a good Estate to maintain you whenever you should be
forced to return to your own Native Soil, would you be so indiscreet as to lay
out all the product of your Merchandise in Building fine Houses, or purchasing
great Farms, when you know not how soon you may be commanded to depart, and to
leave all these immovable Goods behind you, or rather would you not think your
selves obliged by all the Laws of Interest and Discretion to convert all your
Gain into portable Wealth, into Money or Jewels, or such moveable Commodities,
as when you depart hence you might carry home along with you, and there be able
to maintain your selves in many years ease and plenty. Do but think then, and
think it often, that here you are strangers, and foreign Merchants; that you
came hither from another World, to which you know not how soon you must return
again; that all the Wealth, the Houses and Lands, you gain by your present
Commerce, are immovable Goods, which you must leave behind ye when ye go from
hence, and that there is nothing of them Portable, but what you lay out in
Piety and Charity; and that therefore it concerns you, while you have
opportunity, to store and treasure up a plentiful proportion of these, that so
when you are Shipped off into the Eternal World, you may carry such an Estate of
them thither with you, as may suffice to maintain you there in Glory and
Happiness for ever.

IV. That we should frequently remember our Mortality, even in the midst of our
most happy Circumstances here, is highly necessary to fore-arm our minds
against the Terrors of Death. Whilst we abound with the enjoyments of this
Life, we are apt to put far from us the evil day, and with the rich Churl in
the Gospel, to promise our selves many years Ease and Voluptuousness in this
World: So that Death generally steals upon us before we are aware, and like a
Thief in a frightful Vizor surprises in the midst of a deep Security, and after
we have strugled with him a few moments to no purpose, robs us of our Lives and
our Happiness together. And O how terrible must Death be when it approaches a
man under such Circumstances; when the poor deluded wretch has been just
Singing a soft Requiem to himself, Soul take thy rest and ease, thou have goods
laid up for many years, and many years to possess and enjoy them; For Death now
to pronounce that fatal sentence, Thou fool this night shall thy soul be taken
from thee. Now when he thought all was safe, and concluded himself secure of a
long Lease of Life and Happiness: Now before he has given himself the leisure
to think of his Dying hour, or to fortify his Heart with any wise or good
Thoughts against the Terrors of this terrible one, that is just now brandishing
its fatal shaft at his breast! How must it needs blank and amaze and confound
him? and what a trembling horror must it strike through his Heart, to see
himself thus unexpectedly hurried away, one part of him to the Grave, and the
other to Eternity, now when he thought himself so securely possessed of a long
enjoyment of the good things of this Life. Wherefore as we would be fore-armed
against the Terrors of Death, and enabled to abide his dreadful approaches with
a firm and constant Mind, it concerns us now while we are surrounded with the
Joys and Pleasures of this Life, to entertain our Minds with frequent thoughts
and remembrances of him; to retire now and then into the Charnel-house, and
there to read Lectures to our selves upon the Skelitons and Deaths Heads, those
emblems and representations of our approaching Mortality: and from them to take
such lively Pictures and Ideas of this King of Terrors, as may render his grim
visage and fearful addresses more familiar to us, and give our thoughts a more
intimate acquaintance with him, and with the manner and method of his
approaches; with what an Army of Diseases he is wont to lay Siege to the Fort
of our Life; and how in despite of all the resistances of Nature, he plants and
quarters them in our Veins and Arteries, and Stomachs and Bowels, and from
thence infests us all over with continual Anguish and Pain: how when he has
tired and exhausted us with his continued Batteries, and worn out our strength
with an uninterrupted succession of wearisom Nights to sorrowful Days, he at
last storms the Soul out of all the outworks of Nature, and forces it to
retire into the Heart; and how when upon this last retreat of Life he has
marked us for dead, in a cold Baptism of clammy and fatal Sweats, he summons
our weeping Friends together, to assist him in grieving us with their parting
kisses, and sorrowful adieus; and how at length when he is weary of tormenting
us any more, he rushes into our Hearts, and with a few mortal Pangs and
Convulsions tears the Soul from thence, and turns it out to seek its fortune in
the wide world of Spirits, where it is either seized on by Devils, and carried
away to their dark Prisons of Sorrow and Despair, there to languish out its
Life in a dismal expectation of that dreadful day wherein it must change its
bad condition for a worse; or be conducted by Angels to some Blessed Abode,
there to remain in unspeakable Pleasure and Tranquillity, till the great day of
its Coronation with a Glorious Resurrection. If we would thus frequently survey
our approaching Mortality in all the Circumstances and Appendages of it, we
should hereby familiarize its Terrors to our Minds, so that when ever it
happens to us, our thoughts which have been so long accustomed to converse with
it, will be much less startled and amazed at it, and the often remembrances we
have past upon it, will put us upon laying in such wise and good Thoughts and
Considerations as are best able to fortify our minds against it, and to
inspire us with Courage and Alacrity under it.

V. And Lastly, Frequently to remember our Mortality in the midst of our most
happy Circumstances here, is highly necessary to excite and quicken us in our
Preparations for Eternity: and hence it is that we are so often called upon in
this Militant Estate to consider our latter end, Deuteronomy. 32. 29. and by the
examples of the best men, are invited So to number our days that we may apply
our hearts unto wisdom, Psalm. 90. 12. and to wait till our change comes, Job
14. 14. To which end also we are put in mind, that Here we have no abiding
City, Heb. 13. 14. and that it is appointed for all men once to die, Heb. 9. 27.
and that our life is even as a vapor that appears for a little time, and then
vanishes away, Jam. 4. 14. And to this purpose the Apostle applies this
consideration, 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30, 31. Now this I say, brethren, (i.e. of our
uncertain abode and continuance here) (upon which he exhorts us to compose our
selves to a great indifferency as to the things of this World) it remains, that
they that have wives, be as if they had none: and they that weep, as though
they wept not: and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not: and they
that buy, as though they possessed not: and they that use this world, as not
abusing it: for the fashion of this world passes away, i.e. Since your time
here is so very short and uncertain, see you endeavor beforehand to loosen
your selves from this World, and to put your selves into a fit posture to leave
it; for it is but a short Scene of things, that will quickly be shifted, and
then there will an Eternal state of things succeed. And indeed, since to Die
well is the last Act and final Consummation of our Life; it must needs highly
concern us, to arm and prepare our selves for it beforehand, lest we lose the
prize, by stumbling just at the Goal; and after a long Voyage, miscarry within
sight of Harbor. For in the hour of Death we throw our last Cast for an
Eternity of Happiness or Misery: And how much are we concerned to throw that
well, upon which so vast a Stake depends? O my Brethren, it is a most serious
thing to Die, to pass this dark Entry of Eternity, through which, as we go
right or wrong, we are made or undone for ever: For to carry us right through,
it is not a few Deathbed sorrows, or good wishes; it is not a few extorted
Promises, or forced Resolutions, or racked Confessions, and Lord have mercy
upon us. O no, to Die well is an expensive Passage, which we shall never be
able to defray, unless we carry along with us a very great stock of Spiritual
Preparations. We shall have need of a strong and active Faith; of a Mind well
furnished with wise and good Considerations, of a deep and large, and a tried
Repentance, of an unrestrained Charity, of a confirmed Patience, of a profound
Submission to the Will of God, and a well grounded Hope of a blessed Eternity.
For without all these together, we shall be very ill accoutred to Die, and run
a fearful hazard of miscarrying for ever. And these are such things as do not
usually spring up like Mushromes, in a night, and much less in the disturbed
moments of a Dying hour; but do ask a much larger and serener Season to grow
and ripen in. But if whilst we are entertaining our selves among the Joys and
Pleasures of this Life, we banish from our Minds the remembrance of our
Mortality, and look upon Eternity as a thing at a vast distance, this will put
us upon delaying and deferring our preparation for it. For in this temper we
shall be apt to conclude, that we have time enough to come to begin and
complete our Repentance, and that we may safely indulge our selves yet a good
while longer, in the free enjoyment of our own hearts desires, and sin on at
present upon this Security, that we will certainly Repent hereafter; and by
this easy Train do men toule themselves on through the several stages of their
Sin and Life, till they arrive at their Deathbed, and then they begin to think
of Repenting in good earnest. But then alas, what will they be able to do, when
their Thoughts are continually disturbed with the care of disposing their
Affairs in this World, and the frightful prospect they have of the other. When
their Minds are distracted with incessant Pain and uneasiness; so that it is
not in their power to consider so much as a quarter of an hour together; when
through the stupor and indisposition of the Organs of their Reason, they are
not able to range their scattered and unwieldy Thoughts into any of those sober
Reflections and serious Meditations, that are necessary to the forming of a
sincere Repentance? In effect therefore for men to refer their Repentance to a
Deathbed, is the same thing as to retire into a Battle to Meditate, or to set
up a Closset to study Philosophy in, in the head Quarters of an Army, where
most men are as capable of free and undisturbed Contemplations, as they are of
Repenting amidst the Tumults and Hurries of a Deathbed. And yet upon this
dismal extremity do men commonly cast themselves, through their neglect of
remembering their approaching Mortality. Whereas did they but often remember and
seriously reflect on it, they would as soon dare eat Fire, as defer their
Repentance upon the uncertain hopes of futurity. For alas, what is vain Man,
that he should talk of Repenting hereafter, when perhaps while the words are in
his mouth, the earnest of Death is in his Head, or Heart, or Bowels; when for
all he knows, he may be inflamed with a Fevor with what he has drank to day,
or stifled with a Surfeit with what he shall eat to morrow; when he may expire
his Soul with his next Breath, or suck in his bane with the next Air; and so
many unlooked for accidents may presently put an end to all his talk of
Repenting hereafter, and render it impossible for ever? Now of what dismal
consequence would it be, should I be thus surprised? If while I presume upon my
future Repentance, I am merrily Sinning on, I should all of a sudden be hurried
away out of the company of my Jovial Associates, into that of houling and
tormented Spirits: And from my Songs and Laughter, into weeping, and wailing,
and gnashing of Teeth. How would it blank and amaze me to think, that ever I
should be so mad, as to run such a desperate hazard? How dare we then talk of
Repenting hereafter, when we consider, that it is not in our power to command
so much as one moment of future time? When for all that we know, the hope of
Eternity, which is now in our hands, may be lost for ever, and drop through our
Fingers before to morrow morning? And that when we lie down at night, and fall
asleep securely in our Sins, we do not know, but before the next Twilight we
may awake with horror and amazement in Hell? Let us seriously consider
therefore, that the present time only is in our power; and that as for the
future, it is wholly in God's: and that therefore when we defer our Repentance
to the future, we do, as it were, cast Lots for our Soul, and venture our
Everlasting hopes upon a contingency which is not in our power to dispose of.
For all we know, this may be the Evening of our day of Trial; and if it be, our
Life and Eternity depends upon what we are now doing. Wherefore it highly
concerns us, by all the regard we owe to our own Everlasting safety, wisely to
manage this last Stake, the winning or losing whereof may be our making or
undoing. Thus will the frequent remembrance of our Mortality put us upon laying
in good store of Spiritual provisions against that great day of Expense. For he
who often considers the great uncertainty of Life, the dreadful approaches, the
concomitant Terrors, and the momentous issues and consequents of Death; must be
strangely stupefied, if thereby he be not vigorously excited, to fore-arm and
fortify himself with all those Graces, and Defenses, that are necessary to
render his Departure hence easy, and safe, and prosperous.

And now having done with the Text, I shall only crave your leave to say a few
words upon this sorrowful occasion; viz. The Funeral of our common Friend, Sir
John Buckworth, who perhaps while he lived, was a person as eminently known, as
ever any Merchant that trod the Exchange of London. And indeed considering the
great share he had of Intellectual Endowments, He was a Gentleman that seemed
to have been marked out by Providence, to make a considerable Figure among Men.
For First, Nature had enriched him with a clear bright Mind, with a quick
Apprehension, a prompt Memory, a steady and a piercing Judgment, together with
a natural presence of Mind, and fluency and readiness of Speech, which enabled
him upon all occasions easily to express his own conceptions of things in very
clear and apt Language. All which Natural Indowments he had vastly improved and
cultivated, by a long and curious Observation and Experience. For as Nature had
fitted him for an active Life, so Providence soon introduced him upon the stage
of Action. For as he was born a Gentleman, so he was educated a Merchant; which
perhaps is one of the most advantageous Academies in the World, to instruct the
Mind in the knowledge of Men, and the management of Humane Affairs. His
Education furnished him with a fair opportunity of seeing the World, as well
abroad, as at home; and of prying into the Intrigues of Commerce, and into the
Manners and Interests of Men; whence he drew so many wise and useful
Observations, as rendered him a Prince among Merchants, and an Oracle of Trade;
insomuch that he was thought worthy to be chosen Deputy Governor of that wise
and great Company of the Turkey Merchants; and was perhaps as much consulted by
his Superiors, about the Interest of the English Trade, and the Mysteries of
Commerce, as any one Merchant of this City or Nation. Thus for his
Intellectuals. As for his Morals; I believe that all that knew him, will allow
him this Character, That he was a Gentleman of great Integrity and Fidelity to
his Trust; of exact Justice and Righteousness in his Commerce and Dealings:
That he was a studious and successful Peacemaker: And great part of his Time,
before he was called up by his Prince, into a more busy and active Station,
being spent in Arbitrating differences between Man and Man: in which he was so
expert, so impartial and prosperous; that I am apt to think he cemented as many
broken Friendships, reconciled as many Quarrels, and adjusted as many
Differences, (which otherwise might have flamed out into destructive breaches)
as most of those blessed Peacemakers that are gone before him.

Consider him in his respective Relations, and there all that knew him I am
sure will allow him to have been a Faithful, a Loyal and useful Subject to his
Prince, a kind and obliging Husband to his Lady, a tender and a wise Father to
his Children, a prudent, careful and benevolent Master to his Servants; and in
a word, a wise Counselor, a faithful Friend, and a just and diligent
Correspondent. As for his Religion, he was a hearty Protestant of the Church of
England, which upon mature Judgment, and upon through Information, he preferred
for the Loyalty of its Principles, the Simplicity of its Doctrines, and the
Primitive Purity of its Worship and Discipline, before all the Churches in the
World; and what his Judgment was of our Church, he visibly expressed by his
constant attendance upon the Public Offices of our Religion upon the Lord's
day, from which he never absented, but when he was either detained by Sickness,
or some very urgent and unavoidable occasion; and in which he always demeaned
him with all the profound Reverence and Devotion that outwardly expresses a
Mind inspired with a Pious Sense of its Duty, and of the awful presence of the
great Majesty of Heaven.

Thus he Lived, and as for his Death, though it was accompanied with all the
Circumstances that could render a man fond of Life, and make him play loath to
depart, though he had a plentiful Estate, a loving and beloved Wife, dutiful
and hopeful Children, and these all of them happily disposed off and settled in
the World to his own Hearts content: To leave all which at once, seems a very
hard Chapter to a mind not well resolved; yet all these together had no such
effect upon him. Indeed not long before his Death, though then in perfect
health, he seemed to have an Aboding of his approaching Fate; for having to his
hearts desire, disposed of his only Son in Marriage (who was the last of his
Children undisposed) he has been often heard to say, That now he thanked God,
his business in this World was finished, and that it was high time for him to
think of his Departure into the other: and when soon after he was seized with
his last Sickness, he bore it with an invincible Courage and Constancy; and
though the last part of it was extremely painful to him, he underwent it
without Complaint or Murmuring, with a Mind that seemed entirely resigned to
the Sovereign Disposer of all Events. And when he perceived the approaches of
Death, and found that he was going off this Stage of Mortals, he never showed
the least sign of Regret or Reluctance, but took a solemn leave of his Friends;
and which was much harder, of his dearest Relatives, who stood lamenting and
weeping about him; and this with a Mind very serious indeed, but in all
appearance very calm and composed. And finally he gave up the Ghost like a
brave Man and a good Christian, with a firm and undaunted Mind, and as one that
had placed his main hope on the other side the Grave, and did expect to
exchange an uneasy Mortal Life, for an Immortal one of Pleasure. And therefore
though I make no doubt after all, but that as a Man, he had his Faults, (and he
that has none let him cast the first stone) yet I am sure he had his Virtues,
and those very eminent ones too: And therefore it will highly become us who
survive, in Charity to cast a Vail over the one, and in Piety imitate and
transcribe the other; That so with him, and all our other Christian Brethren
departed this Life in God's true Faith and Fear, we may have our final
Consummation in Bliss and Glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord: To whom with
the Father, and Eternal Spirit, Three Persons and One God, be ascribed all
Honor and Glory and Power and Dominion for ever and ever. AMEN.

FINIS.

