Johannes Scott S. T. P.


PRACTICAL DISCOURSES Upon several Subjects.

Vol. I.

By JOHN SCOTT D. D. late Rector of St. Giles's in the Fields.

LONDON: Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's- Head in S. Paul's
Churchyard; and Samuel Manship at the Ship near the Royal Exchange in Cornhil.
1697.

To the Honorable WILLIAM MOUNTAGUE, Esquire
THE following Discourses do breath the Spirit of the Author, (who being dead
yet speaks.) For they Carry in them a very sensible Concern for the honor of
God, and for that (in which that honor has chiefly displayed it self to us,)
the good of Mankind. For it will be no hard Matter for a considering Reader to
be Convinced, that Misery (whether here, or hereafter) is the fatal Consequence
of wickedness; and that to make our selves happy we must make our selves Good.
And therefore it is hoped, that the seasonable publication of them may by God's
blessing, and by the sweet and forcible insinuations of that Candor, Zeal, and
Reason, with which they are inculcated, at least assist a vicious Age to
Recollect it self; and may so far do so, as to be a means to reclaim some of
those, who have blotted it with that Character. And this hope is so much the
greater, because, as we may rationally expect God's blessing upon our good
Endeavors; so we may the more firmly do so, when such our Endeavors are warm
and hearty. The Good and Merciful God accompany the design of the Author with
his Grace; and extend that Grace to the utmost extent of the publication; and
by making both effectual turn our hopes into prophecy.

Sir, The Relations of the deceased Author having observed your great respect
and kindness to him, and your diligent attendance upon his Ministry, hope the
Dedication of these excellent Relics of his will be acceptable to you, as
they are like to be of singular use, profit and advantage to all pious and good
Christians.

The CONTENTS.
A Discourse concerning Bodily Exercise in Religion, upon 1 Timothy 4 6. Page 1. A
Discourse of the Necessity of a Public National Repentance; upon Ezekiel. 18. 30.
P. 77. A Discourse concerning the meet Fruits of Repentance, and the necessity
of bringing forth such Fruits; upon Matthew. 3. 8. P. 140. A Discourse concerning
a Deathbed Repentance; upon Matthew. 25. 10. P. 189. A Discourse concerning the
great Evil of deferring Repentance; upon Rev. 2. 21. P. 230. A Discourse of
Submission to the Will of God; upon Luke 22. 42. P. 268. A Discourse concerning
Self-denial; upon Matthew. 16 24. P. 305. A Resolution of that grand Case, How a
Man may know whether he be in a state of Grace and Favor with God; upon 1 John
3. 7. P. 357. A Discourse concerning the Nature of Wilful Sins, showing how
incessant they are with a good State, or our being born of God; upon 1 John 3.
9. P. 384. A Discourse of the Excellency of the Christian Religion to procure
Peace and Satisfaction of Mind; upon John 14. 27. P. 415. A Discourse showing
that when Men's Minds are divided between God and their Lusts, they must lead
very anxious and unstable Lives; upon James 1. 8. P. 454.
1 TIMOTHY IV. 6. Bodily exercise profits little; but godliness is profitable
unto all things, having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is
to come.
THE great Design of Christianity being to promote our future Happiness, and
qualify us for it; Things are more or less valuable in its esteem, as they more
or less conduce to this great and excellent End. And hence the Apostle tells
us, that of all the Virtues Christianity obliges us to, Charity is the
greatest, 1 Cor. xiii. 13. that is, a sincere Love of God, and an universal
good Will to Men; and the greatest it is upon this account, because of all
Virtues it is most congenial to the Heavenly State, that being a State of
endless Love and pure Friendship; and all other Virtues are valued more or less
proportionably, as they partake of this Virtue of Charity. To give Worth to our
Faith, it is necessary it should work by Love, Galat. v. 6. To make our
Knowledge acceptable, it is necessary it should run into Love, 1 Cor. viii. 2,
3. yea without Charity the Gift of Miracles, Almsgiving, and Martyrdom it self
are Things of no value in the accounts of Christianity, 1 Cor. xiii. 1, 2, 3.
Nay so much is this great Virtue designed by the Christian Religion, that the
Apostle tells us that the end of the Commandment is Charity, 1 Timothy l. 5. that
is, all the Duties which the Commandment enjoins are designed only as Means to
advance and perfect our Love to God and Men: And all Means, you know, are more
or less excellent proportionably, as they conduce to the Ends they are designed
for. Wherefore since our future Happiness is the ultimate End of Christianity,
and universal Love our most necessary Qualification for it, it necessarily
follows that the Goodness of all Religious Means consists in their Aptitude to
abstract and purify our Affections; to exalt and sublimate our Love, and to
propagate in us that godlike and heavenly Temper, which is so necessary to
qualify us for the Enjoyment of God and Heaven. But alas! how ordinary is it
for Men to mistake their Means for their Ends, and to value themselves upon
doing those Things, which if they be not directed to a farther End, are
altogether insignificant; accounting those Things to be absolutely good, which
are but relatively so, and which, unless they conduce to that which is good,
are perfectly indifferent. Of which we have too many sad Instances among our
selves; for how many are there, who though they have nothing else to prize
themselves for, but only of their keeping of Fasts and looking sourly on a
Sunday, their hearing so many Sermons, and numbering so many Prayers; are yet
bloated with as high Conceits of their own Sanctity and Godliness, as if they
had commenced Saints, and were arrived to the highest degrees of Perfection:
And tho Pride and Malice, Covetousness and Ambition, are the only Graces they
are eminent in, yet shall you see these empty wretched Things pearched upon the
Pinnacle of Self-Conceit, and from thence looking down upon poor moral Mortals
as if they were Things of an inferior Species, not worthy to be reckoned in the
same Class of Beings with themselves. Such flaunting Hypocrites, it seems,
there have always been, and in these later Times it is foretold they should
abound; for so the Apostle tells us 1 Timothy iv. 1. that the Spirit speaks
expressly, that in the later Ages there should arise a sort of People who
departing from the Faith, should give heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of
devils; who should forbid marriage, and command Abstinence from Meats, verse. 3.
that is, as I suppose, should place all their Religion in outward and bodily
Severities, which at best are only Means and Instruments of Religion; and that
in these they should pride themselves, as if they were the only Saints of the
Age: whereas, in truth, they would prove the rankest Hypocrites that ever
appeared in a religious Vizard. And of these he exhorts Timothy carefully to
forewarn his Flock, and for his own part to reject their profane and ridiculous
Fables; and rather to exercise himself in true substantial Godliness, than in
such outward bodily Rigors and Severities; for which he subjoyns this general
Reason, for bodily exercise profits little, that is, mere outward bodily
Exercise in Religion abstracted from inward Piety and Godliness, is of very
little avail in a Religious Account: For the bodily Exercise here spoken of, it
seems, was such as had some little Profit attending it, and consequently was
such as had some general Tendency to Good, and was improveable to some
advantage, had it been wisely managed and directed. For (...), here translated
little, is not so to be understood, as if it signified nothing; because it is
here opposed to something that is greater, viz. to (...): Bodily Exercise
profits little, but Godliness is profitable for all things; and therefore
this bodily Exercise must profit something, though less than Godliness, which
is profitable for all things: As when Plato says (...), Socrates must be a
little attended, but Truth a great deal more. And if it be such an Exercise as
does profit a little, then it must be such as is Religious, and is of some
small account in Religion. In the Prosecution of this Subject therefore I shall
do these two things:

I. Show you what this outward or bodily Exercise in Religion is. II. In what
Cases it is that it profits little.
I. Wherein does this bodily Exercise consist? I answer, it consists in these
six things:

1. In an outward visible Profession of Religion. 2. In bodily Severities upon
Religious Accounts. 3. In bodily Passions in Religion. 4. In bodily Worship. 5.
In bodily Fluency and Volubility in Religious Exercises. 6. In a mere outward
Form or Round of Religious Duties.
1. It consists in an outward visible Profession of Religion. That we should
make a visible Profession of the true Religion, when it is sufficiently
proposed to us, is an unquestionable Duty, and that for this Reason; because
not to profess visibly what we believe to be the true Religion, is an open
disowning of God, who is the immediate Object of all true Religion. For he that
believes that this is the Will of God, and yet is either ashamed or afraid
openly to avow and acknowledge it, declares that he is either ashamed of God,
or that he fears Man more than God; both which are highly impious. Besides, by
our visible owning of Religion, we propose it to others, who by our Example may
be persuaded to embrace it as well as we; and it is our Duty not only to
entertain the true Religion our selves, but so far as in us lies, to propagate
it to others; that so diffusing our Light round about us, others may be
directed to Heaven by it as well as our selves. This therefore is of some
Account with God, that we visibly profess the true Religion; but if this be all
we do, it will profit us but very little. For if we do not own Religion in our
Actions, while we profess it in our Words, we contradict our selves; our
Practice gives the Lie to our Creed, and our wicked Lives baffle our holy
Profession: for while a Man acts contrary to the Rules of his Religion, he does
as effectually disown it, as if he should openly renounce his Baptism, and make
a public Recantation of Christianity. For as our Profession of Religion is
performed by a visible signification of our Belief of it, and as this may be
signified by our Actions as well as our Words; so in effect we do renounce
Religion when we give any visible signification that we do not believe it; and
this we do as well when we act like Infidels, as when by Words we declare our
Infidelity. For by our Deeds we may signify our Minds as well as by our Words,
and he that acts as if he did not believe, does give a more convincing Argument
of his Infidelity, than all his Words or Professions can be of the contrary;
because it is rationally supposable that a Man will rather pretend to believe
what he does not, than that he will act contrary to his own Belief and
Judgment; it being a greater degree of Violence to our selves to act contrary
to what we do believe, than to pretend to believe what we do not. So that it is
not all our Talk and verbal owning of Religion that will serve the end of a
visible Profession, which is, so to own God as to induce others to own him as
well as our selves; because he that denies God in his Actions will never be
able to induce others to believe that he does sincerely own him in his Words
and Profassions. Wherefore unless we will live up to the Rules of our Religion,
we were as good not to make any visible Profession of it; for our Profession
will serve no good Ends of Religion; it may indeed disgrace it in the Opinion
of those who measure its Goodness by the Lives of its Votaries; for either they
will think that our Religion teaches us to live as we do, and that will make
them abhor it; or else they will imagine that notwithstanding our Profession we
do not believe it, and that will make them suspect it to be a Cheat and
Imposture. So that for any Good Christianity is like to reap from wicked
Christians professing it, it were highly desirable that they would renounce
their Baptism, and openly declare themselves Atheists or Infidels; because by
their Actions they blaspheme the Religion they profess, and by assuming to
themselves the holy Name of Christians they do but more openly profane it.

2. Another sort of bodily Exercise that is of some, though but little Account
in Religion; is our voluntary undergoing of bodily Rigours or Severities upon
the score of Religion. There is doubtless a very wise use to be made of bodily
Severities in Religion, provided they be but used with that Prudence and
Caution as they ought to be; for they are excellent Remedies against many of
our inordinate fleshly Inclinations, to came our extravagant Appetites, and to
render them more tractable to the Commands of Reason and Religion: besides,
that in the general they are of singular Use to wean our Souls from the
Pleasures of the Body, which do often corrupt the palate of the Mind, and
render it incapable of relishing divine Enjoyments. For if we indulge to our
Appetites all those lawful Pleasures which they crave, our Souls will be apt to
contract too great a Familiarity with the Flesh, and to be so taken up with the
Delights and Satisfactions of it, as to neglect those diviner Pleasures for
which they were created, and which are more natural and congenial to them; and
considering that in our future State we must live without these Bodies, and
take leave of all the Pleasures of them, it is very requisite that we should
now beforehand wean and abstract our selves from the Enjoyments of corporeal
Sense, that so when we come to part with them we may know how to be happy
without them, and be fit to live the Lives of naked Spirits. And therefore we
find that there has scarce been any Religion whatsoever pretending to qualify
Men for another Life, but has imposed Fasting and Abstinence, and other bodily
Severities, as proper Means to lustrate and purify the Mind, and to prepare it
for immediate Converses with God and separated Spirits; but then the
Consequence was, that the over-strict Imposition of these Instrumentals of
Religion occasioned a world of Superstition; for being so strictly imposed,
they obtained so far in the Opinion of the World, as to be reckoned among the
Essentials of Religion, and counted absolutely good, and in their own Nature
pleasing and grateful unto God; which possibly by degrees introduced those
(...), horrid and bloody Mysteries into the Heathen Religion. For Mankind being
once possessed with such an Opinion of God, as to think he was pleased and
delighted to see his poor Creatures afflict and punish themselves; it was easy
from thence to infer that he would be much more pleased to see them butcher
themselves, and sprinkle his Altars with their own Blood. And as this
overweening Opinion did probably introduce humane Sacrifices into the Heathen
Religion; so it is certain that it has introduced sundry false Doctrines into
the Romish; as particularly, that Fasting, and Whipping our selves, and going
on Pilgrimages, are meritorious Things; that by them we expiate our Sins, and
make Satisfaction to the Justice of God: as if the Guilt that binds us over to
eternal Perdition were to be expiated by a sound Whipping, or a short
Pilgrimage were a proportionable Commutation for the eternal Penance of Hell
Fire. But these are the vain Imaginations of Men, who would faign impose Laws
upon God, and prescribe to him the Measures of Punishment; who would do as
wickedly as they please, and suffer what they please for so doing. But let us
not deceive our selves, if we will choose to sin, it is reasonable that that
God whom we offend by our Sin should choose and appoint our Punishment. It is
by no means fit that Criminals should be their own Judges; for if they were,
they would have very little Reason to be afraid of sinning; because they would
be obliged to suffer no more for it than what they pleased themselves: but the
Right of punishing is in the offended Party; and therefore if we will offend
God by violating his Laws, we have no right to choose our own Penance, but
must, whether we will or no, submit to what He thinks fit to inflict upon us;
and what that is he has told us beforehand, even everlasting Expulsion from
his Presence into the Society and Portion of Devils, and damned Spirits. So
that for us to expect to atone and satisfy God by little voluntary Penances of
our own, is just as unreasonable as if a Murderer should cut off his little
Finger, and thereupon expect to be excused from the Penalty of the Law.

And as these bodily Severities are no Expiations of our Sins, so neither are
they in their own Nature pleasing and grateful unto God: for he is a good God,
and an universal Lover of all his Creation; and consequently can be no farther
pleased with the Sufferings and Afflictions of any of his Creatures, than as
they are necessary either to do them good, or to make them exemplary to others,
or to vindicate the Honor of his own violated Laws; neither of which Ends are
served by voluntary Penances and Severities as such, if they be not
subordinated to the Ends of Virtue and Religion. For what can Fasting signify,
if it be not designed to famish our Lusts? Can our hungry Bowels be a
delightful Spectacle to that God who feeds the young Ravens, and takes so much
care to provide for all his Creation? What Virtue is there in the Chastning of
our Bodies, if it be not intended to humble and mortify our Souls? Do we think
that that God, who is so zealous of our Welfare, can be recreated with our
Miseries, or take pleasure in our tragical Looks, and bloody Shoulders? It Is
true, so far as these things are Instruments of Good to us, they are pleasing
unto God, even as all other Instruments of Religion; but it is not the
suffering of our Bodies he is pleased with, but the good which it does our
Souls: but if they do our Souls no good, if they do not purify our Affections,
and wean us from fleshly Desires, and make us more fit for the heavenly State,
they are as insignificant in the Account of God, as the paring of our Nails, or
the clipping of our Hair.

3. Another sort of these bodily Exercises that are of some, though but little
account in Religion, is bodily Passions in Religion. There is, I confess, an
excellent Use to be made of our bodily Passions in the Exercise of our
Religion, provided we do not place our Religion in them; for if we do, they
will betray us into the grossest Cheats and Impostures. For in the general we
find, that our Passions do wing our intellectual Faculties, and render them
more intense and expedite in their Operations. For whilst the Soul and Body are
united to one another, there is a mutual Reflowing and Communication of
Passions between them, insomuch that whenever the Soul is any ways affected
with any Object, there immediately follows a suitable Perturbation or Passion
in the Body; and then this Passion of the Body, as it is grateful or ungrateful
to it, does more vigorously affect the Soul with Love or Aversation; and then
the Soul being thus reaffected and incited by the bodily Passion, will more
vehemently pursue or shun the Object which caused its first Motion or
Affection. When therefore our Souls and Bodies do thus sympathize with each
other in the Exercises of Religion, we must necessarily perform them with
greater Vigor and Intension.

But to make this more plain to you, I will briefly instance in those four
great Passions of Religion, viz. Love, and Hatred, and Sorrow, and Joy. As for
that of Love; when the Soul is affected with God, or Virtue, or any other
amiable Objects of Religion; immediately there follows a sweet and grateful
Passion in the Body. For the Heart being dilated toward the beloved Object,
puts the Blood and Spirits into a free and placid Motion, which diffuses a
certain agreeable Heat into the Breast, and invigorates the Brain with a flood
of active Spirits; and then the Soul being sensible of this grateful Emotion in
the Body, is thereby more vigorously incited to pursue those amiable Objects
wherewith she was first affected. And so for Hatred; when the Soul is
practically convinced by the Arguments of Religion of the Odiousness of any
Evil it forbids, the Enmity and Hatred she has toward it causes an anxious
Contraction of the Heart, and Compression of the Animal Spirits, which produces
a Chilness in the Breast, a retarding of the Blood, and an unequal motion of
the Pulse; and then the Soul sympathizing with the Body, cannot but be sensible
of this ungrateful Passion it is put into, which must needs add to her Hatred
of those odious Objects which were the Cause of it, and cause her more
vehemently to shun and avoid them. So again when the Soul is moved to Sorrow
and Repentance for any past Sins and Miscarriages, the sad Regrets she suffers
within her self produce a very doleful Passion in the Body; such as pinches the
Heart, congeals the Blood, and causes an ungrateful Languor of the Spirits; and
then by compassionating her grieved Consort, she is thereby excited to a higher
degree of Displeasure against those Sins that caused its Grief and Disturbance.
Lastly, when the Soul is joyed and delighted with any religious Object, or
Exercise; by that sweet Complacency she enjoys within her self, there is
produced a most pleasant Emotion in the Body, the Animal Spirits flowing to the
Heart in an equal and placid Stream; where being arrived through its dilated
Orifices, they sooth and tickle it into a most sensible Pleasure; and then the
Soul being affected with the Body's Pleasure, does from thence derive an
additional Joy, which does more vigorously encourage her to pursue those
Objects, and continue those Exercises from whence her Original Joy proceeded.

So that, you see, that by reason of that perpetual Intercourse there is
between our Souls and our Bodies, there is an excellent Use even of our
sensitive Passions in Religion. And it cannot be denied but that a gentle
Temper of Body, whose Passions are soft, and easy, and ductile, and apt to be
commoved with the Soul, may be of great advantage in our Religious Exercises;
because whenever it is religiously affected, its Passions will be apt to
intend and quicken the Affections of the Soul, and to render them more vigorous
and active; but farther than this, they are of no account at all in Religion.
For as there are many Men who are sincerely good, that yet cannot raise their
sensitive Passions in their religious Exercises; that are heartily sorry for
their Sins, and yet cannot weep for them; that do entirely love God and delight
in his Service, and yet cannot put their Blood and Spirits into the enravishing
Emotions of sensitive Love and Joy: so on the other hand, there are many gross
Hypocrites that have not one dram of true Piety in them, who yet in their
Religious Exercises can put themselves into wondrous Transports of bodily
Passion; that can pour out their Confessions in Floods of Tears, and cause
their Hearts to dilate into Raptures of sensitive Love, and their Spirits to
tickle them into Ecstasies of Joy; which is purely to be resolved into the
different Tempers of Men's Bodies, some Tempers being naturally so calm and
sedate, as that they are scarce capable of being disturbed into a Passion;
others again so soft and tender and impressible, that the most frivolous Fancy
is able to raise a Commotion in them. And hence we see that some People can
weep most heartily at the Misfortunes of Lovers in Plays and Romances, and as
much rejoice at their good Successes, though they know that both are Fictions
and mere Idea's of Fancy; whereas others can scarce shed a Tear or raise a
sensitive Joy at the real Calamities or Prosperities of a Friend; whom yet they
love a great deal more than these Men can possibly do their feigned and
Romantic Heroes. And yet alas how very often do Men place the whole of their
Religion in these mechanical Motions of their Blood and Spirits; that think
they are exceeding good, if they can but chafe themselves into a devout
Passion; and that it is an infallible Sign of Godliness that their Blood and
Spirits are easily moved by religious Idea's, and apt to be elevated or
dejected according as sad or joyous Arguments are pathetically represented to
their Fancies: and though they do not understand the Argument, or which is all
one to them, though that which is delivered for Argument is mere Gibberish, and
insignificant Canting, that has nothing of Argument or Reality in it, only
some empty Fiction is conveyed to their Fancies by a musical Voice in fanciful
Expressions; yet because they are affected by it, and it raises a sensible
Perturbation in their Blood and Spirits, they presently conclude it to be an
Income of God, and an infallible Token of his special Love and Favor to them;
as if it were a Sign of Godliness, and a Mark of God's Favorites to be
affected with Nonsense, feathered with soft and delicate Phrases, and pointed
with pathetick Accents.

Thus there are some Men who believe themselves to be converted, merely because
they have run through all the Stages of Passion, in that new Road of Artificial
Conversion which some modern Authors have found out; for according as the Work
of Conversion has been described by some modern Authors, it is wholly placed
in so many different Scenes of Passion. For first a Man must pass under the
Discipline of the Law, and the Spirit of Bondage; that is, he must be frightened
into a Sense of his lost and undone Condition, and in this Sense he must grieve
bitterly for his Sins as the Causes of his Ruin and Perdition; and this is that
which they call Conviction and Compunction. From hence he must proceed into the
Evangelical State, and pass into the Spirit of Adoption, the Entrance of which
is Contrition or Humiliation; which consists in an ingenuous Sorrow for Sin,
proceeding from a passionate Sense of God's Love and Goodness; and then having
acted over all these mournful Passions, he embraces and lays hold upon Christ,
which is the concluding Scene, and is altogether made up of Joy and Exultation,
and so the Work of Conversion is finished. Now though I do not at all deny, but
to the Conversion of an habitual Sinner it is indispensably necessary that he
should be convinced of his Danger, and deeply affected with Sorrow and Remorse
for his Folly and Wickedness; (and therefore would not be so understood, as if
I intended to discountenance these holy Passions, which are such necessary
Introductions to a sincere Conversion:) yet neither do I doubt, but by the help
of a melancholy Fancy attended with soft and easy Passions, a Man may perform
all these Parts of Conversion, and yet be never the better for it; for many
times these Passions are only the necessary effects of a diseased Fancy, and
are altogether as mechanical as the beating of our Pulse, or the Circulation of
our Blood. And hence we see that this kind of Conversion, which wholly consists
of bodily Passions, does commonly both begin and end with some languishing
Distemper of the Body, in which the Fancy is over-clouded, and the Motion of
the Blood and Spirits retarded by the Prevalence of black and melancholy
Humors; which being once evacuated, the Man's Body returns again to its former
Temper, and upon this he becomes the same Man again that he was before his
pretended Conversion. And accordingly it is observed by those very Persons who
place the whole Work of Conversion in these Mechanical Passions, that generally
after the Pangs of Regeneration are over, their Converts grow cold, and
careless, and remiss in Religion; and so like to what they were in the State of
Nature, that you would hardly believe they had ever been converted; which is a
plain Evidence that this sort of Conversion does not reach the Soul, that it
does not alter our practical Judgment of things, nor rationally determine our
Wills to new Choices and Resolutions; and consequently that it is nothing but a
mere Train of sensitive Passions mechanically excited by the Fancy. And hence
you may observe in the Modern Stories of our Religious Melancholians, that they
commonly pass out of one Passion into another without any manner of Reasoning
and Discourse; now they are in the Depths of Grief and Despair, by and by upon
the Pinnacle of Joy and Assurance; and yet they are the same Men, neither better
nor worse, when they do despair, as when they are assured; and consequently
have no more Reason to be assured now, than they had when they were encompassed
with all the Horrors of Desperation. For the only Reason any Man has to be
assured of God's Love, is his Likeness and Conformity to Him; which is that
alone that endears us unto God, and entitles us to the Promise of his Favor.
And yet though these Men do not pretend to be better, or more Godlike now they
are assured, than they were when they despaired; yet their Hearts are
overwhelmed with Floods of sensitive Joy, and they are strangely comforted they
know not how nor wherefore: And though while they were in Despair, they thought
of those Promises and Motives of Comfort that now ravish and transport them,
and had every whit as much Reason to lay claim to them too; yet then they lay
like Cakes of Ice at their Hearts without affording them the least Gleam of
Warmth and Comfort; which is a plain evidence that both their Ioys and Sorrows
are the products of bodily Temper, and not of Reason and Judgment; because they
pass out of one into the other without any intervenient Discourse, and are
agitated into contrary Passions whilst they are under the same Rational
Motives; are dejected this moment, and comforted the next, which argues, that
their Reason has no hand in their Passions; for if it had, they could never be
so contrarily affected. Nor can it be supposed, that such irrational Passions
are raised in them by the Divine Spirit; because He ordinarily works upon Men
in an humane and rational way, beginning with their Understandings, and so
persuading their Wills, and exciting their Passions by rational Motives and
Arguments: Those Passions therefore that are not so excited can be resolved
into no other Principle but that of bodily Temper. And accordingly you may
observe, that all this Train of Passions, wherein too many Men do place the
whole of their Conversion, are necessarily connected and chained to one
another; so that if you move but the first Link, all the rest will naturally
follow; which is a plain Argument that they may be excited not only in a free
and rational, but also in a necessary, or mechanical way. As for instance,
Suppose these Men before their pretended Conversion to have a good Dose of
Melancholy in their Tempers, this will naturally dispose them to terrible and
mournful Conceits; and being thus disposed, their tender Fancies are easily
impressed with dreadful Images of the Wrath of God, and their own undone
Condition: And according as the Temper of their Bodies is more or less disposed
to fear, so this frightful Passion continues longer or shorter upon 'em; if it
continues longer, it will by the reiterated Impressions of those dreadful
Objects that first raised it, by degrees be heightened into Horror and
Desperation; and when it is so then the Man is under Conviction of his undone
Condition, and under the Terrors of the Law, and the Spirit of Bondage; which,
according to the new Method, is always the first step to Conversion. And when
the first Fury of Despair is over, it naturally issues into a deep Melancholy,
and there spends it self in woeful Regrets, and self-condemning Reflections; and
this is that which they call Attrition, or Compunction, which is the next Step
to be taken in this methodical way of Conversion. And hence many People do
continue many Years together in this languishing state, in all which time they
believe themselves to be under the Lash of the Law, and the Discipline of the
Spirit of Bondage; when, God knows, many times there is nothing in it but a
mere melancholy Humor tinctured and heightened with dismal Notions of Religion.
But then when the Melancholy begins to disperse, and to make way for the
Spirits to flow into the Brain in a more brisk and active Torrent, and so to
warm and refresh the drooping Fancy; they will by degrees scatter those horrid
Images and dismal Fancies of Religion that rid the Imagination, and raised
those tragical Passions; and so the Man will gradually emerge out of the Spirit
of Bondage into a more comfortable and Evangelical Condition. For now his Fancy
being something more lightsome, but still retaining some Relics of its former
Darkness, will be disposed for grateful as well as dismal Phantasms, and to be
impressed by lovely and joyous, as well as terrible and mournful Objects. So
that if now God or Christ, or any other Object of Religion, be but represented
to the Man in such a Dress of Metaphors and glistering Allusions, as is apt to
affect his carnalized Fancy, he will presently form such charming Conceits and
pleasant Imaginations of them, as will necessarily put his Blood and Spirits
into a most amorous Emotion toward them; so that now he shall seem inflamed
with the Love of Christ, and fancy him twined in his Arms and Embraces: whereas
in Reality the Thing he is so infinitely fond of, is nothing but an Idol of his
own Fancy, a mere Baby-Christ, dressed up by his own Imagination in all the
Charms of sensual Beauty, and furnished with Smiles, and Kisses, and Caresses,
and all the pretty Indearments of a doting Lover. And now the Man's Fancy
being thus partly hung with fine Pictures of Christ, those Relics of
Melancholy Vapors that are yet remaining in it, will very much dispose it to
sad and mournful Conceits; especially when this Idol of Christ, which he so
much doats upon, shall be represented as weeping over his Sins, and grieved at
the Unkindnesse he shows him. And now his Fancy being thus furnished with such
a Mixture of amorous and mournful Imaginations, must necessarily beget in him a
Mixture of Love and Grief and cause him to mourn for his Sins; because they
make his Savior grieve whom he seems to love so dearly: And this is
Humiliation, which is the third Stage in this imaginary Road of Conversion. And
now the Man having set up so gay an Image of Christ in his Fancy, and felt
within himself such sensible Pangs of Love toward him, and Grief for the
Affronts and Unkindnesses he has offered him, his amorous Imagination will
presently suggest to him, that doubtless so sweet a Savior cannot but be
conquered with all these passionate Indearments, and smitten with a reciprocal
Love upon so many feeling Expressions of his Kindness toward him; and being
possessed with this Imagination, he will presently fancy his dear Image of Christ
into all the Postures of a transported Lover; smiling upon him, weeping over
him, and spreading out his Arms to embrace him; upon which there will follow
such a sweet Effusion of his Spirits toward his enamoured Savior, that he
will fansy himself to be leaping into his Arms, and rolling in his Bosom, and
resting, and leaning, and relying upon him. And now his Fancy having carried
him to his Iourney's End, and lodged him in the Embraces of his Savior, O the
Joy and Ravishment! he feels his Heart pant through Excess of Delight, and is
ready to break with its own Raptures. And thus you see how this whole Method of
Conversion may be easily transacted by an active and melancholy Fancy.

And as it may be, so I doubt not but many times it is; for how many Men are
there who strongly imagine themselves to have been converted, that yet are
never the better for it, being still as averse unto God and true Goodness as
ever they were before; nay and many times are so far from being bettered by
their Conversion, that they are a great deal the worse for it; for instead of
forsaking all Sin, which is that wherein true Conversion does consist, they
only shift their Vices, and many times in laying one Devil, they conjure up
seven worse in the room of it. Perhaps before they fansied themselves to have
been converted, they were openly lewd and profane; they would swear and be
drunk, and wallow in Sensuality and Voluptuousness; but notwithstanding these
beastly and damnable Crimes, they had some very amiable Qualities in them; they
were courteous and affable, and kind and obliging; faithful in their
Professions, and just and honest in their Dealings; but now alas! by passing
through these dismal Stages of pretended Conversion, they have contracted such
a mass of melancholy Humors as has quite soured their sweet and lovely
Tempers into Pride and Envy, Peevishness and Faction, Insolence and
Censoriousness, and all the other Ingredients of a sullen and unsociable
Nature. So that though now indeed they will not be openly lewd and profane, as
they were before, yet, which is a great deal worse, they will be false and
ill-natured, and griping and ungovernable; and, which is worst of all, they
will be all this while under the Disguise of Religion, and the Patronage of a
deceived Conscience: so that whereas their former Vices had only the Possession
of their Wills, but not of their Consciences, these are seized of both, which
renders their Condition the more dangerous. For heretofore Virtue and Religion
had a strong Party within them, there being a Law in their Minds that warred
against the Law in their Members; but now all is subdued to the Dominion of
their Sins, and their Wills and Consciences, like Simeon and Levi, become
Brethren in Iniquity. Whilst therefore Men place their Religion in such
artificial Trains of Passion, they will be liable to all manner of Cheats and
Impostures. For the Generality of Men being ignorant of the Power of
Melancholy, and of the Frame and Structure of their own Bodies; if their
Fancies are but tinctured with Religion, they will be apt to attribute every
extraordinary Emotion they feel to the immediate Influence of the Spirit of
God, and to account that to be Grace and Inspiration which is a mere necessary
Effect of Matter and Motion; and being once possessed with this Conceit, they
lie open to all the Follies of Enthusiasm; for now nothing will satisfy them
but Heats of Fancy, and Transports of Passion; and whilst they should be
attending to the sober Dictates of Scripture and right Reason, they will be
looking for Incomes, and Impulses, and secret Manifestations; and consequently,
will be apt to interpret every odd Whimsey for an inward Whisper from Heaven,
and every brisk Emotion of their Spirits for an immediate Smile of God's
Countenance; than which, I dare boldly say, there is nothing more mischievous
to Religion, or contrary to the Life and Power of it. For Religion is a wise, a
still, and silent thing, that consists not in Frisks of Fancy, and Whirlwinds
of Passion; but in a divine Temper of Mind, and an universal Resignation of our
Wills to God; and this not only in intermittent Fits of Passion, but in the
midst of cool Thoughts and calm Deliberations. For true Religion is a State of
a fixed and constant Nature, that does not come and go, like the Colors of a
blushing Face, but is the natural and true Complexion of the Soul. How
religious soever therefore we may be in our passionate Heats and Transports, it
it altogether insignificant, unless the standing Temper of our Minds be good,
and our Religion be settled in our Natures. For though it cannot be denied but
these our bodily Passions do profit something, as they are useful Instruments
of Religion; yet I think it is very apparent from what has been said, that he
who places his Religion in them does but deceive his own Soul.

4. Another sort of bodily Exercise that is of some, though but little Account
in Religion, is Fluency and Volubility in Religious Exercises, or a Readiness
of wording our Thoughts in proper and affecting Expressions; either in Prayer
to God, or in speaking of God and Things divine: the proper Use of which is
this, that in Prayer it is apt to exoite and kindle our devout and religious
Affections. For besides that Scantiness of Words in Prayer does divert the Mind
by putting it to the Trouble of inventing new Expressions to clothe its
Thoughts and Desires, which because of its Inability to attend many things at
once, must needs interrupt its Zeal and Intention, and so make Breaks and
Chasms in its Devotions; whereas when a Man expresses himself easily and
fluently, so that his Words keep pace with his Desires and Affections, he will
be able to keep his Thoughts more intent, and to fix himself upon God with all
the united Vigor of his Mind, which not being disturbed with the Difficulty of
expressing its Desires, will be the more at leisure to intend them, that so its
Devotions may flow secundo flumine, in a more easy and undisturbed Current:
besides which, I say, we all find by Experience, that proper and fluent
Expressions are in their own Nature apt to warm and heighten our Affections,
which nothing has a greater Influence in than the Charms of pathetical
Oratory. To be able therefore to word our Prayers in proper and ready
Expressions, is of considerable Advantage to our Devotions; our Words being so
apt to affect our Minds, and our Passions to keep time with the Music of our
own Language: and whilst we wear these Bodies about us, and our Souls are so
clogged and depressed with fleshly Desires, we have need enough to use all Arts
and Advantages of spiriting and enlivening our Devotions. But yet I confess, of
all these bodily Exercises, this is the least considerable in Religion; because
we may easily supply the Defect of natural Fluency by excellent Forms of
Prayer, the Use of which is doubtless far more expedient than the best of our
extempore Effusions. For he that uses a Form, has nothing else to do in Prayer
but only to recollect his own Thoughts, and fix them upon God; and to keep his
Mind affected with a due Sense of the Divine Majesty, and his own Need of and
Dependence upon him: whereas he that prays extempore, besides all this, is
concerned to invent proper and apt Expressions, lest he should be impertinent
or indecent in his Addresses unto God; unless he expects that the Spirit should
immediately dictate to him the Words of his Prayer, which is to suppose himself
a Person immediately inspired, and his Prayer of Divine Revelation; and
consequently, of equal Authority with the Scriptures themselves. But the best
Religious Use that can be made of Fluency and Volubility of Speech, is in
speaking to others of God and Things Divine; here it is useful indeed to make a
Man an Orator for Religion, and to enable him to recommend it more effectually
to others. Thus far therefore this sort of bodily Exercise may be profitable,
both as it may be made instrumental to raise our own Devotions, and to
propagate true Piety unto others; but beyond this, I know no place at all that
it has in Religion: for there is no doubt but we may be very good Men without
this Gift of Fluency, and very bad Men with it, there being no Necessity of
Consequence from an honest Heart to a voluble Tongue. And certainly that which
proceeds from no higher Principle than mere natural Enthusiasm, and
consequently may be easily attained by Persons grossly hypocritical and
debauched, ought not to be looked upon as a Mark of Godliness. And yet alas!
how many Men are there that place all their Religion in their Tongues, and
esteem it as a certain Sign of Grace that they are able to pray in fluent
Expressions, and to talk of God in rapturous Flights of Fancy? For they being
most commonly straightened in their Religious Exercises, and not able to vent
themselves with any Freedom or Readiness; when they fall into an extraordinary
Fit of Fluency and Enlargement, of which they can give no natural Account, they
presently conclude it to be an immediate Gift of God's Spirit, and a special
Token of his peculiar Favor to them. And accordingly, if you peruse the late
Histories of the spiritual Experiences of our modern Converts, you will find
that they contain little else but strange Relations of their rapturous
Discourses, and wondrous Enlargements in Frayer; which because they have
something extraordinary in them, are generally thought to be the immediate
Effects of the Divine Spirit: whereas commonly they proceed merely from the
present Temper of the Body, and are as mechanical as any other Operations of
Nature. For let a Man's Body be but put into a fervent Temper, his Spirits into
quick but manageable Motions, this will naturally produce in him a more fine
and exquisite Power of Perception, by causing the Images of Things to come
faster into his Fancy, and to appear more distinct there; and then his Fancy
being more pregnant with new Idea's and Images than it uses to be, his
Expressions must necessarily be more fluent and easy. But then if when this
natural Fervor of his Temper be intended with Vapors of heated Melancholy,
his Fancy be but often impressed and rubbed upon with the most vehement and
moving Objects of Religion, such as God and Christ, and Heaven and Hell; it
must necessarily raise in him great and vehement Passions, and dictate to him
pathetick and rapturous Expressions. And this has been commonly experimented
by the Devoto's of all Religions; for even among the devouter Turks and
Heathens we may find as notorious Instances of those Incomes and Enlargements,
as in any of our modern Histories of Christian Experiences. Thus the Heathen
Poets; in all high Flushes of their Fancy, conceited themselves divinely
inspired: Est Deus in nobis, agitante calescimus illo. And that great Orator
Aristides positively affirms himself to be inspired in his Orations; because
sometimes he felt in himself an extraordinary Vein of Fluency, which was only
excited by a brisker Agitation of his Spirits. Wherefore it is not at all to be
wondered at if, when Men are employed in Religious Exercises, the same natural
Enthusiasm, especially when it is exalted by Religious Melancholy, should so
wing and inspire their Fancies. For there is no Man whatsoever, that is but
religiously inclined, and of a soft and impressive Temper, but by familiarizing
his Fancy to the great Objects of Religion, and setting them before his Mind in
distinct and affecting Idea's, may easily chafe himself into such a Pathos as
to be able to talk to, or of, God and Religion, in lofty and rapturous Strains
of Divine Rhetoric; nor is it any Argument of such a Man's being inspired,
that his Discourse does so move and affect those that hear him; because all
Language that is soft, fluent, and pathetical, is naturally apt to make deep
Impressions on the Auditors. For even the Grecian Sophists, as Plutarch tells
us, by their singing Tones, and honied Words, and effeminate Phrases and
Accents, did very often transport their Auditors into a kind of Bacchical
Enthusiasm: And no doubt but the Hearers of whom he speaks, who were wont to
applaud their Orators at the End of their Declamations with a (...), divinely,
heavenly, preciously, unimitably spoken, found themselves as much moved, as
many a Man does at a Sermon; who yet thinks it is not the Art of the Preacher,
but the Spirit of God speaking in and by him that warms and excites them.
Wherefore as we would not deceive and undo our own Souls, let us have a great
care that we do not place our Religion in any such Enthusiastic Fervors of
Spirit, and Overflowings of Fancy; for though this may be a helpful Instrument
to us in our Religious Exercises, yet it is not by this that we are to estimate
the Goodness of them, but by those Laws and Circumstances which do moralize
humane Actions, and render them reasonable, and holy, and good. For it is not in
loud Noises or melting Expressions that the divine Spirit is discovered, but in
a divine Nature and Godlike Disposition; and the Effects of true Religion are
not to be looked for in Words and Talk, but in Life and Action; and therefore
St. Paul tells the Corinthians, some of whom, it seems, had too great an
Opinion of his Way of Religious Rhetorication, that he would come among them
and know, not the speech of them that were puffed up, but the power; for the
Kingdom of God, says he, consists not in word, but in power, 1 Cor. iv. 19,
20.

Fifthly, Another sort of bodily Exercise that is of some, though but little,
Account in Religion, is outward and bodily Worship. There is no doubt but we
ought, when we are worshipping God, to signify the profound sense that we have
of his Majesty and Greatness by outward Adorations and an humble and lowly
Demeanor. For though we may signify to God the Honor and Worship that we owe
him by the internal Acts of our Mind, by our Love, and Fear, and Hope, and
Admiration, because he sees our Hearts and discerns the most secret Motions of
our Souls; yet since to him we owe the Members of our Bodies, as well as the
Faculties of our Minds, it is very reasonable that we should worship him with
both, that both our Bodies and Minds should offer the Tribute of Homage which
they owe to the Fountain of their Beings; that so having each of them a share
in the Bounties of God, they may be Copartners too in the Returns of Gratitude
to him. And though the internal Acts of our Minds do sufficiently signify unto
God our Esteem and Veneration of Him, yet it is highly reasonable, especially
in our public Addresses to him, that we should signify it to Men also, that
they may be excited by our Example to glorify God, and to acknowledge and adore
the infinite Perfections of his Nature: and we have no other way to signify to
Men our Veneration of God, but only by corporeal Actions, that is, by such
Actions or Gestures of the Body as either by Nature or by Custom are
significant of our inward Esteem and Adoration of him. And this, without doubt,
is a Part of Natural Religion; forasmuch as there never was any People of any
Religion whatsoever, but what have always expressed their Veneration of the
Divinities whom they owned, by such external Reverences as were customary
amongst them. And accordingly we are enjoined in Scripture to offer up unto God
the Homage of our Bodies as well as of our Souls; to worship, and bow down, and
kneel before the Lord our Maker, Psalm. xcv. 6. and to glorify him with our
Souls and Bodies, which are his, 1 Cor. vi. 20. And when the Devil solicited
our Savior with the Promise of all the Kingdoms of the World to bow down and
worship him, that is, to render him external Homage and Reverence, our Savior
rejects the Motion with an it is written, thou shall worship the Lord thy God,
and him only shall thou serve, Matthew. iv. 10. which Words must be understood of
external as well as internal Worship, otherwise his Answer is no wise pertinent
to the Devil's Proposals, which extended only to external Worship and Adoration.

And as bodily Worship is enjoined by express Precept, so it is warranted by
the concurrent Examples of all holy Men; for in the Old Testament you have
almost as many Examples of it, as there are Instances of devout and religious
Persons: and so observant were the Jews of all external Reverence in their
Religious Exercises, that to fall down and kneel before the Lord our Maker
seems to have been Proverbial of their Prayers and Public Worship. And lest
any Man should imagine these bodily Reverences to have been Part of that
Ceremonial Worship that was abolished by the Gospel, there are sufficient
Examples of it recorded in the New Testament both to excite and warrant our
Imitation. For even the blessed Jesus himself who thought it no Robbery to be
equal with God, yet being in the Form of a Servant, he thought it no scorn to
kneel and prostrate himself before him; for thus when he was in his last Agony,
it is said, that he fell on his face, and prayed, Matthew. xxxvi. 39. which in
those Eastern Countries was a Signification of the profoundest Reverence: and
afterward when having awoke his Disciples, he returned to his Prayer again,
St. Luke tells us that he fell upon his knees and prayed, Luke xxii. 41. Thus
of St. Stephen, when he was breathing out his Soul in that hearty Prayer for
his Enemies, it is said that he kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice,
Lord, lay not this Sin to their Charge, Acts vii. 60. So also St. Peter, when
he came to raise Tabitha from the dead, is said to kneel down and pray, Acts
ix. 40. And St. Paul acquainting the Ephesians how earnestly he prayed for
them, thus expresses himself; for this Cause I bow my knees unto the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. iii. 14. And when he was going to Rome, and had
taken his last Farewell of the Brethren at Miletum, it is said that he kneeled
down, and prayed with them, Acts xx. 36. And how loudly soever some of our
new-fashioned Christians may explode external Reverence under a Pretense of
worshipping God in a more spiritual Manner, it is certain that there never was
any thing even externally more devout and solemn than the Religious Assemblies
of the Primitive Christians; for generally at the Reading of their public
Liturgies, the whole Congregation kneeled down upon the bare Floor with their
Heads uncovered, their Eyes lift up to Heaven, and their Hands stretched forth
in fashion of a Cross; and then the whole Congregation being composed into a
deep Silence, the Minister began the public Service in a most serious and
humble manner, not throwing about his Prayers at random with a clamorous, wild,
and confused Voice, but pronouncing them with a most decorous Calmness and
Modesty: the People in the mean time demeaning themselves so solemnly and
uniformly, that you would have thought the whole Assembly to have been animated
with one Soul, and that Soul to have been nothing else but a vital Sense of the
adorable Majesty and supereminent Perfections of God. So heavenly wide was the
Primitive Pattern from the Rudeness and Irreverence of our modern Devotions,
that I doubt not should those blessed Martyrs and Confessors of our holy
Religion arise from their Graves, and come into our public Assemblies, they
would suspect that we met together rather to be worshipped by God than to
worship him; our usual Postures being much fitter for Judges than for
Supplicants, and such as rather bespeak us to be receiving Petitions from God,
than offering up Prayers to him. For what Sign do we give that we come to
worship the great Majesty above, when we rudely squat upon our Seats with our
Hats half on, as if we thought it too great a Condescension to uncover our
Heads, and kneel before the Lord our Maker; and that we made not bold enough
with him, unless we treated him as our Fellow, and it were a piece of holy
Familiarity to be saucy in our Language, and irreverent in our Addresses to him?

But by what has been said I think it is apparent, that bodily Worship is of
so much Account and Necessity in Religion, that to neglect it is a Piece of
great Injustice to God, and an high Affront to his Majesty, whereunto we owe
the lowliest Homage and Adoration. But after all it must be acknowledged, that
unless our bodily Worship be attended with an inward lively Sense of God, with
great and worthy Thoughts of him and suitable Affections toward him, it is all
but a perfect Pageantry; which, though it makes a goodly Show, has nothing of
Substance or Reality in it: Nay if by those external Reverences we render him,
we do not express the inward Veneration of our Souls; while we pretend to
worship him, we mock him to his Face; and by offering him a Shell which has no
Kernel in it, we only seek to put a Trick upon him, to make him believe we
honor and adore him, when in reality we do but more demurely flout him, and
with our Mock-Obeysances affront him with greater Ceremony: If therefore we do
not bow our Hearts before him as well as our Knees, in our most solemn
Addresses to him, we are but so many liveless Images of Prayer, that, like our
Grandfathers Statues on their Tombs, have our Hands and Eyes lift up to Heaven,
but no Soul to animate our Devotions. But God expects that those that worship
Him should approach him with pure and humble Minds, with their Wills inspired
with divine Affections, and their Souls touched with an over-awing Sense of
his. Majesty; without which he accounts all our bodily Adorations to be nothing
but demure Scorns, and complemental Mockeries; and therefore upon this very
Account God denounced most fearful Judgments against Israel, because they drew
near him with their mouths, and with their lips did honor him, when their
hearts were removed far from him, Isa. xxix. 13.

Sixthly, and lastly, Another sort of bodily Exercise that is of some, though but
little Account in Religion, is a mere outward Form or Round of Religious
Duties, such as saying of our Prayers, hearing the Word of God, and receiving
of Sacraments, and the like; which are all of them expressly enjoined by the
Christian Religion, as the Means by which we are to purge our Minds from all
Impurity and Wickedness, and to acquire those divine Habits of Piety and
Virtue, which are necessary to qualify us for eternal Life: And without all
doubt, such Means they are as, if rightly used, will by the Blessing of God,
and their own natural Efficacy, exceedingly ^onduce to those great and worthy
Ends for which they were ordained. For what Means can be more conducive to our
Reformation and Amendment, than constant and diligent Prayer? for, besides that
hereby we move God to enable us to our Duty by his own Grace and Assistance; by
these our solemn Addresses to him we take an effectual Course to abstract our
Minds from carnal and sensitive Things; to excite and raise our Affections
toward God, and inspire our Souls with an awful Sense of his Majesty; which
are the most rational Antidotes we can take against the venomous Temptations of
Sin. How necessary is it to make us thoroughly good, that we should seriously
and diligently attend upon the Preaching and public Ministries of God's Word;
the great End of which is to state and describe the Bounds of Christian Duty,
and to explain and enforce those mighty Motives which Christianity urges to
oblige us to it? both which are indispensably necessary to our Reformation;
because a Man cannot be good, unless he knows his Duty, and when he knows it,
he will not be good, unless he be persuaded to it. What can be more conducive
to our Growth and Progress in all Christian Grace and Virtue, than frequent
Receiving of the Holy Sacrament? which, besides as it is a Channel and
Conveyance of the Divine Grace and Assistance to all worthy Communicants, does
sensibly represent to us one of the mightiest Arguments to Obedience in all the
Christian Religion, viz. the Death and Sacrifice of our blessed Redeemer. For
here we see his bloody Tragedy acted before our Eyes, the breaking of his Body
and the pouring out of his Blood for us being visibly represented to us; which
dismal Spectacle (if we have any Remains of Ingenuity in us) cannot but affect
us both with Love to Him who suffered so deeply for us, and with Horror against
our Sins, which brought those Sufferings upon Him: and being thus affected, how
can we forbear vowing Revenge upon our Sins, and perpetual Obedience to our
most loving Redeemer, which is one great End of this sacred Festival? So that
these outward Duties are not only necessary, as they are enjoined by our
Religion, but also as they are effectual Means and Instruments of that internal
Piety and Virtue, which our Religion does principally require and design: and
therefore doubtless it cannot but be a great Sin for any Christian to live in
the ordinary Neglect of these instrumental Duties, because in so doing he does
not only affront the Authority of that holy Religion to which he has vowed
Submission and Obedience, but also rejects the Means of his own Recovery and
Reformation, and so does openly declare himself a reckless profligate Creature,
one that neither is good, nor ever intends to be so. But yet after all it must
be acknowledged, that he that only prays, and hears, and receives Sacraments,
and places all his Religion in a perpetual Round of these outward Performances,
has nothing of the Life and Spirit of true Religion in him: For, as I have
already observed to you, these Duties are intended only for Means and
Instruments of that internal Purity of Mind, and those Divine and Godlike
Dispositions of Soul, wherein the Life and Substance of Religion does consist.
Now you know it is not barely the using of Means that either is or does Good,
but the using them to some good End or Purpose: as for instance, Books are
Means and Instruments of Learning; but it is not barely the using of Books, or
turning over the Leaves of them, that will make Men wise or learned; but the
using them so, as to understand the Contents of them, and acquaint our selves
with the Things and Notions contained in them. Thus Prayer, and Hearing the
Word of God, and Receiving of Sacraments, are doubtless excellent Means to make
Men good and virtuous; but barely to use them, without any farther Intention,
is to do a thing that signifies nothing, that neither is good in it self, nor
will do any good to us: If we would use them to any Purpose, we must use them
to the End, they are designed for, or else we had as good not use them at all.
For we may as soon become good Scholars barely by turning over the Leaves of
learned Books, as we shall good Christians barely by praying, and hearing, and
receiving. If we do not pray to the End we may be more humble and
heavenly-minded; if we do not hear, and receive Sacraments to the End we may be
more just and charitable and meek and temperate; we take a great deal of Pains
to no purpose. For though a Hammer and a File are excellent Tools to make a
Watch, or a Clock, or any such curious Machin; yet doubtless you would account
that Man extremely impertinent that should reckon himself a skilful Mechanic
merely because he knocks and files with them. And by the same Rule, though
Prayers and Sacraments are excellent Instruments of Christian Piety and Virtue,
yet it is a ridiculous Vanity for a Man to esteem himself a good Christian,
merely because he prays and communicates; because as the Art of the Mechanic
consists not barely in using his Tools, but in using them so, as to perfect and
accomplish his Work with them; so the Virtue of a Christian consists not barely
in Praying, Hearing, and Receiving, but in using these Duties with that
Religious Art and Skill, as is necessary to render them effectually subservient
to the Ends of Piety and Virtue; and unless we use them to these Ends, we were
as good not use them at all for any Benefit we are likely to reap from them.
For what does it signify for a Man to confess his Sins to God, if he only go
round in a Circle of confessing and sinning, and sinning and confessing again?
Is it any Pleasure to the Almighty, do we think, to hear us read over, with
tragical Looks and woeful Tones, the odious Catalogue of our uncancelled Guilts?
is he so fond of the Affronts and Injuries we do him, as to take delight in
hearing them recounted? No, doubtless, it is impossible. It Is true, he has
commanded us to confess our Sins to him; but why has he done so? why, that our
Confession might be instrumental to our Reformation; that it might affect us
with Shame and Sorrow for our Sins, and Horror and Indignation against them;
and if this be not the Effect of it, we do but blazon our Shame, when we
confess our Sins, and prefer a Bill of Indictment against our selves. To what
purpose do we daily offer up our Prayers unto God, if we do not endeavor by
our Lives to please him? Can we imagine him so easy a Sovereign as to be
soothed and flattered with the humble Petitions and Entreaties of open and
avowed Rebels? Certainly if we do, we are infinitely mistaken: he bids us pray
to him indeed, but why? why, that by our constant Addresses to him we might be
always affected with so deep a Sense of his Sovereignty over us and our own
Dependence upon him, as might keep us continually in Awe of Him; and if this be
not the Effect of our Prayers, we only talk to the Air, and spend our Breath to
no purpose. To what End do we praise God, and make Rhetorical Acknowledgments
of his Glory and Goodness, if we do not imitate him in those Perfections for
which we admire and laud him? Do we think so wise, so great a Being can ever be
pleased and tickled to hear himself extolled and commended by a little of that
fading Breath which himself gave being to? alas! no; he needs not our poor
Praises to emblazon and magnify him, being infinitely glorious in his own
Perfections, and a sufficient Stage and Theater to Himself. It Is true he bids
us praise him, but why? why, that he might provoke us to imitate what we do
commend, and to transcribe into our own selves those adorable Perfections which
we laud and admire in Him; and if this be not the Effect of our praising him,
all the Good we say of him is nothing but Flattery and Complement. To what
purpose do we come to Church to hear Sermons and pious Exhortations, if we do
not live them too? Do we think to please God by meeting together to gratify our
Ears or Curiosity with some new Notions, or quaint Piece of Oratory? If we do,
we are much mistaken. He has commanded us indeed, diligently to attend the
public Preaching and Ministers of Religion; and why has he done so, but only
that we might learn his Will, and be instructed in the Motives to Obedience?
And if this be not the Effect of our Hearing, we had as good spend our time in
hearing the whistling of the Wind, or the roaring of the Sea. In a word, to
what End do we receive the holy Sacrament, if we do not improve in Virtue by
it? Do you think to please an All-wise God by eating a little Bread, and
drinking a little Wine, in a devout and humble Posture? Is it likely that so
wise a Being should be taken with such an insignificant Trifle? It Is true, He
has instituted this holy Solemnity for a perpetual Memory of our Savior's
Passion; but is this all do you think? Has he commanded us to meet, and eat and
drink together, only to remember that a great while ago the blessed Jesus was
crucified at Jerusalem? no, doubtless; that which he ultimately designed by
this solemn Memorial was to inflame our Love, to confirm our Faith, and
strengthen our Resolutions of Obedience; and if this be not the Effect of it,
our receiving the Sacrament is of no more Account in Religion, than if we
should eat and drink only to satisfy our Hunger and Thirst. This I have the
longer insisted upon, because it is so ordinary for Men to place all their
Religion in these instrumental Duties, and to believe themselves highly in
favor with God, merely because they pray very often, and hear a great many
Sermons, and are constant Communicants at the Lord's Table; when God knows all
this is only the Religion of the Means, and is good only as it tends farther to
produce in us a divine Temper of Mind, and to make us sober, and righteous, and
godly in this present World; which if it does not effect, it does nothing at
all, but is altogether vain and insignificant. Wherefore as you would not
deceive and ruin your own Souls, beware of mistaking the Means of Godliness for
Godliness it self, and of taking up your Rest there, where you should only
bait, in order to a farther Progress; lest falling short of your Duty, you fall
short of the Reward of it, and in the End receive your Portion with Hypocrites
in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone.

2. Having showed what that bodily Exercise is which profits something in
Religion, though, compared with Godliness it self, but very little; I now proceed
to the second thing proposed, which was to show you in what Respects it is that
this bodily Exercise does profit but little. In general it profits but little
in respect of those great and noble Ends which Religion does most principally
aim at: for there are four great Advantages which Religion does principally
design and intend us:

1. To reconcile us unto God; 2. To perfect our Natures; 3. To entitle us to
Heaven; 4. To qualify us for Heaven;
And to each of these, these kinds of bodily Exercise are no farther profitable
than as they conduce to a holy Life and internal Purity and Goodness; which is
that alone by which these great Advantages are to be obtained: so that though
they profit something, yea very much, as they are Means of Godliness, yet
compared with Godliness it self, they profit but very little; because these are
only instrumental to make us godly, but it is Godliness alone that reconciles
us unto God, and perfects our Natures, and qualifies us for Heaven. In these
four Respects therefore these kinds of bodily Exercise do, in comparison with
Godliness, profit but very little.

1. As to the reconciling us to God. It Is true, this bodily Religion is
instrumental to reconcile us unto God, so far as it tends to purify our Minds,
and to inspire us with a divine and God-like Nature; but farther than this, it
has no Influence at all upon it; for there is nothing can reconcile God to us,
or us to God, but only a mutual Likeness and Agreement. While we continue in
our Sins, we cannot love God, our Nature being repugnant to His, who is
infinitely holy, and pure, and good; nor can He love us, His Nature being
repugnant to ours, which is vile, and wicked, and unreasonable. And how can two
Natures be reconciled, which have such mutual Antipathies to each other? How
can we love him whilst we are so prevalently averse to all that is lovely and
amiable in Him, and so unreasonably fond of every thing that He hates and
abhors? Doubtless while there is such a Contrariety between God and us, it is
impossible we should love him without hating our selves. Hence the Apostle
tells us, that the carnal Mind is not only an enemy, but that it is enmity it
self to God, Romans viii. 7. It is Spite and Rancor in the Abstract, being as
repugnant to His pure and holy Nature, as Heaven is to Hell, or Light to
Darkness. And the same Apostle gives us an Account of this Enmity, and shows us
from whence it does arise, Col. i. 21. And you that were sometime alienated and
enemies in your minds by wicked works: These are the Make-baits that infuse
into our Souls a secret Enmity to God, by inspiring them with such Dispositions
as are altogether repugnant to the Purity and Heliness of his Nature; and there
is nothing will extinguish these wicked Dispositions, from whence our Enmity to
God does arise, but only the contrary Habits of Virtue and true Goodness. So
that all our bodily Exercises in Religion do no otherwise tend to reconcile our
Minds to God, than as they are instrumental to destroy the Body of Sin in us,
and to beget in us a Divine and God-like Nature; which if they do not effect,
they will leave us at as great a distance from God as ever they found us; and
after all our Professions, and bodily Severities, our rapturous Passions in
Religion, and fluent Strains of Devotion; after our Hearing, and Praying, and
Receiving of Sacraments, we shall be found as utter Enemies to God as ever we
were before: For there is nothing can reconcile the Mind of a Man to God, but
only a thorough Conformity and Agreement in Nature with him. And as we cannot
be reconciled to God without being godly, so neither can God be reconciled to
us. It Is true he bears a hearty Good Will to all his Creation, and earnestly
desires the Welfare of every Being that he has made capable of any degree of
Happiness; and there is no Man whatsoever excluded from this his universal
Benevolence, which with outstretched Arms embraces the whole Creation: But it
is impossible he should love any, so as to be pleased with or delighted in
them, but only those that are good; for though his Love be terminated upon
infinite Objects, yet it is founded upon one unchangeable Reason, and that is
true Goodness, which is the only Motive of wise and reasonable Love. Thus he
loves Himself, not purely because he is Himself; for that would be rather an
Instinct, than a reasonable Love; but because he is good: and he loves Himself
above all other Things, not out of a blind unreasonable Fondness to himself,
but because he knows Himself to be the highest and most perfect Good. And if
upon an impossible Supposition, he were less good than he is, he would
doubtless love himself less than he does; but because his own Essence is the
fairest Copy, and most perfect Idea of Goodness; therefore if he love
reasonably, he must love Himself most; and consequently love all other things
proportionably as they approach and resemble Himself in Goodness, and Purity,
and Holiness. For if he love himself best, because he is most good, he must
necessarily love all other things proportionably as they are more or less good;
and indeed he could not love Himself infinitely, should he love us for any
other Reason, but that for which he loves Himself: For he can love Himself no
farther than he has Reason for it; and therefore if he had other Reasons to
love us, beyond what he has to love Himself, he would not love Himself
infinitely; because he would not have infinite Reason for it. So that it is
plain, God loves Himself and us for the same general Reason. And as he does not
love Himself, but because he is good; so he does not love us, merely because we
are such and such Men, out of a peculiar Fondness to our individual Persons;
but because we resemble Him in that Goodness and Purity for which he loves
Himself. For one of these three things we must say, That either God loves us
for no Reason at all, which would be a degrading of his most wise Love into a
foolish Fondness; or else that he loves us for our Sins, which would be to make
Him love different Objects, Himself and us, upon contrary Reasons; or that he
loves us for our Goodness, and Conformity to his own most pure and perfect
Nature. This therefore is that alone, that will reconcile God to us, and
without this all our bodily Religion is insignificant. Though we should profess
Religion with the Constancy of Martyrs, and our whole Lives were a continued
Rapture of Religious Passions; though we should fast our selves into Skeletons,
and pray till our Knees clave to the ground; though we should live upon
Sacraments, and hear as many Sermons as there are hours in the Day; yet if upon
all this we do not grow more charitable and benevolent, more honest and
temperate, more humble and heavenly minded, it will be all to no purpose; for
when all is done, there is nothing but true Goodness can indear us to the good
God. So that it is apparent, that notwithstanding all our bodily Exercises, so
long as we continue in our Sins, there is so vast a Gulf between God and us,
that neither we can go to Him, nor he come to us; and, unless God alters his
Nature by becoming impure as we are impure, or we alter ours by becoming pure
as He is pure, so immense is the Distance between him and us, that it is
impossible we should ever meet and agree. What the Prophet therefore says of
Sacrifice, may be said of all bodily Religion, Will the Lord be pleased with
thousands of Rams or ten thousand rivers of Oil? Will he be reconciled with
zealous Professions, fluent Prayers, or melting Passions? no, no; He has
showed thee, O man, what is good. And what does the Lord require of thee, but
to do Justice, to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God, Micah vi. 7, 8.

2. Bodily Exercise profits but little in comparison with Godliness, as to the
perfecting of our Natures. It Is true, this bodily Exercise is instrumental of
our Perfection, so far as it promotes in us the Virtues of Godliness and
Religion; if it makes us meek and humble, and just, and charitable, and
temperate; if it inspires us with a sincere Love to God, and a dutiful Awe and
Dread of his Majesty; if it produces in us a hearty Submission to his Will, and
a constant Dependence upon his Truth and Goodness; then indeed it does
effectually conduce to the Perfection and Accomplishment of our Natures, it
being productive of that wherein the Perfection of our Natures does consist:
But if these are not the Effects of it, we are never the better for it, and
after all our Hearing, and Praying, and Professing, our Nature will be still as
maimed and imperfect as ever it was before. For the Perfection of a Rational
Nature consists not in Forms and Outsides, and such and such bodily Motions and
mechanical Exercises of our Sense and Passion, but in being wise and good; in
having our Understandings informed with the Principles of right Reason, and our
Wills and Affections regulated by them. For to be a perfect Man, is to live up
to the highest Principle of Humane Nature, and that is Reason; which is the
proper Character of our Beings that distinguishes us from all sublunary
Natures, and sets us in a Form of Being above them. When therefore we are
released from the Slaveries of Sense and Passion, and all our Powers are
perfectly subdued to this superior Principle, as to do every thing that it
commands, and nothing that it forbids, and we choose and refuse, and love and
hate, and hope, and fear, and desire, and delight, according as right Reason
directs and dictates to us; then, and not till then, we are come to the full
Stature of perfect Men in Christ Jesus. Now what else is Godliness, but only an
Habit of living according to the Laws of Reason, or an accustoming our selves
in all our Circumstances, to do those Things that are most fit and reasonable;
to demean our selves toward God, our Selves, and all the World, with that
Devotion, Sobriety, and Justice, as becomes Rational Beings placed in our
Condition and Circumstances? This is Godliness; and till we are in some measure
arrived to this, our Faculties are wholly out of Joint, notwithstanding all our
bodily Religion. For so long as we live in a state of Sin, we live in Rebellion
to our own Reason, and the Natural Polity of our Souls is dissolved into a wild
confused Anarchy. Our Reason, that was made to govern us, is inslaved by its
own Vassals, and forced to truckle to our Passions and Appetites. The Law in
our Members controuls the Law in our Minds, and countermands the Dictates of
our purest Reason; and so our Nature is turned upside-down, and the Cardinal
Points of our Motion changed into quite contrary Positions. And so far is our
Nature from being perfected without Godliness, that it is the most wretched
confused thing in the whole World; a mere undistinguished Chaos, where frigida
cum calidis, Sense and Reason, Brute and Man, are shuffled together in a heap
of rude and undigested Ruins: and being in this sick disorderly Condition, what
can recover us but only inuring and accustoming our selves to live godlily; or,
which is all one, according to the Prescripts of right Reason? This, by
degrees, will re-advance our Reason to its native Throne, and reduce our
rebellious Passions and Appetites to a pure and spiritual Mind: This will set
our disjointed Faculties in order, and restore our decayed Nature to its
primitive Health and Vigor. For by inuring our selves to a Life of Reason, our
Passions and Appetites will by degrees be tamed and civilized, so that at
length it will be natural and easy to us; and then we shall cheerfully go on
from one degree of Virtue to another, till all the Unevennesses of our Natures
are filed off, and our Souls are polished into living Images of the most
perfect God; till we come to that heavenly permanent state of ever knowing and
doing that which is best and most reasonable: and this is the utmost Pitch of
Perfection that any reasonable Nature can aspire to. So that it is Godliness
alone that does perfect our Natures, and restore us to the pure state of
reasonable Beings. For to be perfectly godly is to be perfectly conformable to
the eternal Laws of Reason; and he that is so, is advanced to the utmost Pitch
of Perfection that his reasonable Nature is capable of.

3. Bodily Exercise profits but little in comparison with Godliness, as to the
entitling us to Heaven and eternal Life: For God has been so gracious, as not
only to assure us that there is a Heaven and future Happiness, but he has also
promised it to us upon certain Terms and Conditions, that so by performing
these, we might not only believe that there is a Heaven, but also be inspired
with a certain Hope of enjoying it. For upon our performing the Condition upon
which Heaven is promised to us, we are vested with such an inalienable Right to
it, as we can never be disseised of; unless the God of Truth break his Word,
which he can never do, until he ceases to be God. This therefore is one great
Advantage which Religion does design us, to beget in us such a lively Hope of
that blessed Immortality which it promises to us, as might carry us cheerfully
through all the weary Stages of our Duty, and support our Minds under all the
Calamities of this present World. And without all doubt, the Hope of Heaven is
the greatest Blessing that we are capable of on this side Heaven; for if we had
all the World before us, and every Pleasure of it were distilled to a
Quintessence to feast our Desires and entertain our licorice Appetites, what a
poor inconsiderable Trifle would it be, compared with the Hope of being
transformed into the Likeness of God, and dwelling for ever in His Presence,
there to spend a blissful Eternity with Saints and Angels, Archangels and
Seraphims, in one continued everlasting Act of rapturous Love and Joy? What
mean things are all the sickly Joys, the empty, flat, evanid Pleasures this
World does afford us, compared with the ravishing Pleasures and divine
Contentments that spring from such vast and mighty Hopes? This Hope of Heaven
therefore being so highly advantageous to us, God has therefore promised it to
us upon certain Terms and Conditions, that so we might have a sure Foundation
to build our Hope upon; that we might know upon what Grounds we are to expect
that blessed Reward, which we could never have done, had God left himself free
to withold or bestow it upon us, according to the arbitrary, and, to us,
uncertain Determinations of his Will, and not bequeathed it to us upon such
Conditions by his own irrevocable Promise. That therefore which gives us a
Right to Heaven, and is the only true Ground of our Hopes of it, is our
performing the Condition upon which it is promised to us; and the Condition
upon which it is promised to us, is nothing less than true and universal
Godliness. And hence the Apostle tells us, that without holiness no man shall
see the Lord, Heb. xii. 14. and our Savior, in Matthew. v. restrains the
Beatitudes of the other World to those that are poor in Spirit, and pure in
Heart, that are benign and merciful, that hunger and thirst after
Righteousness, and that endure the unjust Persecutions of the World with
Christian Patience, and Courage, and Constancy. And the Promise of eternal Life
is limited by the Apostle to those who by patient continuance in welldoing,
seek for glory, and honor, and immortality, Romans ii. 7. And if Godliness be
the sole Condition of eternal Life, then it necessarily follows, that all our
bodily Exercises in Religion do no farther conduce to entitle us to it, than as
they conduce to make us godly and virtuous; which if they do not effect, they
give us no more Right to Heaven, or Ground to hope for it, than the most
indifferent Actions in the World. Hence our Savior has told us before hand,
that we may know what to trust to, Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my Father
which is in heaven, Matthew. vii. 21. that is, not every one that professes my
Name, and acknowledges me for his Lord and Master, and makes solemn Prayers and
Addresses to me, shall be admitted into the Kingdom of Happiness; such outward
bodily Exercises as these will never entitle any Man unto that blessed
Condition: Though you should profess my Name never so solemnly, and pray to me
with never so much Fervor and Earnestness, yet do not think I will be bribed by
such Trifles to connive at your Sins, and admit you into Heaven notwithstanding
all your Impieties; no, no; I do assure you before hand, that you may know what
to trust to, that there is nothing but your sincere Submission unto the Will of
my Father, shall ever persuade me to receive you into his heavenly Kingdom. Let
us not therefore flatter our selves any longer with vain Expectances of Heaven,
upon the account of our bodily Religion; for unless our Natures are changed,
and our Minds reformed and bettered by it, we may as well lay claim to Heaven
because we eat and drink and sleep, as because we pray, and hear, and receive
Sacraments: For though these bodily Exercises are profitable Means to entitle us
to Heaven, yet it is only upon this Account, because they are Means to make us
good; but if they do not effect this, they are all but so many insignificant
Ciphers. He therefore that builds his Hope of Heaven merely upon bodily
Religion, builds upon a sandy Foundation, which if he finally trust to, will
sink under him, and bury him in eternal Ruins.

4. And lastly, Bodily Exercise profits but little in comparison with
Godliness, as to the qualifying us for Heaven; which is a distinct
Consideration from the former. For supposing we could have a Right to Heaven,
without being disposed and qualified for it, it would be no Advantage at all to
us; for before we can enjoy Heaven, our Minds must be reconciled to the
Pleasures and Delights of it, or else it is impossible they should be Pleasures
to us. Now in the Temper of every wicked Mind there is a natural Antipathy unto
all those pure and spiritual Joys wherewith the heavenly State abounds, which
being pure, and chaste, and refined, can never agree with the vitiated Palate
of a base degenerate Soul. For what Concord can there be between spiteful and
devilish Spirits, and the Fountain of all Love and Goodness? between sensual
and carnalized Souls that understand no other Pleasures but only those of the
Flesh, and those pure and virgin Spirits that never eat nor drink, but live for
ever upon Wisdom, and Holiness, and Love, and Contemplation? How could I be
happy in seeing that God, whom I cannot love; in conversing with those Spirits,
whose Genius and Temper I abhor; and in being for ever employed in those
heavenly Exercises, to which I have the greatest Aversation; no, no; till I am
of the same Disposition with those celestial Inhabitants, and my Mind is
contempered to the heavenly State, it is impossible that Heaven and I should
ever agree; and I may as well see without Eyes, or hear without Ears, as enjoy
Heaven without a Heavenly Disposition. For as to the main, we shall be of the
same Temper of Mind when we come into the other World, as we are of while we
continue in this, it being unimaginable how our Disposition should be totally
changed merely by passing out of one World into another; and therefore as in
this World it is Likeness that does congregate and associate Beings together,
so doubtless it is in the other too: so that if we carry thither with us our
wicked devilish Dispositions, (as we shall doubtless do, unless we subdue and
mortify them here) there will be no Company fit for us to asscciate with, but
only the Devils, and damned Ghosts of wicked Men; with whom our wretched
Spirits being already joined by a Likeness of Nature, will be forced to
congregate, as soon as ever they are excommunicated from the Society of
Mortals. For whither should they flock but to the Birds of their own Feather?
Where should they join Society, but with those malignant Spirits to whom they
are joined already by a Community of Natures? For supposing that when they are
landed in Eternity, it were left to their own Liberty to go either to Heaven or
Hell; yet Heaven would be no Place for them, the Air of that bright Empire of
eternal Day would never agree with their black and hellish Natures; for alas!
what should they do among those blessed Souls that inhabit it, to whose Godlike
Natures, divine Conversations, and heavenly Employments, they have the greatest
Repugnancy and Aversation? From hence therefore it is apparent, that to our
comfortable Possession of Heaven it is not only necessary we should have a
Right to it, but also that we should be prepared and qualified for it; and as
to this, all our bodily Exercises in Religion are no farther profitable than as
they are effectual Means of true substantial Godliness. For when the Soul goes
out of this Body, it must leave all this bodily Religion behind it, and carry
nothing with it into Eternity, but only those divine Virtues and heavenly
Dispositions, which by the Means of this bodily Religion it did here acquire.
For our outward Professions and bodily Severities and Passions, our praying,
and hearing, and receiving of Sacraments, are all but Scaffolds to this
heavenly Building of inward Purity and Goodness; and when once this is finished
for Eternity, then must these Scaffolds go down as Things of no farther Use or
Necessity. But as for the Graces of the Mind, they shall stand for ever as the
only fit Habitations of the heavenly Pleasures; and therefore it is impossible
that these our bodily Exercises should formally dispose our Souls for Heaven,
since in Heaven they shall wholly cease. For although our Love and Joy, and all
our sweeter Affections, shall there be kept in everlasting Exercise, yet shall
they be wholly refined from all bodily Passion, because there we shall be
stripped into naked and unbodied Spirits. Our Love shall unite our Wills to God
and the whole Choir of blessed Spirits, without any Warmth of Spirit, or
Expansions of Heart. Our Joy being purely the Jubilee of our Minds and the
Recreation of our Reason, shall flow without Shouts or Noises in a most sweet
but silent Current; and the whole Scene of our Happiness shall be transacted on
the Stage of our Reason. There being therefore no room for bodily Exercise in
this heavenly State, it is impossible we should be qualified by it for the
Enjoyment of Heaven; but doubtless, our Fitness for Heaven must consist in such
inherent Qualities of Mind as separate Souls may carry to Heaven with them; and
what these are, may be easily concluded by considering what the Employment of
Heaven is; which, so far as we are given to understand of it, consists in
contemplating and adoring the Divinity, and in conversing with those pure and
blessed Spirits that dwell for ever in his Presence. Now to make us fit for
such an Employment, the only necessary Qualities of Mind are an universal Love,
and a profound Humility, which two are the fundamental Virtues of Religion, of
which all the other Virtues are so many different Operations. It Is true, our
Love and Humility will not have all the same Operations in the other World as
they have in this, because there we shall not have the same Occasions for them;
for being placed above all Sufferings in the Enjoyment of the most perfect
Good, we shall have no occasion either for the passive Virtues of Patience, and
Meekness, and Forgiveness of Injuries; nor yet for those active Virtues which
speak us distant from our Happiness, such as Faith and Hope, which shall be
swallowed up in Vision and Fruition. But though in that blessed State we shall
have no occasion to express our Love and Humility in such Acts as these, yet
without these two great Virtues we shall be no ways capable of the heavenly
Employment; for what Pleasure can we take in contemplating the Being of God, if
we do not love Him? Doubtless our own Antipathy to the Goodness and Purity of
His Nature will either avert our Eyes from beholding him, or render the Sight
of him horrible and dreadful to us. And if we do not contemplate him with an
humble and lowly Mind, the Sight of his supereminent Perfections will either
provoke our Envy or Contempt, make us pine to see our selves out-shone by him,
or contemn his Glories out of an overweening Opinion of our own. Again, if we
do not love God, we cannot adore him with a free and cheerful Mind; and if we
are proud and self-conceited, instead of God we shall adore our Selves, and
become our own Idols and Votaries. So that without Humility and Love we shall
be no ways fit for the other part of that sweet Employment which consists in
conversing with holy and blessed Spirits; for their Conversation being wholly
regulated by the sacred Laws of wise and holy Friendship, and consisting in an
everlasting Intercourse of chaste and mutual Indearments; no Soul can be
capable of bearing a Part in it that is not inspired with universal Love and
great Humility; both which are indispensibly necessary to every wise and
friendly Conversation: For where Humility is wanting, every Trifle will offend;
and where Charity is wanting, every Offense will kindle an unquenchable
Discord. So that a proud malicious Nature can converse no where with
Satisfaction, much less with those blessed Souls, in whose most pure and
perfect Friendship there is not the least Intermixture either of Flattery or
Envy; for being all perfectly good and perfectly happy, they can neither
overvalue themselves, nor envy what another enjoys; so that in all their
Conversation there is no Entertainment either for Pride or Malice, but on the
contrary there is nothing but what is distasteful to them: for where there are
none that overvalue either themselves or others, but every one loves every one
with a sincere and inviolable Friendship, there can be no Conversation but what
is distasteful to an arrogant and malicious Temper. What then should a proud
malignant Spirit do among those happy Beings, a great Part of whose Heaven
consists in rejoicing in each others Happiness? Doubtless could such a Spirit
be admitted into their Society, their Bliss would so enrage its Envy, their
Perfection so upbraid its Baseness, that it would find nothing but Causes of
Discontent in a Conversation so disagreeable to its Nature: so that without
universal Love and profound Humility, there is nothing in Heaven that we can
enjoy; there being no Employment in that blessed State that is agreeable to the
Genius of a proud and malicious Mind. So that unless our bodily Religion does
make us really good by begetting in us those heavenly Virtues of Humility and
Love, it is altogether impertinent as to the disposing of us for Heaven; and
after all our fasting, and praying, and hearing, and receiving of Sacraments,
we shall be found as remote from Heaven, and as unprepared for it, as if we had
spent our time in gathering Cockles, or telling the Sands upon the Seashore.
So that though this bodily Exercise be highly useful and necessary to our
Reformation and Amendment, and is in it self a very conducive Means to internal
Holiness and Goodness; yet compared with Godliness it self, wherein our
Holiness and Goodness does consist, it is of very little Account, either as to
the reconciling us to God, or the perfecting our Natures, or to the entitling
us to Heaven, or qualifying us for it.

Now from hence we may learn, what the true End is of external and bodily
Religion: It is not required for its own sake without any farther End or
Intention, but for the sake of Godliness, which is the ultimate Mark at which
it ought to be levelled and directed. And therefore as he that would build an
House must make use of the Means, the Tools and Materials of Building; but if
he think to build the House merely by using these Means, by cutting the Wood
and carving the Stone, without any farther Aim or Intention, he will find
himself extremely mistaken: so he that would be godly must use the Means of
Godliness; he must profess the true Religion, and pray, and hear, and receive
Sacraments; but he that thinks he is godly merely because he uses these Means,
though he does not at all concern himself to direct them unto the great End for
which they were designed, does but deceive and abuse his own Soul. For, for
God's sake, what does it signify for a Man to pray in his Family, and
afterward to go and cheat in his Shop? to keep the Lord's Day strictly, and
play the Knave all the Week after? What does it avail for a Man to hear the
Word of God, if he make no Conscience of obeying it? to receive the Sacrament
of Charity, if he still retain Hatred and Ill Will to his Neighbor? Do we
think that God is so fond of these instrumental Duties of Religion, as for
their sakes to dispense with these gross and fulsome Immoralities? No, no;
these are things only fit to cheat Children and Fools withal. But let us not
imagine, that the wise and holy God will be so imposed upon; that when he has
ordained these Duties only as the Means of acquiring that universal Purity and
Goodness which he principally intends and requires, he will be contented barely
with your using these Means, whether the great Ends for which he designed them
be ever obtained by you or no. If you should enjoin your Servant to copy out
such a Letter or Manuscript, and for that End should require him to use Pen,
Ink, and Paper; would you not think him extremely absurd or insolent, should he
come and show you a large insignificant Scribble, and tell you that according
to your Command he had used the Pen, Ink, and Paper, though indeed he had not
transcribed one Word with them of what you did command and enjoin him? And yet
thus rudely and insolently do you deal by God, who place all your Religion in
the instrumental Duties of it. God does require of you that you should copy out
his Justice, Purity, and Goodness, and transcribe them into your own Natures;
and in order to your doing of this, he has prescribed you certain Means and
Instruments, such as Prayer, and Hearing, and receiving of Sacraments; and when
you come to give him an account of that mighty Task he has enjoined you, you
show him an insignificant Flourish of Religion, and have nothing to say for
your selves but that according to his Appointment you have prayed, and heard,
and received Sacraments; but you must confess that with all these you have not
transcribed one Tittle or Iota of that Purity and Holiness which he required at
your hands. Is this a proper account, do you think, to be given to the wise and
holy Sovereign of the World? Would you be thus mocked by your own Servants? and
dare you presume thus to mock the great God, between whom and you there is
infinitely a greater distance than between you and the meanest Vassal about
you? In the Name of God, for what End do you pray? Is it to please him with a
fine Speech, or an humble and eloquent Address? or is it to persmade him by
your fawning Submissions to befriend you in all your Wickedness and Rebellion
against him? If either of these be your Aims, I must plainly tell you, you were
as good save your Breath for some other purpose; but if you pray to him upon a
sincere Design, to affect your Minds with an awful Sense of God, and to obtain
of him Grace to enable you to repent and amend, and for Pardon and Mercy upon
your unfeigned Repentance; then your Prayer must necessarily make you more
meek, and humble, and industrious to please him by a free and generous
Obedience. To what purpose do you come to hear the Word of God? Do you think it
gratifies the Almighty that you will please to give him the Hearing? or that
you meet in the public Assemblies to furnish your Heads with Notions and your
Tongues with Discourse? If this be your Opinion, I must needs tell you, you
have very mean Apprehensions of God, to think him a Being capable to be pleased
with such a mean and inconsiderable Trifle: but, if you come with humble,
honest, and teachable Minds to learn the Will of God in order to your obeying
it, your hearing will necessarily lead you to the Practice of all those
excellent Virtues which God requires at your hands. What do you design when you
receive the Sacrament? is it to please God with offering Vows to him, which you
do not mean to perform, to pacify him with a short Pang of religious Passion,
with shedding a few Tears over your bleeding Savior; or to get your Pardon
sealed with the Blood of the Covenant without Repentance and Reformation? If
so, I must needs tell you, you receive the Sacrament to no other purpose, but
only to deceive and abuse your own Souls. But if you come with an honest Design
to remember the great things that your Savior has done for you; to excite
your Love to him with the Spectacle of his Passion, and to renew your Communion
with the Saints, and your Vows of Obedience unto God; you will then infallibly
be made better by it, and be more and more accomplished in every part of true
and real Goodness. So that unless we perform this outward and bodily Religion
to the Purposes of true Godliness, we perform it to no purpose at all. Let me
therefore beseech you, even for God's sake and your own Souls, do not rest in
this bodily Religion, think not that you have done enough, when you have fasted
and prayed, heard and received Sacraments; for if you do, you are short of your
Duty, and will infallibly fall short of the Reward of it. These Things indeed
we must by no means neglect, they being the necessary Means and Instruments of
our Reformation; but if we do not use them as such, we take a great deal of
Pains to no purpose; if they do not render us more humble and charitable, more
sober and heavenly-minded, we have spent all our Labor in vain, and in the End
shall have no other Reward for it but the Portion of Hypocrites in the Lake of
Fire and Brimstone.

EZEKIEL XVIII. 30. Repent and turn your selves from all your Transgressions,
so Iniquity shall not be your Ruin.
THE great Design of this Chapter is to answer an Objection which the Jews were
wont to make against the Righteousness of God's Procedure with them; viz. That
he punished them not only for their own, but for their Fathers Sins. Which
Objection, tho it did not at all impeach the Righteousness of God, it being no
Injustice in Him to inflict temporal Evils upon the Children for their Fathers
Sins; yet that they might urge it no more as a Pretense of Gods unrighteous
dealing with them, God assures them by his Prophet that from thenceforth he
would remit that Right he had to make them smart for their Fathers Iniquities,
and inflict no other Punishment upon them than what was due for their own
personal Faults; that if they did well, they should fare well, notwithstanding
the Sins of their Parents; and that if they did wickedly, they should surely
smart for it, how well soever their Parents behaved themselves. Nay, says he,
your Fathers Merit or Demerit shall henceforth be so far from excusing you
from, or exposing you to Punishment, that you shall not suffer for your own
past Wickedness, if you repent of it, nor yet escape for your past
Righteousness if you revolt from it. This is the Sum of the whole Chapter to
the 24th Verse: and yet, says he, the house of Israel says, the way of the Lord
is not equal. O house of Israel are not my ways equal? Are not your ways
unequal? Can any method of rewarding and punishing be more equal than this
which I now propose? or can any Accusation be more injurious than this of yours
against me? but know, it is not your unjust reproaches shall make me desist from
this my most righteous procedure. Therefore, says he Verse the 30th, I will
judge you, O house of Israel, every one according to his ways; how much soever
you reproach and calumniate me, I will strictly insist upon this method of
rewarding and Punishing you according as you repent of, or persevere in your
Iniquities; and to let you see that I will be as ready to reward you upon the
former, as to punish you upon the latter, do but for once make a trial of me,
repent and turn your selves from all your trangressions, and you shall surely
find that your past iniquity shall not be your ruin. The sense of which Words
resolves into two Propositions:

1. That the Iniquity of any People or Nation tends directly to their Ruin. 2.
That true Repentance and Amendment is the certain way to prevent the Ruin
which Iniquity tends to.
I begin with the first, that the Iniquity of any People or Nation tends
directly to their Ruin: So it shall not -- intimating that if they did not
repent their Iniquity would certainly end in their Ruin. And of the Truth of
this the constant Experience of all Ages is a sufficient Testimony; for if you
consult either sacred or profane History, you will find that Iniquity, like
the Worm at the root of Ionah's gourd, has many times blasted the most
flourishing Kingdoms, pulled down their Banks, and laid them open to such
Inundations of Misery, as have finally overwhelmed and destroyed them. And
those that have made the strictest Enquiries into humane Affairs have
constantly observed that the Rise and Fall of Nations has been more owing to
their Virtue and Vice than to any other Cause, and that upon these two Hinges
generally the Fates of Empires turn; that the Foundations of their Rise were
laid in virtuous, brave, and generous Actions, and that by Wickedness and
Corruption of Manners they were undermined, and sunk into a final Ruin. But
the Truth of this will yet more fully appear by considering how many ways Vice
does contribute to the Ruin and Destruction of a Kingdom; all which I shall
reduce to these eight Heads:

1. It does it by depriving Kingdoms and Nations of the Favor and Protection
of God. 2. By inflicting positive Plagues and Punishments upon them. 3. By
corrupting and infatuating their Counsels. 4. By melting and emasculating their
Courage. 5. By breaking and disturbing their Order. 6. By dissolving their
Unity and Concord. 7. By consuming their Wealth and Substance. 8. By debasing
their Esteem and Reputation.
1. Wickedness directly tends to the Ruin of Kingdoms and Nations, as it
deprives them of the Divine Favor and Protection. For if we acknowledge God to
be the Almighty Lord and Sovereign of the World, we cannot but confess that the
Strength and Establishment of Kingdoms is founded in His Favor and Protection;
that his Goodness, Wisdom, and Power are the Pillars upon which those vast and
mighty Structures lean; and consequently that if he withdraw from them those
necessary Supports, they cannot stand, but must inevitably sink under their own
Weight into irreparable Ruins. For nothing can subsist without God, and much
less Kingdoms and Nations which have so many Principles of Corruption lurking
within their own Bowels, and in which there are compounded so many boisterous
Passions, repugnant Humors, inconsistent Designs and contesting Interests; all
which like the contrary Qualities of our Bodies do by their mutual jarring with
one another continually tend to the Dissolution of the whole. So that did not
the wise and Almighty Providence of God continually superintend these contrary
Principles, and by its skilful mingling them with one another, preserve them in
a just and due Temper, those great and unweildy Bodies in which they do reside,
would be every moment in danger of being diseased, corrupted and destroyed by
them. But now the Sins of Nations do mightily contribute to the depriving them
of this Benefit of Gods Providence and Protection; for how can any Kingdom or
Nation expect that God will continue to protect them in their Rebellions
against Himself? that he who is so implacable an Enemy of wickedness, and so
zealous an Assertor of his own Honor and Authority, will employ his Power to
patronize them in the one, and take their part against the other: and if he
withdraw his upholding Providence from a Nation, he needs do no more; for now
it must sink of its own accord, and like a falling House, when its prop is
removed, its Weight will bear it down and quickly crush it into Ruins.

2. Wickedness tends to the Ruin of Kingdoms and Nations not only by engaging
God to withdraw his Protection from, but also to inflict positive Plagues and
Punishments upon them. For God being the supreme Sovereign of the World, and
especially of this World of Men who are so extremely prone to contemn and
violate the Laws of his Government, it is necessary that since our Hopes and
Fears are the mastersprings of all our Motions, he should take especial Care,
as on the one hand to allure us to our Duty by the Hope of Reward, so on the
other to awe us into it by the Fear of Punishment; and if he should not, there
would be no confining such extravagant Creatures, as we are, within any Rule or
Compass. Now as for particular Offenders, the great Scene of God's Rewarding
and Punishing them is the future State, where every Man must answer for himself
and receive the just Retributions of his own Actions; but as for sinful and
virtuous Nations, they are capable only of being rewarded and punished in this
Life; there being no such thing as particular Nations and Kingdoms in the Life
to come; where Heaven and Hell are the two Nations into which the Spirits of
Men are distributed; so that if wicked Nations were not punished here as such,
they could never be punished at all. And if there were no such Punishments set
up like Banks and Shores to break the Insolence and check the overflowing
Wickedness of Sinners, the whole World would soon become a Sink and Deluge of
Iniquity: and therefore though here God many times spares particular Offenders,
there being a future State in which he can reckon with them and call them to a
strict account for all their Affronts and Provocations; yet it is very rare, if
ever, that he suffers wicked Nations to go unpunished here; because if he
should, as such they would escape for ever. And how would it weaken the
Government of the World, if when God sees a People confederate against him,
blow the Trumpets of Rebellion and gather into Armies to urge war against him,
he should sit still with his hands in his bosom and take no notice of it? for
though among Men the Multitude of Offenders be many times the Cause of their
Impunity, because of the Weakness of Humane Governments which are glad to
spare, where they are not strong enough to punish; yet in the Government of God
things are quite otherwise: no Combination of Sinners is too hard for Him, and
the greater and more numerous the Offenders are, the more his Justice is
concerned to vindicate the Affront. However therefore God may pass by single
Sinners in this world, yet when a Nation combines against him, when hand joins
in hand, the wicked shall not go unpunished.

3. Wickedness tends to the Ruin of Kingdoms and Nations as it contributes to
the corrupting and infatuating of their Counsels. For Vice and Wickedness does
very much depress the Minds, and weaken the Understandings of Men; it does so
warp their Judgments, and cast such mists of Prejudice around their Reason,
that they are not able to discern the Issues and Consequents of things; for
when they are overpowered by their Lusts, their Affections will mislead their
Minds, and impose upon them for Truth and Realities their own unreasonable
Wishes and Desires: And when we advise in the midst of a Company of headstrong
Passions and Appetites, we are like Rehoboam amongst his young and hair-brained
Counselors, who represented things to him not as they were in themselves, but
according to his own Desires and Inclinations. And when the Counsels of a
Nation are steered by its own vicious Affections, that will most commonly seem
best which is most unreasonable, and so Storms will many times be mistaken for
Calms, and Rocks for safe and quiet Harbors. No Man is fit to counsel for a
public Good but he that is led by simple and unbiassed Reason, because he only
will attend impartially to the Reasons of things, and accommodate his Advices
to the public Necessities and Exigencies of Affairs; but when the Man himself
is governed by any unreasonable Appetite or Affection, that will ever and anon
intermingle with this Judgment and biass his counsels toward its own
unreasonable Desires and Inclinations. And when such blind Affections as Pride
and Ambition, Covetousness and Revenge sit at the stern, and are the Pilots and
Steer-men of a Kingdom; how can it be expected but that in the midst of so many
Rocks and Quicksands that surround it, it should run a ground, or be split in
pieces?

4. Wickedness tends to the Ruin of Kingdoms and Nations as it contributes to
melt and emasculate their Courage. For though it cannot be denied, but that the
Valor and Courage of Nations is very much owing to the temper of the Climes in
which they are situate, yet it is evident that as People of the most effeminate
Climes have by Virtue been improved into heroic and magnanimous, as the Romans
and Persians for instance; so those of the most hardy and courageous Climes
have many times by their dissolute Manners been broken and dispirited into the
most wretched Cowards and Poultroons; as the English for instance, who though
they have been ever remarked for a People of a daring and undaunted Genius, yet
have sometimes been so melted by their own Softness and Luxury, as that they
became Preys to every Dog that hunted them. And indeed Softness, Luxury, and
Wantonness, are Vices that will effeminate the Spirits and spoil the strain of
the most valorous Nation; for as Virtues are increased by Exercise, so they
shrink and decay by Inactivity, and there is no State of Life that does so
fetter our Courage and restrain its Vigor and Activity, as that of Idleness
and Luxury; in which after it has stewed and dissolved a while it will convert
into the greatest Baseness and Pusillanimity: for an intemperate Bowl, a Bed of
Sloth and a Dalilah's Lap are Charms sufficient to effeminate a Hero, and
bewitch a Lion into a timorous Hare. And as these particular Vices do naturally
discourage a Nation, so Vice in general has the same Effect; for it naturally
impresses a sense of Guilt upon the Mind, which fills it with such Tears and
Herrors as cannot but weaken and ^^pirit the hardiest and most daring Courage.
For how can a Man be courageous that is continually stung with the Remorses,
and haunted with the restless Furies of his own guilty Mind; that carries a
Hell within his own Bosom, and has a thousand Guilts, like so many grim and
ghastly Devils, continually staring him in the Face? Certainly such an One must
either lay by his Reason or his Courage, and become a Coward or cease to be a
Man. Hence it is said, The wicked flees when no man pursues, but the
righteous is bold as a Lion, Prove. 28. 1. And when a Nation is thus dispirited
by their own Lusts and Guilts, then are they ripe for Ruin, and fit to be made
a prey for every Nimrod that will hunt and invade them.

5. Wickedness tends to the Ruin of Kingdoms and Nations, as it breaks and
dissolves their Union. For as true Religion knits men's Hearts together by the
indissoluble Ligaments of mutual Love and Charity, as it heals their Spirits,
and corrects their Passions, and inspires their Natures with all those obliging
Graces upon which the Peace and Concord of Society is founded; so on the
contrary, Vice and Wickedness tends and divides the hearts of men, sows seeds
of Discord in their Natures, frets and inflames their Spirits against one
another, and impregnates them with such rude and barbarous Passions as do
naturally render them unfociable to each other; such as are Pride and Ambition,
Envy and Malice, Covetousness and Revenge, which naturally tend to the
Dissolution of Society, and the cutting in sunder all the cords of Friendship
and good Neighborhood. Hence is that of St. James, Chap. iv. 1. From whence
come wars and fightings among you? come they not hence, even of your lusts that
war in your members. Yea doubtless this is the Cause of all those Discords that
spoil the Harmony of this Moral World, the Pandora's Box out of which have
swarmed all those Strifes and Contentions, Broils, and Confusions that have
destroyed and ruined many flourishing Kingdoms. For though the most turbulent
Factions are usually faced with zeal for God, yet if you look beyond the
Outside, you will always find that most of the Broils that have been conducted
under the displayed Banners of Religion have been raised and led on by the
Devilish Passions of those who have been the most zealous Sticklers for and
Fomentors of them. Thus Vice, you see, does naturally divide a Nation; and
tears the Members of it in sunder; and our Savior assures us that when a
Kingdom is divided against it self, it is soon brought to desolation, Matthew
xii. 25. For those Divisions do mightily impair the strength of a Kingdom,
which like an impetuous Stream being parted into several Currents runs with far
less force, and is much more easily forded. And when once a Nation is torn and
separated into Factions, it is at best but like a Confederate Army, which though
it be united into one Body has several contrary Interests and Designs which
divides their counsels and makes them suspicious of one another, and so less
able to withstand the force of an united Enemy; and in these circumstances what
can be expected but that either they should fall out among themselves and
sheath their swords in one another bowels, or be made an easy prey to the
power and rapine of their common Adversary?

6. Wickedness tends to the Ruin of Kingdoms and Nations, as it disturbs them
in their Order and regular Administration. For as Religion lays the Foundations
of all good Order in a Kingdom, as it obliges the Governors to all those
regular virtues that make them public Bessings, to Justice and Liberality, to
Truth and Mercy, to Constancy and Magnanimity; as it binds the subordinate
Instruments and Ministers of State to Fidelity and Diligence as it ingages the
Subjects to honor and reverence, to obey and submit to their Governors; so on
the contrary, Vice and Wickedness when it has insinuated it self into a
Nation, subverts the whole Order of it, and miserably confounds the Course of
its Administration: it introduces into the Government Opposition and Tyranny,
Fraud and Cruelty, Cowardice and Inconstancy; it perverts the Ministers of it
into Traitors and Robbers, and turns its Courts of Justice into dens of
Thieves; it alienates the Subjects from their Duty and Allegiance, makes them
heady and high-minded, rude and pragmatical, factious and ungovernable; and in
a word, spreads such a poisonous Contagion over all the vital Parts of a
Nation, as, without a speedy Cure, must necessarily end in the Ruin and
Desolation of the whole. For such universal Disorders are as the Symptoms of
Death upon a Nation, and like those gentler Convulsions within the Bowels of
the Earth do portend the Approach of some dreadful Earthquake. And as when the
whole mass of Blood and Humors is corrupted, the Body is sick unto Death, and
will putrefy apace into a Carcass; thus when a Kingdom is thus universally
disordered, when as the Prophet expresses it, the whole head is sick and the
whole heart is faint, when from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot
there is no Soundness in it, but all is covered with wounds and bruises and
putrefying sores; what can be expected but a speedy and a fatal Period?

7. Wickedness tends to the Ruin of Kingdoms and Nations, as it consumes their
Wealth and Substance. Whilst Virtue and Religion do bear sway in a Nation; to
besure it is of a frugal and industrious Genius, the People will attend to
their own Business and not be intermedling pragmatically in another Diocese;
They will enjoy themselves within the Bounds of Modesty and Sobriety, and make
a conscience of out-spending their Fortunes, and living above their proper
Ranks and Degrees in the World. And whilst every Member thus acts within its
proper Sphere, the Nation cannot but thrive and prosper, each one by his honest
Frugality and Industry being enabled upon all occasions to contribute to the
Defense and Support of the Public. But when once Vice and Wickedness have
thrust out Virtue and overspread the Nation, it introduces in its room so many
costly, chargeable, and prodigal Lusts, as will soon exhaust its Wealth, and
suck the Blood out of its Veins. Then in comes Idleness, and like a Drone lives
upon the acquests of Industry: Then Pride begins to spread her Peacocks train,
and flaunt out what Frugality had saved, in gorgeous Apparel and sumptuous
Furniture. Then Drunkenness and Gluttony begin to call out for Meat and Drink
offerings to their God, the Belly; and Lust and Wantnoness to crave Provisions
to feed and pamper their insatiate Appetites: in a word, then comes in such a
Pack of greedy Hell Hounds to devour the Fruits of our past Frugality and
Industry, as are sufficient to drain and exhaust the Indies. And when there are
so many Locusts swarming in every corner of the Land, what can be expected but
that at last they should eat up every green Thing, and devour the Fruits of
every Tree? For we may maintain whole Fleets and Armies at a cheaper rate than
a few extravagant Lusts, and let but Pride and Idleness, Intemperance and
Wantonness be let loose, and allowed to sponge a while upon a Nation, and in a
little time they shall more impoverish and consume its Substance, than a long
and wasting War. And when the Wealth of a Nation which is the vital Blood that
runs and circulates about its Veins and Arteries, is thus continually sucked by
these insatiate Daughters of the Horseleech that still cry out Give, Give; its
Life must necessarily ebb by degrees, and at the last it must faint away and
expire.

8. And lastly, Wickedness tends to the Ruin of Kingdoms and Nations, as it
impairs and debases their Esteem and Reputation. Righteousness exalts a
Nation, says the Wise Man, but Sin is the reproach of any people, Prove. xiv.
34. for Vice has such a natural Baseness and Uncomeliness in it, that whenever
it appears in its own Colors, it creates a mighty Disesteem of it self in the
Minds of all that behold it, and wherever it goes, it carries an infamous
Character along with it; it blasts the Reputation of its own Votaries, covers
their Heads with Shame and Dishonor, causes them to rot above ground, and to
stink alive, and when they are dead, writes a black and inglorious Memory on
their Graves. When therefore this foul and noisome Leprosy has spread it self
over the Face of a Nation, it must necessarily render it a horrid and monstrous
Spectacle unto all that behold it; and though the Universality of Sin may give it
some Reputation where its Throne and Empire is seated, and render it genteel
and fashionable among its own Slaves and Vassals; yet it is such a Reputation as
has no bottom to support it. For unless my Honor be founded in some real
Excellency, it is not in me, but in the Conceit of him that honors me; his
Fancy is the Mint where all my Reputation is coined, and it is at his pleasure
to stamp me an Angel or a Devil. So that though Vice may sometimes be in Vogue
where it is universally spread and propagated, yet it being a Vogue without
Foundation, all the Credit it gives is only a fantastic Being, a thing that is
only the Sport and Dalliance of vulgar Breath and popular Noise; but whilst its
own blind Votaries sing Hosanna's to it, and strew its way with Palms, all the
World besides exclaim against and cry unanimously Crucify it, Crucify it. So
that while it is honored at home, it is vilified abroad, and though we may be
sometimes so besotted as to reckon it our Glory, yet to be sure all wise and
indifferent Judges will upbraid it to us as our Shame. For what wicked Nation
is there that has ever escaped the Reproaches and Infamy of Mankind, that has
abandoned it self to Fraud and Treachery, to Softness and Effeminacy, to
Oppression and Cruelty; and has not thereupon drawn upon it self the Scorn and
Hissing of all the Nations round about it? And when a People are grown cheap
and despicable in their Neighbors eyes, when their Faith is suspected, their
Truth branded, and their Virtue stained and blemished, what Support or friendly
Intercourse can they expect from them? Who will trust to their Leagues or
Confederacies, or enter into Commerce with them, who have neither Truth nor
Justice to secure them? for so much Reputation as a Nation loses, so much
Strength it loses; for it is a mighty Strength to a People to be feared and
loved by their neighboring Nations, neither of which they can expect to be
when once they have sunk their Reputation; for who will dread an effeminate
People softened with Luxury and Voluptuousness? or who will love a profligate
People distained with Cruelty and Falsehood? And when a People has not Credit
enough to make them either feared or loved, if then they are not ruined and
destroyed, it is because their Enemies either think it not worth the while, or
are not at leisure to attempt it.

And thus you see, how many ways Wickedness contributes to the Ruin of a
Nation. So that when Wickedness has overspread a People, and is become their
Epidemical disease, it does not only bode their approaching fate, but hastens
it, and pulls it headlong down upon them; and without a Miracle they must
reform, or sink or perish. For unless God alters the natural Course of things
and hinders necessary Causes from producing their Effects, it will be as
impossible to hinder the Ruin of a Kingdom that is overwhelmed with
Wickedness, and obstinately continues so, as it is to save a House from burning
that is wrapped and compassed round with Flames; because the burning of a House
is not a more necessary Effect of the Flames that surround it, than the Ruin
of a Nation is of the Sins that overspread it. One way therefore there is left,
and only one, for such a Nation to save it self, and that is by Repentance;
which brings me to the next Proposition in the Text, That true Repentance and
Amendment is the certain way to prevent that Ruin which our Iniquities
threaten. Repent and turn your selves from all your trangressions, so iniquity
shall not be your ruin. But before I enter upon this Proposition, I shall draw
a few practical Inferences from what has been said.

1. From hence I infer what plagues and nuisances wicked Men are to a Kingdom,
since the Tendency of Sin in so many particulars is so very destructive to its
Welfare and Interest. These are the grand disturbers of Israel the wretched
Incendiaries, that set all in Flames and Combustions about them; their Sins are
the Trains that do give Fire to those Mines of Ruin that sink and tear up
Kingdoms, and their Breasts are the Seminaries and Harbourers of those Traitors
that do conspire against and undermine our Peace and Happiness. For as for
those Traitors without, though they were a thousand times if possible more crafty
and restless and malicious than they are, we might defy their hellish Plots and
Intreagues, and smile at their vain Attempts did not our Sins contribute to
make us miserable; but when we by our own Wickedness will join hands with their
restless Craft and Malice, assist them against our selves and cooperate with
them to our own destruction, what remedy is there for us? when the sins of our
Friends are conspiring our ruin together with the malice of our Enemies, how
can we hope either, wholly to escape, or much longer to defer it? for if ever
that destruction come upon us which has been so long designing and is now
hanging over us, this Epitaph will very well fit our Tombs, Here lies a
miserable Nation, whose Ruin is owing more to their own Sins than to all the
Designs and Powers of their Enemies. Consider this therefore, O you Sinners in
this our Sion; you are, tho you know it not, in a strict confederacy with the
Priests and Jesuits against your native Country, against the Protestant
Religion, and against the Liberties and Properties of English Men; you are
accessory to all those Treasons which they have contrived, and are still
contriving against the Religion and Laws and Government of the Nation; and if
ever they thrive and take effect (which the God of Heaven avert) we may thank
you for prospering and succeding them; who by your pride and sensuality, your
fraud and faction, your covetousness and oppression do what in you lies to
ripen and give a prosperous birth to the treasonous designs of our common
Adversaries. And therefore if yet you have any regard either for this sinking
Kingdom whose Womb bore you, or to this bleeding Church whose Paps gave you
suck (both which in the most sorrowful postures that a Church and Kingdom can
be well reduced to, are now crying out unto you, O you our cruel and unnatural
Children, have pity upon us! have pity upon us!) if, I say, you have any regard
either for the one or the other, O be now at last persuaded to commiserate
their deplorable Condition, to take off those loud-mouthed Sins you have set
upon them, and are now like a Pack of Hounds tearing and worrying them in
pieces.

2. From hence I infer what is the true Cause of those many national Evils
which we feel and justly fear. For since Iniquity does so directly tend to the
Ruin of a Nation, to what other Cause may we more truly attribute either those
present or those future Evils that have, or shall befall us? When any Calamity
befalls us we are apt to ascribe it all, either to false or else to partial
Causes, and if we reckon Sin among the Causes, to be sure we skip and overlook
our own. It Is the Carelessness or ill Design of this or the other Minister of
State cries one; it is the Peevishness and Faction of such a Gang and Party, cries
another; it is the Rigor and Severity of those who comply with and contend for
the legal Establishment, cries a third; when these at most are but a partial
Cause, and the main Spring, God knows, of all our Mischiefs lies within our own
bosom^. And though many of us are sensible, as we cannot well be otherwise, that
Sin has a great hand in all our Sufferings and Calamities, yet alas how few
are there that reckon their own Sins into the tale: They are the sins of the
Court cries the City, and the sins of the City cries the Country; they are the
sins of the Church cries the Separatist, and the sins of the Clergy cries the
Laity, and the sins of the Gentry cries the Commonalty. Thus every one washes
his own hands, and like the Whore in the Proverbs, wipes his mouth, and cries I
have done no wickedness; so that though none are guiltless and every one stands
accused by his Antagonist, yet if all may be believed, none are guilty: and so
the Judgments of God are posted from Tithing to Tithing, from one Party of Men
to another, and no body will own them though they call us all Father; which is
just as if a company of People in a dreadful Conflagration should fall a
contending with one another at whose House the fire began, and in the mean time
permit it quietly to burn on till it had consumed all before it. Whereas if we
would put a stop to the Judgments that begin to flame about our ears, we should
every one reflect upon our selves, and bring our Buckets of penitential Tears
to extinguish that part of them which our own sins have kindled; and if we
would but do thus, if every Man would smite upon his own Thigh and cry, Lord
what have I done? then we might hope to see that growing Flame put out and
quenched that now waves its curled Head, and threatens universal Ruin: but
till once we are brought to a sorrowful sense of our own Sins, and of the share
they contribute to the public Mischiefs, we are not so much as in the way of
Recovery. For since the Cause of the Kingdoms Sickness lies, God knows, in all
our Breasts, how is it possible we should conspire to remove the whole till we
are every Man sensible of his own part? Let us therefore search and examine our
own hearts what we have contributed to the public Disease, and every one purge
out his own particular share of it; and then to be sure all will soon be well
again, and this poor Kingdom that has so many years been languishing under the
Sins of its Natives, and is now reduced almost to its last gasp, will yet
recover, and once more flourish in perfect health and vigor.

3. From hence I infer what is the just Character of those Men who by their
Principles and Practices contribute to the Ruin of Kingdoms. For since
Iniquity so directly tends to a public Ruin, we may be sure that those
Principles and Practices that naturally tend to the same end are Principles and
Practices of Iniquity; and yet good God! how many such are there that under the
fair disguises of Christian Doctrines and godly Zeal, and with their demure
Looks and religious Countenances do many times seduce and cajole weak and
well-disposed Minds into such seditious Gangs, mutinous Practices and
treasonous Conspiracies as do too often end either in their own Ruin, or their
native Countries. Thus in the Church of Rome, what horrid and barbarous
Practices have there been occasioned by those Antichristian Doctrines of the
lawfulness of destroying Heretics, deposing and murdering of Kings? How many
Kings and Emperors have there been excommunicated, butchered and destroyed by
them? How many flourishing Kingdoms have there been depopulated, wasted and
imbrewed in blood by them? How many millions of Men, Women and Children have
there been sacrificed to the demands of those inhumane and bloodthirsty
Principles? Insomuch that it may be justly questioned, whether for 600 Years
together, these Pretenses of Christianity did not destroy more Lives than
Christianity it self has saved Souls. And would to God that these destroying
Principles had been for ever confined within the Pale of that degenerate
Church! Then might our Reformation have boldly challenged to it self the Spirit
of Peace and Meekness, of unbounded Charity, unstained Loyalty and firm
Allegiance, and without a blush in its face have upbraided that Mother of
Harlots with being the only Patroness of Treasons, and Rebellions, and
Confusions. But alas, those that have turned the World upside down are come
hither also, and have sown their mischievous Principles in our fruitful Fields,
where they have sprung up many an ill Weed; and these, God knows, have grown
apace. For not to touch upon the old Sores, which for our own Credit sake and
our Religions, O would to God were lost in perpetual Oblivion; how many are
there this day among us that out of a pretense of Zeal for God and Religion,
make it their business to divide and tear, rend and distract the Kingdom? who
by starting Jealousies and ill Surmises, fetching and carrying Tales and
scandalous Reports against the Government, suggesting miscarriages of State
that never were, and blackning and aggravating those that are, do what in them
lies to blow up the Discontents of the Kingdom into an intestine Flame, and,
whilst the common Enemy is boring a Hole in the bottom of the Ship, do set the
Mariners together by the ears, that so while they are scuffling within they may
neglect the danger from without, till one common Ruin involves them all, and
sinks them together with their Swords in one another Bowels. And though it is
notorious to all the World what a mighty Bulwark this Church has always been
to the Reformed Religion, how much it has been the Dread and Envy of Rome, and
the Mark of her Power and Malice; how all her Agents have constantly conspired
to fight neither against small nor great, but against the Church of England, in
hope that if once this Master-fort were dismantled, they should quickly force
the lesser Garrisons and Citadels to surrender; yet how many Parties have we
among our selves, who yet pretend great Zeal to the Reformation, that
industriously set themselves to batter down its Sanctuary about its ears; that
join their Throats in one common Cry with the Priests and Jesuits, Down with
her, down with her even to the ground; and all this to gratify their prejudice
againg a few innocent and indifferent Rites, which as private Communicants they
are very little, if at all, concerned in. I do not charge these Men with a
Popish Design, though I am sure they charge us with it upon far less Reason; but
this I say and will maintain it, that whilst they thus industriously set
themselves to tear open the Wounds of our Church, and widen them into incurable
Schisms, they take a most effectual course to open a gap for Popery, which
stands at the door and only waits till the Breach is wide enough for it to
enter.

To conclude all therefore, seeing it is the Sin and Wickedness of People and
Nations that is the main Spring of their Ruin and Destruction, let us, as we
would escape that dismal Ruin, which for several years has hung over our
Heads, and has been pouring it self upon the Heads of several neighboring
Countries and Nations, betake our selves to a deep Humiliation for, and hearty
Repentance of our Sins, which threaten us more than all the Powers of our most
powerful Enemies. We are now engaged in a War against a great Prince, who has
not only by a most salvage and barbarous Persecution of his own Subjects
proclaimed himself a mortal Enemy to our Religion, but also by his perfidious
Violations of the Laws of Nations, his Infractions of the most sacred Ties and
Obligations, and his unparalled Cruelties toward all that have fallen within
the Reach of his Power, has rendered himself the common Enemy of Mankind, and
seems to have been raised up on purpose by God to be the Plague and Scourge of
a wicked World; his Power having for several years hung over all Christendom
like a dismal Cloud charged with Thunder and Lightning, and having discharged
it self upon several Countries and Nations in such prodigrous Showers of Blood,
and Tempests of Ruin and Devastation, as scarce any History can parallel:
against this mischievous Power that glories in nothing but Outrage, and
triumphs upon the Ruins of Mankind, we are now engaged in conjunction with
almost all the Christian World in a common Defense, there being no remedy left
us but either to repel and vanquish it or to lie at its feet, and tamely submit
our selves to be trampled into Destruction by it: nor is there any Nation under
the Cope of Heaven that has greater advantages of curbing it in its Career
than our own, if our own Sins and intestine Divisions do not spoil all.
Wherefore as we hope to succeed in this our necessary Defense of our Religion
and our native Country, let us every one in our places endeavor by laying
aside all our Malice and Revenge, our Pride and Faction, to cement those
unhappy Breaches that are among our selves, and all betake our selves to a
serious and hearty Repentance for our own Sins, that thereby we may reconcile
our selves to God and engage his Almighty Power to fight for us.

And thus I have done with the first Proposition contained in these Words,
[Repent and turn your selves from all your Transgressions, so Iniquity shall
not be your ruine] That the Iniquity of any People or Nation tends directly to
their Ruin. And shall now proceed to the second; viz.

That true Repentance and Amendment is the most effectual way to prevent that
Ruin which our Iniquities do so naturally bring upon us.

This it is upon a twofold Influence it has,

1. Upon God. 2. Upon our Selves.
1. It has a powerful Influence upon God, who is the Sovereign Arbitrator of
the Fate of Nations, and does dispose of their Ruin and Happiness as he
pleases. For he being the sovereign Lord of the World, and supreme Moderator of
all Issues and Events, there is no particular Kingdom or Nation that is exempt
from his Jurisdiction and Disposal, and it is in his Power alone to determine of
every one of them whether they shall be happy or miserable. It is the Lord that
kills and that makes alive; that brings down to the grave, and brings
up; the Lord that makes poor and makes rich, that brings low and lifts
up, 1 Samuel ii. 6, 7. And as he thus disposes of the Fate of particular Persons,
so he does much more of the Fate of particular Nations: for it is he that
increases the Nations, and destroys them; he that enlarges the Nations, and
streightneth them, Job xii. 23. And Dan. iv. 17. it is said, that the most High
rules in the Kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will. And in 2
Kings xix. 15. Hezekiah thus addresses to him, Thou art the God, even thou
alone, of all the Kingdoms of the earth. And if the Government and Disposal of
Nations be in Gods hand as you see it is, then whatsoever has an Influence
upon God, to oblige and indear him to a Nation, must needs effectually conduce
to its Recovery and Welfare; because it makes Him its Friend, who alone can
make it happy and miserable: and that which indears God to us, who alone has
Power to rescue and recover us, must needs effectually conduce to our Recovery.
Now that Repentance has such an Influence upon God, will evidently appear,
whether we consider it,

1. As an Act of natural Justice and Rectitude; or, 2. As the primary End and
Design of Punishment; or, 3. As the best Reparation we can make him for our
Rebellions against him; or, 4. As the Condition upon which he has voluntarily
obliged himself to be reconciled unto us.
1. Consider it as an Act of natural Justice and Rectitude; and as such it must
needs have a powerful Influence upon God: for Justice or Rectitude of Choice
and Action are everlastingly founded in the Nature of God, to whom it is as
natural to govern himself and all his Actions by the best and purest Reason, as
it is to exist or live. So that whatsoever has natural Rectitude in it, and is
squared and regulated by right Reason, must needs be harmonious to the Nature
of God, and consequently does as naturally please and gratify Him as a musical
Note does a musical Ear: for every Nature has a delightful Gust and Relish of
that which is agreeable to it self; and therefore since it is natural to God
himself to act according to the eternal Reasons of things, to see others act so
too, must needs be grateful to his Nature; but to repent is the most reasonable
Action that sinful Creatures can perform. For if it be best and most reasonable
not to do amiss at all, then doubtless when we have done amiss, the next most
reasonable is to resolve to do so no more, there being the same Reason why he
that has sinned should sin no more, as why he that has not, should not sin at
all. And therefore I cannot but wonder at the wild Assertion of some of our
Philosophical Sinners, that to. repent is an Argument of Meanness of Spirit;
and discovers in us a weak and irresolute Mind; as if, because I have played the
Fool, I must resolve to be a Fool for ever, for fear of being accounted weak
and irresolute; as if to change a mean and base Resolution were a piece of
Meanness and Baseness. Indeed to enter into base Resolutions argues a base or
inconsiderate Spirit, but to revoke them is so far from being base or mean,
that it is highly rational and generous; there being the same Reason for the
revoking a bad Resolution as there is against the making it; and next to not
yielding to an unreasonable Motion, the highest Bravery in a reasonable Nature
is not to persist in it. For if we are reasonable Beings, our Strength and
Bravery must consist in being constant to our Reason; but to be constant
against it, is to be constant Fools, or constant Knaves, or both; and if this
be the Character of a bravely resolute Mind, much good may it do those heroic
Sinners that count it a Reproach to repent. For the main of Repentance consists
in the changing of unreasonable for wise and reasonable Resolutions, than which
no Change can be more agreeable to the eternal Laws of Reason; and these Laws
being founded in the Nature of God, this Change must be infinitely agreeable to
him, and have a most powerful Influence upon him. For since to repent is the
most reasonable Action that a Sinner can do, by what can we sinful Creatures
more effectually indear our selves to God; who being most reasonable himself,
must needs be most affected with that which is most reasonable in us.

2. Consider Repentance as the primary End and Design of Punishment, and as
such it must needs have a powerful Influence upon God. For there being no such
thing as a blind unreasonable Vengeance in the Nature of God, he cannot be
supposed to punish for Punishment sake, since that would be to inflict Misery
on others merely to sport and recreate his own Revenge, that being the only
Passion in Nature which a pure Mischief can gratify or please. Since therefore
there is no such Affection in the Nature of God, we may be sure he does not
punish to please Himself, but to reform and amend his criminal Creatures, and
that it is for the Good that Punishment does us, and not for any Good that it
does Him that he chooses and inflicts it upon us: for he needs not our Misery
to make him happy, being most completely happy already in the immense
Perfection of his own Nature; and it is nothing but the Want of Happiness in it
self that makes any Being desire or design another Misery. Since therefore God
cannot be supposed to design our Punishment under the Notion of a pure Misery,
it hence necessarily follows, that if he designs any thing, as to be sure he
does, it must be to do us or others Good by it, and consequently, that since it
is for the sake of this Good that he inflicts it, he will most readily dispense
with it, if that be but answered and obtained without it. But now our
Repentance does in a great measure answer and supply the End of our Punishment,
which is either to reform us when we have done amiss, or to warn others by our
Example not to tread in our Footsteps; both which Ends are in an high degree
obtained in our unfeigned Repentance. For if we heartily repent of our past
Iniquities, we shall be sure to amend them for the future; and it is impossible
that Repentance should be true, which does not upon the first Opportunity
commence into an actual Reformation: and so if it be true also, it will render
us exemplary Warnings unto others; for it will inflict upon us such bitter
Sorrows, such deep Remorses and stinging Reflections as will render us almost
as great and eminent Examples of the Evil and Folly of our Sins, as the
Punishments that were intended against them: and those of our Brethren in
Iniquity that will take no warning by us, when they see the Throbs and Agonies
of our Repentance, how it Pierces, Wounds, and Mortifies our Souls; in all
probability would be as little affected should they instead of that see the
hand of God upon us, chastizing and correcting us for our Follies. For he that
heartily repents; makes almost as woeful an Experiment of the Folly and Evil of
his Sin, as he that has felt the Punishment of it; and next to a bleeding
punished Criminal, there is no such Example of the Madness of Sin as a weeping,
mournful, and dejected Penitent. Since therefore in both these respects
Repentance does so effectually supply the Designs of our Punishment, we may be
sure the merciful God who does always punish in order to those Designs, will be
very much influenced by it. For every Agent is satisfied, when it has its End,
and therefore since our Repentance will supply those Ends which God designs in
our Punishment, we may besure it will highly please and gratify him; for in our
Repentance he has what he aimed at, when he designed to punish us, and to be
sure a good God will never be so fond of the Miseries of his Creatures as to
punish them to no purpose.

3. Consider Repentance as the best Reparation we can make for our past Sins
and Rebellions, and as such also it must needs have a mighty Influence upon
God. It Is true for Sinners to make a full Reparation to God for the Affronts
and Dishonors they have cast upon him, is impossible; because what they have
done they can no more undo, than make what is past never to have been. But yet
he that heartily repents of his former Sins, for as much as he hates and
laments them and wisnes from his Soul that he had never done them, does hereby
morally cancel and rovoke them; for this universal Act of Nolition extending to
all his past bad Choices, though it cannot so undo as to cause them not to have
been, yet it does so unwill and unchoose them, as that if they were not, they
should never be. It Is true, God being our supreme Lord and Lawgiver, the only
complete Satisfaction we can personally render him is perfect unsinning
obedience to his Laws, of which when we have once failed there is no after-Act
of our own can make him a perfect Reparation; because if our after-Act be an
Act of Obedience (as all good and virtuous ones are) God has the same Right to
it, as he had to that wherein we failed, and it is impossible that by satisfying
one Debt we should make a full Repayment of another. But of all our after
Reparations there is none approaches so near to Innocence and unsinning
Obedience, as this of unfeigned Repentance; for all the difference between an
innocent Person and a true Penitent is only this, that the former never chose
to Sin, and the latter has unchosen all his sinful Choices; the one did not
Sin when it was in his power to do it, the other would not have sinned, if it
were in his power not to do it. So that though Repentance is by no means
equivalent to Innocence, yet because of all the after-Acts of a nocent Person
it makes the nearest approach to it, it necessarily follows that it is the best
and highest Reparation that any sinful Cretture can make to an offended God.
What better Reparation can I make for the Delight and Pleasure I have taken in
offending him than to submit my self to the Pains and Anguish of a bitter and
severe Repentance for it? How can I more effectually repair the many Dishonours
I have done him by my base and impious Actions, the shameless Affronts I have
put upon him, then by laying my stubborn Will at his feet, putting on Shame and
Confusion of Face, and abhorring my self in Dust and Ashes before him. This
being therefore the best Satisfaction that such a sinful People as we are can
make to our offended but most merciful God, we may justly hope, that if we
render him this, it will have an auspicious Influence upon him to incline him
toward us and avert his just Displeasure from us. When he shall sec us
prostrate at his Feet, acknowledging with sorrowful Hearts the infinite
Injuries we have done him, offering him all the poor Amends we can make him,
and grieving that we can offer him no more; such a moving Spectacle cannot but
kindle in him a Relenting toward us, and cause his propitions Bowels to
resound with Eccho's of Mercy.

4. And lastly, consider Repentance as the Condition upon which God has
voluntarily engaged himself to be reconciled unto us, and as such also it must
needs have a powerful Influence upon him. So in the Text you see he has
obliged himself, upon the Repentance of wicked People, to interpose between
their Sin and Ruin, So iniquity shall not be your ruin. So also Job xxxvi. 8,
9, 10, 11. you have an excellent Account of Gods Readiness to relieve a
repenting People, In their Adversity if they be bound in fetters and holden in
cords of affliction, then he shows them their work and their trangression
wherein they have exceeded. He opens also their ears to discipline and
commands that they return from their iniquity. If they obey and serve him,
they shall spend their days in prosperity and their years in pleasure. But this
prehaps you will say is only a Relation of what God usually does, and not a
Promise by which he obliges himself always to do so well, but it supposes such
a Promise on Gods part; else there could have been no sure Foundation for Elihu
to have promised it. But then Isai. i. 16, 17, 18. you have Gods own word for
it, Wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine
eyes; cease to do evil, learn to do well. Come now and let us reason together
says the Lord, though your sins be as Scarlet, they shall be white as snow,
though they be red like crimson they shall be as wool. If ye be willing and
obedient, ye shall eat the good of the Land. So also Hosea. xiv. 1, 2. 4. O
Israel return unto the Lord thy God for thou have fallen by thine iniquity.
Take with you words and turn to the Lord, say unto him take away all iniquity
and receive us graciously, so will we render thee the calves of our lips. To
which in the 4th Verse God returns this answer of mercy, I will heal their
backsliding, I will love them freely, for mine anger is turned away from him. I
will be as the dew unto Israel, he shall grow as a lilly and cast forth his
roots as Lebanon. But these Promises perhaps you will say, respect Israel only,
and consequently ought not to be extended unto other Nations; well then let us
see in the last place what he has said to Nations in general Ierem. xviii. 7,
8, At what time I shall speak concerning a Nation and concerning a Kingdom to
pluck up and to pull down and to destroy it, if that Nation against whom I have
pronounced turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to do
unto them. So that what he had promised before to Israel his People here
extends to all Nations, viz. that upon their Repentance he will be favorable
to them, and repent of the Evil he intended against them; which gives us as
great a Certainty of the good Influence of our Repentance upon him as we can
have of his eternal Truth which is the Foundation of all Certainty. So that if
to have God for our Friend can contribute any thing to the saving us from an
impending Ruin, then must our Repentance which makes him our Friend be so far
the Means of our Salvation.

2. As Repentance has a great Influence upon God to move and incline him to
rescue us from Ruin, so it has also a mighty Influence upon us toward the
preventing and obviating our Ruin; so that though there were no such thing as a
God for it to work upon and engage in our Defense and Protection, or though that
God should wholly withdraw himself from Action, and absolutely refuse to
intermeddle in our Affairs; yet would our Repentance it self by its own natural
and necessary Influence most effectually operate toward the Prevention of that
Public Ruin; and that these four ways:

1. As it will thoroughly awaken us into a due sense of our Danger. 2. As it
will animate and encourage us with the Hope of Success upon the Use of due and
proper Means. 3. As it will take us off from those mischievous Actions which do
so necessarily contribute to our Ruin. 4. As it will put us upon such a
regular Course of Action as does naturally tend to the Public Good. In all
which respects, as I shall show you, it would be an effectual Means of our
Recovery.
1. True Repentance naturally awakens us into a due and serious Sense of our
Danger. For a vicious Life does naturally lull men into a Sottish and Senseless
Security; it makes them stupid and reckless, and bereaves them of their natural
Foresight and Sagacity; for besides that it takes off their Minds from the
exercise of Reason, and infatuates them with weak and fantastic Prejudices it
renders them so soft and indulgent to their own luxurious and effeminate
Genius, that they cannot endure any sad or serious thoughts should intermingle
with their Jovial Airs. So that if Danger stands at any distance from them,
they wilfully wink at it, and are afraid to look it in the face, lest it should
suggest such thoughts to them as would disturb the Scenes of their Mirth, and
dash their Draughts of sinful* Pleasures with Wormwood. Hence Amos vi. 1. 3. it
is made the Character of the wicked Israelites that lived at ease in Zion, that
they put far from them the evil day, that is, they would not entertain a
thought of the Nearness of their Danger, lest it should prove a Thorn in their
Pillows, and disturb their soft and beloved ease. So also Hosea xi. 9.
Strangers have devoured his strength, (says he speaking of that wicked People)
and he knows it not, yea gray hairs are here and there upon him, yet he
perceives it not; that is, though they were exceedingly wasted already and had
all the Symptoms of an approaching Ruin upon them, yet they were so intent
upon their Lusts, and so besotted by them, that they took no notice of it. And
if Men will be so stupid as to neglect their Danger, and never think of
retreating till they have run themselves into the Iaws of it, what Remedy is
there for them? how can they escape that will sleep on securely upon the Brinks
of a Precipice, and will not regard their Danger till they are dropping
headlong into it, and are fallen beyond Prevention or Recovery? But when once
Men betake themselves to a course of serious Repentance, they will soon recover
out of this their Lethargick temper. For Repentance will not only chase away
all those effeminate Lusts which barred their Understanding against all
Apprehensions of Danger, and rendered them so supine and regardless, but it will
make them deeply sensible of the Desert of their Sin, and what fearful Effects
are to be expected from it; so that now they will be so far from thrusting from
them the Thoughts of their Danger, that they will reckon it among the
numberless Miracles of Gods Goodness that they were not long ago swallowed up
and consumed by it: and besides those visible Dangers that attend them in the
common Course of Things, they will discern a black Cloud arising out of their
own Guilts, and gathering into storms of Vengeance, and look upon their past
Wickedness as the dire Omens of an approaching Judgment; and being thus
awakened into a Sense of the Danger that threatens them, they are so far on
their way toward an happy Recovery.

2. True Repentance will also animate and encourage a People with the Hope of
Success upon the use of due and proper Means. It is the natural Property of a
wicked Life to render Men secure when Danger is at a distance, and desperate
when it is near at hand; when it is remote they are afraid to mind it lest it
should interrupt their Pleasures, and mingle Discords with their Harmony; but
when by reason of their Fear they are forced to mind it, the sudden unexpected
Alarm it gives them raises such an Uproar in their Thoughts that they can
neither find nor force an Escape from it. For the opposite Affections of Humane
Nature succeed one another in the same Degree. Thus when we hate those whom we
loved we usually hate them in the same degree that we loved them; and when two
contrary Passions follow one another, they are generally both extreme, and by
how much the foregoer exceeded the just medium of one way, by so much will the
follower exceed the other; just like the vibrations of a Pendulum, the which
the farther you swing it this way, the farther it will return the other; and
consequently the more we exceed in Security whilst Danger is pursuing us, the
more we shall exceed in Fear when it has overtaken us. So that when out of an
extravagant Indulgence to their sinful Pleasures Men shut their Eyes against
approaching Danger, and will not open them till it is just upon them and stares
them in the Face, the ghastly and surprising Spectacle will presently transport
them out of one Extreme into another, out of a deep Security into a dead
Despair; especially considering how naturally the Sense of Danger awakens in
guilty Minds their natural Dread of God, and fills them with fearful
Expectations from Him: and when a Man awakes upon the brinks of a Precipice and
all on a sudden sees an apparent Destruction before him, and by this Sight is
at the same time roused into a dismal Apprehension of an Almighty Vengeance
behind him stretching forth its arm to thrust him headlong down, how must it
needs appale and astonish him, and disarm him of all Hope and Power of
escaping. So that out of a secure Impenitence, you see, there is but one remove
into an heartless Desperation: and when Men are desperate in the midst of
Danger, and are reduced to their wits end; when they have neither Prudence to
forecast, nor Courage to execute any method of Recovery, without a Miracle
their Ruin is unavoidable. Of this you have an eminent Example in the wicked
Israelites, who when their Danger was afar off were most unreasonably secure
and regardless of it, but when Senacheribs Army had invested their City, and
they saw themselves surrounded with Ruin on every side, then their Security
immedately converts into the most frightful and horrid Apprehensions; for so
the Prophet describes it Isaiah xxxiii. 14. The sinners in Zion are afraid,
fearfulness has surprised the hypocrites: who amongst us shall dwell with the
devouring fire? who amongst us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? Whilst
the Power of that haughty Monarch was at a distance from them, they laughed at
and despised it; but now it is at their doors they are so frightened at it, that
they had no softer Words to express it by than devouring fire and everlasting
burnings: So that if God had not rescued them by a Miracle, their unmanly Fears
had so disarmed them, that they would have never been able to defend
themselves. But now by our Repentance we do most certainly prevent being
reduced to this woeful Extremity: for that will open our Eyes to all approaching
Dangers, and remove those effeminate Lusts out of our way which interrupted our
Prospect of them; so that we shall see them afar off, and having a free Sight
and Expectance of them, shall not be surpised by them when they draw nearer,
and are ready to fasten upon us; by which means we shall have Time to arm and
fortify our selves against them, and to prepare to receive them with Courage
and Conduct. And when they are come, our Repentance will also animate us with
the Hopes of a timely Relief and Succor from above, and encourage us to hold
out to the last Extremity in Expectance of God's appearing in the Mount, and a
timely Interposure between us and Ruin. For this being the Condition upon
which God has promised us his Favor and Friendship, there is no Reason why we
should be desperate, so long as we live in the Performance of it. So that the
Sense of our unfeigned Repentance will inspire us with joyful Hope that God is
for us; and what Danger can dishearten us under this glorious Hope that
infinite Wisdom and Power is on our side?

3. True Repentance does also abolish those mischievous Actions which do
naturally contribute to the Ruin of a People. How much a wicked Course of Life
tends to a Nations Ruin, is notorious enough to any Man that has been an
Observer of the Effects and Consequences of humane Actions; how it infatuates
their Counsels, weakens their Courage, rends their Unity and Concord; how it
disorders them in all their natural Respects and Dependencies, consumes their
Wealth, and prostitutes their Reputation; and how by all these mischievous
Effects it gradually wastes and consumes them, and lays the Foundation of their
inevitable Ruin. So that whilst Vice and Wickedness prevail in a Nation, it is
like a lingering Consumption in our Bodies that sooths us into an Opinion that
we are well and in Health, or flatters us with fair Hopes of Recovery; but in
the mean time is undermining the Fort of our Life, and preying upon our Vitals.
But it is the most wretched piece of Deceit in the World for a Nation to think
it self well while it is wicked; for so many Vices as it has growing in it, so
many Diseases it has ingendring in its Bowels, which though it may struggle with
a while by the natural Strength and Vigor of its Constitution, will by degrees
inevitably weaken it, and without a speedy and effectual Purgation finally
consume and destroy it; and if it were the best constituted Nation in the
World, it would be impossible for it not to decay and languish under the
malignant Influence of an Epidemical Wickedness. That therefore which purges
away this corrupt Humor out of which all National Diseases spring, must needs
be the most effectual Means of a dying Nations Recovery, and that, and that
only, is Repentance, one essential Part whereof consists in putting off the
Body of Sin, ceasing to do Evil and denying all Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts.
And if once this bad Cause were removed, all the mischievous Effects of it
would immediately cease, and thereupon the sick and declining Kingdom that
groans and languishes under them would immediately mend, and in a little time
recover its native Health and Vigor. For what should hinder it from growing
well, when the malignant Cause of all its Distempers is removed? when that
which befools its Counsels, Dissolves, its Courage disorder its Harmony, breaks
its Unity, lavishes out its Wealth and Reputation is utterly abolished; what
should hinder it from growing up again into a wise and a valiant, an orderly
and unanimous, a wealthy and renowned Nation?

4. And lastly, true Repentance does also put us upon such a Course of Action
as does naturally tend to the Public Good. For Repentance does not only
consist in ceasing to do Evil, but in learning to do Well, in putting on the
new Man as well as putting off the old, that is, it is an entire Submission of
our souls to God, to do what he commands, as well as to forbear what he
forbids, and the Matter of his Commands is such as all of it tends to the
public Good: and if the several Ranks and Orders of Men whereof a Nation is
composed would but unanimously conspire in that Course of Action which God has
enjoined, it would doubtless more contribute to the Weal and Prosperity of such
a Nation, than the wisest Counsels or most puissant Forces without it. If those
that sit at the Helm would but once resolve to stear by those excellent Rules
of honest Prudence, impartial Justice, discreet Mercy, wise Liberality, advised
Constancy and Magnanimity, it would doubtless render their Government far more
safe and easy, more useful, and prosperous, than all the crafty Tricks, dark
Intreagues, and wiley Subterfuges of wicked Policy, which instead of promoting
the Government do generally lead it into a perplexed Maze, and leave it there
miserably bewildred and entangled. Again, if those that are Subjects would but
learn to govern themselves by those Laws of Candor and Modesty, of Meekness and
Fidelity, of Submission and Loyalty, which God has enjoined them; with what
Peace and Quiet, Safety and Contentment might they enjoy themselves under the
Shadow of Government. In a word, if the Rich would be but as courteous and
charitable, the Poor as thankful and industrious, and all as just and honest,
as kind, and gentle, as ready to assist, forbear and forgive one another as God
requires, what a most glorious and happy Society would there spring out of such
a regular Course of Action? doubtless for Peace and Contentment, for Bliss and
Happiness, next to Heaven it self, there is no Place comparable to a virtuous
Nation, and were I in quest of a terrestrial Paradise, I should sooner expect
it in a barren Wilderness inhabited with a virtuous People, than in the most
fruitful and delicious Canaan peopled with wicked and degenerous Natives. Since
therefore a virtuous Course of Action has so direct a Tendency to the public
Good, it hence necessarily follows that Repentance, which is the Entrance and
Introduction to it, must needs very much contribute to the Safety and Recovery
of a Nation; because it puts the several parts of it into such a Course of Life
and Conversation as mutually conduces to the Peace and Happiness and
Preservation of the Whole: so that whether we consider the powerful Influence
it has upon God, or the good Effect it has upon us, you see it is a most
efficacious Instrument of public Happiness and Salvation. Wherefore if the
Consideration of our own private Interest, and everlasting fate in another
World be not sufficient to move us to a serious Repentance, let us add to this
the Consideration of our temporal Concerns, which are all involved in the fate
of the Nation. For the public Good is a common Bank in which every Member has
a share, and consequently whatsoever Damage that suffers, we must expect to
bear our Part of it. And yet, God help us! if we impartially view the Designs
and Behavior of the Generality, we would hardly think that they did seriously
believe there were any such thing as a Common Weal among us, every one almost
endeavoring to advance his own Interest though it be upon the public Ruin,
and all our Pretenses to the Public being little else but a contrasting of
Parties running a Tilt at one another, whilst the Common Good lies between
them, and is equally trampled on by both sides. Wherefore as we would not
betray our Common Interest, and bury our selves in the public Ruin, let us be
persuaded to consider our ways before it be too late, and turn to the Lord by a
deep and hearty Repentance. And to move you hereunto I shall desire you to
consider these few things.

1. What imminent Danger we are in. 2. How much we have all contributed to it.
3. How possible it is to prevent it by our timely Repentance. 4. How much our
personal Repentance will avail us though we should not prevent it. 5. How dearly
we shall repent when it is too late, if we do not endeavor the Prevention of
it by repenting now.
1. Consider the imminent Danger we are in. For if we consider our present
Circumstances, how many visible Causes there are conspiring to effect our
Ruin, how we lie open to the common Adversary that does so vigorously pursue
our Destruction, and like an unwalled Vineyard, are surrounded with wild Boars
without, and overrun with little Foxes within, which, though they are of
different Kinds, agree in the same Ends, and concur to waste and to destroy;
how whilst these little Foxes are pulling down the Vine above, the wild Boars
are waiting underneath to seize and to devour both; how the restless and
indefatigable Malice of our Romish Adversaries without is assisted with the
furious Zeal of our hair-brained Factions within, who though they cannot be
insensible how much their Divisions weaken and expose us, yet seem resolved
rather to venture all than not to be uppermost; how our Counsels puzzled and
entangled, and our Procedures clogged and encumbered; how our Choices are poised
and suspended between contrary Evils that seem so equally great, that we can
hardly determine which is the least; in a word, how our Mischiefs are chained
and linked to one another, so that we cannot remove one without drawing on
another in the room of it, and the suspicion of future makes us afraid to
provide against present Mischiefs: if, I say, we consider all these things, we
cannot but be sensible how great and near our Danger is, and how earnestly it
calls upon us for a speedy and effectual Remedy. And when we are encompast with
so many Dangers on every side, it is not prodigious Sottishness for us to stand
gazing on them with our Hands in our Bosoms, making Speeches about them, and
telling frightful Stories of them to one another, whilst like a spreading
Gangreen they are growing upon us, and creeping insensibly to our Hearts,
whilst the proper Remedy of them is in our own hands, and by a timely
Application we may quickly cure and prevent them. When we see our selves upon
the Borders of Ruin, is it a time to stand chattering at the Wind, spending
our Breath in fruitless Complaints, impotent Invectives, and factious
Murmurings? When if, instead of finding fault with our Superiors, arraigning
the Government, and quarrelling at the public Management and Conduct, we would
at least resolve to find Fault with our selves, arraign our own Vices at the
Bar of an impartial Conscience, and make a through Inquisition into the ill
Conduct of our own Lives and Manners, we might cure the Evils and prevent the
Dangers which we talk and complain of to no purpose? Certainly if ever Dangers
called for a speedy Repentance, ours do; but if we will be deaf to their Cries
we desperately abandon our selves to the dismal and pitiless Desert of our own
Folly and Madness.

2. Consider how much we have all contributed to the Dangers that are pressing
upon us. I doubt if we impartially survey our selves and take a severe Account
of our own Doings, there be very few, if any, that will be able to acquit
themselves of having some hand in those public Mischiefs that hang over us;
that in all Particulars have behaved themselves so soberly and circumspectly as
to contribute nothing toward the filling up the Kingdoms Iniquities. Though many
of us indeed have not been carried away with the impetuous Current of open
Profaneness and Debauchery, yet perhaps we have suffered our selves to be born
down with the contrary Stream of Faction, Schism, or demure Hypocrisy; by which
we have not only scandalized our Religion, and weakened the Interest of it,
imbrolled our Government, and disturbed the methods of our Happiness; but also
highly incensed against us the God of Peace and Truth, and Order. And tho*
others of us have neither been profane nor factious, yet it may be we have been
remiss and lukewarm in Religion, or extremely unfruitful under those rich
Manurings and growing Showers which it continually affords us; by which we have
mightily provoked our God to remove our Candlestick, and leave us in the dark;
to cut us down like fruitless Trees that are good for nothing, but only to
burden and cumber the ground: and if one way or 'tother we have contributed to
those public Calamities that threaten us, we have no other way to repair the
Injury we have done our Country, but by our timely and serious Repentance: this
is the only Balsam by which we can hope to heal those Wounds we have given her;
and if when we have wounded we refuse to cure her, 'tho the Means are in our
own hands, we are doubly guilty of her Blood, and shall be doubly charged with
it whenever an Inquisition is made for it. So that Repentance is a Debt we owe
the Nation for the Mischiefs which our Sins have done to it, and which we can
no otherwise repair but by repenting of those Sins before it is too late, lest
we leave such a Reckoning behind us as will ruin the Kingdom, and undo
succeeding Generations to discharge it.

3. Consider how possible it is yet to prevent our Danger by a timely
Repentance. Though our Condition be full of Hazard, yet, God be praised, it is
not altogether desperate; though we are inter pontem and fontem descending
between the Bridge and River, yet there are a thousand Accidents may intervene,
and catch us in our Fall and set us safe a shore again; and that Almighty
Providence which orders and disposes the Issues and Events of Things, has
infinite ways, which we foresee not, to change the confused Scene of our
Affairs, and reduce our Chaos into Order. And how willing and ready he is to do
it, is visible enough by his Long-suffering toward us, and his patient
Endurance of our Provocations, in expectation that at length his Goodness may
lead us to Repentance. How careful and industrious has he been to discover our
Danger to us? to draw the Curtain from before the dark Designs of our Enemies,
and to unmask their intended Mischiefs in despite of all their Arts of
Concealment? And considering through how many Difficulties the Providence of God
has pressed in carrying on the happy Discovery, how strangely he has forced
it on, and scattered the Clouds before it, we have abundant Reason to
acknowledge his Readiness to succor and relieve us, to prevent our being
surprised with an unexpected Ruin, and swallowed up by it before we were
aware. For what should his Aim be in showing us our Danger, but only to awake
us to Repentance, that so by that powerful Motive he might be induced to rescue
and deliver us; Why should he warn us so long before hand of the Blow that is
falling upon us, but only to give us Space and Opportunity to prevent it by our
timely Repentance? So that ever since the Discovery of our Danger, Deliverance
has been waiting upon us, expecting that happy moment when we would open the
door of our Repentance to it, and invite it in, and make it welcome. But
hitherto, alas! we have shut the door against it, and made it wait in vain: for
several Months the willing Child has been struggling for Birth in the Womb of
Providence, and yet it is unborn; and still it struggles, but all in vain, for
want of our Repentance to open the Womb to it, and promote its travail to a
happy Birth. And do we yet stand still as Persons unconcerned, when ours, our
Country's, and our Childrens Fate depends upon the Issue of it? When we may yet
be safe, if by abandoning our Wickedness we will but assist to our Deliverance,
shall we stand looking on with our Hands in our Bosoms, and see it stifled in
the Womb?

4. Consider how much our personal Repentance will avail us though we should not
prevent our present Danger by it. For I know it will be objected, To what
purpose should we repent, if others still go on in their Wickedness? Can it be
hoped that our personal Amendment should have such a mighty Influence as to
disperse that mighty Cloud of Judgments that hangs over the whole Nation? To
which, in the first place, I answer, that perhaps it may. It may be there is
not yet a sufficient Number of rightous Persons among us to move the holy God
to be propitious to this sinful Nation; and if for the sake of five righteous
Persons God would have saved a Sodom, why may not you hope that by adding your
selves to the far greater number of righteous Persons among us, you may yet
prevail with God to save the whole Nation; and for the possible Hope of being
Saviors to our native Country, who would not make such a cheap and easy
Experiment? But suppose it should not produce this happy Effect, that
notwithstanding our personal Repentance the Cloud should break, and discharge a
bloody Storm upon the Kingdom; yet I dare secure you, you shall never have
Cause to repent of your Repentance; for God will either call you into his
Chambers, shut his door upon you, and hide you for a little moment till the
Indignation is overpast, or he will turn it into such an inestimable Blessing
that you shall be sure to reap from it unspeakably more Good than Prejudice;
and whilst impenitent Wretches shall be lashed at the same time both by God and
their own Consciences, whilst they shall be surrounded with Darkness and Horror
on every side, and not be able to discover any glimps of day either within, or
without, or above them; whilst Heaven and Earth, and their own Consciences are
storming together about their Ears, so that which way soever they turn
themselves, they are miserable; whilst God disowns them, their own Consciences
reproach them, and the World will no longer help or succor them; you, being
reconciled by your Repentance both to your God and your Conscience, will have a
safe Retreat within your own Bosoms, whereinto you may retire, and be merry in
spite of Fortune; and being there entertained with the ravishing sense of your
Fathers Love, with the soft Harmonies of a quiet Conscience, and the glorious
Hopes of a blessed Immortality hereafter, you will not only be enabled to
support your share of the public Calamity, but also to rejoice and triumph
under it. So that would you be but persuaded to repent, I durst assure you, you
shall find the Benefit of it either in the Removal of the Judgments you fear,
or in the Assistance it would give you to undergo them bravely.

5. And lastly, Consider how dearly we shall repent when it is too late; if we
do not endeavor to prevent our Danger by repenting now when we are grovelling
under those dreadful Judgments that hang lowering over us. When our Religion,
Liberties and Properties are seized, and become a prey to our insulting
Enemies; when our Country is spoiled or imbrewed in Blood by intestine Broils
or Foreign Invasions, and all is involved in Ruins and Confusions round about
us; then we shall remember with the Tears in our Eyes that we had once an
Opportunity to be happy; that if we would have been contended to part with a
few base Lusts that did unman and prostitute our Natures, we might have been
still a blessed and prosperous People; that if we would have been so wise as to
have sacrificed to Gods approaching Judgments our Sensuality and Profaneness,
our Faction, Oppression and Hypocrisy, they would then have fairly retreated
and left us in the quiet Enjoyment of all our spiritual and temporal Blessings
we enjoyed; whereas now being incensed and drawn on by our desperate Obstinacy,
they have made a dismal Spoil of all, and left us nothing but our Sins and
Guilts to bear us company in our Miseries. When we shall see our desolate
Country that was heretofore the Queen of Nations sitting like a mournful Widow
in the dust, with her Head uncrowned, her Garments torn, her Breast wounded,
and all her Parts besmeared with Blood; when we shall see our Church unpaled
and all her fences trodden down by wild Beasts; her Beauty defaced, her Sun
extinguished, or overcast with Darkness and Confusion; how will it cut our
Hearts to think that all this is the Product of our own Follies, and that if we
would have been persuaded betime to abandon our Lusts and listen to sober
Counsels, all these dismal Ruins and Desolations might have easily been
prevented. O then we shall lament our Follies and wring our woeful hands, and
wish a thousand and a thousand times that we had been wiser before it was too
late! Seeing therefore it is not yet too late, let us for once resolve to make
a trial what good our Repentance can do to the Public; and O would to God we
would once conspire to make this blessed Experiment! and if upon our making it,
a Cure does not yet follow, if we do not sensibly perceive our Grievances
abate, our Dangers vanish, our Enemies weakened and disheartened, and our broken
Counsels retrieved and united in the public Good, I will be contented to
undergo Cassandra's Fate never to be believed in my Affirmations more. For this
I am sure of, Repentance cannot fail of a good Effect, and that besides all the
Good it would do us by its own natural and necessary Influence, it would
reconcile Him to us that has the disposal of our Fate, and then all would go
well, and God even our own God would give us his blessing. Which he of his
infinite Mercy grant, to whom with his eternal Son and Spirit be ascribed of us
and all the World all Honor and Glory and Power from this time forth and for
evermore.

Amen.
MATTHEW III. 8. Bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance.


THese Words are a Part of John Baptist's Sermon to the Pharisees and Sudducees
of whom mention is made in the foregoing Verse: the first of which being a sort
of demure and formal Hypocrites, who under religious Pretenses shrouded the
blackest Villainies; the second, a Company of Atheistical Debauchees, who, to
supersede the troublesome Obligations of their Consciences, and to obtain of
themselves a free Dispensation to be wicked, denied the Existence of Spirits
and the Life to come. The Baptist, upon their Address to be admitted to his
Baptism, sharply reprehends them both under one common Name, O Generation of
Vipers, who has warned you to flee from the wrath to come! and then he goes
on, Bring forth fruits meet for Repentance. As much as if he should have said,
O ye worst of Men, ye brood of venomous Miscreants! I perceive by your coming
hither some body or other has alarmed you with the Forewarnings of that
dreadful Vengeance that is falling upon this Generation; and now to prevent it,
you pretend Repentance of your Sins, because you have heard that I baptize with
Water unto Repentance, you would needs assume this outward Badge of Penitents.
But I know you well enough, ye are a pack of arrant Knaves and Hypocrites, and
howsoever at present you may be frightened into a demure Pretense of Repentance,
I know your Hearts are as wicked as ever, and that you will not part with one
of those Lusts which render you so base and infamous. And therefore, for my
part, till I have better hopes of you, I am resolved I will have nothing to do
with you. Go therefore, bring forth fruits meet for Repentance; let me see by
your Actions that you are Penitents indeed, and then if you come I shall gladly
receive you to this my solemn Sacrament of Repentance. This I take to be the
most natural and genuine Sense of the Words, and I know but one Objection of
any weight against it, that whereas this Account makes John Baptist to have
refused them his Baptism, other Texts of Scripture seem to assert, that they
themselves refused to be baptized of him, and they did not come to him under a
Pretense of Repentance, but upon a Design to cavil with him, and expose his
Baptism to the People: for Luke 7. 30. it is said, that the Pharisees and
Lawyers rejected, the counsel of God against themselves, i. e. the Counsel
which God, by John the Baptist, gave them, being not baptized of him; but what
Counsel was it that they rejected? Was it the Counsel of being baptized? No
such matter; for John Baptist never advised them to it, but the Counsel he gave
them was to repent, and to bring forth fruits meet for Repentance. And this
they rejected; for which they were not baptized of him. Not but that they would
have been, if they could; for it is expressly said in the Verse foregoing my
Text, that they came to John's Baptism, but John knowing their Hypocrisy would
by no means admit them to it, till they had first brought forth such Fruits as
were meet and proper for Repentance. In handling of which Words, I shall
endeavor these Three things:

1. To show you what this Repentance is of which he exhorts them to bring forth
the meet Fruits. 2. What the meet Fruits of this Repentance are. 3. The
Necessity of bringing forth such Fruits.
1. What this Repentance is of which the Baptist here exhorts them to bring
forth meet Fruits? To which I answer, briefly, that by Repentance we are to
understand a sincere and thorough change of Mind, which as it has been often
observed, is the proper signification of (...), which is the word which the New
Testament most commonly uses for Repentance. And then the Mind is changed, when
the prevailing Purpose and Resolution of it is altered; when upon a due
Consideration of the Mischief, Indecency, or Inconvenience of his present
Resolution, a Man is effectually persuaded into a contrary Purpose, his Mind,
we say, is changed; because he has now a contrary Judgment of things, which
form his Will into a contrary Resolution: and when once our Mind is thus
changed as to any Design or Course of Action we are then said to repent of it.
So that to repent of our Sins, is to be effectually changed and altered in our
Minds concerning them, so as that whereas before we did in our practical
Judgment prefer them at least pro hic and nunc before our duty, and in our Will
embrace and resolutely adhere to them, we do now upon cool Deliberation
pronounce them to be the worst of Evils, and as such do heartily purpose and
resolve to forsake them. And in this consists the Nature and Essence of
Repentance, viz. in a firm Resolution to forsake our Sins upon cool and
deliberate Judgment. Where, by Resolution I do not mean a mere Logical
Conclusion by way of Inference from Premises, that such or such a thing is best
and fittest to be done; for in this there is no Choice, the Proceedings of our
Reason being as necessary as those of our Sense; and where there is no Choice,
there can be no Virtue. But the Resolution of Repentance is an Act of the Will,
viz. its decretory and definitive Sentence for the actual Prosecution of such a
Course as upon calm Deliberation is proposed as that which is most fit and
necessary. For suppose our Reason and Sense as two Parties pleading their
respective Causes and Interests, the one for Virtue, and the other for Vice;
and suppose that in the Conclusion, either the Matter be left in aequilibrio
between them, or that Reason has baffled Sense, and obtained a clear
Conviction that the Cause of Virtue is infinitely best and most preferable, but
that still the Will is in suspense, and has not peremptorily decreed either
one way or the other; why hitherto all that has been done is but mere
Speculation, there is nothing of Choice in it, nothing of Virtue, nor
consequently of Repentance. But when upon a through hearing of both Parties,
the Will interposes its Sovereignty, and pronounces Sentence on Reason and
Virtue's side, this is my final Resolution, and this by the Grace of God I will
stand to, I will from henceforth submit to my Duty, how difficult soever it be,
and discharge those base mischievous Lusts of mine what Temptations soever may
assault me: when, I say, our Will with good Advice and with a full Consent has
pronounced this peremptory Decree and Resolution, our Mind is changed and our
Repentance actually commenced. Thus the Predigal Son, for instance, while he
was considering with himself the happy State he was fallen from, How many hired
Servants of my Father have bread enough and to spare, and the miserable
Condition he was fallen into, and I perish with hunger, was only in the Porch
and Entry of Repentance, and had he staid there and gone no farther, all this
had been nothing but a dead Speculation notwithstanding which he would have
perished in his Sin. But when from hence he proceeded to that peremptory
Resolution, I will arise and go to my Father, in that very Moment he became a
sincere Penitent; and if in that instant he had been struck dead before ever he
had taken one step toward his Father, he had dyed in a State of Repentance.
For it is plain his Mind was changed, he had put off the old man and put on the
new, he had formed a new Judgment and a new Resolution; and if he had
immediately died, he had died in Subjection to God, and would have arose and
gone to his Father, as he did while he lived. So that the precise Notion of
Repentance, you see, consists in the Change of our Mind, that is, of our
Judgment and Resolution: and hence it is called being renewed in the spirit of
our Mind, Ephesians. iv. 23. and being transformed by the renewing of our Mind Romans
xii. 2. Consonantly to which, Hierocles, though an Heathen, thus defines
Repentance, (...) etc. that is, Repentance is the beginning of Philosophy, it is
a Renunciation of Evil Courses, and a Preparation to a Life not to be repented
of. So that when a Man has repented, says he, he neither quits real for
imaginary Goods, nor chooses Evil for fear of unfortunate Accidents; but
conforms his Judgment and submits his Will to the divine Canons. And thus you
see what that Repentance is of which we are here bid to bring forth meet Fruits.

2. I proceed in the next place to show what those Fruits are which are meet
for this Repentance. In general, they are such Fruits or Works as are natural
and agreeable to such an inward Change of Mind and Resolution as Repentance
imports, or such as may give a plain Demonstration that you are effectually
convinced in your Judgment of the Baseness and Malignity of your past sinful
Courses, and sincerely resolved to discard and renounce them for the future.
For the Fruits of Repentance are nothing but the proper Acts and Operations of
it, and it is then and then only that we bring forth these Fruits, when the
Effects of a real Repentance do appear in our Life and Conversation, and our
Actions do signify that our Judgment condemns our Faults, and our Will
renounces them. And according to this account, the Fruits of Repentance may be
reduced to these following Particulars.

1. An actual and thorough Reformation. 2. A profound Humility and
Self-Abasement. 3. A great and tender Modesty in our Expectation. 4. Candor and
Gentleness toward others. 5. Simplicity and Integrity of Manners toward the
offended Party. 6. Caution and Wariness for the future not to offend again in
the same or the like Instances.
1. One necessary Fruit and Effect of our Repentance is an actual and thorough
Reformation. If those invisible Springs of Action the Judgment and the Will be
changed and rectified, the Wheels of Affection and the Hand of Practice must
necessarily move more regularly and orderly: For all our inferior Powers being
subject to the Authority of the Will, and carried about with the swing of this
Primum Mobile, this first great Orb of the Soul, do naturally apply themselves
to the Execution of whatsoever that decrees and resolves on; and to suppose a
Man's Judgment and Will to be reformed when his Life is not, is to suppose that
he is not a voluntary Agent but a piece of Clockwork, that he is not determined
in his Motions by Choice and Deliberation, but by Weights and Plummets, by
necessary Pressures and Impulses; which Supposal not only strips him out of all
capacity of Repentance, but also contradicts all Experience. For this we are as
sensible of as we are of our Hunger and Thirst, that while we are our selves,
and can deliberate and choose, we do nothing but what we will, nothing but what
we judge to be good pro hic and nunc, and nothing but what we choose upon so
judging. So that for a Man to pretend to be a Penitent in his Heart whilst he
is unreformed in his Life, is to lie against his own Experience. He knows and
feels that what he does he does voluntarily, with Approbation of Judgment and
Consent of Will; and therefore if his Actions are bad, his Judgment and Will
must be so too. You say you do heartily repent of your Sins, by which, if you
understand what you say, you mean you do absolutely condemn them in your
Judgment, and peremptorily disclaim them in your Will; but still you must
confess you lead a bad Life and persist in many of those sinful Courses of
which you hope you have heartily repented: which is as much as if you should
say, I am fully resolved I will play the Knave no more, but yet I must confess
I do lie and cheat as much as ever; I am peremptorily determined to be very
temperate and chaste, but I must acknowledge I am very often drunk, and do very
often whore: that is to say, you do what you will not do, you will not do what you
do, your Will has no Influence on your Actions, your Actions no relation to
your Will, there is no Communication nor Intercourse between your Power of
choosing and your Power of acting; so that as you cannot derive the Good that is
in your Will to your Practice, so neither can you attribute the Evil that is in
your Practice to your Will; all which is as false, and you know it is so, as
any Contradiction in Nature. So that a thorough Reformation of Life, you see,
is a necessary Fruit and Effect of Repentance, and you may as well suppose a
Sun without Light, as Repentance without Amendment, if there be Time and
Opportunity for it; for if a Man out-lives the Change of his Mind, there is not
a more necessary Connection between his Life and his Motion, than there is
between the Change of his Mind and the Reformation of his Manners. And hence we
find, that to repent and turn from our evil ways, to repent and do our first
Works, to repent and be converted, to repent and turn to God, are in Scripture
very often put together to denote the inseparable Connection that there is
between them.

2. Another necessary Fruit and Effect of our Repentance is a profound Humility
and Self-Abasement; for between Pride and Repentance there is as direct an
Opposition, as between any Vice and Virtue whatsoever. To repent of a Fault is
to be ashamed of it, to condemn and abhor ones self for it, to hate and
renounce it as vile and abominable; and for a Man to do this, and at the same
time to be highly opinionated of his own Desert, and plumed with glorious
Conceits of himself, is impossible: such a Sense of our own Shame and Vileness
as is implied in a serious and hearty Repentance, can no more consist with a
haughty Look, a puffed and self-conceited Mind, than Light with Darkness, or
excessive Heat with bitter Cold. And upon this Account the Baptist might well
upbraid the Pharisees, who were a Sect of the most bloated Monsters that
appeared in humane Forms; and yet by offering themselves to his Baptism of
Repentance, pretended to be true Penitents. O ye proud Wretches, do you pretend
to Repentance? you that have swelled your selves with Self-Conceit till ye are
ready to burst again! you that are so full of your selves that you can never
forbear overflowing with self Applause and Vainglory! that like a company of
Bladders are blown up with your own Breath, and swell and look big, and yet
have nothing but Wind in you! go, bring forth fruits meet for Repentance; let
me see you grow more humble, mean and prostrate in your own Opinions, and when
by this Effect I am satisfied that you are Penitents indeed, I will readily
admit you to this my Baptism of Repentance. And God knows, we have too many
such Pharisaical Pretenders to Repentance, that under a dejected Look, a solemn
Face and whining Tone do carry as haughty self-conceited Minds as the proudest
Pharisees of them all; that having been affected a little with the Sense of
their Sins, and cast down with the frightful Apprehensions of God's Wrath and
Displeasure, or that having suffered the Terrors of the Spleen, and acted
through a few tragical Scenes of Melancholy, Fancy, and Passion, are presently
borne aloft out of the Spirit of Bondage, as they call it, with such towering
and magnificent Conceits of their own Sanctity and Goodness, as causes them to
look down with Contempt upon ordinary Mortals, to despise their Superiors, and
villify their Betters, and separate themselves into Parties, that monopolize
all Sanctity and Godliness to themselves; which, whatsoever these Men may
think, is doubtless a very dangerous Symptom of a rotten and diseased
Repentance. For he that has truly repented of his Sins, must necessarily have
discovered Cause enough in them to humble and abase himself in his own Eyes;
and he that after such a Prospect of his own Baseness and Vileness as is
necessary to Repentance, can upon the next Review applaud and admire himself,
and grow fond and conceited of his own Excellencies, has a Judgment with two
Ends like a Prospective, with which he can lessen or magnify himself as often as
he pleases.

3. Another necessary Fruit of Repentance is Modesty. He that is so thoroughly
sensible of a Fault as heartily to repent of it, will be thereby instructed to
behave himself more modestly for the future. The Sense of his Fault will cool
his Confidence, and render him more bashful and moderate in all his Pretensions
and Expectations. Should I see a Company of Rebels, upon a Pretense of having
repented of their Disloyalty, not only lay Claim to their Prince's Mercy, but
presently fall foul upon his faithful Adherents, and call themselves his best
and most loyal Subjects, and pretend to his greatest Favors and Rewards; I
should certainly suspect that they had no Sense of their Guilt, but that in
their Hearts they were as very Rebels as ever. And thus, when upon pretense
that having heartily repented of our Rebellions against God, we presently grow
bold and confident, and begin to crow over those who were never involved in our
Guilts, as a Company of carnal and moral Wretches; when we are immediately
flushed with triumphant Assurances of God's Love, and our Loyalty to him, and
nothing will serve our Turns but to be presently counted his Darlings and
Favorites, it is a very ill sign that we were never yet truly ashamed of our
Rebellions; that whatever we pretend, our Wills are as stubborn and disloyal as
ever. And this was the true Genius of the Pharisees whom the Baptist does here
so severely reprehend; who being a proud and conceited Generation, as I showed
you before, made no doubt but God valued them at the same rate as they valued
themselves; and though in reality they were a Pack of as ill-condition'd Knaves
as ever walked demurely under the Cloak of Religion, though they were as factious
and turbulent, as covetous, griping, and oppressive as the Devil himself could
make them, yet because forsooth they were zealous for their Party, and the
Opinions of their Sect, and the little Modes and Affectations that
distinguished them from other Men, they blew themselves up into as high a
Confidence of God's Favor to them, as if they had been the most Saintly and
Godlike Souls in the World, and did so wholly ingross and monopolize the
Kindness of Heaven to themselves, that they would scarce allow the least share
of it to any of the rest of Mankind; notwithstanding which they pretended to be
Penitents, and as such, it seems would fain have been admitted to John's
Baptism. But he, considering how inconsistent their Humor was to their
Pretense, bids them go bring forth fruits meet for Repentance: As much as if he
should have said, You are a special sort of Penitents indeed! one would think
by the Confidence of your Talk and Behavior, you had no Sins to repent of: why
you are the godly Party, the only Favorites of Heaven, and will allow none but
your selves to pretend to the Smiles of God's Countenance. Go for shame; if you
would be accounted Penitents, behave your selves as such, learn to be more
modest, to live as becomes Persons that are deeply affected with their Sins and
ashamed of their Guilts, and then perhaps I may see cause to admit you to my
Baptism. And certainly it is a very ill sign, when after a few Pangs of Sorrow
and Compunction Men are presently perking up into Confidence and Assurance;
when they will needs be at the Top of the Ladder before ever they have touched
the lowermost Rounds, and be gaping for secret Incomes and Manifestations of
God's Love before they have manifested their Repentance by their Obedience to
him. Sure if they were but as sensible of their Guilt as they ought to be, they
would be contented to lie still a while with their Mouths in the Dust, and be
satisfied that they are not desperate of being restored to God's Favor, but
are admitted to hope well, that by God's Blessing on their Endeavors they
shall at length arrive to such a state of Goodness as will entitle them to
God's Favor and eternal Life. And such Modesty the Sense and Shame of their
Guilt would teach them, if it were such as is necessary to an hearty and
unfeigned Repentance.

4. Another necessary Fruit of Repentance is Candor and Gentleness toward
others. He that has been so affected with the sense of his own Faults as
heartily to repent of them, will not be very forward to censure and condemn the
Faults of others: his Mind is so oppressed with the load of his own Sins, that
he is not at leisure to find Fault with other Men; or if he were, yet deeply
conscious, as he is, what abundant Reason he has to find Fault with himself,
that gags and silences him. His own Sins fly in his Face while he is censuring
other Men's; while he is pertly exposing his Neighbors Fault, his Conscience
twits him in the Teeth, and tells him, the Devil rebukes Sin, so that in his
own Defense he is forced to be candid and favorable to others, being conscious
should he severely reflect upon their Faults, he should thereby libel and
upbraid his own. And indeed, it is a certain sign that Men have little or no
Sense of the Evil and Baseness of their own Sins, when they are so forward and
flippant in animadverting upon other Men's. Should you hear a deformed Wretch
exposing another Man for the Blemishes of his Nature, the Disproportion of his
Parts, or the Irregularity of his Features, you would doubtless conclude that
either he imagined himself to be very handsome, or designed to make a Satyr on
his own Ugliness. And so when I hear Men that are great Sinners themselves
briskly declaiming against the Sins of others, I cannot but conclude that
either they conceit themselves to be innocent, or have a mind to expose their
own Guilt and Shame; but to be sure, were they but as sensible of their own
Shame as they ought to be, that would restrain them from throwing Dirt upon
others. And doubtless it was upon this Consideration among others, that the
Baptist does here so tartly upbraid the Pharisees; who though they had rendered
themselves by their malignant Tempers and Practices the greatest Pests and
Mischiefs of Soceity, the most direct Antipodes to the Nature of God, and the
eternal Laws of Righteousness, were yet the severest Censurers of other Men's
Actions in the World. What tragical Clamours did they make against the
Publicans and Sinners for playing the Beast while they themselves played the
Devil? What base Interpretations did they make of the holy and innocent
Freedoms of our Savior, whom because he was not of their sower and unsociable
Temper, they damned for a Wine-bibber, and a Friend of Publicans and Sinners?
In a word, who was more forward than they to emblazon the Faults of other Men,
to fetch and carry scandalous Reports, and shake their Heads at the Iniquities
of the Times, when, God knows, they themselves were the greatest Plagues and
Scandals of the Age they lived in? And with all this Rancor and Bitterness of
Temper they would needs pretend to be Penitents; upon which the Baptist bids
them bring forth such Fruits as were proper for Penitents. As if he should have
said, One may easily discern what goodly Penitents you are, how deeply you are
affected with your own Sins by the Noise and Clamor you make against other
Men's: you have Wickedness enough of your own to censure and make Invectives on,
but while you should be looking inwards, your Eyes are in the Ends of the
Earth, observing other Men's Faults and Miscarriges. Go, if you would appear to
be Penitents, learn to be more severe upon your selves and more candid to other
Men, to make the worst of your own Faults, and the best of your Neighbors; and
then I shall have reason to hope that you are Penitents indeed. But it is
fulsome Hypocrisy for Men to pretend to Repentance whilst they are bitterly
censorious and apt to judge hardly of other Men. And to Men of Understanding
there is nothing can be more ridiculous, than to see one that is just fallen
off from a lewd and dissolute Course of Life, presently set up for a Censor of
the Age, and with a wise and serious Forehead animadverting upon the Freedoms,
and declaiming against the Debaucheries of this or the other Man; which
whatsoever he may think, is a plain Demonstration that he has never been duly
affected with the Sense of his own Sin, and that he is only changing one kind
of Wickedness for another. For were he but thoroughly convinced how bad he has
been himself, he would be ashamed to clamor, and inveigh against other Men,
and the great sense he would have of the Beam in his own Eye, would make him
less apt to take notice of the Mote in his Neighbors.

5. Another necessary Fruit of Repentance is, Simplicity of Heart and Integrity
of Manners toward the Party offended; for tho it is a Maxim in Policy not to
trust to a reconciled Enemy, yet could I be secure of the Sincerity of his
Reconciliation, I should have more reason to trust him than a constant Friend;
because if he be thoroughly sensible that he has unjustly offended me and has
heartily repented of it, it is reasonably to be supposed that he will not only
use me as a Friend for the future, but as a Friend whom he has injured and
unjustly provoked, and consequently that the sense of the Injury he has done
me, will make him supererogate in Friendship, and by a Superabundance of good
Offices endeavor not only to discharge what the Laws of Friendship exact, but
also to expiate the unjust Provocations he has given me. For the very Sense of
a past Injury, when it is heartily repented of, does naturally kindle into a
cordial Affection toward him whom we have injured: And thus, if we have
heartily repented of our Sins against God, the Sense of what is past will
render us more sincere and cordial to him for the future; and by how much the
more we have provoked and offended him, by so much the more studious we shall
be to serve and obey him. But if our pretended Repentance produces in us no
other Effect but an outward Show of Obedience, and renders us more studious to
appear good than to be so; if it puts us upon picking and choosing our Duty,
upon being zealous about small things to compensate our Negligence and
Remissness about great, it is an infallible sign that it is merely pretended,
and that all the Shows we make of Reconciliation are nothing but mere Vizors
and Counterfeits. And such was the Temper and Disposition of the Pharisees,
they took care to disguise themselves in a pompous Form of Godliness, and to
carry a very demure and sanctified Outside. Their Looks were solemn, austere,
and mortified, their Tongues all tipped with the Language of Canaan, their
Motions and Gestures were artificially composed to the Tune of a humble and
heavenly Mind. They fasted thrice a Week, and prayed so long that they made all
the Streets ring again with their loud and clamorous Devotions, and gave Alms
too now and then in a good Echo whence they might be sure to hear their
Charities resounded after them in Praises and Commendations. They kept a mighty
Noise about the Fringes and Phylacteries, the external Circumstances and
Appendages of Religion, and were most zealous Assertors of pure Ordinances and
pure Worship: but under all this Formality our Savior tells them they were
whited Sepulchers, who though they look gloriously without, are full of
Rottenness within. For this demure Outside of theirs was only a Disguise under
which they cheated and played the Knaves more securely. Their long Prayers were
nothing but specious Introductions to their Rapines and Oppressions. Their Alms
were their Decoys which they sent forth on purpose to train simple and
well-meaning People into their nets. Their zeal for the Mint and Cummin was the
varnish of their Fraud and Injustice. Their long Fasts for Reformation were
stirups to their Ambition of being uppermost, and their constant Refreshments
after them were Widows and Orphans tears. In a word, they would cheat in
saintly Language, play the Knaves with their Hands and Eyes lift up to Heaven,
and while they seemed to be as fervent as Angels in their Devotions, they were
as false and treacherous as Devils in their Dealings. And yet these base People
would needs have been admitted for Penitents to the Baptism of John; who
considering the Inconsistency of their Temper with their Pretense, tartly
upbraids them and bids them bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance; that is,
learn to be more simple and sincere in their Carriage toward their offended
God, study more to be Penitents than to appear such; contract your Show into
Reality, and let it appear by your sincere Respect to God, and Devotion to his
Service, that you do heartily repent of your Rebellions against him. And
certainly there can be nothing more suspicious than for a young Penitent to
affect to make a great Show of Religion; for true Repentance is naturally
bashful and modest, it shuns the Theater, the tops of houses, and the corners
of Streets, and is best pleased with Silence and Retirement; and provided God
sees its Tears and hears its Sighs and holy Purposes, it desires no other
Spectator or Auditor. For the great Design of a Penitent is to reconcile
himself to God, and if he be but so sensible of his Sin as heartily to repent
of it; by how much the more he has offended him for the time past, by so much
the more he will study to please him for the time to come.

6. And lastly, Another necessary Fruit of Repentance is Caution and Wariness
for the future not to offend again in the same or the like Instances. For
Repentance is a penal Duty in which a Man undergoes some degree of the smart
and punishment of his Fault, in which he indures the Shame and Confusion of a
guilty Mind, the Regrets and Remorses of an awakened Conscience; and the burnt
Child, we say, will dread the Fire. He that has undergon the severe Discipline
of a deep and solemn Repentance will be sure to take warning by it; and be very
cautions for the future not to approach those sins for which he has smarted so
severely. And hence we find that Repentance is not only expressed in Scripture
by (...) which signifies a Change of Mind, but also by (...) which signifies an
After-Care; which shows that though the Essence of Repentance consists in the
(...) or Change of our mind, yet (...), or an After-Care to avoid those sins
from which our Minds are changed and converted, is a necessary Effect and Fruit
of Repentance; it being an usual Figure in Scripture to express Causes by their
most natural and easy Effects. And indeed when I see Men boldly approaching
and venturing toward those Vices of which they pretend to have heartily
repented, I cannot but suspect that their Repentance is nothing but a Pretense,
that 'twas only a present Pet and Distaste that they took against their sin
upon some ungrateful Accident, or under a sudden Qualm of Conscience, and that
it never proceeded so far as to a cool and deliberate Change of their Judgment
and Resolution concerning it. For certainly had they undergon those Lashes of
Conscience, those sharp and cutting Reflections that are usually necessary to
prepare the way for such a Change, they could never be so foolhardy as to play
upon the hole of the Asp again, and to thrust their hands into the den of the
Cockatrice after they have been so severely stung by it; and the Remembrance of
those Agonies of Soul, those Spasms and Convulsions of Conscience which their
sin has already cost them, would make them tremble to think of it and be
instead of a Sea-mark to forewarn and terrify them from approaching it again.
But such was the humor of the Pharisees, that though they pretended to be
Penitents, yet when it served their Cause and Interest they were as bold and
venturous at an evil Action as ever. For so our Savior long after this
Reprehension of the Baptist, and consequently after this their pretense of
Repentance, charges them with being as intimate and familiar with their old
Vices as ever. It was their way indeed, and so it was always, to make their
Religion a Cloak and Pretense for their Wickedness; but to serve their own
Faction, which they called propagating the Glory of God, they esteemed nothing
unlawful. And though in any point that was repugnant to the Interest of their
Sect they were the most nice and scrupulous People in the World; yet to serve
their Cause they could lie and forswear themselves with the help of a juggling
Reserve or Distinction, as our Savior observes of them Matthew. xxiii. 16. And
no doubt but they could have taken Oaths and Sacraments too against their
Consciences to keep their Placcs in the Sanhedrim, and there carry on their
factious and turbulent Designs. It being therefore evident by their being so
venturous upon sinful Actions, that their Pretense to Repentance was false, the
Baptist dismisses them with this severe Admonition, go bring forth Fruits meet
for Repentance; i. e. let me see you more wary and cautions of running into
those sinful Courses of which you now pretend to repent, and then I shall have
some reason to believe that you are Penitents indeed. And certainly while a Man
affects to draw near to his old Sins, and to dwell in the Neighborhood of
them, whilst he delights in their Remembrance, and loves to sport and entertain
himself with their fantastic Pleasures, while he affects to dwell within View
of their Temptations, to venture to the very Edge and Brink of them, to the
very utmost Limits of lawful and innocent; it is a very ill sign that he never
had that thorough Sense of their Malignity and Danger that is necessary to an
hearty Repentance; for if he had, he would be afraid of all Approaches and
Tendencies toward them, and be ready to start and run away not only from the
sins themselves but even from their Appearances and Resemblances.

And thus I have endeavored to give you an Account of the natural Fruits and
Effects of true Repentance, by considering of which and impartially consulting
our own Experience of our selves, we may easily determine whether the
Repentance we pretend to, if we pretend to any at all, be true or false. We
live in an Age that does so abound with all sorts and degrees of Wickedness,
that a Man can hardly mention any kind of Wickedness, or party of wicked men
that are branded for such either in Sacred or Profane History, but it is
presently suspected that his design is to reproach and expose some Party or
other among our selves. And I confess if men will set themselves to guessing
who is meant by the Pharisees, and who by the Sadducees, they may find
Parallels enough of both in this degenerate Age; and, God knows they go
together too often now in pursuance of worse Designs than those Sadducees and
Pharisees that came together to John's Baptism. But if any should ask me who or
what Party of Men it is I reflect upon in these severe Representations I have
made of Pharisaical Pretenders to Repentance, I can truly answer that I intend
no one Party of whatsoever Denomination; there being among all Parties a great
many that do not so much as pretend to Repentance, and among most, as I verily
hope, a great many that do more than pretend to it. But the Pharisees whom I
mean are those whom the Baptist and after him our Savior himself do so smartly
inveigh against; and if you please to consult St. Matthew xxiii, you will there
find them treated with much more Severity by the meekest and most charitable
Person that ever was. But if in any Party among our selves there be any such
Hypocrites and false Pretenders to Repentance as these Pharisees were, as I
doubt there are too many among all Parties, I must then ingenuously acknowledge
that I mean them too. And if any thing that has been said should reflect upon
and gall them, they ought to consider that that is their own Fault. They may
avoid being Hypocrites, but We must not avoid declaiming against Hypocrisy, and
when ever we do so, we must reflect upon them whether we will or no. If Men
will be Hypocrites, our Savior's Sermon as well, as this will upbraid and
expose them, and if it does so, it is not his Fault but theirs who made
themselves obnoxious to his Satyrs and Invectives. The only way for you to
avoid the Edge of such Reflections is to become honest and sincere Penitents,
but if you will not, you must thank your selves, if it cuts and wounds you. For
if our Savior himself had stood this day in this Place, and preached over his
Sermon to the Pharisees, it would have been impossible for you not to have been
touched and concerned at it, and if you should be so disingenuous as to fall
foul on me, as they did on him, I will only propose St. Paul's Quere to you, am
I therefore become your Enemy, because I tell you the Truth? and so I have done
with the second thing proposed, which was to show you what are the proper
Fruits and Effects of Repentance.

3. I now proceed to the Third and last Argument, namely to show the
indispensible Necessity of bringing forth these Fruits, which I shall endeavor
to make appear by these following Instances.

1. That we should bring forth these meet Fruits of Repentance is necessary to
the Satisfaction of God. 2. It is necessary to the Satisfaction of our own
Consciences. 3. It is necessary to the Obligation of Repentance. 4. It is
necessary to the Perfection of our Natures.
1. That we should bring forth these meet Fruits of Repentance is necessary to
the Satisfaction of God. For though it be wholly owing to Christ's
Satisfaction, that lost Sinners are admitted to a Possibility of recovering
themselves by the After-game of Repentance, yet God we see has declared, that
without our Repentance he will not be satisfied. Neither indeed does Christ's
Satisfaction extend to final Impenitence, it cancels none of our Guilts but
only those which we heartily repent of, but as to all the rest we are as
accountable to the Tribunal of God as if he had never died for us. So that all
the Favor which the meritorious satisfaction of our Savior has obtained for
us is only this, that our Repentance shall be accepted instead of our
Punishment, that is, that if we unfeignedly repent of our sins, we shall
thereupon be set as right in the sight of God and in the court of Heaven, as if
we had undergon the utmost Rigor of the Law. So that now our Repentance being
accepted of by God instead of our Punishment, it is necessary that it should be
such a Repentance as does in some measure answer and fulfill the Ends of our
Punishment. For since it is for wise and good Ends that God punishes, it is not
to be expected that he will accept of any thing in the stead of our Punishment
which does not in some measure fulfill and accomplish those Ends; and this no
Repentance can do but that which produces the proper Fruits of Repentance. For
the principal End of Punishment is either to amend the Criminal himself, or to
warn others not to imitate his Sins by the Example of his Sufferings, which
Ends can never be effected by our Repentance unless it produce in us the
visible Fruits of Amendment. For suppose it possible that I should have
internally repented, i. e. that my Mind should be really changed, that in my
Judgment I should absolutely condemn my sinful Courses, and in my Will I should
be peremptorily resolved against them, and no actual and visible Reformation
should follow; if this I say were possible, it is plain my Repentance would be
wholly ineffectual both as to my own Amendment and the Amendment of others. If
indeed I actually avoided the Sins I condemn and am resolved against, my
Repentance would effect the Ends of my Punishment, that is, it would make me a
better Man, it would reform my Nature, rectify my Motions, and extinguish my
bad Inclinations and corrupt Principles, and prove an effectual Means to reform
others too; who by the good Example of my Actions might be as effectually
wrought upon, as by the sad Example of my Sufferings. And God having thus
obtained his Ends by my Repentance, there is very good reason why he should
dispense with my Punishment. But if after I have condemned my Sin and resolved
against it, neither my self nor other Men can be reformed and amended by it,
this Change of my Mind will have no influence on my Nature, it will never
correct its disorderly Affections, nor subdue its wild and extravagant
Inclinations; but leave it altogether as vicious and degenerate as it found it.
Neither will it have any good Influence upon others, because it does not appear
to them in any visible Effects. So that it is only by bringing forth its
natural Fruits that our Repentance or Change of Mind serves the Ends of Gods
Punishments, and it is unreasonable to expect that God should accept of our
Repentance for our Punishment, when it does not at all serve the purpose of our
Punishment. For this would be to defeat himself, to countermine and baffle his
own Intentions, and fondly to give up his wise and good Ends to the Obstinacy
and Perverseness of his Creatures. You would fain have God dispense with your
Punishment; well, but you ought to consider that there are very wise and good
Ends that he drives at in punishing you. Would you have him give up these Ends?
that is unreasonable, that is to desire him to acknowledge that his Ends are
not worth aiming at. Why what is to be done then? I will tell you what, you
must give him his Ends by your Repentance, that is, by bringing forth such
Fruits of Repentance as will effectually amend you, and contribute to amend
others, and then you may be secure that God will be satisfied; but if not, be
assured he will prosecute his Ends by your Punishment and take care to warn
others by the sad example of your Sufferings, since you would not take care to
warn them by the good example of your Actions.

2. That we should bring forth these meet Fruits of Repentance is also
necessary to the Satisfaction of our Consciences; for without such Fruits a Man
can never be rationally satisfied that his Repentance is real and sincere for
if we have made any Observation upon our selves, we cannot but be sensible of
our own Fickleness and Mutability, how many Sorts of Men we are under our
several Circumstances, how our Mind veers about upon every change of Wind, and
into what contrary Tempers it is molded upon contrary Chances and
Contingencies. And having such an abundant Experience of our own
Inconsistency, how can we rationally conclude upon every Variation of Temper.
That this or that is our fixed Judgment or our standing Resolution, that the
Mind we are now in will not Change upon the next Change of our Circumstances,
and that when contrary Accidents occur we shall not take up contrary
Resolutions; especially when our Resolutions do oppose our Inclinations, and
our Inclinations are perpetually importuned and solicited by outward Objects
and Temptations; which is our Case in the matter of Repentance. In this case
for Men to conclude from the present Bent and Inclination of their Wills that
they are steadily fixed and determined to good Resolutions is a piece of very
unreasonable Self-Assurance; for when they know themselves to be so fickle and
inconstant in matters to which their Inclinations are more indifferent, how
much reason have they to suspect the Firmness of those Resolutions to which
their Inclinations are so extremely averse, and from which so many outward
Objects are continually beckoning and inviting them? in this case therefore we
have no other way to be rationally satisfied of the Firmness and Stability of
the change of our Mind but only by the Fruits and Effects of it, for, if when
it has Opportunity, it does not pass forth into Action, and display it self
upon our Lives in an answerable Practice, if it does not ordinarily restrain us
from those Evils it condemns and resolves against, and spur us on to those good
things it approves and consents to, it is most certain it is a mere Cheat and
Imposture. For let Men say what they please, it is impossible that any Man
should live in those vicious Courses which they absolutely condemn and are
sincerely resolved against they may now and then quarrel at their sins and take
Pet against them upon some little Disappointment or unhandsome Accident, and in
the Heat of their Distaste they may condemn and renounce them, but if when
their Passion is allayed, they resent and return to them again, it is plain
that their Minds were never changed, and that the Current of their Judgment and
Will was only interupted by a contrary Gust; but that it was never diverted
into a contrary Channel. So that what our Savior asserts of Men is as true of
their Repentance, the Tree is known by its Fruits; if our Repentance be
genuine, it will bring forth the Fruit of Reformation, but if it be barren or
bring forth nothing but Leaves and good Words and Professions, it is certainly
Spurious and Hypocritical. However therefore Men may juggle with and impose
upon their Consciences with false Shows and Semblances, they can never hope to
be rationally satisfied of the Truth of their Repentance till the natural
Fruits and Effects of it appear in their Lives and Conversations.

3. That we should bring forth these meet Fruits of Repentance, is also
necessary to satisfy the Obligation of Repentance: for Repentance is not
required of us merely for its own sake, but in order to the Fruits and Effects
of it; and the Reason why God obliges us to this Change of our Mind, is,
because it is a necessary Introduction to a thorough Change and Reformation of
our Manners; and for a Man to condemn Sin in his Judgment merely to condemn it,
and resolve against it in his Will merely to resolve against it, is so far from
being a Virtue, that it is a ridiculous Impertinence. And if we still practice
what we condemn, and do what we resolve against, we are so far from answering
the Obligation of Repentance, that we do but inhance and aggravate our
Impenitence. For he that does what he condemns sins against his Knowledge, and
flies in the face of his own Convictions; and he that does what he resolves
against, sins against his Promise, and basely falsifies his own Engagements. So
that the mere Change of our Mind, you see, abstractedly considered, does by no
means answer the Obligation to Repentance, because the Obligation does not
terminate in it self, but is made with respect to the natural Effects of such a
Change; and because this Change in it self is of no farther Use and
Significancy in Religion than as it is pregnant with and productive of those
Effects. For either the Sin which I condemn in my Judgment is such an Evil as I
ought to shun and avoid, or it is not; if it be not, it is no Virtue for me to
condemn that for an Evil which I need not take care to avoid; if it be, it is a
Folly to condemn it, unless I also avoid it. And so again, either the Duty I
consent to and resolve upon in my Will is necessary to be done, or it is not;
if it be not, it is unnecessary for me to resolve to do it; if it be, it is in
vain to resolve to do it unless I perform my Resolution. For as a Cipher which
is only in order to a Number signifies nothing, unless a Number be added to it;
so a Resolution, which is only in order to Action, is perfectly insignificant,
unless it be seconded with Action. And since it is nothing but the Necessity of
doing what we resolve that can make it necessary for us to resolve to do it, we
must either deny the Necessity even of our resolving to amend, or acknowledge
the Necessity of our actual Amendment. So that that inward Change of our Mind
which Repentance imports being required only in order to the outward Change of
our Manners, it is impossible we should satisfy the Obligation of Repentance
without bringing forth the Fruits of actual Amendment.

4. And lastly; That we should bring forth these meet Fruits of Repentance is
also necessary to accomplish the great Work and Design of Repentance, which is
to repair the Decays and Ruins of our Nature, and recover it from the Diseases
it has contracted by sinful Courses to a State of Health and Perfection. For
Repentances suppose a degeneracy of our Nature, and the great Business and
Design of it is to raise and recover us. And hence the Prodigals Repentance is
called coming to himself Luke xv. 17. implying that before he was gone from
himself, that he had abandoned his Reason by which he was constituted a Man,
forsaken the Guide and leading Principle of his Nature, and was degenerated
either into a Beast or a Devil; which is a very proper Description of the State
of Sinners, who when they depart from God do depart from themselves, and run
out of Humanity into Bestiality or Devilishness. For they do not govern
themselves by Reason as Men should do, but by their Passions and Appetites as
Beasts and Devils do; they turn a deaf Ear to the voice of their Reason and
Conscience, and constantly choose and refuse what their own black Passions or
brutish Appetites direct them, and in the whole course of their Lives do act
like upright Beasts or incarnate Devils. The proper business therefore of
Repentance is to bring back these Vagrants, to themselves, and restore them to
their Wits and Reason, to rescue them out of the Hands of Passion and Appetite,
and put them under the Power of Reason and Conscience, that so for the future
they may live like themselves and as becomes rational Beings that are related
to God and one another. This is the proper work of Repentance, which it can
never effect without it bring forth its natural Fruits. For he that so repents
of his evil Courses, as not to correct and reform them, how is it possible he
should ever be the better for it, when he moves not a step forward from the
corrupt and degenerate State of his nature, but only dances round in a Circle,
and sins and repents, and repents and sins, and at last still returns to the
same point. The only way to reform our Nature and subject its Passions and
Appetites to its Reason, is to live well, and regulate our Actions by the Laws
of Reason and Righteousness; by this we shall by degrees tame and reduce our
irregular Inclinations, and readvance our Reason to its native Throne and
Dominion: by forcing our selves, as we must do at first, to the Practice of
Virtue and Religion, we shall by degrees acquire virtuous Dispositions, and
those will improve into virtuous Habits, and those in the end will grow to
Perfection. But if we only condemn our Sins and resolve against them, but do
not actually renounce and forsake them; instead of bettering our Nature we
shall more and more debauch and deprave it, and be still declining from bad to
worse, and from worse to worse, till at last our Disease becomes desperate and
incurable. So that it is indispensibly necessary, you see, that we should bring
forth Fruits meet for Repentance, because, unless we do, it is impossible our
Repentance should ever accomplish the Work it is designed for; that it should
heal and reform our nature, extinguish its vicious Inclinations, and adorn it
with those Graces wherein its Beauty and Perfection consists: and we were every
whit as good not to repent at all, as to repent so as to be never the better
for it. And now give me leave to conclude this Argument with a few Inserences.

1. From hence I infer what a ridiculous thing it is for Men to make a fond
Pretense of zeal for Religion, while the direct Contraries to all the natural
Fruits of Repentance do most visibly appear in their Lives and Conversations. I
confess of all the offices that belong to a Preacher, I am naturally the most
averse to that of Reprehension. I do not love to expose Men's Faults, and rake
in their filthy Dunghils; and it is not only my Charity to Mankind but also the
Indisposition of my Nature to find fault, that makes me so heartily wish, O
would to God that Men were once so good as to need no Reprehension! that so we
might have nothing to do but to praise and encourage them, to excite them to go
on with the Comforts of Religion and the just Applauses and Encomiums of their
Virtues. But alas we live in an Age that would make a Stone to speak, and force
any Man of any Conscience, in despite of all the Candor and Modesty of his
nature, to cry aloud against the fulsom Hypocrisies and Impostures that look
through our most glorious Pretenses to Religion. For, for God's sake Sirs, is
it not a Shame, a burning Shame to hear a Company of professed Atheists and
notorious Knaves set up for Zealots and Reformers, and raise a Clamor for
Liberty of Conscience, and pure Ordinances? as for the sober and pious
Dissenters, I can bear their mistakes with as much Tenderness and Compassion as
any Man, and can make them as large Allowances as I could reasonably desire for
my self, if I were in their Condition. But when I see Men rank themselves under
the Banners of Religion, that live in open Hostility to its Commands and
Precepts, that make no Conscience of blaspheming the Name of God, traducing his
Vicegerents and Representatives, defaming and defrauding their Neighbors, and
exposing the most Sacred and Serious things to Scorn and Derision; I cannot but
suspect that there is Mischief behind the Curtain, what zealous Appearances
soever they may make upon the Stage. For it can never enter into my Head, and I
wonder how it should into any Bodies else, that those Men should ever design
well to Religion, whose Principles and Practices are so openly irreligious.
They may pretend Religion, for that is so venerable a Name that 'twill serve to
set a fair Color upon the ugliest Intentions; but though we may be deceived by a
well disguised Hypocrisy, yet sure we can never believe that Profaneness is in
earnest, when it pretends to be zealous for Religion and a through Reformation.
O would to God that Men would at last be so honest as to appear what they are,
or at least not be so ridiculous, as to pretend the quite contrary to what they
appear! it would make any honest heart bleed to see how Religion, how the
Protestant Religion is rendered cheap and vile by the impudent Pretenses which
bad Men make to it; Men whose Lives are bad enough to disgrace Popery it self,
and who are Protestants only because they are not Papists. In the name of God,
Sirs, what have you to do with any Religion, and much more with the Protestant,
which by its pure and honest Principles defies and renounces you, which
abominates your designs and disavows your Actions, and blushes to see how you
Profane and Scandalize it by pretending Friendship to and Familiarity with it.
For what will strangers think of it, that understand not its Principles, when
they hear such as you claim such an intimate Acquaintance with it? how prone
will they be to suspect that it is a Religion for your tooth, and that it
shelters and patronizes you in all your Wickedness? wherefore for God's sake be
at length so just to the Reputation of that Religion you pretend so much zeal
for, as either to bring forth the Fruits of it by living up to its Principles,
or not concern your selves any farther about it. For this I am sure of, while
such as you pretend to it, it loses much more by the Disgrace which your Lives
do cast upon it, then ever it is like to gain by your zeal and your Clamor for
it.

2. Hence I also infer how extremely insufficient that Repentance is, which the
Church of Rome does frankly approve and allow of; which is such as plainly
evacuates and supersedes the Necessity of bringing forth the natural Fruits of
Repentance; as any one may easily apprehend that will but take the pains
impartially to consider the Chain of that Churches Principles. For first the
Council of Trent teaches that Attrition, which is nothing but a Sorrow for Sin
proceeding from the Fear of Punishments, does dispose Men to receive Grace in
the Sacrament of Penance, and that all the Sacraments of the Gospel, of which
Penance is one, do actually confer grace upon those that are disposed for it.
So that if he has but the Grace to be afraid of Hell and to be sorry that he
is in Danger of it, it is but confessing his Sins to a Priest and undergoing a
short trifling Penance, and upon a few words of Absolution he shall presently
be dubbed a true Penitent, and be as effectually instated in the Favor of God
as if he had brought forth all the Fruits of Repentance. And this Bellarmine
tells us is the current Judgment of all their Divines; which if it be true,
poor Judas had very ill luck to be damned; for according to this Doctrine he
was thoroughly disposed for Justification, it being out of mere Attrition that
he hanged himself; so that had he had but a Priest to have administered Penance
and Absolution to him, that Grace that made him hang himself, would have
entitled him to Heaven. It Is true indeed they tell us that there is a certain
Penance which Men must undergo for their sins in this Life and that if they
should not perform what is imposed upon them, or if what is imposed should not
be sufficient to satisfy Gods Justice, they must be forced to make it up by
their Sufferings in Purgatory. But even against this too that Church has
contrived an excellent Remedy, and that is the Treasury of the superabundant
Merits of Christ and the Saints, of which at very reasonable Rates Men may
purchase such a share, as will immediately pay off all their Purgatory scores,
how great soever their present Sins, and how small soever their present
Penances are. For out of this Treasury of Merit you may have Indulgence for a
Hundred, a Thousand, or a Hundred Thousand Years; and if this will not satisfy,
you may besides this have full Indulgence, fuller Indulgence and fullest
Indulgence, and it is impossible you should ever want Merit to keep your Soul
out of Purgatory, if you have but Money and Hearts to pay for it. But if you
should still be doubtful, you may secure all, if you please, by listing your
self into an holy Confraternity; for if you will but turn Brother of St.
Francis his Cord, you shall presently be entitled to such a stock of
Indulgencies as all the Sins you can commit will never be able to out-spend.
For at your first putting on this sacred Implement, you have as full and as
effectual Pardon as was ever vouchsafed in the Sacrament of Baptism. And
afterward should you fall into mortal Sin, it is but taking so much Pains as to
walk after the monthly Procession, and you shall have a plenary Indulgence
which shall attend your holy Cord to the very Article of your Death. Besides
which, you shall have your share in all the superabundant Merits of the Saints,
of the Order of Saint Roses, and Saint Clara's and Saint Francis himself, who
by preaching to Beasts and teaching Larks and Swallows their Chatechism, and
silly Sheep to bleat out their Canonical Hours, with sundry other such like
holy Feats, could not fail to treasure up a vast stock of Merits in the common
Bank of his Fraternity. Or if you would be surer yet, you may enter your self a
Brother of the holy Fraternity of the 150 Beads of St. Dominick, where, for
saying over 150 Ave Mary's and 15 Pater Nosters in a week, you shall not only
be allowed your Dividend of the superabundant Merits of all the Saints from
Adans, and as many Indulgencies as you can possibly have occasion for your
self; but such an overplus as will be sufficient to redeem 115 Souls yearly out
of Purgatory. And it would be a very hard case if with all this tackle you
should go to Purgatory your self. But if the worst come to the worst, it is but
inrolling your self a Brother of St. Simons Scapular; and then if you should go
to Purgatory, the Virgin Mary has engaged her self, if Pope John XXII. does
not foully belly her, to come down to Purgatory every Saturday night, and pull
up every Soul thence that has worn this sacred Vestment into the holy hill of
eternal Life. And when a Friars Cord, or Rochet, or String of Beads are such
excellent tools for Men to work out their Salvation with, what need they
trouble themselves to bring forth the Fruits of Repentance? had these things
been only the Conceits of some particular Members of that Church I should not
have mentioned them in this place, because to us they cannot but look extremely
ridiculous; but alas they are Cheats that have been founded and established on
the Bulls of their Popes, avowed and contended for by their gravest Doctors,
and reverenced and believed by the devoutest Members of their Communion. And
how can they be obliged to bring forth the Fruits of Repentance, who are
furnished with so many pretty Devices to get to Heaven without them?

3. And lastly, Hence therefore let us all be persuaded heartily to comply with
this Injunction, and bring forth the natural Fruits of Repentance; first to
form a hearty and deliberate Resolution against our Sins, and then to put it
into Execution by forsaking all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and living
soberly and righteously and godly in this present World. I do not deny but in
this undertaking there are many times very great Difficulties, especially when
we first enter upon it, when after a long Course of Folly we begin to reform;
for then we must wrestle against our own Inclinations and struggle with
inveterate Habits; and this perhaps will put us to a greater trial of our
Courage and Constancy than we are now aware of. But if upon a due consideration
of the Arguments on both sides we can but once persuade our selves to a through
Resolution of Amendment, in all probability we have broke the heart of the main
Difficulty of Repentance. It is I confess a hard thing for a Man to persuade
himself against all his Habits and Inclinations, to resolve without any reserve
in Cold and Deliberate thoughts upon an universal Reformation, at once to
resolve to bid adieu forever to all his darling Lusts and their appendant
Pleasures. This, as our Savior describes it, is like the cutting off of a
right Hand and the plucking out of a right Eye; and therefore must doubtless be
attended with vehement Struglings and Reluctances; but when this is done, the
sharpest Pang of our Repentance is over; and if now we do not wilfully
miscarry, these our bitter Throws like the Virgin Mother's, will soon conclude
in Songs and Magnificats. For by arming a firm Resolution against them, we have
already broken the main strength of our Lusts, so that now we have nothing to
do but to pursue our Victory; and if we have but the Courage to keep the ground
we have gotten, and to stand firm to our Resolution that so our conquered Foe
may not be able to rally and reinforce himself against us; we shall soon be
crowned with the Joys of a Victory that will lead us into an everlasting
Triumph. For our evil Habits, being for a while kept under a constant and
severe Restraint, will by degrees decay and languish, and at last expire; and
then the Trouble of contending will be over, and all our consequent Religion
will be Sweet, and Natural, and Easy; and we shall reap far more Pleasure and
Delight from it than ever we did from the most jolly Course of Sinning. For
besides that a Religious Life is in it self more agreeable to our rational
Faculties, and consequently more grateful unto Humane Nature, whose noblest
Pleasures do result from the Exercise of her highest Faculties, and whose
highest Faculties are never so vigorously exercised as within the sphere of a
Religious Life: Besides which I say we shall therein find an unspeakable
Satisfaction of Mind, and such a Calm of Conscience, and such ravishing Ioys
and Delights springing out of our sense of the Love of God and our Hopes of a
blessed Immortality hereafter, as will abundantly compensate all our Labors
past, and render them not only tolerable but delightsom. For how can I think
any Pains intolerable, the Endurance whereof will create a constant Harmony
within me, will Crown me with the Applause of my own Mind, will indear me to
the Fountain of all Love and Goodness, and entertain me with the Hopes of being
as happy after a few moments as all the Joys of an everlasting Heaven can make
me? But I beseech you to consider, is it not much easier to endure the Agonies
of a bitter Repentance, than the horrid Despair of a damned Ghost? to thwart a
foolish and unreasonable Lust, than to roar forever upon the Rack of a
self-condemning Conscience? if it be so grievous to us to contend with an evil
habit and struggle a while with a stiff and obstinate Inclination, to resolve
and strive and watch and pray against them, Lord, how grievous will it be to
dwell with everlasting Burnings, and to endure the dire Effects of thy
unquenchable Fury forever? and yet one of these must certainly be endured, for
between them there is no medium. Wherefore seeing we are under such an absolute
Necessity of enduring Hell or the Difficulties of Repentance, in the Name of
God let us but act like Men, and of the two choose that which is most tolerable,
and then I am sure we shall follow the counsel of the Text, and bring forth
Fruits meet for Repentance.

MATTHEW XXV. 10. last part. And the Door was shut.


THESE Words are the close of the Parable of the ten-Virgins, whom our Savior
distributes into five Wise and five Foolish, and by them he represents the
different Carriage and Fate of Men both good and bad. For the better
understanding of which Parable you must know that our Savior borrowed this, as
well as sundry others, from the Jewish Doctors, of which our learned Sheringham
in his Preface of his Translation of the Ioma has given us sundry Instances;
of which this is one, which to this purpose he transcribes out of the Gemara
Babylonica; Rab. Eliezer said, be sure thou repent the day before thou die.
Upon which his Disciples asked him whether a Man might know that hour of his
death; whereunto he answers let a Man therefore repent every day, because he
knows not when he shall die. Upon which Rab. Iochanan proposes this Parable; a
certain rich man prepared a Marriage Feast, to which he called his Servants,
but did not tell them the distinct time when this Feast should be: of these
Servants some were wise, and some foolish; the wise clothed themselves
splendidly, and sitting before their Masters house thus thought with
themselves, all things are here prepared, and nothing is wanting; wherefore
since we are uncertain what hour we shall be called, we will wait, that so
whenever he calls us. we may be ready to attend. But the foolish sleepy
Servants loitered away their time, concluding thus with themselves; we need not
be overhasty in making our selves ready it being yet a great while before we
are like to be called. But on a sudden the Master calls them all to the
Supper; upon which the Wise appeared before him ready to attend, but the
Foolish being unready would fain have gone away to dress themselves: but the
King rejoicing for those who were ready, and being very angry with those that
slept, said, you who are ready shall sit down, and Eat and Drink and Rejoice;
whilst you that slept shall be shut out of Door; for so says the Lord, behold
my Servants shall eat, but you shall hunger, my Servants shall drink, but you
shall thirst. This is the Jewish Parable, which for substance being so exactly
agreeable with our Saviors, we may very reasonably conclude that his was only
a Copy of that Original; and since the Design of it is evidently to show the
Danger of delaying Repentance to the last, we may fairly suppose the Design of
our Savior to be so too. For by the Wise and Foolish Virgins here, our Savior
plainly means good and bad Christians, and by the Marriage feast, that state of
Happiness which he has prepared for the good. By their going forth to meet the
Bridegroom is meant their expectation of Christ's Coming, either to their
particular, or to the general Judgment. By their Lamps in their hands
Expositors generally understand their visible profession of Christanity. By the
Oil that made those Lamps to shine, is meant Charity and good Works, which are
the Fruits of a sincere Repentance, and the glory and luster of our Christian
Profession. And as for the Wise who by sincere Repentance had prepared
themselves for this feast of heavenly Happiness, they are admitted into it; but
as for the Foolish that had put off all to the last, though they bestirred
themselves very vigorously in this sad Extremity, yet all was to no purpose;
for when they came to ask admittance into Heaven, the Door was shut against
them, and they are dismissed with this bitter farewell, Verily I say unto you, I
know you not. So that the Design of the Words is plainly to represent the sad
Catastrophe of a late Repentance, which though it may be very active and vigorous
when things are reduced to the last extremity, yet proves most commonly
ineffectual, and finds the Door of Heaven shut against it.

That therefore which I design from these Words is this, to explain and state
what is the Effect of a Deathbed Repentance, by which I mean such a Repentance
as after a long Course of Wickedness begins upon the very near and sensible
Approach, either of a natural or violent Death, such as is put off till Death
is at the Door, and Men perceive themselves to be departing hence, and going
away into Eternity. For as for that Repentance which is begun in Health, when
Death is not in view, and Men are in the midst of Temptations to the contrary,
it is much more free and ingenuous than that of a Deathbed can be supposed;
and consequently though it should be stopped in its progress by a sudden
unexpected Death, yet there is much more hope of it: and that which begins also
in a long lingering Sickness, though it be not so free as the former, and
therefore not so hopeful, yet is there much more hope of it than of that which
begins in more acute Diseases, to which Death more suddenly follows; because it
has much more time to grow in, and to finish and complete it self by. That
late or Deathbed Repentance therefore concerning which we are now inquiring,
must be such a Repentance as begins in the prospect of a nearapproaching Death,
and to which that Death does very suddenly follow. Concerning which I shall
enquire these three things.

1. How far it is possible for such a Repentance to be effectual. 2. How
extremely hazardous it is whether it ever actually prove effectual to our
Happiness or no. 3. If it should prove so, yet how impossible it is in an
ordinary way for us to attain any comfortable Assurance of it.
1. How far it is possible for such a Repentance to be effectual. And here I
dare not pronounce it to be absolutely and universally Ineffectual, though I
confess I am horribly afraid that it very rarely proves otherwise. For the
Repentance on which Salvation is entailed necessarily includes a through Change
of Soul, that is, a new prevailing Judgment and Resolution; and for certain
wheresoever this really is there is true Repentance. For the very Life of
Repentance consists in the universal Subjection of our Souls to God, and this
Subjection consists in such a firm Resolution of Soul to obey him, as,
whenever occasion is offered, will render us actually obedient. I know there
are some who place this Subjection of our Souls to God in an universal Habit of
Obedience, but surely they do not consider that an Habit of Obedience, which
consistsin an inherent Aptness and Facility of obeying, is not attainable under
a long progress in Religion, and that in our first Entrance into the religious
State we are so far from being habituated to obey God, that we generally obey
with a greatdeal of Difficulty; and while we do so, it is a Contradiction to say
that we are habituated to Obedience. So that by placing the Souls Subjection to
God in such a Habit, we undermine the Comfort of all Beginners in Religion, and
exclude all those from being faithful Servants who have not conquered the
Difficulties of obeying. And therefore I think it much more safe to place our
first Subjection to God in a hearty Resolution of obeying; for as Choice and
Resolution is the principle of all our voluntary Actions, so it is of our
Subjection to God; which being a moral Action must be voluntary, and so begin
in Choice or Resolution, from whence if it has opportunity it will proceed
into Action, and that being often repeated will gradually improve into an
Habit, and so in time render it natural and easy to us. But if Death should
intervene and deprive the Man who is thus sincerely resolved on all
opportunities of actual Obedience, that being accidental makes no change in his
main State, the Frame and Temper of his Soul remains the same, it goes into
Eternity a faithful Subject to God, and had it continued longer here would have
expressed its Subjection in all the necessary Acts of Homage and Obedience. And
far be it from us to imagine the condition of such a Soul to be desperate, for
though it is true that a holy Life is the indispensable Condition of Salvation,
yet it is also true that a holy Life is necessarily included in this Subjection
of our Souls to God. That Man does live a holy Life who sincerely submits his
Soul to God, and is firmly resolved, as occasion offers, to express his
submission in all the external Acts of Homage and Obedience. It Is true the
Deathbed Penitent has not opportunity to exercise himself in all the parts of
Obedience; he cannot practice Chastity and Temperance, nor any other Virtue, to
whose contrary Vice his Sickness has utterly disabled him; but what of that?
neither has the healthful Penitent always opportunity to practice every Virtue
which God injoyns: If he be poor or single, he can no more give Alms, or
provide for his Children, than the sick Man can be chaste or temperate, and yet
he lives a holy Life, I hope, though he has no occasion or opportunity to
practice either of these Duties. Why then may not the sick Penitent that
practices his Duty so far as he has opportunity, that heartily mourns for his
sin, and patiently submits to Gods correction, that practices Humility and
Devotion, is charitable in forgiving Offenses, just in making Restitution for
Injuries; why may not such a one be as well said to live a holy Life, when he
does all this out of a hearty Subjection of his Soul to God, though he should
have no opportunity to practice some other Virtues. For he who is sincerely
resolved to submit to the Laws of Temperance and Chastity, is chaste and
temperate though he never have opportunity to practice them, and all the
difference between him and one that lives to practice what he resolves is only
this, that the latter will practice it, and the former would; and in Gods
account, who sees the Issues of all our Resolutions, he is as really temperate
who would be so if he had opportunity, as he who is so when he has: so that
though his Repentance be not strictly the same with the others, yet it being to
the same purpose, we cannot imagine that the good God will damn him only for a
punctilio. If therefore it be possible for the Deathbed Penitent to reduce
himself to a firm, prevailing Resolution of obeying God, I see no reason to
conclude his Condition to be absolutely desperate; for being so resolved, he is
a holy Man, though very imperfectly I confess; and if he go into Eternity with
that Resolution with him, that will dispose him for some degree of Happiness.
For if his Resolution be such as would have prevailed if he had continued in
this Life, it will as well prevail in the other; and if it so prevail there as
to render him actually obedient, it will be necessary consequence render him in
some measure a happy and blessed Spirit; Obedience to God being as natural a
Cause of Happiness, as the Sun is of Light, or the Fire of Heat and Burning.
All the Difficulty therefore is this, not whether God will accept of such a
Resolution, as whether a Deathbed Repentance can be so far improved as to rise
to such a Resolution. And here I must needs confess, and shall hereafter make
it evident, that the Difficulty of perfecting such a Repentance into such a
Resolution is so exceeding great, that it is the greatest madness in the World
for any Man to promise himself success before hand whilst he is in Health, and
has so many better opportunities of Repentance in his hand. But that it is
absolutely impossible I dare not say for these following Reasons:

1. Because de facto we sometimes find that the Resolutions of a sick Bed have
proved effectual. We know there have been some Men who in a Fit of Sickness
when they have looked on themselves as abandoned of all Hopes, have yet betaken
themselves to serious Resolutions, which when they have recovered to their
former Health, have visibly proved effectual. I confess these Sickbed
Resolutions do most commonly die when the Man recovers, and he usually leaves
his Bed and his good Purposes together; but since there are some Instances
wherein they have held and proved effectual, that is sufficient to demonstrate
the Possibility of the Thing: for what has been, may be; and what Reason can
be given why some Men may not perform in Eternity what they promised on their
Deathbeds, as well as others do after their Recovery what they promised on
their Sick-beds? As therefore the Relapse of most Men from their Sickbed
Purposes proves it extremely hard, so the Continuance of others steadfast to
them proves it possible for such Purposes to be sincere.

2. Another thing that proves it possible is this, that upon a Deathbed often
times the Arguments of Repentance have a more immediate Access to the Minds of
Men than at any other time, and consequently may be well supposed to be much
more effectual and operative. Now the Promises and Threats of Religion will
strike more immediately on the Soul, the Goods and Evils which they propose and
denounce being nearer at hand, and the Soul perceiving her self within a moment
of enjoying the one or suffering the other for ever; and that thick Fog of
earthly Cares and Pleasures that interrupted her Prospect into the other World
being in a great measure dispelled and scattered, she lies more open and
uncovered to the Things of Eternity: and therefore as one thing strikes upon
another with a natural Effect, as Light strikes upon the Eye, and Sounds upon
the Ear; so eternal Things do upon immortal Spirits when there is nothing
between to intercept the Stroke, and make most deep and vigorous Impressions on
them. And when Heaven and Hell are so near the Soul that she expects almost
every moment to expire into the one or the other, who can tell what strange and
sudden Alterations they may make in her Temper and Resolutions? So that though
I must confess it is a stupendous Effect for a Soul to be changed in the short
Twinkling of a Deathbed Repentance, yet when I consider the mighty Influence
which the Arguments of Religion may then be reasonably supposed to have upon
her, I dare not say it is absolutely impossible; especially considering,

3. And lastly, That how impossible soever it may be to humane Power, yet it is
not impossible to the Grace of God. It Is true indeed, God ordinarily vouchsafes
his Grace to Men proportionably to their Improvement of it; and I confess if he
proceeds by this Rule with the dying Penitent, he has less Reason to expect
God's Grace now than in any former Period of his Life. But yet we see the Grace
of God does not always proceed by stated Rules and Proportions, for sometimes
God has given the largest Measures of his Grace to those who have made the
least Improvements of it: sometimes very great Sinners have been stopped in
their wicked Courses when they least expected it, and turned back by a Grace
that was almost irresistible; and though this be more ordinary than other
Miracles are, so that Men may as reasonably immure themselves, and depend upon
God to feed them by Miracle, as put off their Repentance to the last in
expectation of having their Souls renewed and changed by such a miraculous
Grace; yet who knows but when the poor dying Penitent, under the mighty Hopes
and Fears of Eternity, is struggling might and main for his Soul, to rescue it
from endless Misery; who knows, I say, but the good God may sometimes, and in
some peculiar Cases, take pity upon him, and by a more than ordinary Grace
concur with his Endeavors, and render them successful. It Is, I confess, a sad
State when Things are brought to this Extremity that he has nothing but this to
depend on; but yet since the Grace of God is not confined to do thus or thus,
and no otherwise; but may, when it pleases, transgress the ordinary Methods of
its Procedure. I dare not pronounce the State of those Deathbed Penitents
wholly desperate, who heartily implore the divine Assistance, and exert their
utmost Strength, and use all means within their Power to change the wicked
Temper of their minds. For God may hear and pity them if he please, and if he
will, there is no doubt but his own Grace concurring with their Endeavors can
produce this happy Effect how great and difficult soever it may be. All that
can be said therefore in the Case is this, that an internal Change of Soul from
a State of Disobedience to a State of universal Subjection to God, is
indispensibly necessary to Salvation; that such a Change is possible to the
Deathbed Penitent, and so consequently is the Salvation which depends upon it.
But alas, it is barely possible, so barely possible, that while I am in my Wits
I think I should hardly venture on it for a thousand Worlds. Which brings me to

2. The next Thing proposed, which was to show you how fearfully hazardous it
is, whether a Man that begins his Religion on his Deathbed can actually arrive
to that degree of Repentance as is necessary to his future Happiness. And this
will plainly appear if we consider,

1. The great Difficulty of the thing it self. 2. The Impotency and
Indisposition of him that is to perform it. 3. The little Reason he has to
expect any extraordinary Aid and Assistance from God.
1. It is extremely hazardous, because of the great Difficulty of the Thing it
self. We find by Experience, that after a long Course of Sin, it is one of the
most difficult Things in the World for a Man to reduce himself to a thorough
Resolution of Amendment; for Custom of sinning begets sinful Habits, and sinful
Habits are a second Nature to us. So that for a Man to resolve upon a holy Life
after he has been long habituated to the contrary, is to resolve to make War
with himself, and to live in open Hostility with the Inclinations of his own
Nature; and thus to resolve against the Grain, and incline himself against his
own Inclinations, is one of the greatest Acts of Violence that a Man can offer
to himself. It Is true, in a sudden Heat and Transport it is an easy matter for
a Man to resolve upon any thing when he is in a Pet against his Sins, or his
Mind is chafed into a religious Temper; but, alas! these inconsiderate Purposes
are generally the greatest Cheats in the World, for they rarely, if ever, work
any Alteration in the Soul; for though now the Man be in a Pet against his
Sins, yet his Judgment of them is the same, and that is the Principle of his
standing Resolutions. Men are often angry with their best Friends, and while
the Passion continues, they can easily resolve to discard them for ever; but
notwithstanding they do so, yet they are Friends still, and love them heartily,
though at present they do not perceive it: and as soon as their Passion is
over, their Love will return, and immediately cancel all their Resolutions
against them. And so it is with these passionate Resolutions Men make against
their Sins, which work no Change at all in the standing Temper and Disposition
of their Souls and are so far from curing them, that they are only the
Intermissions of their Disease; and though at present they are angry with their
Sins, and do purpose never to be reconciled to them more, yet still they love
them heartily though they perceive it not, and as soon as their Passion is
over, their Love returns and reverses their Purpose; and so these Fallings out
of Lovers end in the Renovation of Love: so that these rash and hasty
Resolutions are so far from being hearty Submissions unto God, that they only
make a Truce with him to fetch Breath and recruit for a farther Rebellion. And
thus to resolve, is, I confess, the easiest thing in the World; but for an old
Sinner to enter into a serious Resolution of Amendment in the midst of cool and
deliberate Thoughts, when his Sins are about him entertaining him with the
fresh Remembrance of those dear Pleasures they were wont to invite him to; when
he is, or supposes himself to be environed with Temptation, and importuned on
every side with all those soft Allurements that are so sweet and grateful to
him; this, doubtless, is such a Task as will exact his utmost Industry and
Consideration. For now he will meet with such Oppositions from his Appetites,
such Shrinkings and Recoilings from his Will, such Struglings and Pulbacks from
his darling Lusts, as will even distract his Soul, and interpose a thousand
Impediments to hinder him from coming to a thorough Resolution. So that unless
he be armed with great Consideration, animated with invincible Courage, and
aided by a mighty Grace, after all his Deliberation he will either not resolve
at all, or, which is almost as bad, resolve with Reserves and Exceptions. Since
therefore to form a hearty and thorough Resolution of Amendment is so extremely
hard and difficult, what a fearful Hazard must that Man run that remits it to a
dying Hour. For how can we hope to accomplish so great a Work in so short a
Time? when we crowd up a Duty of so vast a Bulk, in so narrow a Room, in how
much Danger must it be of being strangled in the Birth for want of Time and Air
to breath in? I dare not say it is absolutely impossible in so short a Time to
make a thorough Change in our Temper and Resolution; but sure I am it is so
extremely difficult, that it is the greatest Hazard in the World whether we
actually perform it, especially considering.

2. The great Impotency and Indisposition of Deathbed Penitents to perform it.
By what has been said of the Difficulty of it, you plainly perceive that to
the Performance of it there is required vast Industry, great Consideration, and
earnest Strivings and Contests with our selves; but alas! how unable and unfit
is a Man for these things when he lies languishing on a Deathbed? when
commonly the sickness he languishes under is either such as wholly disables, or
extremely weakens and impairs his Reason; so that either he is wholly incapable
of such Reflections and Considerations as are necessary to a thorough
Resolution of Amendment, or at least is very unfit for them. Now in this sad
Extremity what can the poor Wretch do? His sinful Soul sits drowzing on the
very Brinks of a dismal Eternity, and Deaths cold hand is thrusting it headlong
down; so that if She does not presently rouse and start up and run away from
her Danger, within a very few moments she will awake in everlasting Flames. But
alas! how should she rouse her self out of those fatal Slumbers when she has
scarce Reason enough to reflect upon her Danger or to take any Notice of that
fearful Precipice before her; when by the distemper of her bodily Organs She is
so stund and stupefied that she can neither discern where She is, nor whither
She is going? But suppose his Sickness be such as leaves him the free Use of
his Reason, yet considering how much he must needs be distracted by Pain and
Uneasiness, by Weakness and Languishment, by the Cares of settling his Affairs
in this World, and the frightful Prospect that he has of another, it will be
impossible for him, without a mighty Assistance from above, to range his
scattered and unweildy Thoughts into such sober Reflections and serious
Considerations as are necessary to the forming of a thorough Resolution of
Amendment; for such a Resolution can never be formed in a hurry of Passion, but
must be the Result of calm and composed Deliberations. For, as I showed you
before, hasty and passionate Resolutions work no Change upon the Soul, and till
a Man has made a new Judgment of Things, it will be in vain for him to make
any new Resolutions; because it is impossible that any Resolution should be
lasting that is not founded in the Judgment. But what Capacity can a Man be in
to make a new Judgment of Things in the midst of the incessant Hurries and
Distractions of a Deathbed, when he cannot consider a quarter of an hour
together, but is interrupted almost every moment by a thousand Accidents and
Avocations? So that to refer our Repentance to a Deathbed is the same thing as
to retire into a Battle to meditate, or to set up a Closet to study Philosophy
in the Head Quarters of an Army, where a Man is as capable of free and
undisturbed Contemplations as Men usually are of forming thorough Resolutions
of Amendment when they are a dying; which, without an extraordinary Assistance
from God, being utterly impossible, must needs be extremely hazardous;
considering,

3. And lastly, the little Reason such a Man has to expect any extraordinary
Assistance from God. When a Man has slighted all Gods Invitations to
Repentance, and wilfully turned a deaf Ear to all the secret Whispers and
Importunities of his blessed Spirit, when he has all his Lifetime rejected
the Motions and Tenders of his Grace upon this resolution that he would sin on
as long as he was able, and never repent till he could sin no longer; with what
confidence can he expect that God should vouchsafe him in his dying Hour that
extraordinary Grace which he stands in need of, and without which he must dye
forever? For when a Man has been mocking God all his Life with the Promises of
a future Repentance, but from time to time has still delayed and deferred it
till he has driven it to the last Extremity, so that now he must repent, or be
damned prehaps the next Moment; with what face can he implore such an
extraordinary Favor from that God with whom he has so wretchedly
prevaricated? For unless we suppose God to be a Being that loves to be
provoked, one that is taken with Affronts and Injuries, and consequently that
measures his Favors to us by the degrees and number of our Rebellions against
him; we cannot reasonably expect that he should be then most kind to us when we
have offended him as much as we are able, and would never be persuaded to
repent of our Wickedness till we were able to offend him no more. I desire to
have as large Apprehensions of the Mercy of God as can be reasonably admitted,
but withal I am assured he is the hardest to be imposed upon of any one in the
World; and being so, it cannot well be expected that when in despite of his
Authority and frequent Invitations to Repentance, the Sinner has squandred
away all his Strength and Vigor in a Course of Wickedness, God should be so
indulgent to him on his Deathbed as to supply that Strength which he has
spent in sinning against him by the extraordinary Assistances of his own Grace;
especially considering how often he has declared his Resolution of dispensing
his Grace to us in greater or lesser Proportions according to the improvements
we make of it. So James iv. 6, 7, 8. For the Scripture offers more Grace; and
therefore says, God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble.
Submit your selves therefore unto God; resist the Devil, and he will fly from
you; draw near unto God, and he will draw near unto you. And thus more expressly
in the Parable of the Talents, Matt. xxv. 29. For unto every one that has,
that is, improves what he has, shall be given, and he shall have abundance;
but from him that has not, i. e. improves not what he has, shall be taken
away, even that which he has. God therefore having thus declared that he will
lessen or augment his Grace proportionably as we abuse or improve it, we may
reasonably expect that the oftener we do repulse its Motions, the weaker will
be its Attempts upon us, and so weaker and weaker till it is wholly with drawn,
and has given us up for desperate and irreclaimable; and consequently if God
proceed in this Method, as doubtless he most ordinarily does, then the longer a
Man continues in sin, the more he is abandoned of the Grace of God. So that
when the Sinner is arrived to his Deathbed, he may reasonably expect that if
Gods Assistance be not wholly withdrawn and lessened into nothing, as he may
justly fear it will, yet it will be much less vigorous and powerful than in any
former Period of his Life; and if it be, his Condition is next to desperate;
for if his Soul be not renewed and changed, within a few Moments it is ruined
beyond all recovery. And since to effect this Change is a Work of mighty
Difficulty, what but a mighty Grace can enable the dying Penitent in so short a
time and with so small a Strength to perform it? So that the Sum of all is
this, though the Condition of him that remits his Repentance to a Deathbed be
not absolutely desperate, yet it is so fearfully hazardous, that nothing on this
side Hell can be more wretched and deplorable; and therefore for Men to put off
their Repentance to the last, and venture their Souls upon so great an
Uncertainty, is a piece of the most desperate Folly and Madness. I confess when
a Man has been so desperate and cruel to himself as to run himself upon this
fearful Venture, I would by no means discourage his Repentance, but rather use
all Means to invite and persuade him to it: for Repentance is always the best
thing we can do, and when a Man has been so desperately besotted as to defer
it to a Deathbed, and put himself upon this woeful Extremity, this is the last
Remedy he can apply, and the best Refuge he has to fly to. But so long as Men
are well and in Health, and have a fair space of Repentance in their hands, I
would not for all the World encourage them to run such a desperate Hazard; for
next to leaping headlong into Hell without any Repentance at all, doubtless the
most desperate Folly a Man can be guilty of is to defer his Repentance till he
is dying. And so I pass on to

3. The Third and last thing proposed; which was, to show you that supposing
our Deathbed Penitent should repent effectually, yet how impossible it is for
him in an ordinary way to attain any comfortable Assurance of it. And indeed
considering how many Cheats and Frauds there are under most of our Resolutions
of Amendment, it is at least extremely difficult for us to be any otherwise
secure of them than by their Effects and Performances. As for the dying
Penitent therefore that does not long enough survive his Resolution to see the
Execution of it, how can he be secure that it is sincere and perfect,
especially considering that the Circumstances in which he makes it are such as
do conspire to render it extremely suspicious. For

1. He makes it under the fear of Death. 2. In the Absence of Temptation. 3.
Under a great agony of Conscience. 4. In the near Neighborhood of Eternity.
1. He makes his Resolution under a mighty fear of Death, which gives him great
reason to suspect it. We daily see how much our Humors change and vary upon
every Remove out of one Condition into another, and how these do cast the
Balance of our Superior Soul and make us every day so many several sorts of
Men. Every Wind almost turns our Minds toward a new point, and like Water we
take the form of every Vessel we are put into. So that we have great reason to
suspect that our Deathbed Repentance is not so much the Mould of our Minds, as
of the Condition we are put into, and that were we poured back again into an
healthful Condition, we should immediately lose our present Shape, and return
into our former Figure again. For when Men see their Life is in Gods hand, and
that he is ready to cut it in sunder, it is no wonder at all if they do what
they can to bribe him to spare them a little longer; and consequently, if they
resolve well, and make fair Promises of future Obedience; which is the best
thing they can do in this Extremity. But if their Resolution be founded in the
Fear of Death, its Foundation is contrary to its Performance, the Motive of
their Resolution to live well for the future being a presumption that they
shall live no longer; And it will be an Act of Reason and Justice to themselves
to stick to their resolution, when the Motive of it is changed: and on the
Contrary, of Imprudence and Unkindness, to forsake the Conclusion, when the
Premises are consulted. So that upon such grounds as these what can be expected
but that this sick Resolver will resume his Sins with his Health if he should
recover, and leave his new Vows in that Bed where he first took them up, and
discharge his Fears and his good Actions, his Physician and his Confessor
together; it being so, how is it possible he should be assured that his
Resolution is sincere unless he recover and perform it?

2. He makes his Resolution in the Absence of Temptation, which gives him also
great reason to suspect it. For now the Seasons of the Pleasures of Sin are
over, he cannot relish their Delights because his cloyed Appetite distastes
them as the full Stomach does the Honeycomb: and his Soul being now
uninterested in all sinful Pleasure, and being naturally in continual Motion,
must necessarily divert the Current of its Action some other way; and the
future State to which it is so nearly allied being all it has to work upon, it
is no wonder if the Freedom of its Motion turn thitherwards, being diverted out
of its old Channel: for if he love his Sins or the World never so well, he must
leave them whether he will or no: if he dislike God and his Holiness and an
everlasting Abode with him never so much, he is forced upon them, or dashed
upon eternal Misery, which it is impossible for him to choose. So that now his
good Resolution is scarce an Act of Choice; for though he would not choose to obey
God if he could still enjoy his former Lusts, yet they being out of his reach,
he must take what is to be had. So that it is mighty Suspicious that the Sense
of his Resolution is no more than this, Holiness is good when a Man is just
dying, but while he lives and can enjoy his Lusts, they are a great deal
better; so that the Approach of Death makes Holiness good to him upon this
account only, because there would be some thing worse, and there can no longer
be any thing better; and it is to be feared he esteems it good only in
comparison with Hell which without it will inevitably follow. And when it thus
purchases the reputation of being good from the near approach of such a mighty
Evil, it is not so much esteemed a Good as a lesser Evil; which argues that the
Man's Judgment is not at all altered, for still he looks on Holiness as an Evil,
and in choosing it before Hell, he only chooses of two Evils the least, and it is
extremely Suspicious that he would no more have chosen it now than he did while
he was Well and in Health, but that it stands at present, out of the Air of
Temptation, and is presented to him without the Counterpoize of those sinful
Delights for whose sake he formerly rejected it. For there are many
Apprehensions which make deep Impressions not only on our Brain and Fancies,
but on our Affections too, whilst these are calm and unprovoked; which
impressions notwithstanding quickly vanish upon the starting of new Objects,
and the provocation of contrary Fancies and Affections by them; so that it is
impossible to be certain what those good Resolutions will come to which a Man
makes when he has no Temptation to the contrary. The utmost therefore that can
be said of them is this, they may be sincere and they may hold out, but there
is an infinite Hazard in them; they are easily made, because at present there
is no Temptation against them, no vicious Appetite strong enough to control
them; but there is vast Reason to fear that should the Man recover, and his
Appetites return again upon him, the next Temptation would betray him and make
him surrender up all his Resolution; and consequently if he die before he has
made a Trial of himself, his Condition must needs be extremely uncertain, his
Hope must sit upon the Brinks of Despair, and his Soul go trembling into
Eternity to think what a Hazard it is now a running.

3. He resolves under the Horrors and Agonies of an awakened Conscience, and
this also renders his Resolution extremely Suspicious. And indeed that Man must
be in a dead Sleep that will not awake when Death is sounding the Trumpet of
Judgment in his Ears, and calling him instantly away to give up his unprepared
Accounts. For though when Judgment seems to us at the other end of Heaven all
is quiet, yet certainly when Death brings us to the very Seat of it, the Awe of
that dreadful Tribunal of which we are now in sight, and the Sense of so many
Guilts staring us in the face, of which we must the next Moment acquit our
selves, or Die for ever, must necessarily shake out sleepy Consciences into
unspeakable Horrors and Agonies, and make us infinitely Solicitous to fly from
the Wrath that is to come. And in this Distress being conscious to himself that
the best thing he can do is to resolve upon Amendment for the future, here he
puts in for Sanctuary having no other hole to hide his guilty Head. So that now
to resolve well is hardly an Act of Choice, and it is much to be feared that
it is only an Expedient snatched up for the present Extremity; and though now he
be very serious, yet that prehaps is only the effect of a sudden Cast of
Melancholy on his Thoughts; and if it be, when that removes, his Thoughts will
be quite of another Color, or if it be the Result of a more through
Conviction, yet it is very probable that may go off too when the Man's
Circumstances are altered; that when the present Tragic Scene is removed out
of sight, and the Alarm of his approaching Judgment sounds no longer in his
Ears, he will presently let fall those Resolutions again which he took up only
as a shield, against his Conscience. And this being so uncertain, what a
fearful Hazard must that Man run that depends upon such Resolutions, and
imbarks his Soul into Eternity in them? For though it is possible they may be
sincere, yet it is highly probable that they are not, but as they were raised
only by a Storm of Horror, so if that were laid they would fall again; and if
they should be False and Hypocritical, as God only knows whether they are or
no, the poor Man is certainly lost and undone for ever.

4. And lastly, he resolves in the near Neighborhood of Eternity, which also
renders his Resolution very Suspicious. For the Soul is never more sensible of
Eternity than when it is walking on the Confines of it; for the very loosing it
from the Body wherein it dwells, and in which its Motions are all confined,
does many times give her some lesser Degrees of those Advantages which free and
naked Spirits have that are not imprisoned in Flesh. For the less the Soul is
found to work by the Body, the higher are its Operations, and all her
extraordinary Motions are a kind of Ravishment from Sense. It is therefore very
probable that when the Soul is leaving the Body, it has naturally a more
sensible Touch and Feeling of its eternal State, because the nearer any thing
is to its Residence, the more vehement is its Motion thither; and consequently
the nearer the Soul is to its eternal Abode, the more quick and vigorous may we
reasonably suppose its Motions thither; so that when the other World is in
view, and it is just upon the Region of Spirits, it is no wonder if the Sense
of her approaching everlasting Fate put her into great Tremblings and Agonies.
For now there is nothing between her and Eternity to intercept her Prospect of
it; no sinful Pleasures or Delights to interrupt her Thoughts of it, or deaden
the force of its Impressions: so that if in this State of Things she should not
resolve to throw off her Sins and embrace Virtue, when she is in view of that
Hell of endless Miseries to which those tend, and of that Heaven of Joys to
which this aspires, it would be prodigious. But whether this Resolution will
hold when Heaven and Hell are vanished out of sight again, it is a mighty
Hazard; and sadly probable it is that if the Man recover from the Brinks of
Eternity, and get farther off it, he will soon forget his good Resolutions, and
leave all his Piety behind him. For when he resolved, alas he was sick and
dying, leaving this World and launching into another; but when he is well
again, the Case will be altered; this World will be present to him, and the
other a great way off; and when his Resolution is thus abandoned of the Motive
that animated and held it together, there is infinite reason to suspect that it
will immediately languish and expire. So that the Sum of all is this the
Deathbed Penitent may possibly repent sincerely, but it is an infinite Hazard
whether he will or no; and if he does, it is ordinarily impossible for him to
have any comfortable Assurance of it. I will not deny but in some rare and
extraordinary Cases, to serve some great and excellent End, God may immediately
suggest Comfort to him and give him the Joy of his Repentance; but whether ever
he does or will do so or no, is more than I am able to determine. For this I am
sure of he has no where obliged himself to it, and what he has not promised,
we have no reason to expect. For whatsoever is extraordinary, is more than what
is promised, but the ordinary Comforts of dejected Penitents are such as arise
from an inward Sense of their own Sincerity, and of the glorious Hopes to which
that intitles them. But as for the Sincerity of the Deathbed Penitent it is so
indiscernable by reason of Suspicious Circumstances, that without an immediate
Revelation it is hardly possible to be perceived, and from any promise, that
God has made, there is not the least encouragement to hope for any such
immediate Revelation. So that if any such Comfort be vouchsafed to him, it is
doubtless very rarely; because it is extraordinary. I know there is nothing
more common than for Men that never repented till they came to die, to die very
comfortably; but alas I am horribly afraid that generally their Comforts are
nothing but the Effects either of their Stupidity, or their Disease, or else
the Consequence of very false and dangerous Principles.

First, many times it is plainly the Effect of their wretched Stupidity and
Sottishness. For some Men we see are so Stupid in their Sins, that nothing but
Hell flames will awake them; and though when they feel themselves upon the edge
of Eternity passing into an irreversible Condition, they cannot forbear
reflecting on their Sins, and starting at the dangerous Consequence of them;
yet if they can but so far obtain of themselves as to weep for, and resolve
against them, they think that all is well again, and so go into Eternity with a
great deal of Comfort and Assurance. But these are a sort of Stupid Souls that
have no regard of themselves, that are dying forever but have not Sense enough
to apprehend their Danger, or to feel the Disease of which they are dying; for
if they had they would never be so confident of their Recovery upon such slight
and easy Applications; they would consider how false and hypocritical all
their former Resolutions have proved, and how much cause there is to suspect
lest those should prove as bad as they, and how impossible it is to impose upon
God to whose all-seeing Eye the inmost Nature, and utmost Issues of Things are
open and naked, which would necessarily render them extremely jealous and
Solicitous concerning their eternal State. I am now going away into everlasting
Weal or Woe, Lord, what will become of me, the only security I have that it
will go well with me forever is only this, that I am resolved upon a future
Amendment; but alas I have too much reason to suspect my Resolution is rotten
at the Core, and if it be, Woe be to me that ever I was Born. This without all
doubt would be his Language if he were but thoroughly awakned into a Sense of
his Danger, which because he is not he dies in a Dream of Happiness and will
presently awake in real and intolerable Misery. And as this Comfort of the
Deathbed Penitent does often times arise from his Stupidity, so,

Secondly, many times it is nothing else but the mere Effect of his Disease. For
there are many Diseases that have a natural Enthusiasm attending them, viz.
such as alternately chill and freeze the Blood, and put the Spirits into
unequal Motions; and to such as these Dejections and Transports do as naturally
follow, as Shiverings and Burnings to an Ague. For when the Blood runs low, and
the Spirits are weak and languid, then usually the Scene is all Tragedy;
melancholy Vapors cloud and overwhelm their Fancies, and they are lost in a
Wood of Spiritual Desertions. But when the Tide turns and warmer Blood flows up
into the Brain, and refreshes the drooping Fancy with Brisk and active Spirits,
then they are full of Raptures and Ecstasies, which, because they look on as
streaming from an heavenly Original, they labor to swell and heighten to the
utmost Brink of their Capacities; in so much that sometimes they are even
stifled and overwhelmed with joy: and it is usual for them, especially in high
Fevers, when their Blood is more briskly fermented by the sharpness of their
Humors, to chafe and tickle themselves into real Trances and Deliriums, which
they, not understanding the Structure of their own Bodies, and the Nature of
their Disease, do commonly mistake for the immediate Sealings and Incomes of
the Spirit of God. So that if they chance to die in one of these Transports,
those that are Spectators of their End conclude that they depart in full
Assurance, and are most infallibly received into the joy of their Master;
whereas most commonly I fear their Joy expires with them, and leaves them
desperate and miserable. But then

Thirdly, In the third and last place, their Comfort is many times nothing else
but the Effect and Consequence of their own false and dangerous Principles.
They have entertained such Principles as these, that their own Personal
Righteousness is not at all necessary to render them acceptable to God, and
that all is required of them is to rest and rely upon Jesus Christ; which if
they do, all their Defects and Miscarriages shall be most certainly covered
with the Robe of his Righteousness, and God will look upon them, and deal with
them as if they had been as righteous as he. That Men have imbibed such
Principles as these, and learned to practice on them, we who converse with
Sick-beds cannot be ignorant; for when they have gone on impenitently to their
Deathbeds, and we come to enquire into the grounds of their Hopes, this we
find is the ordinary Refuge they fly to, that Jesus Christ has obeyed and
suffered for them; and therefore they firmly rely upon him, and fling their
Souls into his Arms, and make no doubt but he will catch them and save them
from the Wrath to come: as if the design of our Saviors Undertaking had been
to privilege those who believe in him to Live wickedly, and Die comfortably.
That he by his Merit and Satisfaction has obtained this Grant of his Father,
that all who heartily submit themselves unto him shall be received into his
Favor, notwithstanding their past Rebellions and present Imperfections of
Obedience, I think an undoubted Principle of Christianity; but that he has
obtained this Favor for us absolutely whether we submit to his Father or no,
is so far from being Christian, that I think it is one of the most Antichristian
Doctrines that was ever set on broach in the World; for it plainly defeats the
main Design of Christianity, and totally dissolves all its Obligations. For
whereas the principal Drift of Christianity is to teach Men to deny Ungodliness
and Worldly lusts, and to live soberly righteously and godly in this present
World, this Doctrine unteaches all again, and gives Men a Dispensation to live
as wickedly as they please. For if upon my Reliance upon Christ I shall be
received into Gods Favor whether I submit to him or no, farewell to all
Obligations of Obedience. What need Men be so Sollicitous of making such hearty
Submissions of their Souls to God, if the Righteousness of their Savior be a
Sanctuary from the Authority of his Laws? So that for Men to rely confidently
upon Christ before they are secure that their Souls are heartily subjected to
him, is a piece of the greatest Arrogance and Presumption; and though they may
pacify their Conscience with it when they are dying, yet when they are dead
they will find they have made more bold than welcome with their Savior; that
he will not be a Patron to their sins, nor side with them so far in their
Rebellions against his Father, as to shelter them in his Wounds from the due
Vengeance of eternal Fire. Although therefore these deathbed Penitents do too
often dye very comfortably, yet considering what false grounds their Comforts
generally stand on, I had much rather see them go down to their Graves in the
greatest sorrow and anxiety of Soul; for if they should miscarry, as there is
vast reason to fear they will, it grieves my Soul to think what a surprise they
will be in, how they will be blanked and amazed when, contrary to their bold
Presumptions of waking in immortal Joys, they find themselves among Devils and
damned Ghosts abandoned to endless Misery and Despair. And indeed I cannot but
wonder that a Man who has deferred his Repentance to a Deathbed should have
the confidence to talk of Comfort and Assurance; which is such a Reward as God
usually appropriates to long and most eminent Piety. But for a Man that has
rebelled against God all his days to pirk up presently after a few sighs and
submissions, and pretend to as much Assurance of his Savior as if he had been
his ancient Friend and Familiar, is down right inexcuseable Impupudence. Alas
poor Man! what less can thou do in Modesty than spend the small Remainder of
thy Days in Sighs, and Tears, and deep Humiliations; and when thou have done
thy utmost, to content thy self with this, that thou art not altogether
desperate? But as for Comfort and Assurance, it would well become thee to leave
them to those who have better deserved them; for after all thou can do, if
thou gettest to Heaven it will be a Wonder of mercy: so that unless thou art
absolutely besotted, thou must die in great fear, and go trembling away into
Eternity. So miserable is the State of the deathbed Penitent, that it is a
mighty Hazard whether ever he repent to purpose, and if he does, it is
ordinarily impossible to reap any comfortable assurance of it.

And now I expect that it will be objected against this Discourse that it
savours of too much Rigor and Severity, because it represents the State of
dying Penitents so very near to desperate. To which I briefly answer, that if
it were absolutely desperate, as I confess I think it very near so, yet
doubtless the best way is to represent Things as they are: for the nature of
the Thing is already fixed, and neither your Opinion nor mine will alter it.
Indeed if I could recover a dying Man by telling him that he is not dying, it
would be cruelty in me to pronounce him past Recovery; and so could I save the
dying Penitent by telling him that he is secure. I never very much to blame
should I say his Case is desperate; but alas! if it be so, it will be so, let
me say what I please; so that in pronouncing that it is so, I only make him
sensible of it a few Moments sooner. I do but show him what he must trust to,
and what he will presently be convinced of by woeful Experience; and by ringing
out a passing Bell to his departing Soul, I do him this kindness at least that
he will not be in Hell before he is aware of it. And certainly this is some
Charity, though it be severe; but yet neither do I represent the Case to be
altogether desperate, though I must confess some very great and eminent Divines
have done so; for I have endeavored to show that true Repentance is not
impossible on a Deathbed, though extremely hazardous and difficult; so that
still there is some Hope, enough to encourage the Sinners utmost Endeavor, and
keep his Head above water; and for him to give up himself to Despair while
there is any glimmering of hope, is to enter into Hell before his time, which
is a degree of imprudence next to that he has been already guilty of, in
putting himself upon this dismal Extremity. But supposing it had been
represented as wholly desperate, yet this can occasion no Man that hears me to
despair, unless it be through his own Default. For God be praised I am not now
preaching to a sick or dying Auditory; you are now well and in health, and have
a space and season of Repentance before you, which if you will but diligently
improve, you prevent the fearful Hazard whereunto a deathbed Penitence exposes
you. But if through your own Neglect you should fall into it and despair in it,
who can you blame but your selves for it. All that I aim at is to prevent your
Danger by persuading you to repent betime; but if you will be so cruel to your
selves as to delay it till it is too late, and then Despair overtake you, you
may thank your selves for it that would take no warning. And therefore to
render this Argument yet more effectual, I intend to represent to you at large
the Folly and Wickedness of deferring our Repentance to the last, and thereby
to excite and provoke you to a speedy Resolution of Amendment; that so when the
Bridegroom comes you may not with these foolish Virgins in my Text find the
Door of Heaven shut against you, but that having finished your work, you may be
admitted with that good and profitable Servant into the joy of your Master.

REVELATIONS II. 21. I gave her space to repent of her fornication and she
repented not.
THE Person here spoken of is Iesabel, as you may see in the foregoing verse;
but who this Iesabel was is very much disputed by Expositors. Epiphanius and
some that follow him refer this title to those Women Heretics, Priscilla,
Maximilla, and Quintilla who followed Montanus, and about Commodus his Reign
took upon them to be Prophetesses, and under that pretense propagated many
monstrous Heresies. But since it must be after St. John's time that those Women
were in the Church of Thiatira, and since St. John here speaks not
prophetically of what should be, but historically of what already was, it is
not supposeable that these Montanist Women should be the Iesabel here spoken
of: besides that the Character here given her does not agree with that Sect,
for these Montanists were a very severe and strict Sect, and that was the main
motive which seduced Tertullian to it; whereas this Iesabel, or Sect described
by her Name, is here accused of Fornication, and sacrificing to Idols. So that
it seems more probable that by her is meant either the whole Sect of the
Gnostics, which as all agree was infamous for Leudness, Uncleanness and
Idolatry; or else some particular Woman who was an eminent Patroness and
Ringleader of that Party. And if he mean this latter, as it seems most
probable by the Distinction he makes between her and those that committed
Adultery with her, that is, her Followers; then it is probable that he means
Helena the Whore of Simon Magus, who was Father of the Gnostics; whom he
styled his (...), or first Conception. And well might she be called Iesabel,
since she so much resembled the Wise of Ahab called by that name in her
notorious Whoredoms and Idolatries; but yet in her he reprehends the whole Sect
which was all involved with her in the same Impenitence. So that it was equally
true both of her and of her Followers, that God gave them space to repent of
their Fornications, and they repented not, that is, Gods patience waited on
them, and gave them time to reform their lend and infamous Practices; but still
they deferred and put it off, and under all his Forbearance continued obstinate
and impenitent. So that the design of the Words is to represent the Evil of
Men's putting off their Repentance when God in mercy forbears them, and gives
them space enough to perform it. And how great an Evil this is I shall
endeavor to represent to you,

1. By showing you the Wickedness, 2. The Absurdity, and 3. The Danger of it.
1. I shall show you the Wickedness of it, and that in these following
particulars:

1. It Is a profane mockery of God's Patience. 2. It Is an ungrateful
Undervaluing of his Service. 3. It Is an open Contempt to his Authority. 4. It Is
an impious Presumption on his Goodness. 5. It Is an arrogant defiance of his
Displeasure.
1. To defer and put off our Repentance when God gives us space to repent is a
profane Mockery of his Patience. That he did not strike us dead upon our first
sin, and consign us immediately to the chains of Darkness, was purely the Effect
of his Goodness; 'twas this that obliged him to try us a little longer in hope
that at last we might be prevailed with to consider our danger, and correct our
folly before it had determined us to an irreversible Ruin. Whilst therefore we
linger out the space of our Repentance in Delays, we sport and dally with the
Patience of God; we promise fair, and give it hope that it shall at last obtain
its Ends upon us; but when we come to performance, we baffle and disappoint it,
and render all its past attendance ineffectual. For when the Date of our former
Promise is expired, and God expects our Performance, instead of that, we only
give him new Promises, and pay him with Words instead of Things; as if by our
Promises we only intended to raise in him an expectation of our Repentance,
that so we might have an opportunity to vex him with a Disappointment. We
promise we will repent hereafter only to get leave to sin for the present, and
so when that hereafter comes we promise again, and only repeat the old
Delusion; as if we meant to tantalize his Patience by profering the golden
Fruit of our Repentance, and snatching it away again before he can lay hold of
it. Now what a fearful wickedness is this for Men to put such Tricks upon the
Almighty, still to defer the payment of a Debt that has been so long due, and
so often demanded, and still to pay his Demands with Promises, and only feed
his Expectations with Air! as though we thought him bound to attend our Leisure,
and to give us Credit to run deeper on score upon the security of our Promise
of future Payment which we have already forfeited over and over.

2. Thus to put off and delay our Repentance, is a most base and ungrateful
Undervaluing of his Service: For the Reason why we delay our Repentance, is,
because we think it will be time enough to return to our Duty hereafter, when
the Opportunities of Sin are gone, and the Pleasure of it is out of season. For
into what other sense can God construe our Delays but only this, that it is our
Design to shift off him and his Service, till we have served our Lusts as long
as we are able, and never to begin our Repentance till we are able to be wicked
no longer. Now I beseech you, could you without Horror and Trembling make such
an Address to God as this, O God, I know it is my Duty, and the very End of my
Life to serve thee; but I beseech thee, be not angry, if while I live I serve
my Lusts, and employ the Powers thou have given me in Rebellion against thee:
And if thou will but indulge me this, I will be thy humble Servant when I am
good for nothing, neither to serve, nor disobey thee: Do but have Patience till
I am Bedridden, and can enjoy the World and my Lusts no longer, and then I will
return to thee, and be sorry for my Sins, and wish that I had never offended
thee. I would now devote the Service of my Youth and Strength to thee, but that
I am sensible it is too good for thee; and therefore come what will, I will
feed my Lusts with the Marrow of my Days, and if the dull insipid Bone will
content thee, it is at thy Service. This, though it be horrible Language, is
yet the natural Sense of our Delays. We would repent immediately, but that we
think it is a Thousand Pities such fair Opportunities of sinning should be
lost, and so many precious Minutes should be so ill bestowed: So that the
reason of our Delay is this, that at present we apprehend we can spend our time
more pleasantly in sinning on, than in the Exercise of a severe Repentance, and
consequently, while we can still sin on with Pleasure, we shall still have the
same reason to delay, and never think it reasonable to begin our Repentance
till we are old, decrepid, or dying, and can sin with Pleasure no longer. Now
what a profane Reflection is it upon God and his Service, to think our selves
too good to serve him till we are good for nothing; that the Dregs and Lees of
our Life are good enough for him, and that he ought to be satisfied with the
leavings of our Lusts, and to take it as a Favor that we will repent of our
sins when we are no longer capable of sinning with Pleasure? With what Patience
can he endure to be thus slighted and contemned by us, to be thus rudely put
off with the Refuse of our Lusts, thus unmannerly treated with the Scraps of
the Devil's Table?

3. To defer our Repentance when God gives us space to repent, is an open
contempt of his Authority; for by the Laws of Religion we are bound either
always to continue innocent, or when we have contracted any Guilt, to expiate
it by immediate Repentance; for so long as we continue under any guilty
Impenitence, we are in a state of actual Rebellion against God, and are not
only accountable for the Guilt of the first Sin, but also for that of not
having repented of it. And though we do not repeat the first Sin any more, yet
our very continuing impenitent under the Guilt of it, brings a distinct Guilt
upon us, and renders us doubly criminal in the sight of God; for unless our
sinning against God does cancel the Obligation of his Laws, they must
necessarily oblige us to repent, that is, to revoke our wicked purpose, and
return to our Obedience as soon as ever we have broken and transgressed it.
It Is true indeed as for particular affirmative Precepts, they being always
relative to Time, and Place, and Persons, are to be practiced only in special
Times, and pertinent Occasions, because they being but Parts of a good Life,
must give way by turns for other Parts and Instances of it, which are of the
like particular and limited Nature with themselves; but yet we are always
obliged to the Purpose and Disposition of Practicing these, whenever Occasion
does require it. A man is not always bound to be doing Justice, by giving Alms,
or saying his Prayers; but to the Devotion of Prayer, the Disposition of
Justice, and the Charity of Alms he is continually obliged: These being Works
of the inward Man cannot be limited to Times and Opportunities, nor receive any
accidental Determinations from without, but are always possible, and always
good, and always necessary; for the performance of them depends only on the
Grace of God, and the Will of Man, and that never fails, if this does not; and
therefore is always possible, unless we will not, but it is always necessary
whether we will or no: So that when we have broken our purpose of obeying God
by any actual Sin, it is another distinct Sin, not to renew it by immediate
Repentance, and when by this actual Sin, we have lost our disposition to obey
God, and contracted the contrary, there is in this a proper Guilt, and Venom
distinct from that actual Sin that introduced it. But then there are general
Precepts, of Religion, such as to love God, and to Repent from dead Works; the
first of which includes the whole Religion of a Man, the second, the whole
Religion of a Sinner; and consequently we being both, must needs be universally
obliged to both these Duties in all Accidents, Times, and Cases. For when once
we have apostatized from our Duty, all our after-obedience is an Act of
Repentance; and therefore though the Command of it be affirmative, yet because
it is universal, including all those Duties, which by binding at several Times,
do fill up all our Time; there can be no Time in which we are not bound to
repent. This I have the longer insisted on, because it is a great Question
among the Roman Casuists, whether a Man be always bound to this Duty, and some
of them have been so wicked, as to determine that a Man is not bound to repent
till he comes to die; others, that it is sufficient if he repent once a Year;
others thrice upon the Three great Holidays of Christmas, Easter, and
Whitsunday; as if there were any time wherein it was not our Duty to return to
our Duty; or the Laws of our Religion did only oblige us at certain seasons,
and in the Intervals gave us a free Dispensation to live as wickedly as we
pleased. Since therefore as soon as we have sinned, we are bound immediately to
repent, it necessarily follows, that he who sins, and then delays his
Repentance, sins Twice; his very Delay being a farther Provocation. For how can
we imagine that he who persists in Rebellion against God Twenty Years together,
does not much more offend him, than he who submits within Twenty Months, or
Twenty Days, or Twenty Hours; and if the longer we persist, the more we do
offend him, then every delay of our Repentance must needs be a further
Provocation. The Sum of all therefore is this, that every Day God calls us to
Repentance, and that every Call of his ought to be regarded, and consequently,
that every regardless Delay of it, adds to the heap of our Guilt, and helps to
fill up the Measure of our Iniquities. And what a rude Contempt is it of Gods
Authority, when he commands us to repent to Day, to cry well we will repent
tomorrow? Lord, we beseech thee be not so hasty with us, suffer us to offend
thee yet a little longer; for whether thou will or no, we are resolved to do
it. We will repent, but will not be prescribed when, as for that, leave it to
us, for say what thou will, we are fully resolved to take leave to do it when
we please. This in effect is the impious meaning of every Delay of our
Repentance, and when God commands us to repent, we might as modestly tell him
that we will not repent at all, as when he commands us to repent now, tell him,
that we will repent hereafter.

4. To defer our Repentance when God gives us space to repent, is an impious
Presumption on his Goodness. The reason why God forbears us when we sin, is to
give us second Thoughts, and to see our Danger, and to run away from it; that
so he may not surprise us into ruin: for the end of his long-suffering, is to
lead us to Repentance; but when upon this Consideration we take encouragement
to delay, we do not only defeat his Goodness, but so far as in us lies, render
it injurious to him. For we war against him under the Protection of his
kindness to us, and fortify our selves in our Rebellion, in that very
Goodness, and Long-suffering, with which he seeks to conquer and subdue us. O
barbarous Ingratitude! that we should fetch Arguments from his mercy to offend
him, and maintain Enmity against him out of the Revenue of his own Indulgence!
would you not look on that Malefactor as a Monster, that should rob his Judge
merely because he reprieved him, and use him with all the Despite and Ignominy,
because he knew him to be a merciful Man, and will be loath to hang him the
next Sessions? and is it not altogether as monstrous for us to abuse God,
because he is kind to us, and to take Encouragement to rob him of our Duty,
because we know he is unwilling to ruin us? but though every Man has not
Impudence enough to assign this Reason, yet it is plain, this lies at the
bottom of all their Delays. Because Sentence against an evil Work is not
executed speedily, faith the Wise Man, therefore the Heart of the Sons of Men
is fully set in 'em to do Evil, Eccles. 8. 11. But what horrid Baseness is
this, to urge his Goodness against himself, and fetch Motives from his Mercy to
affront his Authority? it seems, if he were worse to us, we would be better to
him; if he were less kind, we would be more dutiful. O Wretches that we are! I
had almost said, it is even pity that we have a God to deal with, that we are
not under the Government of some Fury that would watch for our halting, and
catch at all Opportunities to plague and punish us; and we were best have a
care we do not presume too much upon God, for though he bears long, he will not
bear always; and there is nothing can sooner provoke him, than to see us
conduct our Rebellions against him under the Banners of his own Goodness. This
is such an intolerable Provocation as is sufficient to inrage a Soul of
Patience, and turn the most boundless Mercy into Fury: and if once his Wrath be
kindled against us, he will make us rue for ever in our Abuses of his Goodness.

5. And lastly, To defer our Repentance when God gives us space for it, is an
arrogant Defiance of his Displeasure, for God has sufficiently declared to us
the Displeasure he takes in the Delays of our Repentance. Thus in his holy Word
he has given us fair warning of it; thus Romans 2. 4. despisest thou the Riches
of his Goodness, and Forbearance, and Long-suffering, not knowing that the
Goodness of God leads thee to Repentance? From whence I argue 1. that the
Goodness of God is a Motive to Repentance. 2. That not to be persuaded by it,
is to despise his Goodness. 3. That this despising his Goodness by delaying our
Repentance, is treasuring up Wrath against the Day of Wrath. So also Rev. 2. 5.
remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first Works; or else
I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy Candlestick out of its place
except thou repent. Where he plainly declares, that if our Repentance be not
very quickly, his Judgments will be too quick for us; by which he plainly
signifies how much he is displeased with our Delays, how importunately they
urge and provoke him to overwhelm us with a speedy Destruction And accordingly
we see by Experience, how he takes some away in their early sins, and gives
them no respite; and he who has made it Damnation to some for not repenting
instantly, has made it damnable to all. The Earth does not open, and swallow
up all Rebels in the Day of their Mutiny; but it did so once, and thereby God
has sufficiently signified to all Ages his Displeasure against Rebellion; And
so it is in deferring Repentance; for that some have smarted for it eternally
is a sufficient Manifestation that God is displeased with every one that defers
it. Whilst therefore we delay our Repentance from time to time, we sit down
quietly under the divine Displeasure, as if it were altogether indifferent
whether the Almighty be pleased or displeased with us; we do as good as say,
Lord, we know well enough thou would have us repent immediately, and that if
we do not, thou will be angry with us; but be thou never so angry, we will not
repent us yet, we must enjoy our Lusts a little longer, and if thou will be
displeased, we will run the venture. We had rather endure thy Frowns a while,
than part with our sins for ever, and think it much more tolerable to be hated
by the Fountain of all Love and Goodness, than abandoned of all our sinful
Pleasures. This is such Language perhaps as the boldest Sinner would hardly be
able to pronounce without trembling, but yet such as it is, it is the natural
Sense of every Man's Actions, who delays and puts off his Repentance: he knows
that God is displeased with him, but regards it not, and as if he were
ambitious of being a Hero in Wickedness, he defies Heaven, and dallies with
its Thunderbolts, and runs into the Mouth of its Canon whilst they are
spitting Fire, and roaring out Destruction upon him.

And thus you see the monstrous Wickedness of Men's delaying their Repentance,
which is such, as had we not seared our Consciences, and stifled our natural
Sense of God, we could never be able to reflect on without Horror and Agonies.
And so I pass to the Second Head of Discourse, the great Absurdity of delaying
our Repentance; which I shall endeavor to demonstrate in these following
particulars.

1. It is putting off a Work that must be done to the most unfitting Season of
doing it.

2. It is putting it off upon no other Reason, but what will hereafter be more
prevalent than now.

3. It deprives us of the Satisfaction of having done what we must do at last,
and prolongs the Pain and Trouble of doing it.

4. It defers the doing it upon no other Presumption, but that it shall one Day
dearly repent of its own Neglect.

1. To delay our Repentance, is to put off a Work that must be done to the most
unfitting Season of doing it. That Repentance is indispensibly necessary to the
Recovery and Happiness of a Sinner, is a Principle wherein all the reasonable
World are agreed; and since it must be done, it is highly reasonable we should
take the best Opportunity of doing it, and for a Man to say, I must do such a
thing, and am resolved to do it, but however, I will take the most improper
Season to do it in, is the most absurd and ridiculous Thing in the World. But
for a Man to repent in, there is no Season can be so convenient as the present;
for it will never be so easy for us to repent as now; the difficulty of it will
daily grow upon our hands, and if we do not engage in it immediately, it will
be harder to morrow than it is to day. When Men begin to sin, their Nature
starts and boggles at it, from an innate Sense of God, and of their Duty, and
this natural shiness must be tamed and broken ever they can be through-pac'd in
Wickedness; but when they have inured themselves to it by frequent Acts, they
grow by degrees familiar with it, and then every Act breeds Delight in it, and
every Delight begets a Desire of repeating it, and that Desire brings forth a
new Act. And when a Man has walked the Rounds a while in this Circle, at last
he centers in Custom and Habit of sinning, and then every new Act will confirm
the Habit, and root it deeper in our Natures, and so as we sin on, it will grow
stronger and stronger, 'till at last it becomes almost fatal and necessary, and
then the Lord have mercy upon us; for without a Miracle of Grace we shall never
be able to retrieve our selves. Thus every step we take in our sinful Progress,
leads us further out of our way, and renders our return more hard and
difficult, so that by going on in a sinful Course, we do what in us lies to
block up the way of our Return, and do as it were build a Wall behind us, to
disable our selves from making any Retreat. What a ridiculous Thing therefore
is it for Men to pretend that they will repent, but not yet; when it is so
apparent, that if they repent not now, it will never be so easy again as long
as they live? To Morrow it will be more difficult than now, and every Day it is
delayed will drive it nearer to an Impossibility: So that by our foolish
Delays, we do but make Work for our selves, and heap up Difficulties on our own
Heads; we resolve that we will repent, but withal, that we will not go about
it, till we have rendered it more difficult, and our selves less able to do it.
Our Soul is wounded, and must die without the sovereign Balsom of Repentance,
which we therefore resolve to apply and make use of; but first her Wound shall
fester into a Gangrene, not to be cured, but by the most painful Lancings, and
Corrosives. And can there be any Thing more ridiculous for a Man to resolve to
do a Thing, and at the same time resolve to make it more difficult before he
does it? For certainly, if our Repentance after so many Delays, should at last
commence, which is very questionable, it will in all probability be accompanied
with so many sad Circumstances, so many Tumults of Passion, and Uproars of
Conscience, so many piercing Sorrows, and bitter Agonies, that we shall dearly
repent we did not repent sooner.

2. To delay our Repentance, is to resolve to defer this Work to hereafter,
upon a Reason which will then be much more prevalent than now; and for a Man to
defer a Thing to hereafter which he resolves to do upon such a Reason as will
be much more prevalent hereafter than now, is doubtless the absurdest Thing in
the World. Now the main Reason why Men are now unwilling to repent is, because
they love their sins, and are unwilling to part with them, and in all
likelihood, hereafter they will be much more unwilling; so that this Reason
will every Day improve upon their hands, and have so much the more strength, by
how much the longer they defer their Repentance: So that we can have no Reason
in the World against fixing on the present Time, but only because it is
present; but when hereafter comes to be present, the Reason will be just the
same. But as for our Unwillingness to leave our sins, if that be the Reason of
our Delay, that will every Day increase and grow more prevalent upon us; for
Sin gains, upon the Will by Practice, the Delight of it recommends it to the
Desire, and renders us more fond of its Embraces; so that if we defer our
Repentance till hereafter, because we are unwilling to leave our Sins, when
that hereafter is present, we shall have much more reason to defer than now;
and so the plain Sense of our deferring our Repentance upon this reason, is
this, I cannot yet forsake my Sins, because I love them, and am highly pleased
with them, but hereafter I am resolved I will; but first I will act them a
little longer, and grow more in love with them, and then when I love them more,
and am more inslaved to them, I will be sure to hate and forsake them for ever.
Whilst therefore we delay our Repentance, because our Sins do please us, we
shall have the same reason to delay it for ever. For the longer we live in Sin,
in all probability, the more it will please us; and so Twenty Years hence, the
reason of our Delay will be far more prevalent than now; and if we forsake not
our sin till it ceases to please us, we shall never forsake it as long as we
live: So that to resolve not to repent now, because our sins do please us, is
the same thing in effect as to resolve not to repent at all; and indeed this
generally lies at the bottom of all such Resolutions, when men's Consciences
like importunate Creditors begin to dun and clamor upon them, they are forced
many times to give good Words, and appoint some future Day of Payment, else
they will put them to a great deal of Trouble, and ever and anon arrest them
with Horrors and Affrightments; but still they purpose to run further in Debt,
and to put off the Day of payment from time to time, till they are utterly
insolvent. So that by these promises of repenting hereafter, Men only delude
themselves, and under a specious Pretense of future Repentance put tricks upon
their Consciences to blind and bribe them that may not disturb them whilst they
are sinning themselves into Ruin.

3. By delaying our Repentance we deprive our selves of the satisfaction of
having done what we must do at last, and prolong the pain and trouble of doing
it. To have accomplished a necessary Work, especially if it be difficult and
important, is a great satisfaction to the Mind; and whereas, whilst it is yet
to do, the prospect of the Pain and Labor we must undergo in doing it creates
in us a great deal of Trouble and Anxiety; when once it is done, the very
Reflection on the Pains and Labors we have past, sweetens our present repose,
and crowns it with greater Joy and Triumph. And so it is with Repentance, which
we all acknowledge to be a most necessary Work, and of the vastest Moment and
Importance to us; and though it be never so painful and difficult, yet we must
undergo it, or that which is much more intolerable; so that if once it were
done, it could not but give a great satisfaction to our Minds, and fill us with
unspeakable Joy. When a Man shall thus reflect with himself, Blessed be God, I
have done that work, which had it been yet to do I must have done, or been
undone for ever. I charged through all those pains and difficulties that were
wont to startle and affright me, and by the grace of Heaven am come off
victoriously. O happy Achievement! how well am I rewarded for all my labor!
now I am past it, and settled in the quiet possession of my conquest! When, I
say, a Man can thus reflect with himself, it must needs be unspeakable Pleasure
to him: whereas he who defers his Repentance and has it yet to do, is in
perpetual pain and anxiety; whilst he thus considers with himself, alas, to
repent is a very sad and painful work! but yet at last I must undergo it, or
suffer that which is a thousand times more painful. I must lament and weep for
my folly, watch and pray against it, struggle with and overcome it, or rue for
it to all Eternity. O that it were done! but O how loath am I to go about it! O
that my pain were over! but O how afraid am I to endure it! Thus the poor
Wretch for fear of Pain exposes himself to a lingering Torment, and whilst by
one brave Attempt he might ease himself, and set his soul at rest for ever, he
languishes away his Life in misery, and is sick with the fear of his Remedy:
just like some Men under the torments of the Stone, they know they must be cut
or die, but the frightful apprehensions they have of their Remedy makes them
delay it from time to time. They will endure it, they say, rather than lose
their Lives, but when they come to the trial their heart fails and they must
needs have a little longer respite; and all the while they are full of pain and
uneasiness, and full of sad Apprehensions of those severer pains they must
endure in order to their recovery, and yet these at last they must endure too
or that which is much more terrible to them; whereas had they but endured them
at first, they might have saved themselves all those Torments, and all those
Fears of farther Torments which they endured in the time of their delay. And is
not this extremely absurd and ridiculous? And yet just thus it is with those
who put off their Repentance. Had they repented on their first Lapse, their
hearts might have been at ease a great while ago, and they might have saved
themselves all those gripes and twinges of Conscience which they have been
forced to endure. But Repentance they thought was a sad remedy, and the fear of
that too augmented the torment of their disease. But be it never so sad, they
know well enough they must at last apply it, or perish for ever. Well; but they
will apply it, that they resolve on; but fain they would have a little longer
respite. Ah foolish Souls! will it hereafter be more easy than now to you? Will
your Delay do you think mollify the pain and anguish of it? Alas no, it will
rather render it more dolorous. So that all the while you delay, and think of
it only but do not do it, you do but anticipate the Torment, and prolong the
misery of it; and whereas if once it were done you would be at rest, and all
the pain of your past Guilt, and the fear of your future Repentance would be
over; whilst you only think of it but do it not, is is a continued Disease to
you, and the very Apprehensions you have of it are many times more dolorous
than the performance.

4. And lastly, to delay our Repentance is to do a thing upon no other
presumption, but that we shall one Day repent of our own Action. And can there
be any thing more ridiculous than for a Man to do an Action in hope that he
shall live to repent of it? for either the Action is reasonable, or not, if it
be, why should he hope to repent of it? if it be not, why should he be so
extravagant to do it? so that for a Man to do a Thing upon Presumption that he
shall repent of it, is to proclaim himself a Fool; and yet this is the Case of
him that delays his Repentance. For that this very Delay is a Sin superadded to
those criminal Actions of which he ought to repent, I have already
demonstrated; from whence it necessarily follows, that this must be repented of
as well as those. So that for Men to encourage themselves not to repent at
present, in hope that they shall repent hereafter, is to act professedly
contrary to the reasons of Things. For if the Nature of our Delay is such as
that we have reason to hope we shall one day repent of it, this is so far from
being a proper Encouragement to it, that it is one of the strongest Reasons
that can be urged against it; and for a Man to rob in hope to be hanged for it,
or to drink deadly Poison in hope to be convulsed and tormented with it, is
every whit as wise and rational, as to delay our Repentance in hope to repent
of it. For who but a Madman, or one that is resolved to act counter to all
Rules of Reason, would ever practice on this extravagant Conclusion; I will do
this or that Action at present, in hope that hereafter I shall be sorry for,
and extremely ashamed of it, and wish a Thousand times that I had never done
it. I know it is a great Evil, and do plainly perceive, that one time or other
I shall find it so; but come what will, I will venture upon it, in hope that
hereafter I shall be ashamed with the horror of it, and tormented for it upon
the Rack of a self-condemning Conscience. And now, I beseech you, is this a
reasonable Hope, or proper Encouragement for a wise Man to act upon? or rather,
is it not one of the most absurd and foolish that ever any Fool or Madman
proceeded on? and yet this is plainly the Meaning of our Pretension, when we
delay our Repentance in hope to repent of it hereafter.

And thus you see how extravagantly absurd it is for Men to defer and put off
their Repentance; so that methinks had we any Reverence for our selves, any
Respect for those reasonable Natures by which we are constituted Men, we should
be ashamed to act so inconsistently with all the Rules of Reason and Sobriety:
and so I pass on to

3. The Third and last Head, under which I proposed to demonstrate the mighty
Evil of delaying our Repentance, and that is the Danger of it; which I shall
endeavor to make appear in these following particulars.

1. Every Delay of our Repentance, is a nearer Approach toward final
Impenitence. 2. It Is a desperate Venture of our Opportunity of Repentance. 3.
It indangers the forfeiting that Grace without the Assistance whereof we cannot
repent. 4. It drives us nearer to the last Extremity.
1. Every Delay of our Repentance is a nearer Approach toward final
Impenitence. For a sinful State is like a shelving Pool, in which the farther a
man wades, the deeper it is; and so deeper and deeper till he come to the
bottom of it; and when we are there, we are sunk beyond all hope of Recovery;
so that at every step forward, we are in Danger of going beyond our Depth, and
plunging into an irreversible Ruin. For final Impenitence, which is the
Consummation and Perfection of all Sin, is nothing but a persevering Neglect,
or Refusal to repent. And as a Man is always dying, and that which we call
Death is only the last and finishing Act of it; so final Impenitence is not the
Sin of one Day or Moment, unless it be by accident, but it is a state of Sin,
begun as soon as ever the Sin is acted, and carried on through each repeated
Action, and in fine is nothing but the same Sin so many times told over. But if
it should happen, that he who sinned Yesterday should die to Day, it would be
final Impenitance in him to defer his Repentance that one Day. So that our
first Delay of Repentance, is the beginning of our final Impenitence, which in
all its Periods differs from the Delay only by Chance and Accident; it is
materially the same Sin, and if Death chance to strike the next Moment, it will
also have the same Formality. For as he that dies young, dies as really as he
that dies after Fourscore Years, so he that dies in the midst of a short Delay
of his Repentance is as well finally Impenitent, as he that is snatched away to
die for ever after Fourscore Years Impenitence; for though the Evil be hot so
great, nor the Judgment consequent to it so heavy, yet is it as fatal, and as
irreversible as the Decree of Damnation on the fallen Angels. So that all the
Time we delay, and put off our Repentance, we are bordering on the worst of
Evils, we are just upon the Confines of an irreversible Mischief, and the next
step for all we know may carry us beyond Recovery. For if Death should
intervene between us and to morrow, this Days delay will be fatal, and
irreparable. And can we stand upon the brinks of this Precipice, and feel how
the ground sinks underneath us, and yet sleep on securely, without ever
thinking whether we are falling, or being in the least concerned at this
amazing Prospect of our Danger? Methinks if we had any concern for our own
safety, we should think it high time now to start up, and run away from our
neighboring Ruin, and not presume any longer to swim within the Circumference
of this fatal Whirl-Pool that is every Moment sucking us in, and for all we
know the next Moment may swallow us up irrecoverably.

2. Every Delay of our Repentance is a desperate Venture of the Opportunity we
have to repent in, and that is this present Life, which is the Day in which we
are to do our Work, the Time of Trial in which we are to pass our Probation,
and perform our Exercise for Eternity; and therefore considering how uncertain
this Life is, and to how many Events and Casualties it is exposed, it must
needs be a most desperate Venture for a Man to delay his Repentance. For who
can tell but while we talk of repenting hereafter, there may be some latent
Disease undermining the Fort of Life, and ready to seize the Garrison of our
Souls; So that perhaps before this Day is at an end, we may be surprised in the
midst of our Delay, and lose all our hopes of to morrow? For what is vain Man
that he should talk of repenting hereafter, when perhaps, whilst the Word is in
his Mouth, there may be an Imposthume in his Head or Breast, or a ripe hardened
Stone in his Kidney ready to drop down into his Bladder the next Moment; when
he may be inflamed with a Fever by what he drinks to Night, or drowned in a
Surfeit with what he eats to Morrow; when he may expire his Soul with the next
Breath, or suck in Poison with the next Air, and so many unlooked for Accidents
may put an end to his talk of repenting hereafter, and render it impossible for
ever. And suppose we should be thus surprised, as many others have been before
us, that while we are merry and jolly in our Sins, that all on a sudden we
should be hurried away out of the Company of our jovial Associates, into that
of howling and tormented Spirits, and from our Songs and Laughter into weeping,
and wailing, and gnashing of Teeth; how should we be blanked and amazed, and
with what Horror and Astonishment should we reflect upon the woeful Change, and
upon our own desperate Folly that was the Cause of it? How dare we then talk of
repenting hereafter, who cannot command one Moment of future Time, nor promise
our selves one Day longer? when for all we know the hope of Eternity that is
now in our hands may be lost for ever, and drop through our fingers before to
Morrow Morning; and we that lie down this Night, and sleep securely in our
Sins, may before the next Twilight awake with Horror and Amazement in Hell?
Blessed God! that ever any reasonable Creatures should be so stupefied, to
venture a Soul and an everlasting Interest on so great an Uncertainty, and
rather than begin his Repentance to day, run the hazard of being eternally
miserable to morrow Morning! that he who will not trust his Gold one hour in
the Possession of a Thief, nor his Life one minute within the reach of a Lions
Paw, should abandon his Soul whole Months and Years together, to the Mercy of a
Danger great enough to distract all the Wits of Mankind, did they but fully
understand it! Let us therefore consider that the present Time only is in our
Power, and that as for the future, it is wholly in God's; so that while we
defer our Repentance to the future, we do as it were cast Lots for our Souls,
and venture our everlasting Hopes upon a Contingency that is not in our Power
to dispose of. For all we know, this may be the Evening of our Day of Trial;
and if it be, our Life and Eternity depends upon what we are now doing.
Wherefore it highly concerns us, as we regard our own Safety, wisely to manage
this last Stake, the winning or losing whereof, may prove our making or undoing.

3. Every Delay of our Repentance endangers the forfeiture of that Grace,
without the Assistance whereof, we can never repent to purpose. For we can no
more repent without God's Grace, than we can live without our Food. No man can
come to me, says our Savior, except the Father which has sent me draw him.
Joh. 6. 44. But since God has promised, that if we draw near to him, he will
draw near unto us. Jam. 4. 8. that if we work out our own salvation, he will
work in us to will, and to do. Philip. 2. 12. and that he will give the holy
Spirit unto every one that asks him. Luke 11. 13. Since I say, God has thus
intailed his Grace upon our Endeavors, Repentance is within our Power, so long
as that Grace is so; by which, if we do our Endeavor, we shall be enabled to
it. He who can repent by the Grace of God, is able to repent so long as he is
able to obtain his Grace to assist and concur with his Endeavors; but if he
once withdraw his Grace, and give us over to our own Hearts Lusts, then are we
no more able to repent by our own natural Strength and Power, than a Clod of
Earth is to mount up to Heaven, and fix it self a glorious Star in the
Firmament: But all the time we do delay our Repentance, we are wearying out the
Grace of God, which whilst we are running away from God and our Duty, follows
us with Importunities to return; but instead of complying with it, we still
defer to listen to its Solicitations, and put it off from time to time with
false and empty Promises, what can be expected but that after so many defeats
and disappointments it should at last abandon, us to our selves, and leave us
to the miserable Fate of our own Folly and Madness: and if once it does so,
farewell to all the Hopes of our Recovery. Consider therefore, O thou vain Man,
that say thou will repent hereafter; must thou command God to wait thy
leisure, or fasten his Grace with such adamantine Chains as that it should
never be able to get loose from thee? art thou sure it will be always at thy
Beck, or that notwithstanding thy long Provocations, it will be ready to come
in to thy aid whenever thou call for its Assistance? for by promising to
repent hereafter, thou do not only promise for thy self, but for the Grace of
God too, whose Assistance is as necessary to thy Repentance, as thy own
Endeavor; and methinks it is a strange piece of Confidence in thee, to promise
for that which thou have so much disobliged, and which upon that account thou
have so little reason to trust to. It Is true God has promised you his Grace,
but I beseech you, where has he promised that you shall have it when you
please? or that after all his Tenders, and your scornful Refusal of it, it
shall be still at your Choice whether you will at last accept of, or again
refuse it? for unless you can produce some such Promise as this, you can have
no reason to expect that God will still continue his Grace to you, how long
soever you refuse and reject it: And if he should at last deal by you, as you
have dealt by him, this will be the final Issue, because when he has called,
you have refused, when he has stretched out his hand, you have not regarded,
but have set all his Counsels at naught, and would not hearken to his
Importunities; therefore when you call, he will not answer, when you seek, he
will not be found; but will even laugh at your Necessity, and mock when your
last Extremity comes upon you. And should things be reduced once to this sad
Issue, woe be to us that ever we were born.

4. And lastly, Every Delay of our Repentance drives us nearer to the last
Extremity, which is that of a Deathbed Repentance; and how great a one that
is, I have already showed you at large, and given you evident Proof, that though
it be not absolutely desperate, yet it is most fearfully hazardous and
comfortless; and yet this is the common Center to which all our Delays do
naturally tend. We venture to sin on, because we know that if we do repent, God
will have Mercy upon us, and so we do resolve upon both; that is to sin now,
and to repent hereafter. And by this Train the Devil touls us on through all
the Stages of Sin and Life, till we come to our Deathbed, and then when our
Time and Strength is spent, we shall have all the Business of our Life to do,
and being reduced to this Extremity, what a woeful Condition shall we be in?
when we shall feel our selves departing into a long Eternity of Weal or Woe,
and have nothing to bear us company thither, but our Sins and Guilts, which, if
they be not cancelled in an instant, will consign us immediately to endless
Misery; and whether we look either within, without, or above us, shall be able
to see nothing but a black and dismal Cloud hanging over us, and Causes of Fear
surrounding us on every side; how will our Heart sink within us, and our Soul
quiver on our Lips to think how naked and harbourless she is left, having no
other Refuge to fly to, now the Avengers of Blood are at her heels, but only
that wronged and affronted Mercy which all her Life time she spurned and
trampled on? When we shall consider what a vast Work we have to do, how little
Time we have to do it in, how our own Strength is spent, and what little Reason
we have to expect that God should strengthen us by a Miracle; in what a Tumult
will our Souls be? how shall we quake and tremble to think whither we are
going? and what will become of us for ever? Surely if we die in our Wits, and
are not Atheists or Sots, it will be impossible for us to reflect on our selves
and the fearful Risque we are running, without extreme Horror and Amazement.
For we must be strangely stupefied, if when we perceive our selves upon the
Confines of Eternity, within a very few Moments of being Happy or Miserable for
ever, we do not awake from our Security; and if we do, the vastness of the Work
that lies upon our Hands, the number of the Guilts that will stare us in the
Face, and the little Time and Power we have to perform the one and expiate the
other, must needs put our guilty Consciences into a fearful Agony, and unchain,
and let loose all its Terrors upon us: And then how miserable will our
Condition be, when we shall look about for Comfort, and see nothing but God's
everlasting Threats ready to be fired and discharged upon us, and not one
Promise opening a Door of Hope, nor any Arm of Mercy held forth to catch us now
we are leaping down into Eternity; but Hell gaping for us as wide as our Grave,
and both ready to receive a part of us, and our selves ready to divide our
selves into those Two sad Habitations. O then shall we sigh and lament our
Folly, and curse our lingering Delays, and wish a Thousand and a Thousand Times
we had begun our Repentance sooner. This is the sad Extremity whereunto we are
driving in every Delay of our Repentance; and considering all these Things,
methinks these mighty Dangers whereunto our Delays expose us, should be enough
to frighten the most resolute Sinner into present purposes of Amendment. And O
would to God, that this might be the happy Effect of it! that Men at last would
be but so wise as to consider these things, how monstrously Wicked, how
shamefully Absurd, how fearfully Dangerous it is for them to put off their
Repentance; and that considering this they would be so kind to themselves as
now at last to betake themselves to the Discipline of a severe Repentance. This
I know is a Word that Men are extremely frighted at, they think if once they
betake themselves to Repentance, they must encounter with vast Difficulties,
and enter into a very dolorous and unpleasant Course of Life, which while they
can live merrily in their Sins, they are very loath to do. And indeed I cannot
deny, but after an habitual Course of Sin, our Entrance into a penitent Life,
will in all probability, be attended with a great deal of Sorrow and Disquiet,
but who can help this? it is you that have brought this Inconvenience on your
selves by deferring your Repentance so long; and assure your selves, the longer
you defer it, the more difficult it will be whenever you begin. But for God's
sake consider Sirs, which do you think will be more uneasy, to undergo the
Severities of Repentance for a Time, or Hell Fire for ever; to weep for your
Sins whilst you have Hope of Mercy, to contest against them whilst you have a
Prospect of Victory; or sigh and groan for them to all Eternity, without any
hope of Ease or Redemption; for whether you will or no, you must endure
Repentance or Hell; and therefore since there is no other remedy, at least be
persuaded to choose that which is most tolerable, and if you do so, I am sure
you must conclude, that it is infinitely easier to repent, than to be damned.
But yet it is plain, that Men do commonly fancy Repentance to be much more
grievous than it is; for could they once persuade themselves to resolve upon
the Work, and seriously to engage in it, they would find the greatest part of
the Trouble were over; for the main Difficulty of Repentance, lies in forming
our first Resolution; this indeed will exact great Consideration, and vigorous
Struggling with the wicked Habits and Inclinations of our own Natures; but when
we have so far overcome our selves, as to obtain a full and clear Consent and
Resolution, we have past the main brunt of our spiritual Warfare, and if we
have but the Courage to keep our Ground, shall soon be crowned with the Joys of
Victory, and that which seemed at first so frightful, and terrible to us, will
presently grow tolerable, and soon after easy, and after that by degrees so
pleasant and delightful, that we shall prefer it before all the Pleasures of
Sense, and feel our selves infinitely more blessed and happy in it, than ever
we were in the midst of the highest Ravishments of our sinful Delights. Come
then, my Brethren, let us stand no longer amusing our selves with the
Difficulties, but let us seriously consider the indispensible necessity of it,
the great Assistance God has promised us if we will speedily undertake it, and
the immense Rewards he proffers to encourage us to it, and let us never leave
pressing our selves with these Considerations, till we have obtained of our
selves a full and free consent to it, and wrought our Wills into a serious and
hearty Resolution. And when we have prevailed thus far, we have gotten over the
greatest Difficulty that lies between us and Heaven, and if we do but
vigorously pursue our Resolution, our Work will every day grow easier and
easier, and so at last it will be our Recreation, and we shall reap from it so
much Peace of Conscience, so much Joy in the Holy Ghost, such a calm and sweet
Enjoyment of our selves, and such a glorious Hope of a future blessed
Immortality, as will carry us with unspeakable Vigor through all the weary
Stages of our Duty, till we are arrived to our Journeys end, where all the
Sorrows of our Repentance shall be swallowed up in everlasting Joys and
Triumphs.

LUKE XXII. 42. Nevertheless, not my Will, but thine be done.
THESE Words are a Part of our Savior's Prayer in his Agony; in which his Soul
being at present under a mighty Contest with the Powers of Darkness, and under
a vigorous Apprehension of his approaching Passion on the Cross, expresses an
earnest, but yet natural and innocent Desire of Deliverance; Father, if thou be
willing, says he, remove this Cup from me. For his Humanity being now in a
great measure deprived of the Supports and comfortable Influence of his
Divinity, and left alone to grapple by its own single Strength, with the
powerful Malice of Men and Devils, and being under a piercing Sense of those
mighty Evils they intended against him, began to recoil and shrink, out of a
natural desire to preserve it self; but yet this natural desire being perfectly
under the Government of his Reason, and that as perfectly under the Government
of God, He does to this Effect address himself to God, Father, if it be thy
Will, remove this Cup away from me. I do not desire in the least to control or
cross thy blessed Will in any thing, no, rather than thou should suffer the
least Disappointment in thy blessed Intentions, I am ready to undergo the
utmost that the Malice of Men and Devils can inflict upon me; but alas! the
Evils that I feel and fear are so exceeding grievous unto Flesh and Blood, that
if it might be without Contradiction to thy Will, or Prejudice to thy gracious
Intentions to a sinful World, I cannot but earnestly desire that they might be
removed from me. But if there be any the least Competition between thy Designs
and my Desires, so that they do not fairly agree, and perfectly consist with
one another, whatsoever I endure, not my Will, but thine be done.

Behold here a most perfect Pattern of Submission to the Will of God, and that
under the most dismal and difficult Circumstances. When he plainly saw it was
the Will of his Father to expose him to the utmost Extremity of humane Misery,
to object his naked Breast to the utmost Malice of Men and Devils; when, by the
Force of a most powerful Instinct, his Nature recoiled at the Apprehension of
it, and would fain have been excused; then did he supplicate on his bended
Knees, that his Father would not listen to the innocent Language of his natural
Fears and Desires, but that he would fully execute his own severe and terrible
Will upon him; not my Will, O Father, i. e. not the Will of my natural Fear and
Desire of Self-preservation, but thy Will be done; though it be to inflict on
me the utmost Misery that a poor Innocent, as I am, can be exposed to. The
Words being thus explained, do naturally resolve themselves into this
Proposition,

That God's Choices for us, are much better than our own, and consequently,
that if it were in our Power to determine which of the Two should take Effect,
it would be very unreasonable not to choose what God has chose for us.

The Truth of which will evidently appear if we consider these Two Things:

1. That God does as really and heartily will what is Good for us, as we do for
our selves. 2. That he knows much better what is Good for us than we.
1. That God does as really and heartily will what is Good for us, as we do for
our selves; i. e. So long as we are proper Objects of his good Will, and have
not sinned our selves into an utter Incapacity of being beloved by him; for
then the Case quite alters, and that good Will which he formerly bore us,
converts into a severe Resolution of making us dreadful Examples to others,
that so when through our own Obstinacy and Incorrigibleness he can do no more
good upon us, he may do good to others by us, and warn them not to imitate our
Actions by the fearful Example of our Sufferings. But so long as there is any
Hope of doing good upon us, he declares himself as heartily inclined to do good
to us, as ever any Man was to do good to himself; for what mighty Designs has
he set on foot? what expensive Methods has he used to save us? in what
passionate Strains has he expressed his good Will toward us, and with what
restless Importunity does he court us to be happy? He swears by his own Life,
that he desires not our Ruin, but rather that we should return and live, and
solemnly professes, that he would have all men to be saved, and to come to the
Knowledge of the Truth. And when with all his Courtships and Addresses he
cannot prevail upon our Obstinacy, to dissuade us from ruining our selves, he
puts on the Passions of a mournful Friend, and with yearning Bowels laments our
fatal Folly; by all which tender Expressions he plainly declares, that he does
as heartily will our Welfare as we can do our own. But because a firm Belief of
this Principle is indispensibly necessary to a free Submission to his heavenly
Will, I shall endeavor briefly to demonstrate the Truth of it from these Four
Considerations.

1. That his Interest in us is much greater than ours in our selves.

2. That his own Self-love does as strongly incline him to will our Good, as
ours does to will our own.

3. That in concerning himself about us, he can have no other End to serve,
than what we have in being concerned for our selves.

4. That even that good Will that we bear to our selves, is only a Derivation
from, and Participation of that infinite good Will which he bears us.

1. That his Interest in us is much greater than ours in our selves. If we
believe him to be the Author of our Beings, we must acknowledge him to have a
most absolute and unalienable Propriety in us; that what we are, as well as
what we have, we hold from him who is the Head-Landlord and Supreme Proprietor
of all those Beings that are derived from him, even as Brooks and Rivulets owe
all their Streams to the Fountain from whence they flow. And can we imagine him
not to be greatly concerned for what he has so great an Interest in? or that
he who has so much greater Propriety in us, should have less Regard for us
than we have for our selves? Can it be thought that the great Father of Beings,
should be forgetful of his own Offspring? that he who has imprinted on all
other Parents such a tender Kindness toward their natural Issue, should be so
regardless of his own, as to expose them to a wide Wilderness, and leave them
there to shift for themselves? no, doubtless the mighty Interest he has in us
cannot but indear his Affections to us, and render him mightily concerned for
our welfare. Can the Mother forget her sucking Child, that she should not have
Compassion on the Son of her Womb? yea, they may forget, but I will not forget
thee says the Lord. Isai. 49. 14. For since every thing is naturally inclined
to love its own, we cannot but conclude that the God of Nature, from whom all
natural Inclinations spring, has in himself a most tender Regard for all that
Family of Beings, of which he is the Parent; especially considering

2. That his own Self-love does as strongly incline him to will our Good, as
ours does to will our own. For if he love himself as he cannot but do, being
infinitely lovely; he must necessarily love what is like him, and affect to
propagate his own Resemblance. But no miserable Thing can be like himself, who
is infinitely happy; and therefore he cannot love to make others miserable,
since in so doing, he must affect to produce what is contrary to himself, which
implies a plain Contradiction. For unless he love our Misery, he cannot be
supposed to desire it, because as I shall show you by and by, himself can never
be the better for it, and therefore if he desire it, it must be for its own
sake. But how is it possible that the same Being should love Contraries at the
same time; that he should at once take Delight in himself, and in what is most
unlike him, or, which is the same thing, that he should be pleased with his own
Happiness and with our Misery together. So that if he love himself who is
infinitely happy, his own Self-love must necessarily incline him to will the
Happiness of others; and unless our Happiness might be supposed to be
prejudicial to his, which is impossible, it would be an Expression of Hatred to
himself to wish ill to his Creatures. In his willing Misery in us, he would
manifest himself to be displeased with his own Happiness, and openly declare
that Misery was much more grateful to him; for how can he love Misery for it
self, as he must needs do, if he take Pleasure in ours, and at the same time
love himself who is so infinitely happy? This therefore we may build upon, with
as much Confidence, as upon any first Principle in Philosophy, that God has
the same Reason to will our Happiness, as we have to will our own; that as we
would be happy, because we love our selves; so because he loves himself, he
would have us be so. He loves that others should be like him, even as every
other Being does that loves; for what he loves in himself, he must love in
another, and that which he loves in another where it is, he must love to
propagate to another where it is not; and consequently, as he must love our
Happiness, because he loves his own, even so for the same Reason he must love
to make us happy*

3. That in concerning himself about us, he can have no other End to serve, but
what we have in being concerned for our selves* He is so infinitely happy in
himself, that he can neither conceive nor desire any Good for himself, beyond
what is contained within the Immensity of his own Being and Perfections; so
that now he can have no Self Ends to serve, because he does already enjoy all
possible Degrees of Perfection and Happiness; and so can desire nothing without
himself as an Addition to his own Beatitude, which is so infinite already that
it will admit of no Increase. From hence therefore we may be assured that he
can have no other Reason to concern himself about us, but only to do us Good,
for to do us Mischief cannot be his End, because he can do himself no Good by
it, his Happiness being already so complete, that it cannot possibly need our
Misery either to increase, or to serve as a Foil to it. It Is only Want and
Indigence that make one Being desire the Misery of another. If I desire to rob
another of his Happiness, it is to increase or to secure my own; if I desire to
make another miserable, it is either to preserve my self from being so, or to
procure my self that ill-natured Comfort of having a Companion in Misery. But
God by the boundless Happiness of his Nature, is infinitely raised above all
such mean Considerations, and therefore cannot have any Temptation in his
Nature to do any Thing but Good to his Creatures But does not the Scripture
tell us, that he does all things for his own Glory, and that he obtains this
End as well by punishing as by rewarding his Creatures? Very true, but then it
is to be considered, that the Glory he aims at, consists not in receiving of
any Good from us, but in doing and communicating of all Good to us: For
infinite Goodness can no otherwise be glorified than by its own Overflowings,
and free Communications, and it can no otherwise be glorified in the Punishment
of its Creatures, but only as it does Good by it; for should it punish without
good Reason, it would reproach and vilify it self; but if it does it for good
Reason, it must be because it is good either for it self or others: for it self
it cannot be; for how can an infinitely happy Being reap any Good from another
Misery? and therefore it must be for the good of others, either to reduce those
who are punished, or to warn others by their Example from running away from
their Duty and Happiness. So that to do Good, is the End of God's Punishment,
and because it is so, he is glorified by it; and considering that he is so
infinitely happy, that he can no ways serve himself by our Miseries, it is
impossible he should have any other End in concerning himself about us, but
only that great and God-like one of doing us good, and making us happy. For the
very Notion of an End includes Good; and therefore since the End of God's
Concern about us, cannot be his own Good, it must necessarily be ours.

4. And lastly, That even that good Will that we bear to our selves, is only a
Derivation from, and Participation of that infinite good Will which God bears
us. For it is plain, that our natural Instincts, and Propensions, must be
derived from the same Fountain with our Natures, and consequently that God is
the Author of both; and if so, then that unquenchable Self love, and Thirst
after Happiness, which is implanted in our Natures, must needs be derived from
him, and owe its Original to some overflowing Spring of Love and Benevolence in
his Bosom. For what should move him so to contrive the Frame of our Natures, as
that we cannot but love our selves and breath after our own Happiness, but only
his own good Will to us, and tender Care of our Happiness? What other End could
he propose to himself, in stamping this vehement Propension in our Natures,
only to excite us by it to be careful of our selves, and to pursue our own
Interests? Doubtless if he had not loved us more than we love our selves, he
would never have caused us to love our selves as we do, since he could have no
other aim in causing us to do so, but only to oblige us to befriend our selves,
and contribute all we are able to our own Welfare. And since it was out of mere
Love to us that he made us to love our selves, and our own self-love is nothing
else but a Ray and Participation of his Benevolence toward us, we may be sure
it is purer in the Fountain than it can be in the Channel, that it is much more
intense and vigorous in his Bosom than in our own. For as the natural Love of
all Parents toward their Offspring is a plain Instance of the indulgent Care
which the great Father of Beings has for all his Children, that he has
committed them in their Infancy to such tender Nurses as will be sure to take
care of them when they cannot provide for themselves; that he has not
entrusted them to the Compassion and good Nature of other Beings, to be
maintained by the Alms and Benevolence of their fellow Creatures, but has
taken security for their liberal Nature and Education from the inmost Bowels of
their Parents; so that vehement Propension of Self-love which God has
implanted in us is a most genuine Signature and Impression of his Benevolence
toward us, and shows how careful he was of us thus to take security of our
selves for our own Welfare, and to oblige us to be happy by the most tender and
vigorous Passion in our Natures. By all these considerations I think it is as
clear as the Sun that God does heartily loves us, and has as unfeigned a
Good Will for us, as we can have for our selves; so that unless we can suppose
that we are better able to choose for our selves than he, we have at least as
much Reason to acquiesce in his Choices for us as in our own. It is plain he is
as much our Friend as our selves, and therefore though what he wills and chooses
for us may in some particulars appear very harsh and severe, yet that his
Intention is good, and that he means as well toward us as we can toward our
selves; and therefore if in the Event it prove not as well for us as our own
contrary Will and Choice would have done, we may be sure that it was not want
of good Will to us, but for want of Skill to choose what was best for us. But
if it appear that he does not only wish as well to us as we do to our selves,
but also that he knows how to choose for us a great deal better than we, then
we have all the Reason in the world to acquiesce in his Choices how grievous
soever they may appear to us, and to join heartily with our Savior in this
excellent Petition, not our wills, O Father, but thy Will be done. Which brings
me to

2. The second general Head of discourse, that as God has as good a Will to us
as we have to our selves, so he knows much better what is Good for us than we.
And to prove the Truth of this it is sufficient that God infinitely exceeds us
in Knowledge and Understanding, he being Omniscient, and having all Things
before him in one entire View and Prospect, whereas we see but in part, and
know but in part, and are extremely shallow and superficial in our Conceptions
of those Things that lie before us, which must necessarily render us infinitely
less capable of judging what is Good for our selves than he. And this will more
plainly appear by particular Instances, of which I shall only produce these
five:

1. That we many times know only what is Good for our selves singly, but God
knows what is Good for us as we are Parts of the Whole, and in Conjunction with
it.

2. We many times know only what is Good for us with respect to such a
particular End, but God knows what is Good for us in the main.

3. We many times know only this or that to be Good for us singly and apart by
it self, but God knows whether it be Good for us in Conjunction with those
Concomitants and Consequents that are necessary to it.

4. We many times know only what is Good for us in respect to our present
Temper and Disposition, but God knows what is Good for us in Reference to our
constant and most abiding Disposition.

5. We many times know what is Good for us with respect to this present State
of Things, but God knows what is Good for us in Reference to our eternal
Condition. In all which Instances I doubt not to make it appear that God is
much fitter to choose for us, than we for our selves.

1. That we many times know only what is Good for our selves singly, but God
knows what is good for us as we are Parts of the Whole, and in Conjunction with
it. Man is naturally a sociable Creature, and as such can never be happy alone.
His Music is always best in Consort; when it consists of numerous Voices,
every one bears a Part with every one. And since our Nature is such, as that we
are not comparably so well pleased with solitary as with sociable Fruitions, it
is every single Man's Interest that his own private Good should not be separated
from the Good of the Whole; that it should not grow like a Wen by engrossing
the Nourishment that is due to all the other Parts, but rise and increase in
such just Proportions as is consistent with the Happiness of all the Rest: and
there is no man whatsoever that has the least Spark of Generosity in him, but
to contribute to a Public Good would joyfully submit to a great many private
Inconveniences, and would reckon his own personal Damage fairly compensated by
the Advantage that the Public receives by it. But so narrow and confined is
our Prospect of things, that in our private Choices we many times ignorantly
separate our own Interest from the Publick's, and choose that for our selves,
which, should we obtain, would prove very injurious to the Whole. We would fain
change our present Condition for some other which we have Reason to believe
would be much more advantageous to us; but should we obtain our Desire, it may
be the Public would be much more injured by it, than our selves could be
benefited. Perhaps we are fittest to do Good in our present Station, or, should
we remove, some unworthy Person may get in in our Room, or some Person that is
more worthy than our selves may be displaced by us; and by a thousand other
ways which we are not able to comprehend, our shifting of Places may so puzzle
and disorder the well-laid scene of Affairs, that had we foreseen it at first
we should much rather have chosen to keep where we are. Again, we lie under the
sense or Apprehension of some great Calamity, and doubtless if we might choose
for our selves we would immediately be delivered from it; but did we always
foresee how much Good others may reap from our Sufferings, how much our private
Infelicity may conduce to the Weal of the Public, I hope we should not be such
narrow-spirited Persons as for the sake of our present Ease to neglect so fair
an Opportunity of being public Benefactors to the World. But now God has such
an entire Prospect of all Things before him, that he plainly sees all the
little Clashings and Interferings of Men's private with the Public Good. And as
he knows that we cannot be happy alone, so he resolves that we shall not; for
he never wishes any Man's private Good separately from that of the Public, but
in one steady Drift he carries on the Interest of each single Part in
Conjunction with the Interest of the Whole. And hence in the Prosecution of
single Ends we see he is not always wont to proceed in the most direct and
compendious Way, but often times winds about in a large Circuit, in which he
infolds and takes in a thousand concurrent and subordinate Designs; and drives
them all at once before him in the Course and Series of his Providence. And
though in this general Drift of Things, the Concerns of particular Men are
sometimes set forwards, and sometimes backwards, in Pursuance of the main
Design; yet all at last conspires in the public Good, whereof each Particular
has a share. And therefore though for a public Good we some times suffer a
present Inconvenience, yet since we cannot be happy but in Society, it is much
better for us that we should be dammaged than the Public; because the
Happiness of each particular Member redounds from the Welfare of the whole
Society, and is necessarily involved in it: And did we but rightly understand
our own Interest, we should never esteem any Thing Good for our selves that is
a Nuisance to the Public, because whatsoever this suffers, I and every Man
suffer; and unless I could be happy alone, that can never be for my Interest in
particular that is against my Interest in common. Since therefore the Happiness
of every Part is included in that of the Whole, and consequently whatsoever
promotes the Public Good is beneficial to each particular Member; it hence
necessarily follows that God can choose much better for us than we. For whereas
generally our Foresight is limited within the narrow Horizon of our own
particular Concerns, by reason whereof we cannot many times avoid choosing
against the common Interest, God has the whole series of Things before him,
and so must necessarily see even from the Beginning to the End what is for the
public Interest and what not; and therefore since he who is sole Administrator
of the public Bank of humane Interest knows how to make the best Improvement
of it, it is doubtless much more advantageous for us that he should manage all
our particular Shares of it, then that we should reassume them into our own
Hands, and manage them separately by themselves: And tho under his Conduct and
Management we suffer some present Inconveniences, yet so long as we are sure of
this, that the Public Good requires it and is promoted by it, we have all the
Reason in the world to be satisfied. And this was the Case in the Text; the
Inconvenience which our blessed Lord did here so earnestly deprecate was
indispensibly necessary for the Commonweal of Men, in which himself had a large
Share, being a Member of the Corporation of Mankind; so that had God granted
his Desire, and excused him that bitter Cup he drank, not only Mankind in
general but himself in particular, as he was a Man, would have been very much
damnified by it; for he would have been deprived of those Felicities which he
now injoys in common with us as he is the Head of a glorious Church, whom he
redeemed and purchased with his Blood. He would have fallen short of that
Mediaterial Dignity to which he is now advanced, and lost the Satisfaction of
being the Author of our Happiness, and seeing the blessed Fruits of the Travail
of his Soul; by all which he has been abundantly compensated for those
momentary Sufferings he endured. So that in the Issue we see it was well for
him as well as for us that the Will of God took place, his own personal Share
in the common Happiness of Men being enough to recompense him a thousand Fold
for whatsoever he suffered to procure it. Upon this Account therefore it is
best that God should choose for us, because he always chooses what is Good for
us in conjunction with the Public, in the Prosperity whereof all our
particular Welfare is involved.

2. We many times only know what is Good for us with respect to such a
particular End, but God knows what is good for us in the main. The Generality
of Men we see are so rash and precipitant in the Pursuit of their particular
Ends, that they commonly overlook those Things that are of more general and
Catholic Concern to them, and run themselves upon a thousand Inconveniences
for the sake of such particular Goods as can never make them any reasonable
Amends. Thus in our worldly Affairs, how often do we endanger our main Interest
by snatching too greedily at some present Good? We think if we had it, it would
serve such a Purpose and conduce to such a desired End; but when we have it, it
proves a Mischief to us, and disappoints us of other Ends and Purposes which
are of much greater Weight and Moment to us: And I believe there is no Man that
has been but a diligent Observer of his own Affairs, but has found by
Experience, that many of those Things which for such or such Purposes he has
earnestly coveted, have proved in the main extremely prejudicial to him; that
either his Health or his Estate, his Peace or his Reputation, which are the
main Ingredients of our temporal Welfare, has been very much impaired by the
Acquisition of some of those Goods which he has most impatiently longed for.
And how often have we seen Men impoverished by those Pleasures, disquieted by
those Profits, made infamous by those Honors, and unhealthful by that Ease
which they have doated on, and pursued with the greatest Impatience? So fond
are we generally of our little particular Ends, that in the prosecution of them
we seldom consult our main Interest! we consider only that this or that Good
will serve this or that Purpose, and so we immediately let fly our Desires and
Endeavors after that, without ever inquiring whether it will not be more
prejudicial to us in general, than it can be beneficial in this or that
particular; in which Case if we had but our own Wills, we should many times
ruin our selves for Trifles, and sacrifice all the Happiness of our Lives to
the present gratification of some fond and unreasonable Desire. But now God in
the Conduct and Management of our Affairs considers our whole Case, and has
all our Circumstances together in his View, and so cannot but know whether this
or that particular Good be consistent with our Welfare in the general; and
whereas we, like Men in a Fever, do for our present Ease and Refreshment
oftentimes long most impatiently for what is most hurtful and injurious to us,
God, like a wise Physician, consults our future Health more than our present
Ease, and having an infallible Prospect of our whole Case and Circumstances,
suits all his Prescriptions to the Necessities of our Condition, and not to the
blind Impatiencies of our Appetites and Longings. He many times plainly sees
that what we desire would be our Bane; and therefore out of tender Mercy
chooses rather to deny us than to destroy us. That Patient would be accounted
very unreasonable that should fall out with his Physician for disturbing his
sleep when he is inclining to a Lethargy, or denying him Drink in a Fever or a
Dropsy; because though what he desires is good for those particular Ends of his
present Ease and Refreshment, yet it is apparently destructive to him in the
main. Thus doubtless it would have been very well for Joseph, as to many
particular Ends, not to have been sold by his Brethren, or imprisoned in Egypt,
and doubtless had it been left to his own Option, he would much rather have
chosen to continue at Home under the Care and Patronage of an indulgent Father;
but had he seen, as God did, from the first Link of the Chain of his Fate to
the last, and how inseparably his After-advancement was connected to his
present sufferings, in the Course and Series of Things; he would doubtless have
willingly chosen as God did for him, since though the contrary had been well for
him in some particulars, yet this was much better in the general.

3. We many times know only this or that to be good for us singly and apart by
it self, but God knows whether it be good for us in Conjunction with those
Concomitants and Consequents that in the Course of Things are necessary to it.
For the divine Providence, which runs through all Things, has disposed and
connected them into such a Series and Order, that there is no single Event or
Accident, (but what is purely miraculous) that depends not on the Whole, and
has innumerable Causes antecedent to it, innumerable Concurrences going hand
in hand with it, and innumerable Consequents attending it. But so narrow and
confined is our Prospect of Things, that we only see that part of their Series
and Order that is at present before us; and there are innumerable Things both
concomitant and consequent to every Event that are out of the sphere of our
Cognizance; by Reason of which it is impossible for us to make any infallible
judgment either of the good or evil of almost any Event that befalls us;
because. though we may be secure that such an Event singly and apart by it self
may be good or evil for us, yet for all we know, in the whole series of Things
there be such concomitant or consequent Events inseparable to it, as may quite
alter its Nature, and render that Evil which considered singly may be Good for
us; or that good, which considered singly may be evil. So that in our Choice of
Events we are necessitated for the most part to choose in the dark, because we
see so little of the whole Series of Things, and of the Circumstances wherewith
Events are accompanied and attended, that it is not in our Power to determine
which is good or which bad for us. We many times look on such an Event as
highly good for us and extremely desirable, and believe that if we could
compass it we should be extremely happy; but poor, short-sighted Creatures that
we are! we see neither the Company, nor the Train of it. If this Event does
befall us, according to the Series of Things, a thousand others must, and what
they will prove we are not able to prognosticate, and for all we know the
Mischief of them may abundantly outweigh the Benefit of this: and did we but
foresee all that goes along with and all that must follow it, we should be many
times most afraid of what we most eagerly desire. This therefore being our
Case, how extremely unfit are we to make Choices for our selves, since it is
almost an equal Lay whether what we choose will prove our Food or our Poison.
But God being the supreme Orderer and Disposer of Things, must needs have them
altogether entirely in his View; and having the first Link of the whole Chain
of Causes in his own Hands cannot but plainly see all the intermediate ones
from the Beginning to the End. And since his Power is the Cause not only of all
actual Events but even of the Possibility of those that shall never be actual,
he must needs discern the utmost Issues of every possible as well as actual
Event, and see the remotest Effects and Consequents that are in the Wombs of
all actual and possible Causes and Principles; and having all Things that are,
or that may be in his View, he does not only see what is good or hurtful to us,
but what would be so if it were actual and existing. So that He needs not try
Experiments upon us to know what is beneficial or injurious to us, because the
Operation and Consequence of every possible Event is as obvious to his
all-comprehending Knowledge before as after it is befallen us. And hence it is
impossible for him to be mistaken in his Choices; because he knows as well
before hand what Things would be if they were, as what they are when they
actually exist. And though we may sometimes pervert the Natures of Things by our
Abuse of them, and make that Evil to us which is really Good; yet God cannot be
mistaken so as to prescribe us for Physic what is in its own Nature Poison;
and consequently if he love us but as well as we love our selves, as I have
demonstrated he does, he must needs choose better for us than we; because he
sees the utmost Consequents of all that does or can befall us, and so cannot be
imposed on by shows and false Appearances as we often times are. And of this I
shall only give you one Instance, which is that of good old Jacob when he lost
his Son Joseph, which we plainly see by the Sorrow he expressed at it was an
Accident that happened sore against his Will, and which he would have gladly
prevented had he been but aware of it. But it is plain the good Man saw but a
little Way into the Series of Things; he saw his Loss, but he saw not the
Issues of it, for doubtless had he beheld that Train of happy Consequents that
was chained and annexed to it, how it tended not only to Joseph's Advancement
but to the Preservation of himself and his Family from the ensuing Famine, he
would doubtless have been more a Friend to himself and a Father to his Family
than to have countervoted God in his Choice and Election for him. But it was
well for Jacob that God saw farther into the Consequents of Things than he; for
if he had not, not only Joseph had missed of his Preferment, but himself and
all his Family had been in a great deal of Danger of perishing in the Famine. So
that when all is done, you see the wisest Course we can take is to resign up
our selves into the Hands of God, who seeing the utmost Issues and Consequents
of Things can never be mistaken in choosing what is best for us.

4. We many times know only what is Good for us with respect to our present
Temper and Disposition, but God knows what is good for us in Reference to our
constant and most abiding Condition. We are a Sort of Creatures that are
extremely fickle and immutable, our Humors change upon every new Occasion, and
our Desires, like the Weather-cocks look contrary Ways upon every contrary
Wind; now we are of one Mind, and by and by of another: this seems to us now,
and anon the quite contrary, and often times in the same Hour we are several
Sorts of Men. But still we choose according to our present Temper, and so still
as this alters, our later Choices thwart and run a Tilt at our former. So that
should every Thing happen to us that we desire and wish for, we should be the
most miserable Creatures in the World, since what we choose in this Hour we
should reject in the next, and what we longed for to Day we should be sick of
to Morrow. And since no Man certainly knows now what mind he shall be of anon,
for all that he can tell, that which is most agreeable to him now may be most
disagreeable to him then, and if he should change his present Mind, as it is
very likely he may, he will immediately unwish what he now wishes for, and
dearly repent of what he most heartily chooses. How then is it possible that we
should choose well and wisely for our selves, all whose Choices do depend on a
Temper that is so everlastingly fickle and variable? But now God, who foresees
what our most constant, lasting, and durable Temper will be, is much better
able to adapt Events to it, and to contrive all our Circumstances into a fair
Accommodation with it; and though it is impossible but he must sometimes cross
us, because our Humors do so vary, and we do so often cross and contradict our
selves; yet knowing best what our standing and permanent Temper will be, he
must needs know best also what will be most constantly convenient for us and
agreeable to us. For if he be cordially our Friend, as it is apparent he is, he
will not so much consult the Gratification of our peevish, fickle, and
unconstant Humors, as of our most permanent Temper and Disposition; and if he
know much better than we what our most permanent Temper and Disposition will
be, as it is apparent he does, he must needs be much abler to suit and
accommodate it with convenient Events and Circumstances. Of this you have a
remarkable Instance in the Method of Gods conducting Israel out of Egypt into
Canaan. Doubtless had They had their own Choice, they would have been
immediately translated from their miserable Bondage into that happy Land; but
God knew their standing Temper better than they did their own; he saw they were
a stupid, stubborn, and untractable People, and as yet wholly incapable of such
a propitious Change, and that if he had conducted them into Canaan directly and
in a Moment, they would have presently forgot their Benefactor, and let loose
themselves to all Licentiousness and Wickedness; which must have naturally
shortened their Prosperity and hastened it into an untimely Ruin: And therefore
God saw it necessary to continue them some time longer in Egypt, that so by his
mighty Works there he might awaken their stupid Minds into an awful Sense of
his Majesty and Power. And when by his outstretched Arm he had brought them out
of Egypt, he made them wander about Forty Years in the Wilderness; whereas had
he led them directly on, a very few Days Marches would have brought them into
Canaan. But he considered their stubborn Temper which was not yet capable to
bear a prosperous Condition, till it was thoroughly disciplined for it in the
School of Affliction; till it was broken, and tamed, and civilized, and
rendered more tractable and obsequious. And though in thus Dealing with them, he
acted quite contrary to their present Humor and Desires, yet did he act most
advantageously for them, considering their standing Genius and Temper; for had
he transmitted them into Canaan with all those barbarous Conditions that they
brought out of Egypt, their Prosperity would have only heightened their
Insolence and hastened their Ruin: And accordingly Deuter. 8. Moses tells them
at large, that all Gods Severities to them in the Wilderness were to dispose
them for the happy condition of Canaan; to prove and polish them, to break and
humble their untractable Spirits, and do them good in the latter End; as you
may see verse 2, 3, 5, 16. And if God choose to do what is best for us with
respect to our standing Temper and Disposition, we have no reason to complain
that he sometimes crosses our more fickle and variable Humors and Fancies.

5. And lastly, We many times know only what is Good for us with respect to
this present State of Things, but God knows what is Good for us in reference to
our eternal Condition. For we being a Sort of Creatures that are born to live
for ever in eternal Weal or Woe, it is really a Matter of very small Moment to
us whether we are happy or miserable here; it is no more than a short Nights
Dream of Pain or Pleasure to a Man that has fourscore or a hundred years to
consume in Delights or Torments: and when we awake in Eternity all that is past
will seem a Dream to us in the Presence of those never ending Ages of Joy or
Misery before us. But yet so fond are we generally of the present, that we most
commonly choose without any Regard to the future. In our Choice of Objects we
seldom project beyond our present Pleasure; if the Thing will but please us
now, we rarely trouble our Heads to inquire what Influence it may have on our
eternal Pleasure or Pain; yea, and many times if we should, it would be to no
purpose; because in most of those Goods we choose and covet there are a
thousand Snares we cannot discern, as well as a thousand Advantages which we
are not aware of. In those Evils and Calamities which we run away from, we are
not able to foresee how many Ways our souls may be endangered by those outward
Goods we covet, nor yet how many spiritual Blessings those outward Evils may be
pregnant with at which we are so startled and affrighted: so that in most of
our Choices we can look no farther than our present Convenience, but what
Effect they may have upon our everlasting Fate we can never certainly know till
the Event has determined it. Thus in this great Lottery of Goods and Evils we
short-sighted Creatures are fain to choose at a Venture, and till the Event
has determined what our Choices are, we know not whether they are Blanks or
Prizes. So that if we always had what we choose, God only knows the Mischief
that would follow upon it; for to be sure every Man would choose to be
prosperous, and if every Man were so, how many Thousands would perish for ever
for want of the saving Remedy of Affliction, which is as indespensibly
necessary to the reclaiming of some Persons and putting them into a Capacity of
Happiness, as Food is to satisfy our Hunger, or Nourishment to sustain our
Lives. Lord! what miserable Creatures then should we be, should thou be so
regardless of us as to allow us our Wills, who having so small a Prospect
beyond this State of Things should many times for the sake of a present
Convenience choose what might occasion our eternal Woe? But God being our best
Friend must needs be supposed to intend our main Interest, which being lodged
in our eternal State, he must needs be much more concerned about than about our
Happiness and Conveniences in this present Condition; nor indeed would he be
our Friend should he advance our present Interests to the Prejudice of our
Souls and immortal Concerns. So that if he love us, as we are most sure he
does, the main Drift and Design of his Providence over us must be to secure our
Happiness in the World to come; and when this cannot be secured but by the
Damage of our earthly Enjoyments, it is Mercy and Kindness to us to fling that
Lumber overboard to save our precious and immortal Freight. But he having a
most perfect Intuition of the inmost Nature and utmost Consequents of Things,
cannot but discern all those Stops and Turnings where our temporal and eternal
Interests do clash and interfere with one another; and having a perfect Insight
of all their Competitions, where the one cannot be advanced without the
Depression of the other, he must needs know infinitely better than we how to
prefer our main Interest, and to choose what is best for us. For he knowing
best what our Temper is, and what the Consequents of things are cannot be
ignorant of what is best for us and most conducive to our eternal Interest;
whether Prosperity or Adversity be safest for our Souls, and most for the
Security of our Virtue and Innocence; and knowing this he can so accomodate all
Events to our spiritual Necessities, as that they shall all work together for
our eternal Good. And if at any time he sees it necessary for our spiritual
Good to instruct us by Rods, or to discipline us by Affliction, it is infinite
Mercy in him to cross our blind Wills by interrupting our beloved Ease and
Prosperity. And if we saw but what he sees when he corrects and chastises us,
and knew the Reasons of his Actions; we should doubtless beseech him to do as
he does, and whilst we were smarting under his Lashes, we should be adoring his
Goodness for making such wise Provision for our Welfare. Thus when David was
hunted like a Partridge on the Mountains by those successive Afflictions which
God let fly at him, he doubtless concluded himself to be very severely dealt
with, and would God but have allowed him to choose his own Fate, he would much
rather have chosen to have lived in an uninterrupted Calm of Prosperity, than
to be exposed, as he was, to the incessant Storms of an adverse Fortune. But
when Experience had better instructed him what were the Reasons of God's
Actions, how necessary they were to correct his Follies, and curb the
Extravagancies of his Nature; he was then plainly convinced that God had dealt
much better by him, than he would have dealt by himself, and was forced to
acknowledge that it was well for him that he was afflicted; for before I was
afflicted, says he, I went astray; But now I have kept thy Commandments. Psalm.
119. 67.

So that by all these Instances you plainly see that God can choose much better
for us than we for our selves, and therefore if to this you add what has been
so largely proved, that he is as heartily our Friend as we can be our own, it
will from hence necessarily follow that it is much better for us, that his Will
concerning us should take Effect, than any contrary Will or Desire of our own.

What then remains, but that with all Cheerfulness and Alacrity we resign up
our selves into the Hands of God, and submit all our Choices and Desires to his
heavenly Will; who having as unfeigned an Affection for us, as we can have for
our selves, and a much better Prospect of our Affairs than we, must needs
manage our Concerns to much greater Advantage than it is possible for us to do.
Why then should we murmr and repine at any thing that befalls us? are we
wiser than God? no; or can we pretend to be more careful of our Interest than
he is? neither. In the Name of Goodness, what would we be at then? Would we
have him resign up our Concerns to ourselves, and not intermeddle any farther
in our Affairs? God forbid, that either he should have so little Regard of us,
or that we should be such Traitors to our own Interest. For on this side Hell I
know nothing more formidable than for God to let us alone, and give us up to
our own Wills and Desires. And if I should hear him thus bespeaking me from the
Battlements of Heaven, O foolish Creature, since what I do will not please
thee, and thou art so dissatisfied with my Conduct and Management, from
henceforth I will cross thy Desires no more, but let the Event prove good or
bad, I will comply with thy Choices, and order all things to happen to thee
according to thy own Will: I think I should look on my self as the most forlorn
and abandoned Wretch on this side Hell, as one utterly excluded from the
greatest Blessing that belongs to a Creature; and if I had any Hope of his
Reacceptance, I would on my bended Knees resign back my self, and all that
concerns me into his Hands again. I would beseech him above all things not to
leave me to my self, not to throw me from his Care, or discharge me from his
Conduct; and if I could prevail with him to take me again into his Care and
Protection. I would promise never to repine against him more, but cheerfully
submit to his heavenly Will how severely soever he should think good to deal
with me. And this not only I, but every Man else would do, that truly loves
himself, and understands his own Interest, for where can our Concerns be better
or safer lodged, than in the Hands of that infinite Wisdom that knows what is
best for us, and that infinite Goodness that wills what it knows best, and of
that infinite Power that does what it wills? Why then should any Man be
displeased that his Affairs are not managed his own way, when we are so sure of
this, that they are managed by One that has much more Skill to manage them
than we; and One that having the same Love for us that we have for our selves,
will be sure to manage them to the best Advantage? And since there is the same
Benevolence toward us in God's Will, that there is in ours toward our selves,
how much better is it for us that his should take Effect that is guided by such
an infallible Wisdom, than ours that has nothing to conduct and stear it but a
blind Sense, or at best, a short-sighted Reason. Wherefore though our Affairs go
never so contrary to our Wills in this present state of Things, yet this we may
build upon, that it is best that Things should be as God will have them. And as
when we are grown up to the Age of Men, we thank our Parents for those loving
Severities they Exercised toward us when we were Children, and not able to
govern our selves; because then we see, that if they had let us have our
Childish Wills, and given the Reins to our wild Passions and Appetites, we
should in all Probability have undone our selves: so when we come to our full
Stature in Christ, and are grown up into a State of Perfection, then we shall
see Reason to admire and praise the Goodness of God for those merciful Denials
and kind Severities, upon the Account of which we now murmr and repine
against him; and be fully convinced that it was happy for us, that we were not
suffered to be our own Carvers, but had all our Allowances carved out to us by
the wise and gracious Providence of our heavenly Father. Whenever therefore
we are crossed by his Providence in any of our Desires, let us but consider how
unfeignedly he loves us, and how much more fit he is to choose for us than we,
and then we shall see infinite Reason to acquiesce in his Providence, and to
join with our Savior in this excellent Prayer, Father, not our Wills, but thy
Will be done.

MATTHEW XVI. 24. Then said Jesus unto his Disciples, If any man will come
after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me.
IN the 21. Verse our Savior declares to his Disciples, that it was necessary
for him to go up to Jerusalem, and there to suffer many things, and to be
killed, and be raised again the third Day. Upon which St. Peter rebukes him v.
22. saying, be it far from thee, or as it may be rendered, be propitious to thy
self; this shall not be unto thee. But Jesus considering that this was the Work
he came into the World for, tartly rebukes him, get thee behind me, Satan, thou
art an Offense unto me; for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but
those that be of Men. i. e. thou talk as if thou did not yet understand
what God has foretold of me, viz. that I shall be advanced to my Kingdom by my
Sufferings, and as if thou wer'st merely guided by Rules of humane Policy;
according to which, to expose ones self to Calamities and Death, is a very odd
way to Glory and Empire. But I tell thee, Peter, that it is not only certain
that I must suffer in order to my Advancement, but that those also that will
come after me, must deny themselves, and take up their Cross and follow me. In
the management of which Words, I shall endeavor these Three Things;

1. To show you what is here meant by denying our selves. 2. What abundant
Cause and Reason there is for it. 3. How absolutely necessary it is to our
eternal Happiness.
1. What is here meant by denying our selves. In general, by our selves here we
are not to understand our Nature, considered as it is the Creature and
Workmanship of God; for God has endowed us with rational Faculties, and
stamped immutable Principles of Reason upon our Minds; which Principles we are
so far from being obliged to renounce, that they are the fundamental Laws of
our Nature, by which we ought to regulate all our Motions and Actions. By our
selves therefore we are to understand our sinful selves, or our corrupt Nature
as it is under the Power and Dominion of wicked Principles and Inclinations;
for so our selves does in Scripture many times denote our sinful and corrupt
selves. And so 2 Timothy 3. 2. it is made a Character of bad Men, that they should
be lovers of their own selves; whereas in strictness to love our selves is so
far from being a Fault, that it is a necessary Instinct of Nature, and the Root
and Principle of our Virtue. By loving our own selves, therefore must be here
meant, being indulgent to the vicious Inclinations of our Nature, as he
explains himself in the following Words, being Covetous, Boasters, Proud,
Blasphemers, etc. And accordingly Christ is said to have died for all, that
they which live, should not henceforth live unto themselves; i. e. to their
corrupt Principles and Inclinations; but unto him which died for them 2 Cor. 5.
15. By our selves therefore here we are to understand every thing in us that is
opposite to God, every Motion and Inclination of our Nature that stands in
Competition with his Will, and does any way contend with his Authority. For the
Soul of Man is a Throne to which God and its corrupt Nature are Rivals; God
claims it by a natural and essential Right, as he is the Sovereign of Beings,
and the Lord of the Creation; Corrupt Nature claims it without any Pretense of
Right, but like a barefaced Usurper derives its Propriety from its Possession,
and will rule, because it will, and because it has got Strength and Interest
enough to support its Dominion. So that to deny our selves, is to renounce our
corrupt Nature, and to refuse to be governed by it, and wholly to resign up our
selves to the Government of God; to abandon those evil Inclinations which are
God's Competitors in us, and would countermand his Will, and usurp his
Dominion. In a Word, to deny our selves, is to give away our selves from our
selves to God; to put all our Powers of Action out of our own Disposal into
God's, and not to suffer any Desire or Inclination of our own to take Place of
his Will, or prevail against his Authority. And therefore as they are said to
deny God who reject his Authority in Compliance with the corrupt Inclinations
of their Nature, Tit. 1. 16. so they may be truly said to deny themselves, who
refuse to gratify those their vicious Inclinations in Compliance with the Will
of God. In short therefore, to deny our selves, is to prefer God's Will before
our own, to sacrifice our Inclinations to our Duty. and in all Competitions
between him and our Carnal Interests and Affections to take his Part, and
follow his Command and Directions.

2. I proceed to the Second Thing proposed, which is to show you what abundant
Reason there is for this Duty; and this will evidently appear if we consider
seriously how much more advantageous it is in all respects, for Men to be (...)
by God, than by themselves; to (...) his Will, and comply with his Pleasure,
rather than give up our selves to the Government of his Rival, viz. the
Appetites and Inclinations of our own corrupt Nature: which will evidently
appear in these following Particulars.

1. By thus denying our own Will in Compliance with the Will of God, we shall
choose and act with much more Ease and Freedom.

2. We shall choose and act with much more Evenness and Consistency.

3. We shall choose and act with much more Peace and Satisfaction.

4. We shall choose and act with much more Prudence and Conduct.

5. We shall choose and act with much more Security of the Event.

1. By denying our own Will to comply with God's, we shall choose and act with
much more Ease and Freedom. He that makes his own Will his Law, is upon every
new Occasion put upon new Deliberations, and upon every Change of Circumstances
is fain to change his Will, and to consult new Choices and Resolutions; in
debating of which, he is commonly so mazed and bewildered with cross Thoughts,
and opposite Counsels and Deliberations, that he hardly knows which way to
determine himself, and is more at a loss what to resolve upon, than how to
execute his Resolution. And being thus clogged and encumbered in the whole
Course of his Motion, how is it possible he should act with any Ease and
Freedom? But now when once a Man has renounced his own Will, and entirely
submitted himself to the Direction of God's, he is free from this Toil and
Encumbrance. For the Will of God as to all the material Parts of our Duty is so
plainly revealed, that an honest Mind with little Enquiry may be soon informed,
and satisfied about it; and when once it is so, all its Choices are already
determined, so far as they are concerned in the Matter of its Duty; for God's
Will being his, he no sooner knows that, but he rests in it immediately with a
free Assent, and uncontrouled Approbation, and whatsoever the Event be, he is
fixed to one steady Course of Motion, being resolved once for all, what ever
happens, to do as God would have him. So that when once a Man has entirely
denied himself, and put himself out of his own Disposal into God's, God chooses
for him, and thereby frees him from all the Trouble of doubting, and
deliberating, and disputing pro and con, of being distracted between contrary
Reasons, and bandied to and fro by cross and opposite Importunities. For now
his Soul acquiescing in God, as in its proper Place and Element, does no more
dispute, no longer waver between Two Load-stones, but being unison with God,
resounds and eccho's to his Will, and freely follows him without deliberation.

2. By denying our own Will to comply with God's, we shall choose and act with
more Evenness and Consistency. For so long as Men live in Subjection to the
Principles and Inclinations of their corrupt Nature, it is impossible they
should act evenly and consistently with themselves; for our corrupt Nature is
wholly governed by the Goods and Evils that are without us, and without our
Power and Disposal; by Gain and Loss, by Ease and Pain, by Applause and
Disgrace; and therefore all its Pleasures and Displeasures must be as Casual
and Contingent as the Goods and Evils are from whence they do arise. And whilst
we are governed by such casual Things as these, we are not our own Men, but do
live in Subjection to a foraign Power, and must be what these Things that
govern us will have us; we must turn as the Wind blows, and like Water take our
Form from the Vessels we are poured into. And while the Passions and Appetites
that overrule us are thus overruled by the Chances and Contingencies without
us, we must of necessity be as various, as fickle, and as multiform as they; we
must put on as many Humors as Fortune does Countenances, and shift our
Pleasures and Displeasures upon every Turn of her Wheel; in a Word, we must be
as various, inconsistent, and contradictory to our selves, as the Chances and
Accidents are that do befall us. Now what a wretched State is this, for a Man
to be never the same, but be continually wreathing and distorting his Humor
into all the antic Figures of his outward Condition, which change and vary
almost every Moment? Doubtless that Man will find enough to do, that shall
undertake to make Faces after an Ape, but he will find a great deal more that
will needs be aping an inconstant Fortune through all its Grimaces and Changes
of Countenance.

But now he that has thoroughly learned to deny himself, and to submit entirely
to the Government of God, is all of a Piece, and throughout even and constant
with himself. He is for the main, the same Man when he loses as when he gains,
when he is reproached, as when he is applauded; and the reason is, because he
governs himself not by the uncertain Contingencies that are without him, but by
the immutable Will that is above him; and while he does so, he knows that his
Happiness is as much above the reach of the impotent Malice of Fortune and Men,
as the Moon is above the Noise of those impertinent Curs that sit yelping and
barking at her from below. And being under the Command of one Rule, which is
the Will of God, and one End which is the Enjoyment of God, he goes evenly on
in a calm and composed Current of Action through all the Changes and
Vicissitudes without him; and all his Motions and Designs, Choices and
Prosecutions continue as uniform and consistent with themselves in the midst of
the various Contingencies of this World as the Sovereign Will is that commands
and determins them.

3. By denying our own Will to comply with Gods, we shall choose and act with
much more Peace and Satisfaction. So long as a Man governs himself by the
Appetites and Inclinations of his corrupt Nature, it is impossible he should
ever be satisfied with himself; for besides that his own Reason will reproach
and upbraid him with the natural Filthiness and Turpitude of his Actions, and
represent them to himself as shameful and inglorious; besides which, I say his
own Conscience will be ever and anon vexing and plaguing him with anxious and
unquiet Thoughts and Reflections. For God has imprinted a Dread of his own
Power and Majesty so deep upon our Natures, that with all our Arts we are not
able to deface and obliterate it; and though for some time perhaps we may
suppress and stupifie it, yet in despite of our selves, it will first or last
return again upon us, and avenge the Affronts and Violences we have offered it.
Whilst therefore a Man sides with his corrupt Nature against God, it is
impossible he should be thoroughly satisfied with himself; for either his Reason
will be upbraiding him with the filthiness of his Actions, or his Conscience
will be alarming him with the Vengeance that is due to them.

But when once a Man has thoroughly denied his own Will and Affections, and
entirely resigned up himself to the Government of God, he will be able to
produce God's own Will and Command for the Warrant of his Choices and Actions;
and this will effectually discharge him at the Tribunals of his Reason and
Conscience. For why should our Reason shame, or our Conscience terrify us, so
long as we choose and act in Subordination to God? for so long as we do thus,
our Will and Actions are his, and being clothed in the Livery of his
Authority, are thereby sufficiently protected both from Shame and Fear. For why
should I be ashamed to do as God wills me, whom I know to be the Standard of
all Perfection? or why should I be afraid to do as God wills me, whose Will is
so entirely righteous and good, that I am sure it can never be displeasing to
his Nature? Whilst therefore I choose and act in Submission to God, what should
hinder me from being as courageous as Truth, and as confident as Innocence it
self? for so long my Conscience must not only acquit me, but reverence me. So
that now my Soul which heretofore lived in Thunders, and Lightnings, and
Storms, will dwell above in a serene Ether, and there breath nothing but calm
and gentle Thoughts; and instead of those uneasy Reflections that were wont to
disturb my pleasant Scenes of Mirth, I shall be continually entertained with
the silent Melodies of a clear Conscience, and crowned with the Applauses of my
own Mind.

4. By denying our own Will to comply with God's, we shall choose and act with
much more Prudence and Conduct. Did we understand either God or our selves, we
could not but be sensible that it is much more for our Interest to be governed
by his Will, than by our own; for though there is no doubt, but we wish well to
our selves, and would not wilfully prejudice our own Interest: yet it is to be
considered, that there is the same Benevolence toward us in God's Will;
besides which, God's Will has an infinite Wisdom to stear by, which sees
through all the Intreigues of our Interest, and has an entire Prospect of
whatsoever can hinder or advance it. Whereas our Wills are generally guided
either by a blind Sense, or by a short-sighted Reason that many times mistakes
our Interest, and directs us to Rocks instead of Harbors. And when the
Disadvantage on this side is so great and apparent, how can we imagine our
selves so safe under the Government of our own Wills, as we are under the
Government of God's? He would have us do this? and we would do the quite
contrary; and yet we acknowledge his Will is as kind and benign to us, as ours
is to our selves. Why then, which of the Two Wills do we think is the Wisest?
God's sure we will all acknowledge. Will then, is it not much safer for us to
take the Sun for our Guide, than to grope by the twinkling Light of a
Glowworm? While we follow our own Will, every Step, for all we know, may
plunge us into Bogs and Quagmires; but while we follow God's, we choose as
wisely for our selves, as an infinite Wisdom can direct us. So that what our
Will chooses may be good for us, but what his Will chooses must be so; and
therefore to be sure when ever we choose contrary to him, we choose against our
own Interest. I am as confident of this, as of any Principle in Nature and
Religion, that whatsoever God commands me to do, he must certainly know that it
is for my Good, and that is the Reason why he commands it; and if it be, then
this I am equally sure of, that whenever I act contrary to his Command, I run
from a certain Benefit, to a certain Mischief. But while I submit my Will to
God's, I am guided by God's Wisdom, and in every genuine Act of Obedience, I am
as infallible as Omniscience it self. Whilst therefore I am in the Exercise of
my Duty, I am sure I am safe; because I am under the Direction of a Will that
can never be misled, and so can never mislead me. And had any Thing he commands
been hurtful to me, I know he is so good that he would never have enjoined it;
yea, had any Thing been but indifferent to me, I know he is so wise that he
would never have concerned himself or me about it. And if he has commanded me
nothing that is either hurtful or indifferent to me, it is doubtless richly
worth my while to obey him even in the smallest and most inconsiderable
Instances.

What a mighty Advantage therefore have those happy Persons who have entirely
renounced their own Wills, and submitted themselves to Gods? for whilst others,
poor Wretches! do grope about under the Conduct of their own blind Wills, and
do they know not what, and go they know not whither themselves, but live by
Chance and act at Random; They are conducted in all their Choices and Actions
by an all-wise Will that never fails to measure their Actions by the best
Rules, and point them to the best Ends. So that while they move by the
Directions of that heavenly Guide, they are sure of their Ends, and do know
infallibly before hand, that all their Choices and Actions shall finally
conspire in their own Happiness.

5. And lastly, By denying our own Wills, to comply with God's, we shall choose
and act with much more security of the Event. One of the great Causes why Men's
Minds are so unquiet and anxious, is, that they are not able to discover the
Events of their own Designs and Actions, and it is this that makes them so
doubtful and tremulous in their Motions, and Causes them to act with so much
Caution and Anxiety; because they are not able to pry into those hidden Events
that lurk in the Womb of their Designs. Now while Men give up themselves to
follow the Inclinations of their own corrupt Nature, they cannot but be
fearful of ill Consequents, especially when they consider, that the
Consequents of their Actions are in the hands of God, against whom they are in
Rebellion. For our Understanding being our leading Faculty, and the Eye that is
to direct our Practice, it is impossible that whilst that does either
disapprove or doubt of our Actions, we should ever be able to act with
Steadiness, and Assurance. For while a Man acts with a misgiving Mind, and that
which should be the Guide of his Actions is dissatisfied with his Way, he walks
like a benighted Traveller in a dangerous Road, and is fain to feel out his
Steps, and tread cautiously, lest he should stumble into a Bog, or a Precipice.
Whilst therefore a Man knows that his Actions are displeasing to God, and
considers that the Events of them are in God's hands, he must be very
unreasonable if he expect to be blessed, and prospered in them; he must either
conclude, that God's Displeasure is nothing but a dead and ineffectual Passion,
or that his way of expressing it, is by Smiles and Endearments. So that whilst
we take part with our corrupt Nature against God, we can never have any
rational Security of the Events of our Actions, but must see abundant Cause, if
we do not wilfully shut our Eyes, to be afraid of every Thing that happens to
us; because nothing can happen to us, but by his Disposal whom we daily incense
and provoke by our Actions.

But now he who has sincerely resigned up himself to God, knows enough of the
Events of his own Actions to set his Heart at Rest, and keep his Mind in a
quiet Enjoyment of it self; for he acts with the full Consent and Approbation
of his Mind, and has no by-ways from the Road of his Reason and Conscience;
but keeping straight forwards, as he does in the plain Tracts of eternal
Goodness, he treads firmly and boldly, being secure of the Ground he goes upon,
and is neither ashamed nor afraid of his own Actions; which being such as his
best and purest Reason approves, have the cheerful Euges and Applauses of his
Conscience continually ecchoing and resounding after them. And when a Man is
well satisfied that his Ways are pleasing to God, he may cheerfully expect,
that the End and Events of them will be blessed and prosperous; he may build
upon it, that God will first or last express the Pleasure he takes in his
Actions, by crowning them with a happy Success, and that how grievous soever
any present Event of his righteous Actions may be, yet there is a great deal of
Righteousness in it; because it proceeds from the righteous Lord who loves
Righteousness; and that in the winding up of the Bottom, that which now seems
most grievous, will be found most beneficial to him. For suppose I had an
infallible Physician, whom I know to be my Friend, constantly attending on me,
and ordering my Diet, my Physic, and my Exercise; how securely should I live,
and how cheerfully should I follow all his Rules and Prescriptions! should he
order me a course or a distastful Diet, I should thus conclude with my self;
well, I am sure this is for my Health, and how nauseous soever it be at
present, I know I shall be the better for it as long as I live; and this would
render it very grateful and palatable. Should he prescribe a strong and painful
Purgative; I should thus conclude, well, this is to remove or prevent a Disease
that will be much more painful than all the present Gripes and Twinges it gives
me, and I am sure it will have its Effect, and set me perfectly at Ease within
a very few Moments: and this Consideration would turn my Pain into Pleasure. In
a Word, should he impose upon me a toilsom and laborious Exercise, I should
resolve thus with my self; well, though I stretch and sweat for it now, I shall
certainly be the better for it anon, and reap many Years Health and Vigor from
my present Toil and Weariness; and this Reflection would convert a Drudgery
into a Recreation. And yet this is the real Case of those Men, who have
entirely denied their own Wills, to choose and act in subordination to God: For
he is an infallible Physician, and they have made him their Friend by
submitting themselves to him, and putting their Lives and Interests in his
Hands; and therefore since as he is God, and their Friend, he cannot but know
and design what is good for them, they have all the Security in the World, that
every thing he orders them, shall conduce to their good, so long as they follow
his Prescriptions, and that he will order them nothing, but what they would
order for themselves, if they were but as infallible as he is, and did fully
comprehend all his Reasons; and in a Word, that though this or that Event may be
for the present very troublesome in its Operation, yet if they do not hinder the
Effect of it by their own Irregularity, it shall certainly conduce to their
everlasting Health and Happiness. And under this Persuasion, how cheerfully may
a Man bear up under all Events, and welcome the worst that can happen to him;
for being secure of the infallibility of God's Skill, and of the sincerity of
his Kindness to him, he has abundant Reason to conclude, that since all Events
are under God's Disposal, he will take effectual Care, that nothing shall
happen to him but what is for his good. For while his Will is subject to God's,
his Condition is a Thousand Times more safe and secure than if God's Will were
subject to his; because though there be the same Benevolence to him in both, yet
his Will might mislead God's, but God's Will cannot mislead his.

And thus I have endeavored to represent to you the abundant Advantages that
do arise from Self-denial, i. e. from renouncing our own corrupt Will and
Inclination, and entirely submitting our selves to the Will of God; which are
such as, one would think, should prevail with any Man that does but love
himself, and sincerely respect his own Interest. For this is as certain a
Truth, and as much confirmed by Experience, as any Maxim in Philosophy, that
there is no state of humane Life in which a Man can be happy, whilst his own
corrupt Will is his Law; nor none in which he can be miserable, whilst he is
entirely resigned and devoted to the Will of God.

3. I now proceed to the third and last Thing proposed, which was to show you
how absolutely necessary it is to our eternal Happiness, that in Obedience to
God, we should deny our own Will and corrupt inclinations; and this will
evidently appear if we consider

1. That the Disposal of our Happiness is not in our own Will but God's. 2.
That the Standard of our Perfection is not our own Will but God's 3. That the
Conformity of our Nature to our Happiness consists not in what we will, but in
what God wills 4. That the essential Acts and Ingredients of our Happiness, are
not what we will but what God wills.
1. That the Disposal of our Happiness is not in our own Will, but in Gods. If
we would be everlastingly Happy, we must comply with that blessed Will upon
which our everlasting Happiness depends; and the Apostle assures us, that
eternal Life is the Gift of God. If it were in our Power to support and defend
our selves in a blisful Existence to all Eternity, we might with some
Confidence set up for independent Free-willers, and live as we list; and after
we have followed the Swing of our own corrupt Inclinations in this World,
promise to our selves an Eternity of Happiness in the other: But alas, we are a
sort of poor precarious Beings, that are beholding to God for every Breath we
draw, and for every Moment of our Existence and Duration; and if he should
withdraw from us the vital Influence of his Providence but for the Twinkling of
an Eye, we should be so far from continuing happy, that we should vanish into
nothing. And therefore if we intend to be happy for ever, it is necessary we
should submit our selves to his Will, upon whom every Moment of our Being
depends. For when merely by withdrawing his Arm from us, he can let us drop
into nothing when he pleases, how can we hope, when we will not be ruled by
him, to be upheld by him in a happy Being for ever? can we think that the wise
and holy Governor of the World will be so regardless of his own Authority, as
to sustain and uphold his Subjects in their Rebellions against him; unless it
be with a design to reduce them, or to make them everlasting Monuments of his
Vengeance? No, no; since our Being and Well-being does for ever depend upon
him; we may build upon it, that either he will be obeyed by us, or that he will
not so uphold us, as to encourage us in our Rebellion; and consequently, that
if he does uphold us forever, as he has declared he will, it will be with a
dreadful Purpose, viz. to continue us in an everlasting ill Being, and hang us
up in Chains for public Spectacles of his Vengeance, that all his Creation may
take warning by us. Wherefore if we are resolved to adhere to our own Will in
Opposition to God's, it is in vain for us to aspire after a happy Being
hereafter, unless we can find some way to deprive God of the Disposal of it,
and secure it in our own Power. For so long as God remains the sole Arbitrator
of our Fate, we must make his Will ours, or renounce all our Hopes of Happiness.

2. It is to be considered that the Standard of our Perfection is not our own
Wills, but Gods. For the Faculties of every Nature being the Senses by which it
perceives and enjoys its own Happiness, it is impossible we should ever enjoy a
perfect Happiness so long as the Faculties by which we are to enjoy it are
imperfect. Ours therefore being a rational Nature, all whose Motions are under
the Direction of an understanding, and the Command of a free Will, is framed
and designed for a rational Happiness; which it is as impossible for us
perfectly to enjoy whilst our rational Faculties are out of Order, as it is to
perceive the Pleasures of delicious Meats, and Sounds, and Odours whilst the
Sensories of our Taste, and Smell, and Hearing are discomposed and obstructed by
any bodily Disorder. But now while we follow our own Will in Contradistinction
to Gods, our rational Nature is all over out of Tune; for whereas according to
the true Order and Constitution of our Nature, our Understanding is to guide
our Will, and our Will to command all our Passions and Appetites; so far forth
as our Will swerves and deflects from Gods, it goes quite counter to the
Principles of its own Reason and Understanding, and subjects it self to the
Dominion of those Passions and Appetites which it ought to command; it chooses
and refuses by the Inclination of its Affections, and not by the Directions of
its Reason and Conscience; which is the reason of that Civil War there is
between the Law in its Mind and the Law in its Members, that is between its
Reason and Conscience, and its corrupt Lusts and Inclinations: because while
its Will takes Part against God, it sides with its Lusts against its Reason,
and whilst it does so, it will be so far from being happy, that it will be
continually at War with its self, and its Will and its Conscience will be
perpetually clashing with one another. For so long as a Man goes against his
Reason, his Reason must necessarily go against him, and be continually
reproaching and upbraiding him, and vexing his Mind with severe and angry
Reflections. And how can a Man enjoy himself, whilst he is thus divided; or how
can he enjoy the Happiness of a rational Nature, whilst he is thus divided from
his Reason, and lives in perpetual Variance with it? A Body may as soon be at
Ease whilst its Bones are out of Joint, as a Soul whilst its Faculties are thus
broken and divided. If ever we would be happy with our Reason about us, we must
be all of a piece with our Reason; that is, our Will must be rational, our
Affections must be rational, and our Actions must be rational; if they are not,
our Reason will be as much against them as they are against it, and so there
will be an everlasting Broil and Mutiny within us. Till therefore we are
throughout perfectly rational, that is, till all our Faculties are entirely
compliant with our Reason, it is impossible we can ever be perfectly happy; and
though we had Power enough to defend our selves from all hurtful Impressions from
without, and to ward off the Blows not only of Devils and Men, but even of God
himself; yet so long as our Reason and our Will are at Variance, our Will will
be a spightful Devil to us, and our Reason an angry God. So that while we are
imperfect, you see, we cannot be happy, and while we follow our own Will
against God, we cannot be perfect. For to follow God and Right Reason, says
the Philosopher, is the same thing; and to present our selves, says a far
greater Author, a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God, is our
reasonable service, Romans 12. 1. For the Will of God being invariably determined
in all its Choices and Refusals, by the infinite Wisdom and Goodness of his
Nature, must be the most perfectly rational Will in the World, and as such, the
Standard and Pattern of all other Wills; and therefore so far forth as our Will
does deflect from his, it must necessarily be imperfect and irrational: But
while I govern my Will by his, and do choose and refuse by his Commands and
Prohibitions, I follow the Pattern of my Perfection; and while I follow his
Will which is a most perfect Transcript of his Nature, I transcribe his
Perfections into my own. For while I am copying his Will I am imitating his
Nature, and while I am imitating his Nature I am growing into his Likeness and
Resemblance: And when once my Will is all god-like, and its Affections and
Inclinations are perfectly conformable to God's, then I am perfectly rational,
and shall be perfectly happy. For now as I resemble God in his Perfections, I
shall resemble him in his self-enjoyment; my Reason will be perfectly satisfied
with my Will, even as God's Reason is with his; and my Nature will be a fair
and beautiful Prospect to my Understanding, even as God's Nature is to his. I
shall contemplate my own Graces with a transcendent Pleasure and Delight, and
while I alternately turn my Eyes upon God and my self, and compare Grace with
Grace, and Beauty with Beauty, I shall feel, as he does, a Heaven of Content
and Joy springing up in my Bosom. Thus by denying our own Will, you see, and
submitting to God's, which is the Standard of our Perfection, we naturally grow
up into Blessedness; whereas by following our own Wills in Opposition to God's,
we fatally sink our selves into Wretchedness and Misery.

3. It is also to be considered that the Conformity of our Nature to our
Happiness consists not in what we will, but in what God wills. To make us
blessed it is not only necessary that there should be blisful Objects for us to
enjoy, but that our Minds should agree with and be contempered to them; for
unless we are affected suitably to the Worth and Excellency of them, all the
Objects of Heaven cannot make us happy. For as Delicacies are grateful only to
delicate Palats, and Music to musical Ears; so the glorious Entertainments of
the World to come are a Heaven only to heavenly Minds: For to dwell with a God
whom I do not love, and to be confined to a Society of Spirits whose Tempers I
am averse to; to be put upon Exercises against which I have an Antipathy, would
be a tedious Constraint instead of a free Enjoyment; so that before ever Heaven
can be a Heaven to me, my Mind must be tuned and adapted to its Joys and
Beatitudes. And this is not to be effected by following our own Will but God's;
for our Will as it stands in Opposition to God's is either a sensual or a
devilish one, or both; and it is either Covetousness or Luxury which are the
Lusts of the Flesh, or Pride or Malice which are the Lusts of the Spirit, that
sway and determine it in all its Choices and Refusals; both which are as
repugnant to the heavenly Enjoyments as Light is to Darkness, or one Contrary
to to another. For between a spiritual Heaven and a carnal Mind, a divine
Heaven and a devilish Mind, there is an irreconcilable Distance; and for such a
Mind to live happily upon such a Heaven is as impossible in the nature of the
Thing as it is for a hungry Wolf to fill his Belly with Syllogisms, or to
satisfy its Appetite upon a Lecture of Philosophy. Whilst therefore we give way
to our corrupt Will and Inclination we do contract an Antipathy to Heaven, and
do what in us lies to prepossess our own Minds with an implacable Aversion to
all its Joys and Beatitudes. We take an effectual Course to antidote our Souls
against true Happiness, and to secure our Minds from being ever touched and
affected with the divine and spiritual Pleasures of the World to come. So that
if we are still resolved to take part with our own wicked Will against God, we
were best take our Pleasure while we may have it, while we live among these
sensitive Enjoyments that suit with our brutish Appetites and Affections; for
when we go hence into the Spiritual World, that will be like a barren
Wilderness to us, where we shall find nothing to live upon, but be forced to
pine away a long Eternity under a desperate Hunger and Dissatisfaction. But if
we heartily resign up our selves to God, and prostrate our Wills to his, we
shall thereby quickly acquire a heavenly Frame and Disposition. For the proper
Business of all those Duties he requires at our hands is to dress and prepare
our Souls for Heaven, and make us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of
the Saints in light. It Is by these that he carves and pollishes our Natures,
cuts off the Roughnesses and Unevennesses of our Temper, and squares us into
fit Materials for the heavenly Building. For this is the will of God, says the
Apostle, even our sanctification, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. That is the purging our Nature
from all its Aversion and Repugnancy to the Blessedness of Heaven, and the
inlaying it with all those divine Dispositions wherein our Conformity with
Heaven consists; for so our Savior explains it, Io. 12. 50; I know that his
commandment is life everlasting; that is, that what he commands, is the Seed
and Principle of everlasting Blessedness: That it is the Charity and Humility,
the Righteousness and Temperance, and Self-resignation which he commands, which
do attemper our Minds to the heavenly State, and by which we are to relish the
Joys and Pleasures of it for ever. For it is these Virtues that do reconcile
our Appetites to Heaven, and without these, our Souls can no more relish the
Joys of it, than our Palate can Sweetmeats while is is over-flowed with Gall.
Unless therefore we will deny our corrupt Will and Affections, and submit our
selves to God, it is Nonsense for us to talk of going to Heaven; for Heaven it
self without a heavenly Disposition to relish it, is a tastless and insipid
Thing, and it is as possible to please a blind Man with the Beauty of Colors,
and a deaf Man with a Consort of Music, as to gratify a vicious Mind with its
divine and spiritual Enjoyments.

4. And lastly, It is to be considered, that the essential Acts and Ingredients
of our Happiness are not what we will, but what God wills. It is a great
mistake, to imagine that the Happiness of Man consists in external Possessions,
or in being seized of a great Plenty of outward Goods of any kind whatsoever;
whether they be earthly or heavenly. It is not the possessing the outward Goods
of this World, but the enjoying them that makes any Man happy; and if I had all
the World in my Possession, no more of it could go into my Happiness than just
what I enjoy; all the rest would be like the Possession of a great Mountain of
Sand which I could neither eat, nor drink, nor apply to any of my Needs or
Conveniences: So that the Possession of outward Goods is good only as it is in
Order to the Enjoyment of them, abstracted from which, it is altogether
indifferent whether I am possessed of them or no. But now it is by our own
Actions that we do enjoy the Goods we are possessed of, by applying them to the
Needs and Conveniences of our Nature, and by the Content and Satisfaction we
take in the Application. So that in short, our Happiness is not in the Goods
that are without us, but in the Enjoyment of them that is within us; that is,
in those Acts of Fruition, by which we feel, and perceive them. And thus if we
were possessed of all those outward Goods that Heaven abounds with, they could
signify nothing to our Happiness, unless we had an inward Enjoyment of them,
and by proper Acts of Fruition did taste and perceive their Beauty and
Delightfulness. So that all the Happiness, you see, that Heaven or Earth can
afford us, is immediately lodged in our own Acts of Enjoyment, without which,
neither the Possession of Wealth and Honor upon Earth, nor of the Presence of
God, and Saints, and Angels in Heaven can make us in the least degree happy.
Since therefore our Happiness is so immediately lodged in our own Acts, it will
hence necessarily follow, that those Acts by which the Goods of Heaven are to
be enjoyed are the Acts of our future Happiness. Now the chiefest Goods of
Heaven, being God, and Saints, and Angels, and our Selves, the chiefest
Happiness of Heaven must consist in those Acts by which God, and Saints, and
Angels, and our Selves are enjoyed; and by what Acts can these be enjoyed, but
by Godly, Saintly, and Angelical Ones? It Is by Worship and Contemplation, by
Love and Imitation, by Dependence and Subjection that God is to be enjoyed by
us; it is by Charity and Righteousness, by Modesty and Peaceableness, by
Submission and Condescension that Saints and Angels are to be enjoyed by us;
it is by Prudence and Moderation, by Fortitude, Temperance, and Humility, that
we our selves are to be enjoyed by us: And therefore, if when we go into
Eternity, we carry with us a Mind and Will habituated to these beatifick
Actions, these Acts are the Sum and Substance of God's Will and Law. Whilst
therefore we take Part with our own Will against God's, we act quite counter to
our own Happiness, and go contrary to all the Acts of our heavenly Fruition and
Enjoyment. For that which God designs in all his Commands, is to educate and
train up our Nature for Heaven, to discipline and exercise it in the beatifical
Acts of the heavenly Life; that so when it is advanced from this School of
Probation, to the University of Happiness, it may be instructed in the
Language, and naturalized to the Exercise of it; that it may be predisposed and
habituated to Love and Dependence, to Charity and Righteousness, and all those
beatifical Acts by which Heaven is enjoyed. So that while we follow his Will,
we are learning to enjoy Heaven, and perfecting our selves in the Acts of our
everlasting Fruition; that so when we go from hence to take Possession of the
Goods above, we may be perfectly versed in the Enjoyment of them, and have the
Skill and Ability to make a happy Use of them for ever. Whereas on the
contrary, while we follow our own corrupt Will and Inclinations, we do not only
not learn these blessed Acts of Fruition, but we learn the quite contraries.
Instead of learning to enjoy God by Love and Adoration, we learn how to divide
our selves eternally from him, by contracting Enmity to him, and a profane
Contempt of his Majesty. Instead of learning to enjoy Saints and Angels by
Charity and Righteousness, we learn how to banish our selves from their
Society, by contracting malicious and dishonest Inclinations; in a Word,
instead of learning to enjoy our selves by Humility and Temperance, we learn
how to be our own Devils and Tormentors, by contracting Pride and an unlimited
Propension to bodily Pleasures; by which means we shall at last render our
Nature not only impotent, but also irreconcilable to all those blessed Acts of
our future Happiness, and so utterly disable our selves from enjoying Heaven,
that it would be a real Grievance to us to be forced to endure it. For when by
thus following my own wicked Will, I have contracted a deep and inveterate
Aversion to all those beatifical Acts by which Heaven is enjoyed, I have an
Antipathy against Heaven in my Nature, and so long as this continues, Heaven
must be a Torment to me instead of a Fruition; and if when I go from hence into
Eternity, I should be admitted into Heaven, with this prevailing Aversion to
the beatifical Acts of it; I should be so far from enjoying it, that I should
loath it, and rather choose to banish my self from it for ever, than to be
confined to a Condition so unsuitable to my Nature. Whilst therefore I am
running from God after my own Will, I am running from Heaven; and if I do not
stop the sooner, shall run my self to a Distance from it, as immense and
irreconcilable as that which separated Dives from Abraham's Bosom.

And thus you see how indispensibly necessary upon all these Accounts
Self-denial is, in order to our future Happiness. Hence then, let us all be
persuaded to renounce our corrupt Will and Affections, and resign up our selves
to the Government of God: And further to move you hereunto, I beseech you
briefly to consider with me these Four Things.

1. That in its self, this is the most just and equitable Thing you can do. 2.
That in this consists the Life and Substance of all your Religion. 3. That this
is the great Hinge upon which your Safety and Security depends. 4. That in this
you do the most effectually consult your own Interest.
1. That to deny your own Wills, and resign up your selves to the Government of
God, is in it self the most just and equitable Thing you can do. For all your
Powers and Faculties are Gods by an unalienable Right and Property; your
Understanding is his, and your Will is his, and all your Powers of Action are
the Births and Products of his fruitful Will, and Almighty Goodness. And if it
be thus, we must necessarily be obliged to subject our selves to him, and
prostrate our Wills, and all our Powers of Action at his feet. If then we are
his, as we must be if we are made by him, what have we to do to dispose of our
selves contrary to his Will and Pleasure? with what Color of Justice can I
choose what He commands me to refuse, when my Power of choosing is his, and he
has a far more undoubted Right to it than I have to the Clothes on my Back?
when he is the supreme Proprietor of that Will wherewith I choose, with what
Conscience can I vote with it against him, or give away any of my Choices and
Elections from him? What is this but to embezzle my Masters Goods, and alienate
his Property from his Use and Service? Remember, O Man! in every wicked Choice
that thou make, thou give away thy self from thy right Owner, and do
sacrilegiously rob God of the Fruits of his own Creation, and must one Day
expect to render a dreadful Account to him for every Choice thou have given
away from him, and for every Thought, and Word, and Action which thou have
presumed to dispose of contrary to his Orders: For thou have no more Right to
give away thy self, or any of thy Choices and Actions from God, and can no
more justify thy self for so doing, than thou have to sell away thy Landlords
Feesimple, or to entail his Inheritance on thy Children. And before you make
too bold with God's Property, or presume to dispose of his Goods at your
Pleasure, you were best consider seriously whom you have to deal with; that you
have not to do with a Being that is to be hectored out of his Rights, or born
down with Might and Violence; but with a God that is sufficiently sensible of
your unjust Usurpations, and abundantly able to revenge them; that is jealous
of his own Rights and Properties, has a deep Resentment of all your injurious
Invasions of them, and an Almighty Arm to assert and vindicate them. And when
you have considered this, then alienate your Choices from him if you dare; but
in the mean Time, as you will answer the Injustice of it at the Tribunal of
God, have a Care how you dispose of your selves contrary to his Orders, lest as
a just Retribution he should one Day dispose of you contrary to your Wills to
everlasting Misery and Despair.

2. Consider that in this denying and resigning our selves to God, consists the
Life and Substance of all our Religion. For what is Religion, but a (...) a
Tying or Binding fast Men's Minds and (...) to God? It is the Bond of our
Allegiance to the Throne of Heaven, by which we oblige our selves to be God's
Subjects, and do resign up our Wills, and all our Powers of Action to his
Government; and in this, as I showed you, consists Self-denial. For when once
we have mastered our own Self-Will, and conquered its Obstinacy, and persuaded
it to yield up it self to the Will of God, then is his glorious Empire set up
in our Souls, then he is crowned our Sovereign Lord, his Kingdom is come into
us, and we may cry Hallelujah, for the Lord God Omnipotent reigns. But till
once our Religion has tied our Souls to God, and obliged our Will to renounce
all other Lords, and submit to his Empire, it is only a Name, an empty Show and
Formality of Religion; it is a Religion without a Religion, or a Bond without a
Tie; that is, it is down right Nonsense, and a Contradiction to it self. And
what Shows or Professions soever we may make of Religion, how zealous or
forward soever we may be in the external Acts of it, it will all signify
nothing to us, unless there be a prostrate Will, and a resigned Heart at the
bottom. For this is the Alpha and Omega, the Corner and the Top-Stone of
Religion, and to pretend Religion without this, is to pretend Loyalty in open
Acts of Rebellion. And indeed could Religion consist with a rebellious Will,
the Devil himself might very fairly pretend to it; for that which makes him a
Devil, is nothing but his own boisterous Self-Will that is continually
struggling and lifting up it self against God. And hence Belial is the Devil's
Name, which signifies without Yoke; and accordingly the Children of Belial are
described to be such, as do altogether break the Yoke, and burst the Bonds of
the Lord. Jer. 5. 5. and called Children of Disobedience. Ephesians. 2. 2. because
like their Father Belial they are impatient of Restraint, and will hearken to
no Law but that of their own boundless Self-will. So far are those Men from
being truly Religious, whose Wills are divided from God's, that they are in
Belial's Predicament, unyoak'd from the Divine Government, and their Wills are
in a strict Confederacy with the Devil. And hence the Prophet Samuel speaking
of Readiness Rebellion against God, tells him, that Rebellion is as the Sin of
Witchcraft, 1 Samuel 15. 23. that is, Rebellion against God, is an implicit
Confederacy with the Devil, even as Witchcraft is an explicit one. For the
Devil being the Prince and Ringleader of the Rebel-Creation, whoever sets up
his Will against God, does thereby renounce his Allegiance to Heaven, and like
a false Recreant joins hands with the Devil in Rebellion against his Maker. And
whilst a Man's Soul does thus clasp Wills with the Devil, and conspires with
him in his Rebellion against Heaven; what impudent Hypocrisy is it for him to
pretend to Religion? Wherefore, either let us be so modest for the future as
not to pretend to Religion, or any of those blessed Hopes it sets before us; or
let us resolve to be so honest to our Pretensions as to deny our selves, and
resign up our Wills to God. For while our Will and God's are divided and
separated, and do in any Instance tread Antipodes to each other, all our
Pretense of Religion is a shameless Cheat, which when it comes to be examined
at the Tribunal of God, will be found a mere Paint, and artificial Complexion
daubed upon a black and devilish Nature.

3. Consider that upon our denying our selves and resigning our Wills to God,
depends all our Safety and Security. For if God be against us, all the Powers
of Heaven and Earth cannot secure us; because his Will has an infinite Power
conjoined with it, that like an irresistible Torrent bears down all
Oppositions, and sweeps every Thing before it that stands in its way. To what
purpose then should such impotent Things as we, set up our Wills against his,
Can you ever hope to prevail against him, or to force his Almighty Will into a
Compliance with yours? Gird up your selves like Men, and I will demand of you
in the Name of God; have you an Arm like God, or can you thunder with a Voice
like him? are ye able to withstand the Whirlwind of his Power, or to shelter
your Heads against the Storms of his Vengeance? alas! no; a Feather in the Air
may sooner stop a Thunderbolt that comes roaring down from the Clouds, than
you can the Course of that Almighty Will which does whatever it pleases both in
Heaven and Earth: And if so, with what safety can you oppose your impotent Will
to it, or how can you expect to prosper in such an unequal Contention? Since
therefore God does so infinitely out-match you, and it is infallibly certain,
that first or last he will be too hard for you; all that is left to your Choice
is, whether you will do his Will or suffer it; whether you will obey his
Commands, or endure his Inflictions: for one of these you must do, but which of
the Two, is left to your own Election. If you think it more eligible to obey
what God has enjoined, than to endure what he will inflict, you may by
choosing the former, eternally secure your selves from the latter; For,
besides, that such is the generous Goodness of God's Nature, as it will not
permit him to trample upon the Prostrate, nor to deny fair Quarter to such as
lay down their Arms, and freely surrender themselves to his Will and Disposal,
besides this, I say, upon the Satisfaction which his own Son has made for the
Sins of the World, he has obliged himself by a public Grant and Promise of
Mercy to receive us into his Favor and Protection upon our unfaigned
Submission to him, and to treat us graciously notwithstanding all our past
Rebellions, as if we had been for ever perfectly loyal to him, and had neither
in Thought, nor Word, nor Deed offended him. So that if now if we will heartily
submit our Wills to him, he cannot let loose his Power on us without forfeiting
his Truth, and doing Violence to the Perfections of his own Nature. But
notwithstanding all the Goodness of his own Nature, and all the Virtue of that
Propitiation that he has made for our Sins, this is a Law which he will never
dispense with; I will see that my Creatures shall obey me, or feel me, that
they shall conform to my Will, or sink under my Vengeance; and if they will be
so desperate as to refuse the former, all the Powers of Heaven and Earth shall
not secure them from the latter. If therefore you are so abandoned of all
Reason, as to think it more eligible to suffer the Will of God than to obey it,
you must even take what follows; for as sure as God is in Heaven, and you upon
Earth, you shall one Day feel the Weight of his Arm, if you do not freely
surrender your selves to his Will and Disposal. But before you do so, for your
Souls sake consider once more what a terrible Election you are making, that
it is the unquenchable Wrath of the everliving God that you are throwing your
selves upon, a Wrath that will imprint it self upon every Faculty of your
Nature, and be dropping like burning Sulphur upon your Souls for ever. And if
after you have considered this, you will still adhere to your desperate Option,
the Lord have Mercy upon your Souls.

4. And lastly, Consider that if there were no Obligation to this Duty, or no
Danger in the contrary, yet in thus denying our selves, and resigning our Wills
to God, we do the most effectually consult our own Interest. For God, being
infinitely happy in his own Perfections, and deriving all possible Satisfaction
from his own Self-Sufficiency, cannot be supposed to desire any Thing for
himself without himself; and being perfectly exempted from all Want and
Indigence by the infinite Fullness of his Being, he can have nothing of Envy or
Malice in his Nature, which are weak and impotent Passions that do always
spring out of a sense of Need and Insufficiency, and are utterly inconsistent
with a State of perfect Fullness and Beatitude. Since therefore in his outward
Administrations he can have no Self Ends to serve upon his Creatures, and since
he can have no Principle of Envy or Malice toward them in his Nature, it hence
necessarily follows that in ruling and governing them he can have no other
Design upon them but to do them good, and make them like himself, i. e.
perfectly good and perfectly happy. So that God's End and ours is always the
same; we would be happy and God would have us so too, and we our selves cannot
aim at our Happiness more heartily and sincerely than he does; all the
Difference therefore between him and us is about the Means and Way to our
Happiness: We are for one Way, and he is for another; we think the Way to our
Happiness is to live in all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and he thinks the
Way to it is to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World. So
that the whole Dispute between God and us, so far as Reason is concerned in it,
depends upon this, whether God be in the right, or our selves; whether we are
not deceived in choosing this Way, or God be not deceived in prescribing the
contrary. If we have any Reason to think that we are wiser than God, or do
better understand the Way to our own Happiness; then it must be acknowledged
that in refusing God's Way and choosing our own, we do advisedly consult our own
Interest; but this is such a Supposal, as, I believe, never entered into any
Man's sober Thoughts. And if we have all the Reason in the world to conclude
not only that God is wiser than we, but that whereas we are extremely
short-sighted and apt to be imposed upon with glistering Shows and Appearances,
he has such a full Comprehension of all Things as that he cannot be deceived;
then we may be sure that when we forsake our own Way and follow God's we cannot
be misled, but at every step must be tending directly to our own Happiness. For
if God cannot be deceived, and we may, it is certain that whenever our Way to
Happiness lies contrary to his, he is in the right and we are in the wrong; and
consequently that when we forsake his Way to follow our own, we go from
Happiness to Misery. Is it likely that we should know what belongs to humane
Nature, and the ordering and regulating its Affections and Actions? That we
should understand the just Bounds and Measures where it is to be restrained and
where to be indulged better than the God that formed and composed it. And if it
be not, as doubtless it is not, were we not much better resign our Wills to his
Government than to live at our own Disposal? For he desires to govern us for no
other Reason but because he knows he can govern us much better than our selves.
He sees that we are a sort of blind and precipitant Creatures, that must
unavoidably stumble into eternal Ruin if we follow our own Wills; and
therefore he would fain retrieve us our of our own Hands, that so having the
sole Disposal of us himself, he may conduct us safely to Happiness. And when He
intends as kindly to us as we can to our selves, were we not better follow his
Wisdom than our own Folly? He knows that our Self-love will in the Effect prove
Self-hatred to us, if it be not moderated and directed by a better and a wiser
Love; and therefore he would have it under the direction of his, which is the
best and wisest Love in the World. He desires to have the Government of our
Will upon no other Account but only that he might determine all its Choices to
our Happiness, and requires our Hearts of us merely for this End, that he might
fill them with Peace and Rest. He knows that our Perfection and Happiness lies
in Compliance with our Duty, in Piety and Justice, Mercy and Humility, and that
out of the free and constant, sprightly and vivacious Exercise of these Virtues
arises all our Heaven both here and hereafter; and knowing this, that tender
Love he bears us, that mighty Concern he has for our Welfare makes him thus
urgent and importunate with us in his Demands of our Duty; for he regards our
Duty no farther than it tends to our Good, and values each Act of our Obedience
by what it contributes to our Happiness. He affects not to burden us with
unnecessary Impositions; all that he requires of us is what our Interest
requires, which is so dear and precious to him that he will dispense with
nothing that is necessary to promote and secure it; and it is therefore he will
not dispense with us, because he cannot, without releasing us from our
Obligation to be happy. Why then should we desire, O foolish Creatures that we
are, to be released from the Yoke of his Government? Or how can we count it
Liberty to be loosed from an infinite Goodness that is conducted by infinite
Wisdom and Power? For whatsoever my blind Lusts and Passions may dictate, my
Reason assures me that the greatest Privilege that belongs to a Creature is to
be under the Government of God, and that if he should release me from my
Subjection to his Will by a Dispensation under the Broad-Seal of Heaven, and
give me an unlimited License to live as I list, promising never to be
displeased with me more, or to take any farther Cognizance of my Actions; the
best and wisest Thing I could do for my self would be to resign back my self to
his Government, and surrender up my blind and precipitant Will to his most wise
and gracious Disposal! And if he should refuse to re-admit me to his
Government, and abandon me for ever to my own Self-Will, I should be the most
forlorn Soul on this side Hell; I should not know what to do, nor which Way to
turn my self; but be forced to wander in a dark Wilderness without being ever
able to discover any certain pathway to my Happiness. But so long as I am
under the Government of God, I am sure I am safe; and while I follow his
All-wise and most gracious Will, I know that I am going to a happy End; and
that how rough soever my Way is, it will bring me to Canaan. What then remains
but that from henceforth we utterly deny our selves, renounce our corrupt Wills
and Inclinations, and cheerfully resign our selves to the Will of God; which
has no other Design upon us but to do us Good, to raise and advance our
degenerate Natures, and conduct us through the Kingdom of Grace into the
Kingdom of Glory.

1 JOHN III. 7. Little Children, let no man deceive you: He that does
righteousness, is righteous, even as he is righteous.
THese Words are a short and plain Resolution of that Grand Case, viz. how a
Man may know whether he be in a state of Grace and Favor with God; or, which
is all one, whether he be a good Man and a good Christian. The Gnostics,
against whom St. John particularly directs this Epistle, placed all
Righteousness and Goodness in certain pretended Illuminations, which had
nothing in them but certain swelling Words of Vanity, and like gilded Bubbles
were blown up with wind, and filled with mystical Nonsense. And though in their
Lives and Manners they were a Reproach and Scandal not only to Religion, but
even to humane Nature; yet merely upon the account of these their own Wild
Dreams, they vaunted themselves to be the only Elect, and Favorites of God,
and imagined themselves advanced to that degree of Perfection, as that they
were above all Law, and freely dispensed with under the Broad-Seal of Heaven to
live as they list, and to wallow in Riot and Voluptuousness. Against these wild
Men the Apostle here seems to forewarn his little Children; suffer not these
vile Deceivers to impose upon your Faith this their damnable Error, viz. that
by receiving their high-flown Mysteries and pretended Revelations, you shall
without any more ado be constituted perfect and righteous Men in the sight of
God; for from God himself I do assure you that he, and he only, that does
Righteousness, is righteous even as he is righteous; i. e. as Christ is
righteous, of whom I just before discoursed.

In the Prosecution of which Argument I shall endeavor these two Things;
First, to show you, what it is to do Righteousness in general; Secondly, what
that righteous Doing is which in the sense of Christianity constitutes us
Righteous Men.

1. What it is to do Righteousness in general. I answer, it is to give to every
one his Due, or to perform to God, our selves, and to all the World whatsoever
is owing from the State of our Nature, and the Relations and Circumstances
wherein we are placed. And in this Latitude to do Righteousness is the sum of
Religion, and the Whole Duty of man. The righteous Man therefore, or the Man
that does Righteousness is, in the sense of the Text, one, that demeans himself
so, as in the Judgment of Right Reason he ought to do toward God, himself, and
all the World; that looking upon himself under the Relation of God's Creature
and Pensioner, does freely render him all that Homage, and Reverence, and Love,
and Gratitude, and Trust, and Adorotion that are owing to so great a Creator,
and so liberal a Benefactor; One that considering the Frame of his own Nature,
how he is compounded of contrary Principles, viz. Spirit and Flesh, Reason and
Sense, exercises himself in all those humane Virtues, which consist in the
Dominion of his superior Principle of Reason over his sensitive Passions and
Appetites; such as Patience and Equanimity, Courage and Meekness, Temperance
and Chastity; all which are proper to us as Beings made up of contrary
Principles, from whence spring those contrary Appetites and Inclinations in us;
in the good or bad Government whereof, the Essence of humane Virtue and Vice
consists. In a Word, the righteous Man is one, who, considering his State, and
Circumstances, and Relations in the World, behaves himself in them all as right
Reason directs and obliges him; that as he is a Member of humane Society, bears
an hearty Good Will to the whole Corporation of Mankind; that is courteous and
affable, peaceable and condescending, long-suffering and ready to forgive; that
is grateful to those from whom he has received Good, and so far as he has
Opportunity, is ready to do Good to others; that is faithful to his Promises,
sincere in his Professions, just and honest in his Dealings; that heartily
wishes every Man were good, and without manifest Reason to the contrary,
believes every one to be so; that when he sees a Fault is ready to excuse it,
and where he cannot, silently bewails and laments it; that as a Subject is
loyal and obedient to his Superiors, and as a Superior is careful of the
Public Good, and just and benign toward all his Inferiors; that as a Father
loves his Children, piously and wisely educates them, and is provident for
their Happiness both here and hereafter; that as a Child reverences his
Parents, and is ready to comfort and assist them in their Needs, and in all
lawful Things to render them a cheerful Obedience; that as a Husband is kind to
his Wife, compassionate to her Infirmities, and easy to be entreated by her;
that as a Wife is modest in her Behavior, careful and vigilant in her Family,
and soft and tractable to the Will of her Husband; that as a Master is just and
benevolent to his Servants, and studious of their Welfare both temporal and
eternal; that as a Servant is industrious in his Business, and faithful to his
Trust, and obedient to his Master; that in Adversity is resigned and contented,
honestly industrious to live, and grateful to those that relieve him; that in
Prosperity is humble and modest, and full of good Works; and to name no more,
He is a cordial Friend, a good Neighbor, a faithful Correspondent, and a
zealous Lover of his Country: These are the main Ingredients that compound a
righteous Man; and accordingly we find that wherever he is mentioned in
Scripture, he is always described by such like Characters as these: thus in the
15th Psalm, where the Psalmist sets himself on purpose to describe the
righteous Man that should dwell in the Tabernacle of God, he is represented as
one that walks uprightly, and works Righteousness; that speaks Truth, and
is tender of his Neighbor's Reputation; that freely lends to those that are in
Need, and will not be bribed against the Innocent. So also Ezekiel. 18. 14, 15,
16, 17. he is described to be one that is no Idolater, no Adulterer, no
Oppressor; that does not defraud his Neighbor of his Right, but is just and
Liberal to the Poor, and freely lends to those that are in need. And Micah 6.
7. the Prophet tells us what it is that renders us just and acceptable in the
sight of God, viz. doing Justice, loving Mercy, and walking Humbly with God. So
also in the New Testament we are taught, that pure and undefiled Religion
consists in visiting the Fatherless and Widows in their affliction, and keeping
our selves unspotted from the World. James 1. 27. and Gal. 5. 22. St. Paul
tells us that the fruits of the Spirit which render us righteous in the sight
of God, are such as these, Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness,
Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance; and to name no more, the same Apostle
Tit. 2. 11. says that the Righteousness which the Gospel, or Grace of God
designs to propagate in the World, is this, that denying ungodliness and
worldly-lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present
World; which Three, are the Sum of all those Virtues which constitute a
Righteous Man.

Having thus showed what it is in general to do Righteousness, I now proceed in
the second Place to show what that Righteous Doing is, which in the Sense of
Christianity does constitute us Righteous Men: In order to which it will be
necessary to premise these Three Things.

1. That Christianity supposes many Imperfections and Infirmities in those whom
it yet allows to be Righteous Men; and indeed if it did not, it could admit no
Man in the World to be righteous. For it has seemed good to the Divine Wisdom
to introduce us into the World in an imperfect State, that so by the good Use
of our own free Wills and rational Faculties, assisted by his Grace, we might
by Degrees advance to a more sublime and perfect Condition, till through our
gradual Progress from this rude and imperfect State, we at length arrive to the
Perfection of Happiness for which we were made: And such is the Condition of
our Nature, as that it is as necessary for us to begin imperfectly, as to be
born Infants; nor can a Babe in Christ any more have the Perfections of a grown
and experienced Christian, than can an Infant of a Span long have the Strength
and Wisdom of a Man. In this State of Things therefore, if God will not allow
the lowest Degree of our Perfection to be good, neither can he the highest; for
our Improvement being gradual, there must of necessity be a first Degree,
before there can be a second; and therefore if God allows not the first, he
must for the same Reason disallow the second of the same kind, and so on from
the third to the highest Degree of all. Seeing therefore Christianity is a
Religion for Men, it must be supposed to be fitted to their low and imperfect
Condition, which it could not be if it did not abate for our Defects, and admit
us to be righteous in the main, even while we are imperfectly so; and that it
does so, is apparent by the distinction it frequently makes between the less
and the more Perfect, still allowing both to be Righteous. Thus it
distinguishes between Babes and Men, allowing both to be in Christ; between the
Weak, and the Strong, and Confirmed, allowing both to be in the Faith: And our
Savior himself speaking of some, who upon receiving the Seed of the Gospel
brought forth Thirty, of others who brought forth Sixty, and others a
Hundredfold, does yet allow them all to be good Ground. Matthew. 13. and Luke
19. 14. He as well allows him to be a good and faithful Servant who had
improved his Tallent into Five, as he who had improved his into Ten. From all
which it is evident, that the Gospel does not judge of our main State by the
Degrees, but by the Reality of our Righteousness.

2. It is to be premised, that that which constitutes us Righteous Men in the
Judgment of the Gospel, is some internal vital Principle of Righteousness. For
as all other Things receive their Denomination from their Forms, so it is from
some internal Form of Righteousness that righteous Men receive their
Denomination. It is not the simple doing righteous Actions that constitutes a
Man righteous; for he may be a very bad Man, not only while he does that which
is Righteous, but also in the very doing of it. Thus a Man may fast and pray,
only to gloss his Oppressions; he may do an honest Action, to disguise a
knavish Design, in which Case he sins in the doing of it, because in the doing
it, he prophanes Religion by making it a Cloak for his Wickedness; a plain
Evidence, that Actions which in themselves are materially good, do partake of
the Principles from whence they do proceed, and receive their Form and
Denomination from them; seeing even good Actions may be infected by a bad
Principle, and derive into themselves the Malignity and Baseness of the
Fountains from whence they flow. And if without a righteous Principle our
Actions cannot be righteous, to be sure neither can we; b cause we are as our
Actions are. Hence you may observe in the New Testament, that good Men are
generally denominated from some internal Form of Goodness; they are said to be
born of God, and to have the seed of God remaining in them. 1. Joh. 3. 9. and
to be renewed in the Spirit of their Mind, Ephesians. 4. 23. to be spiritually
minded, Romans 8. 6. and to be transformed by the renewing of their Mind, Romans
12. 2. and to be partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. all which, do
plainly denote, that to constitute us righteous. Men in the Sense of the
Gospel, there is necessarily required some internal Form and Principle of
Righteousness.

3. And lastly, We must premise, that Christianity being the Law or Rule of our
Religion, the internal Principle, which in the Sense of this Law constitutes us
Righteous, must be strictly Religious; that is, it must be such as does
immediately respect God, who is the great Object of all Religion. For Religion
in the strictest Sense, is the Rule of Divine Worship, and under this Notion of
Divine Worship, or Homage, and Obedience to God, Christianity exacts every Duty
of us; for it requires us to do all as unto God, and to do all to the Glory of
God; i. e. in Obedience to him, and out of a sincere Acknowledgment of his
Authority over us, and immutable Right to rule and command us: And even those
moral Virtues which do immediately respect our Neighbors and our selves, are
enjoined as Duties unto God, and bound upon us with religious Obligations. So
that now all the Acts and Functions of a good Life are adopted into the Rubric
of Christan Worship, and required of us as Acts of Obedience to God; from
whence it follows, that the Spring and Principle of those Acts must be strictly
Religious, immediately respecting God and his Authority over us; it being
impossible those Acts should be truly religious, which do not proceed from a
religious Principle.

These Things being premised, I come now to lay down what that Principle is,
which in the Sense of Christian Religion constitutes us righteous Men. In
general, it is a considerate, universal prevailing Resolution to obey God,
proceeding from our Belief of the Christian Religion: For the better
understanding of which, I shall briefly explain the particular Terms of it.

1. I say it is a Resolution. 2. It is a Resolution of obeying God. 3. It is a
considerate Resolution. 4. An universal, and 5. A prevalent one. 6. A
Resolution of obeying God, springing out of our Belief of the Christian
Religion.
1. It is a Resolution; by which I exclude the Habit of Obedience from being
the prime and constitutive Principle of Christian Righteousness. For
Christianity, as was shown before, supposing great Imperfections and
Infirmities even in those whom it allows to be righteous in the main; if we
would judge rightly of our own State by the Christian Rule, we must take
measure of our selves from that which is the lowest and most imperfect
Principle of Righteousness, and not conclude our selves to be unrighteous,
because we are not righteous to such a Degree; but as for the habit of
Obedience which consists in an inherent Promptness, Facility and Easiness to
obey, it is so perfect a Principle, as is not attainable but under a long
Progress in Religion. For when after a vicious Course of Life we begin to
reform, we are so far from being habituated to obey God, that we obey him with
Difficulty, and strong Reluctance, and are fain to row against the Stream of
our own Inclinations; in which state we are far from having attained to an
Habit or Promptness of obeying. So that by making this the constitutive
Principle of Christian Righteousness, we exclude from the State of
Righteousness all Beginners in Religion, and do allow none to be faithful
Servants, but those who have conquered the difficulties of obeying. The true
Form or Principle therefore, from which we receive the Denomination of
righteous Men is that Point or Term, from which we begin to be righteous, and
that is a righteous Resolution. For Choice and Resolution is the Spring of all
voluntary Actions, and consequently from thence we begin to act righteously,
and in the pursuit of that, we grow and improve into an habit of Righteousness.
Our first step, is to resolve well; our next, to do well; the uninterrupted
Repetition of which, will at length improve into an habit of well-doing. I will
arise, says the Prodigal, and go to my Father; that was the first step of his
Return, and the vital Principle whence all his After-motions did proceed.

2. It is a Resolution to obey God; by which I exclude those good Resolutions
from being the Christian Principle of Righteousness which have no respect at
all to God, but either to the gratifying our natural Temper only, or to the
securing our Health, or Reputation, or secular Interest; which, though they may
be productive of very good Morals in our Conversation, are far from being the
inward Form and Principle of Righteousness which Christianity requires; for
that, as was before premised, must be strictly religious, and consequently,
must be a Resolution to obey God. For that we should obey God, is the
fundamental Law of Religion, whence all its particular Laws derive their Force
and Obligation; and therefore to resolve to obey God must be the fundamental
Principle of Religion from whence all the particular Acts of it proceed. So
that the internal Principle which constitutes us religiously good, must answer
to that external Principle which obliges us to be so; and it is only our
Resolution to obey God, which answers to that external Principle that makes it
our Duty to obey him. In this Resolution, and in this only, consists the
Submission of our Wills to God, the Homage and Fealty of our Souls; without
which, all external shows of Piety and Virtue, are but a dead Formality. Not
that an actual explicit Resolution of obeying God is necessary to every good
Action, for this is impossible: our Occasions of doing good being so infinite,
and so often occurring in our secular Affairs, and our Minds so incapable of
attending many Things at once, that it is not in our Power to form an actual
Resolution of Obedience, as often as we are called upon to do good Actions. It
is sufficient therefore, that in general we have such a Resolution fixed in our
Minds; and this, though we do not exert it in every particular Action, will
constitute every Action good, and render it acceptable to God.

3. It must be a considerate, well-weighed Resolution; by which I exclude from
being the Principle of Christian Righteousness, all those rash and unsettled
Purposes Men make in Heats of Passion. For there can never be any holding good
Resolution, but what is founded upon Reason and Judgment; for Reason is the
same Thing in all Circumstances; it is a stiff and inflexible Thing, that will
not ply and bend to the Alterations of our Humors and Interests; whereas
Passion is a fickle and inconstant Thing that is generally governed by outward
Accidents, and is as various and mutable as they. He therefore that founds his
good Resolutions upon Heats of Passion, sets his Soul upon a Weathercock,
which every contrary Blast of Humor or Interest, blows into a contrary
Position. Till such time therefore as a Man has a new Judgment of Things, it
will be in vain for him to make any new Resolutions; because it is morally
impossible that any Resolution should be lasting, that is not founded upon
Reason and Judgment. But when a Man has steared the past Course of his Life by
an old, inveterate, false Judgment of Things, it will require a great deal of
serious Consideration to form and settle a new one; and if before this is done,
men enter upon new Resolutions, they must resolve without considering either
the Matters they resolve on, or the Motives which should support their
Resolution; insomuch that when they come to practice what they thus hastily
resolved, either they find more Difficulty in the Matter than they were aware
of, or want sufficient Motives to carry them through it; by reason of which
their Resolution flaggs in the Execution, and many times yields to the next
Temptation that encounters them. To the forming therefore of a holding
Resolution, such as will prove a living Principle of Righteousness, great Care
must be taken to found it on a through Consideration both of the Particulars we
resolve upon, together with their appendent Difficulties; and of the Motives
and Arguments with which Christianity backs and inforces it. First we must set
before our Eyes the Sins we must part with, and the Duties we must submit to,
and fairly represent to our selves the many Difficulties and Temptations that
are like to attend us in both; and having thus placed our selves in the midst
of the Difficulties of a religious Life, and so far as in us lies, rendered them
actual and present to us; we must never cease pressing our stubborn Wills with
the Arguments and Motives of Religion, till we have obtained of them an
explicit Consent to every Duty that calls for our Resolution. And when we have
thus weighed all Particulars over and over in the Balance of an impartial
Consideration, and implored the Divine Assistance, (without which our strongest
Resolutions will certainly fail, and which is never wanting to any but those
who are wanting to themselves) let us then resolve, and seal our Resolution
with solemn Vows and Promises to God: For thus our blessed Savior, when he saw
the Multitude forward to follow him, fairly proposes to their Consideration the
Difficulties they must engage in, if they would be his Disciples; that so their
resolving in too much haste, might not give them Occasion to repent at leisure;
as you may see at large Luke 14. 26 -- 34. And elsewhere he compares rash and
inconsiderate Resolvers, to a Man that goes about to build a Tower, without
ever considering what it will cost, or whether he has Money sufficient to
finish it; and so when he has laid the Foundation gives it over, and renders
himself ridiculous; and the same he compares also to a King that goes to war
without ever considering whether he has Force enough to encounter his Enemy,
and so rushing headlong into the Battle, is either forced to retreat, or yield
to the Mercy of the Conqueror. And in the Parable of the Prodigal Luke 15.
wherein he purposely describes the whole Progress of the Soul toward God; the
first Thing the Prodigal did after he came to himself, was to consider what an
happy Change he should make in his Condition by returning to his Father; how
many hired Servants of my Fathers have bread enough and to spare, and I perish
with hunger! and having well considered this, he at length resolves, I will
arise and go to my Father. Thus also the Prophet David introduces his
Resolution of Amendment, through a deep and serious Consideration of his ways,
I thought on my ways, and turned my Feet unto thy Testimonies. Psalm. 119. 59.

4. It must be an universal Resolution of obeying God, such as indifferently
extends to all the Instances of our Duty, otherwise it can be no entire
Principle of Righteousness; because though it may reform us in some Instances, it
must leave us unreformed in others, and so can only render us less wicked, but
never entirely good. For seeing the Christion Law exacts of us universal
Obedience, and does not oblige us in one Instance, and dispense with us in
another; it is impossible that any Resolution should be the Principle of that
Righteousness it requires, but that which respects the whole. If we keep the
whole Law, says St. James, and yet offend in one point, we are guilty of all;
for which he subjoyns this Reason, he that has said, do not commit adultery;
said also, do not kill, James 2. 10, 11. i. e. it is the same Authority that
forbids the one as well as the other; and therefore, though thou do not the
one, yet if thou do the other, thou sinnest against the Authority of both.
Seeing therefore we are not accounted universally righteous by the Law of
Christ, unless we do universally obey it, a partial Resolution to obey can
never constitute us Righteous; because such a Resolution will never make us
universally obedient. Then shall I not be ashamed, says David, when I have
respect unto all thy Commandments. Psalm. 119. 6. So that to make our Resolution
a Christian Principle of Righteousness, it is necessary that it should be
universal, i. e. of equal extent with that Law which is the Measure of our
Righteousness; that like a fruitful Womb it should be pregnant with every good
Work, and vertually contain in it every Particular that our Religion has made
our Duty.

5. It must be a prevailing Resolution; a Resolution of such Force as does
engage us to do what we resolve, and actually prevails over all Temptations to
the contrary. For all the Virtue of a good Resolution consists in its Relation
to Action, because if that we resolve to do, be not necessary, it is
indifferent whether we resolve to do it or no; but if it be, it must be done,
otherwise we had been as good never to have resolved to do it. The goodness of
our Resolution therefore consists in this, that it is an Engagement to practice
what we resolve; and consequently if our Resolution to obey God, be not
prevalent enough to engage us to obey him, it is so far from being a true
Principle of Christian Righteousness, that it is a mere insignificant Cipher.
For as that can be no Cause which produces no Effect; so that can be no
Principle of Righteousness, which is not productive of it; and if to make it a
Principle of Righteousness, it is necessary, that it should be a prevalent
Engagement to a righteous Life, then it follows that when it ceases to be
prevalent, it ceases to be a Principle of Righteousness; and consequently that
whenever we do commit any Sin that is inconsistent with a prevailing Resolution
to obey God, we do for that Time cease to be righteous Men. But there are no
Sins inconsistent with a prevailing Resolution to obey God, but such as do
prevail against it, and actually overpower it; and therefore as for those
Weaknesses, Surreptions, and Surprises, which, for Distinction-sake, we call
Sins of Infirmity; either we do not consent to them, and consequently they are
so far from over-powering our good Resolution, that they do not at all contest
with it; or if we do consent to them, it is unawares, before we can oppose our
Resolution against them. So that though upon Surprise they do win our Consent,
yet they do not win it from our good Resolution, which in this sudden Hurry of
Thoughts had not time to canvas for it; but had Power enough to have obtained
it, had it had but Opportunity to prefer its Claim; and therefore as for such
Sins as these, they may fairly comport with a prevailing Resolution of
Obedience. But then there are Sins of Wilfulness which proceed either from
wilful Habits, or from deliberate Choice, and these are no more consistent with
such a Resolution, than one Contrary is with another in the same Degree. For he
who sins wilfully is prevalently resolved to sin; and to be so, and at the same
time prevalently resolved to obey God is a Contradiction in Terms. Whilst
therefore Sin has the Prevalence in us, we are so long Servants of Sin, and do
so long cease to be Servants of Righteousness. It Is true, there are Degrees of
Wickedness, and the longer a Man continues wicked, the worse he will be; but
still he is a wicked Man, who is more prevalently resolved to sin than to obey
God; and he who is so, though but for an Hour or a Day, is so long wicked, as
well as he who continues so for a Month or a Year: He is not wicked indeed to
so high a Degree, and so may far more easily recover; but from the Time that we
deliberately consent to any known Sin, to the Time that we repent of it, we are
wilful Sinners. If we repent immediately, we immediately recover into that good
Estate from whence we were fallen, and so our Wound is cured almost as soon as
it is made. For the proper Repentance of single Acts of wilful Sin, is either
to resolve not to repeat them, or, where it can be done, to undo them again by
Restitution. But when our baffled Resolution to obey God is thus recovered into
a prevalent Engagement to obey him, it revives into a living Principle of
Righteousness; but yet before we can reasonably conclude it is such, we must
make some Trial of it; for as it is certain, that until it be Prevalent, it is
not a true Principle of Righteousness; so it is certain, that till for some
time it has actually prevailed, we cannot be secure that it is prevalent. That
is not to be called a prevalent Resolution, that for a Day or a Week puts us
into a Fit of Religion, and so expires; such flashy Purposes are so far from
being thorough Cures, that they are only so many Intermissions of our Disease,
that always leave us as bad or worse than they found us. But if upon sufficient
Trial we find that our Resolution does hold against all Temptations, and
actually engage us to our Duty in despite of all Solicitations to the
contrary, we may then safely conclude, that it is that very vital Principle,
which in the Judgment of our holy Religion, does constitute us Righteous Men.
And accordingly Matthew. 21. 28, 29, 30. our Savior compares those who might,
but did not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, to a Son that first resolved to
go whither his Father commanded him, but afterward cooled and did not obey;
implying, that the great Fault, which spoiled his Resolution, and rendered it
insignificant was this, that it was not firm and prevalent; which had it been,
it had actually entered him in the Kingdom of Heaven.

6. And lastly, It must be a Resolution to obey God, springing out of our
Belief of the Christian Religion; and this it is which renders it strictly and
properly, a Christian Principle of Righteousness. It Is true indeed, if either
we never heard of Christianity, or it had never been proposed to us, with
sufficient Motives of Credibility, our Infidelity would have been only our
Misery, but not our Crime; and if upon a through Consideration of the Arguments
of natural Religion, and of the Good and Evil which naturally springs out of
good and evil Actions, we were effectually resolved to study the Will of God,
and, so far as we understood it, to obey it; it had been no criminal Defect in
our Resolution not to be founded upon our Belief of Christianity; because to
believe without sufficient Reason, is so far from being our Duty, that it is
our Defect, and an Argument of our Weakness, and foolish Credulity. But now
that Christianity has been made known, and sufficiently proposed to us, we
cannot be good Men, unless we do believe it, and if we do believe it, we cannot
be good Christians if we do not thereupon effectually resolve to obey it. In
short therefore, they who have not the Gospel, are obliged to obey God upon the
Motives of natural Religion, which is all that can reasonably be expected from
them; but as for us who have the Gospel, wherein, together with the Arguments
of Nature, God has fairly proposed to us the higher Motives of Christianity,
we are bound to believe these as well as those; and upon this Belief to proceed
to a firm Resolution of Obedience; which if we do, our Resolution is strictly
Christian in Contra-distinction to theirs who have not the Gospel, and so
resolve only upon Principles of Natural Reason; not but that their Resolution
is for substance the same with ours, only ours is founded upon greater and more
prevalent Motives. The Duties of Christianity are the same with those of
Natural Religion, and excepting those three positive Precepts, of Baptism and
the Lords Supper, and of worshipping God in and through Christ, there is no
Command in the Gospel distinct from the Eternal Rules of Morality which the
Gospel does improve upon new Principles, and strengthen with more powerful
Obligations.

And thus I have explained to you what is that Vital Form and Principle which,
in the Sense of the Law of Christ, does constitute us Righteous Men. In short,
he is a Righteous Man in the true Christian Sense, who upon a through
Consideration of the Arguments and Motives of Christianity is universally and
prevalently resolved to obey its Laws. To conclude all therefore, from hence I
infer

1. What is the true safe Way for a Man to resolve his own Conscience
concerning the main State of his Soul, whether in the Gospel-sense he be
Righteous, or no. I know it is a common Doctrine with some Men, that the
Resolution of this great Case depends upon an inward Whisper, Suggestion, or
Testimony of the Spirit of God, which I fear has fatally deluded too many Men
into a groundless Confidence and Assurance. For when all of a sudden they feel
themselves surprised with joyous and comfortable Thoughts, they presently
conclude it to be an inward Whisper and Testimony of the Spirit of God, when
many times there is nothing in it but an unaccountable Frisque of melancholy
Vapors heated and fermented by a feverish Humor; and many of these sudden Joys
and Dejections, which these Men interpret to be the Incomes and With-drawings
of the Spirit of God, do apparently proceed from no other Cause than the
Shiverings and Burnings of an Ague; upon which account Hysterical Fits are
frequently mistaken for spiritual Exercises. And when Men have most confidently
believed themselves overshadowed by the Holy Ghost, their Fancies have been
only hagg'd and ridden by the Enthusiastic Vapors of their own Spleen. And
some times I make no doubt, but this sudden Flush of joyous Thoughts proceeds
from a worse Principle, even from the suggestion of the Devil; who, though he
has no immediate Access to the Minds of Men, can doubtless act upon their
Spirits and Humors, and thereby figure their Fancies with sprightly Ideas, and
tickle their Hearts into a Rapture; and this Power of his we may reasonably
suppose he is ready enough to exert upon any mischievous Occasion, when ever he
finds a Man willing to be deceived, and to rely upon ungrounded Presumptions.
The true and only safe May therefore for a Man to resolve himself is
impartially to survey himself, and to consider whether in the main his
Intentions and Actions are righteous. If you ask, by what Signs and Tokens
shall a Man know this? I answer, there is nothing can be a true Sign of
Righteousness but Righteousness, nothing but what is an Act or Instance of
Righteousness. But then we must have a great Care, that we do not argue from
particular Acts and Instances that we are Righteous in the main; For you may as
well conclude that you are not blind, because you hear well, or that you are
not deaf, because you see well, or that you have all your Senses, because you
have one or two, as that you are Righteous in the main, because you are so in
this or that particular. Well then, how shall we do to resolve our selves in
this most material Enquiry? Why do but consider what it is to be Righteous, and
then reflect upon your own Motion, and you will quickly feel whether you are
Righteous or no; for to be Righteous is for the main to intend righteously, and
act accordingly. If you ask again, how you shall know whether you so intend and
act; I shall only answer, that it is an unreasonable Question, and that you
might as well ask, whether you are hungry or thirsty; because you do as
naturally feel the Motions of your Soul, as those of your Body; and for you to
ask another Man what your own Intentions are, is to make him a Conjurer instead
of a Casuist. Would it not look extremely ridiculous for a Man to ask his
Creditor or Customer, Good Sir, how shall I know whether I intend to pay my
Debts, or am sincerely resolved not to overreach you? Should any Man ask me
such a Question, I should only bid him consult himself, and if then he
suspected his own Honesty, truly I should suspect that he had too much Reason
for it. For if a Man intends righteously, to be sure he intends it knowingly;
and if he knowingly intends it, he cannot but know he intends it; for if he
cannot know that he does it, it is because he cannot know how to do it; and if
he cannot know how to do it, he is not a capable Subject of Morality, but must
of necessity live and act at random, and blunder on, like a Traveller in the
dark, without being able to distinguish whether he goes right or wrong.
Wherefore as you would not be deceived in a Point of the highest Importance in
the world, a Point upon which your everlasting Fate depends, viz. whether you
are Righteous Men or no; do not measure your selves by any other Rule, but this
sure and infallible one in the Text, He that does Righteousness is righteous,
even as he is righteous.

2. From hence I infer, that seeing Righteousness is the good State of our
Souls, that the main Thing upon which we ought to value our selves is upon our
being truly Righteous. For if we have any such Thing as a rational and immortal
Soul about us, it is doubtless by far the noblest Ingredient of our Beings;
it is that by which we are near allied to Angels, and do even border upon God
himself. He therefore who values himself by any Thing but his Soul, and that
which is its Grace and Perfection, begins at the wrong End of himself, forgets
his Jewels, and estimates his Estate by his Lumber; in so much that one would
think it impossible, did not too many woeful Expeperiments daily evince the
contrary, that any Creature owning and believing a rational and immortal Spirit
to be a Part of its Being, should be so ridiculous as to value it self by such
little trifling Advantages as a well-colored Skin, a Suit of fine Clothes, a
Puff of Popular Applause, a Bag of red or white Earth; and yet, God help us,
these are the only Things almost by which we difference our selves from one
another. You are a much better Man than your Neighbor, who is a very poor
contemptible Wretch, a little creeping despicable Animal, not worthy to be
taken notice of by such a one as you. Why in the name of God, Sir, what is the
matter? Where is this mighty Difference between you and him? Has he not a Soul
as well as you, a Soul that is capable to live as long and be as happy as
yours. Yes, that is true indeed; but notwithstanding that, you thank God for
it, you are another guize Man than he; for you have a much bandsomer Body, your
Apparel is finer and more fashionable; you live in a more splendid Equipage,
and have a larger Purse to maintain it; and to your great Comfort, your Name is
more in Vogue and makes a far greater Rattle in the World. And is this all the
Difference then between your mighty Self, and your poor Neighbor? Alas, a few
Days more will put an End to all this; and when your rich Attires are reduced
to a Winding Sheet, and all your vast Possessions to six Foot of Earth, what
will become of all these little Trifles, by which you value your selves so
highly? Where now will be the Beauty, the Wealth, the Port and Garb, of which
you are so conceited? Alas, now that lovely Body will look as pale and ghastly,
that lofty Soul will be left as bare, as poor and naked, as your despised
Neighbors; and should you now meet his wandering Ghost in the vast World of
Spirits, what will you have left to boast of more than he; now that your Beauty
is withered, your Wealth vanished, and all your outward Pomp and Splendour
buried in a silent Grave? Now you will have nothing left to distinguish you
from the most Contemptible, unless you have wiser and better Souls, which are
the only Preheminencies above other Men that will survive our Funerals, and
distinguish us from base and abject Souls for ever. If we are now more pious,
and humble, and just, and charitable than other Men, this will stick by us when
our Heads are laid, and to all Eternity render us glorious and happy. And
indeed when once we have thrown off our Body and all our bodily Passions and
Necessities, the only Goods we shall be capable of enjoying are God, our
selves, and the Society of blessed Spirits, and these are no otherwise
enjoyable but only by Acts of Piety and Virtue. It is only by our Contemplation
and Worship, our Love and Imitation of God that we can enjoy him; it is only by
our Prudence and Moderation, our Temperance and Humility that we can enjoy our
selves; it is only by our Charity and Justice, our Modesty, peaceable and
mutual Submission and Condescension to one another that we can enjoy the
glorious Society of blessed Spirits, but if our unbodied Spirits carry with
them these divine Graces into the other World, we shall by them be possessed of
every Thing our utmost Wishes can propose; of a good God, a god-like, joyous
and contented Mind, a peaceful, kind, and righteous Neighborhood, and so all
above, within, and without us will be a pure and perfect Heaven. So that if
when I go from hence to seek my fortune in the World of Spirits, God should
thus bespeak me, O man! seeing thou art now leaving all the Enjoyments of
sense, consult what will do thee good, and thou shall have whatever thou will
ask to carry with thee into the spiritual State: I say should God thus offer
me, I am sure the utmost Good I could wisely crave, would be this, Lord give me
a Heart inflamed with Love, and winged with Duty to thee, that thereby I may
but enjoy thee; give me a sober and a temperate Mind, that thereby I may enjoy
my self; give me a kind and peaceable and righteous Temper, that thereby I may
enjoy the sweet Society of blessed Spirits: O give me but these blessed Things,
and thou have crowned all my Wishes, and to Eternity I will never ask any other
Favor for my self but only this, that I may continue a holy and a righteous
Soul for ever; for so long as I continue so, I am sure I shall enjoy all
spiritual Goods, and be as happy as Heaven can make me. What a prodigious Piece
of Folly therefore is it for Men to value themselves more upon these outward
Advantages, of which ere long they must be stripped, than upon the Graces and
Virtues of their own Minds, on which they must subsist for ever? Suppose now
that you were a Merchant in a far Country where you were allowed for a short
uncertain Time the Benefit of free Trade and Commerce in order to your gaining
a good Estate to maintain you in your own Native Country, when ever you are
forced to return; would you be so indiscreet as to lay out all the Product of
your Merchandise in building fine Houses, and purchasing great Farms, when you
know not how soon you may be commanded to depart and leave all these immovable
Goods behind you? Or rather would you not think your selves obliged by all the
Rules of Interest and Discretion to convert all your Gain into portable Wealth,
into Money or Jewels or other such moveable Commodities, as, when ever you are
forced to depart, you might carry Home along with you, and there maintain your
selves with them in many years Ease and Plenty? Do but think then, and think it
often, that while you live here you are but Strangers and Foreign Merchants;
that you came hither from another, World, to which you know not how soon you
may be forced to return; that all the Wealth, the Lands and Houses you gain by
your present Commerce are immovable Goods which you must leave behind you when
you go from hence, and that there is nothing portable of all that you can gain
in this World but only the Graces and Virtues of your Minds, and that therefore
while you have Opportunity it concerns you above all Things to store and
treasure up a plentiful Portion of these; that so whenever you are shipped off
into the eternal World you may carry such an Estate of them thither with you as
may suffice to maintain you there in Glory and Happiness for ever; which God of
his infinite Mercy grant.

1 JOHN III. 9. Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin; for his seed
remains in him, and he cannot sin because he is born of God.
FOR the right understanding of these Words, it will be necessary to enquire,
first, what is here meant by committing Sin; secondly, what is meant by being
born of God; thirdly, in what sense he that is born of God cannot commit sin.

First, what is here meant by committing sin? I answer, that this Phrase in the
Writings of this our Apostle has a special Energy, and does not denote the
simple doing of any sinful Action, though it be out of Ignorance, Incogitance, or
Frailty; nor does it only denote an habitual Course and Custom of sinning
wilfully, but primarily the doing of any sinful Action whatsoever deliberately,
wilfully, and presumptuously. For as for the first, it is not true that he that
is born of God does commit no sin at all; seeing the best of God's Children are
liable to be surpised into evil Actions through their Weakness, Ignorance, or
Inadvertency, of all which, there are some Remains even in the most purified
Natures. And as for the second, viz. the habit of sinning wilfully, though that
in the Apostles Sense is not only to commit sin, but to commit it in the most
eminent Degree; yet it is plain, that it is the deliberate Acts of Sin that he
here primarily intends: for so Verse the 4th he that commits sin
transgresses the Law, for Sin is a Transgression of the Law; which is plainly
meant of every single Act of wilful Sin. So ver. 8. he that commits sin is
of the Devil, that is, he is therein an Imitator of the Devil, which is true of
every deliberate Act; as well as of the Habit of Sin. So here in the Text, he
that is born of God does not commit sin; that is, understanding him still in
the same Sense, he does not commit any wilful and deliberate Act of Sin.

2. Our next Enquiry is, what is here meant by being born of God? To which I
answer, that to be born of another, denotes in general our receiving the
Beginning and Principle of our Life and Motion from him, and consequently to be
born of God, is to receive from him through the Operation of his Grace and
Spirit, the Beginning and Principle of our spiritual Life and Motion, viz. a
considerate, universal, prevailing Resolution to obey God, proceeding from our
Belief of the Christian Religion. When therefore God by the Influence of his
Grace and Spirit has wrought our Minds into such a Resolution, then are we
truly born of him, as having herein received from him the Principle of a new
Life and Motion. And this the Apostle expresses by being transformed by the
renewing of our mind. Romans 12. 2. i. e. having a new practical Judgment and
Resolution of Soul begotten in us; and this he elsewhere calls the renewing of
the holy Ghost Tit 3. 5. Upon which account we may very well be said to be born
of God; because it is from his blessed Spirit that we derive this Renewing,
which is the Principle of our spiritual Life and Motion.

Our last Enquiry is in what Sense this Assertion of the Apostle holds, viz.
That he who is thus born of God cannot sin? To which I answer, That this
Expression, he cannot, relates to the state he is now in; he cannot, as he is
one that is born of God, and while he does continue so; for so the Phrase is
frequently used in Scripture. So Romans 8. 7. The carnal mind cannot be subject
to God; not but the Mind which is now carnal, may hereafter be subject unto
God, viz. when it is renewed and changed: but it cannot be so while it
continues carnal. And in the same Sense he tells us in the next Verse, that it
cannot please God. So Matthew. 7. 18. a good Tree cannot bring forth evil Fruit,
neither can a corrupt Tree bring forth good Fruit; which can import no more
than this, that whilst the good Tree continues good, it cannot bring forth evil
Fruits, nor the corrupt Tree bring forth good Fruits whilst it continues
corrupt; not but that one may hereafter become evil, and bring forth evil
Fruits, as well as the other may become a good Tree, and bring forth good
Fruits. So that the meaning of he cannot sin, is no more than this, it is so
utterly inconsistent with the State of one that is born of God, to sin wilfully
and deliberately, that when ever he does so, he actually falls from that
blessed State, and for the time ceases to be born of God. And hence the Reason
assigned why a Man cannot sin wilfully, and be born of God at the same Time,
is, for his Seed remains in him; that is, because that Principle of new Life
and Motion, which the divine Spirit has produced in him, and which is nothing
else but an universal, prevailing Resolution of obeying God, remains within his
Breast, and for a Man to be universally and prevalently resolved to obey God,
and at the same Time to sin wilfully is a Contradiction in Terms; because
whenever he sins wilfully, he is prevalently resolved to disobey him. And
therefore seeing in every wilful Sin we are prevalently resolved to disobey
God, while we are so, our Resolution to obey him, which is the Seed and
Principle of our divine Life, must necessarily be extinguished; and
consequently, till such time as by our Repentance we have revived and recovered
it, we must cease to be born of God. He therefore who is born of God, cannot
sin wilfully, because while he continues in this State his Seed remains in him;
which is no more reconcilable to our sinning wilfully, than contraries are in
the same Degree. And therefore he adds, he cannot sin, because he is born of
God; that is, his State is such as will no more admit him wilfully to disobey
God, than to be dead and alive in the same Moment. But in pursuance of this
Argument, it will be necessary yet further to enquire what those wilful Sins
are which the Apostle here declares to be inconsistent with a good State, or
which is the same thing, with our being born of God; the Resolution of which is
of absolute necessity to enable Men to make a true Judgment of their own State,
whether it be good or bad. And in order hereunto it will be necessary to
premise the following Particulars.

1. That by wilful Sin, I mean the Acts as well as the Habits of Sin.

2. That by wilful Habits of Sin, I mean such as are contracted by wilful Acts,
and are wilfully retained and indulged.

3. That by wilful Acts of Sin, I do not mean all evil Actions which have any
Degree of Will in them, but only such as are deliberately chosen.

4. That the same Actions may be Sins of Weakness, and Sins of Wilfulness in
the same, or different Persons under different Circumstances.

1. That by wilful Sins, I mean the wilful Acts as well as Habits of Sin. To be
sure there is no Sin can be consistent with our being born of God, for which
the Gospel binds us over to eternal Condemnation; for while we thus stand
bound, we are Children of Wrath, and so cannot be Children of God at the same
time. Now the Law of Christ condemns us for all wilful Sins whatsoever, whether
they be single Acts or Habits; and every single wilful Act is as much a
Transgression of the Law, which threatens Condemnation, as any wilful Habit
whatsoever. The Law, which forbids wilful Lying under the Penalty of eternal
Death, does as well forbid the single Act, as the Habit of wilful Lying, and
therefore must forbid them both under the same Penalty; and indeed if it did
not, there are some of the most heinous sins would escape. For there are some
Sins which when Men have once committed, they never have Opportunity to repeat,
being prevented either for want of a new Occasion. or by just Sentence of Law;
such as Rape, and Theft, and Murder; and others, which can never pass beyond a
single Act, such as Parricide and Self-murder; and so can never grow into an
Habit: and yet I think there is no Man can doubt but that even the single Acts
of these Sins (supposing them wilful) do put a Man into a state of
Condemnation. I know it is usually said, that such horrible Sins as these
indeed do so, because the Mischief of them is so great, and the Malice so
heinous that it renders them equivalent to an Habit of any other Sin. To which
I answer, the Law of Christ condemns these Sins, not as they are greater than
others, but as they are Transgressions for which it threatens Condemnation.
Indeed the greatness of the Sin does increase the Condemnation; but yet the Law
which condemns us for a lesser Sin, does as certainly condemn us, as that which
condemns us for a greater. As for Instance, the Law of Christ as well condemns
us for Drunkenness, Adultery, Lying, and Malice, as for Murder. And as every
wilful Act of unjust Killing, is Murder; so every wilful Act of Adultery and
Malice, is Adultery and Malice; and therefore the Law of Christ condemns to far
greater Pains for the one than for the others; yet still it condemns us for
both: for that Law, which forbids any wilful Sin indifferently under the
Penalty of Condemnation, forbids every Act of it under the same Penalty;
because every Act of it is the Sin so forbidden; and therefore we may as well
say, that the Law of Christ does not condemn us for Parricide and Self-murder,
because these are only single Acts of Murder, as that it does not condemn us
for any other single Act of any other wilful Sin. For every single Act of
wilful Intemperance and Incontinency, are as truly Sins against the Law, which
forbids them under the Penalty of eternal Condemnation, as those single Acts of
Murder are against the Law which forbids Murder under the same Penalty; and
consequently do as well put us into a State of Condemnation; and to be sure,
while we are in this state, we cannot pretend to be born of God.

2. I premise that by wilful Habits of sin, are meant such as are contracted by
wilful Acts, and are wilfully retained, and indulged. For if you take Habits of
Sin in the largest Sense, as they signify a forward Propensity, Promptness,
and Readiness to do Evil, there is no doubt but there may be sinful Habits in
Men, which never were contracted by wilful Acts, as on the contrary, there may
be sinful Habits contracted by wilful Acts, which though not utterly extirpated,
may yet cease to be wilful. As for instance, a Man may be prompted to
unreasonable Anger, or excessive Lust, even from the natural Temper and
Constitution of his Body, without the Concurrence of any wilful Acts of his
own; and though he may be much more disposed to be angry or lustful than another
of a cooler Constitution, yet he may be much farther removed from any wilful
Habit of Anger and Lust, because the latter perhaps contracted them by his own
wilful Acts, and by his repeated Practice of them, does still cherish and
indulge them; whereas the former had no more hand in contracting them, than he
had in the moulding of of his own Constitution, and is so far from cherishing
them by any wilful Acts of his own, that it is the main endeavor of his Life
to oppose and vanquish them. And so on the other hand, a Man that by frequent
wilful Acts of Sin, has contracted wilful Habits, may afterward heartily
repent, and take up a prevailing Resolution of Amendment, and yet still the
evil Habit, the Promptness, or Propensity to his Sin, may be more or less
remaining in him; but this is now so far from being wilful, that the prevailing
Bent and Current of his Will is against it; and though still his evil
Inclinations are ready to take fire upon every Spark of Temptation that falls
upon them, and to blaze out into evil Actions; yet by the Strength of his
Resolution he so keeps it under, that it cannot break forth but upon a
surprise, and even that Surprise will render him more watchful and vigilant to
suppress it for the future. But now when evil Habits do not only exist in us,
but are also cherished and indulged by us, and do ordinarily influence and
govern our Practice; they are then not only wilful Sins, but a fixed and settled
State of wilful Sin; and are pregnant with a distinct Guilt and Venom from
those Acts of wilful Sin, that begot them. And hence in Scripture you find them
marked with the blackest Characters; they are called, the Root of bitterness,
the evil Heart, the Concupiscence wrought by Sin, the Law in the Members, which
those who are carnal and sold under Sin do obey, the carnal Mind, the Flesh in
which dwells no good, and enmity to God: by all which they are sufficiently
pronounced inconsistent with our being born of God.

3. I must premise that by wilful Acts of Sin I do not mean all wilful Actions
which have any Degree of Will in them, but only such as are deliberately chosen
and consented to. Every sin is so far voluntary, as that when we choose it we
are free to refuse it; otherwise it is necessary; and what is necessary, is no
Fault, nor can be justly liable to Reward, or Punishment. Those evil Actions
therefore, which, for Distinction sake, are called sins of Infirmity, are no
farther Sins than as they are chosen, and have some Intermixture of Will in
them; for if they have none, they have only the Matter of Sin in them, but not
the Form. But we are seldom so surprised with any Temptation to Evil, but that
it is possible for us to deliberate upon it, and thereupon to resolve against
it; and many Times by our Care and Watchfulness we do prevent those Evils,
which, when we are more remiss, do steal upon us unawares: and we that can
prevent them this Moment, can prevent them the next too, and so the next, and
so for ever. But then considering the Weakness and Imperfection of our Natures,
how our Wills are biased with bad Habits and Inclinations, and our Thoughts
dispersed and squandered among the infinite Diversions that surround us; it is
morally impossible, that is, it is not reasonably to be expected that in these
Circumstances we should be always upon our Guard against every evil Object
without, and every evil Motion within us, so as never to be surprised, or to
act unadvisedly. Whenever therefore we are so surprised into an evil Action, as
that we could not consider if we would, either for Want of Time, or for Want of
Order and Distinction in our Thoughts occasioned by some sudden Tumult of
Passion; this is not our Fault, but our Infelicity; because our Will is no way
concerned in it. But when we are so surprised, as that notwithstanding we might
have considered, had we taken all due Care to recollect our selves and exert
our utmost Attention; this is partly our Fault; because there is something of
Will in it; but more our Infelicity, because there is more of Weakness and
Infirmity than Will in it; and therefore is called a sin of Infirmity, which by
the merciful Indulgence of the Gospel is discharged of Course from all eternal
Penalties. But if when we are tempted, we either designedly omit to consider,
or consent upon Consideration; this is pure Malice of Will, which, while we are
born of God, can have no Place in us.

4. And lastly, I must premise, that the same Actions may be Sins of Weakness
and Sins of Wilfulness in the same, or in different Persons under different
Circumstances. For seeing it is the willing of an evil Action that makes it be
a sin, it necessarily follows, that it is the willing of it in a greater or a
lesser Degree that makes it a greater or a lesser Sin; and it is certain that
the same sin may have more or less of Will in it in the same, or different
Persons under different Circumstances. As for Instance; one Man may be
excusably ignorant of the Evil of such an Action, which another does either
know to be a Sin, or would have known it had he not been wilfully ignorant; and
that Sin, which this Man commits upon Deliberation, another may be hurried into
on a sudden surprise, in which Case, though both do the same Act, and in some
Sense both do it willingly too; yet because the one wills it more intensely
than the other, it is a Sin of Wilfulness in the one, and a Sin of Infirmity in
the other. And this holds true also in the same Person, who may do the same
Action ignorantly and inconsiderately at one Time, and knowingly and advisedly
at another; and if, when he has fallen into any Sin unawares, he is wilfully
careless and neglective to prevent the Return of it; that which now is a
pitiable Weakness, and as such falls under the general Indulgence of the
Gospel, will anon be inexcusable Obstinacy. From all which it is apparent, that
is not the Kind of the Sin but the Will of the Sinner that makes the Difference
between Sins of Weakness and Wilfulness; seeing the same Sins according to the
different Degrees of Will that are in them may be Sins of Infirmity at one
time, and Sins of Obstinacy at another. For so by the Law of England the same
Act of Killing is distinguished into Chance-medly, Manslaughter, and Murder;
the first of which is innocent, because it has no Will in it; the second
pitiable, because but imperfectly willed; the third capital, because freely
chosen, and fully consented to. And so also by the Christian Law the very same
Act under different Circumstances may be an innocent Error, a sin of Infirmity,
and a sin of Wilfulness; for if it be perfectly involuntary, it is an innocent
Error; if imperfectly willed, it is a sin of Infirmity; but if fully consented
to, a sin of Wilfulness. So long therefore as the Temptations of Men are so
infinitely various, and their Capacities of resisting so unequal, in different
Persons, there will be more or less of Will in the same Actions; and the same
Act will be far more excusable where there is a greater Temptation to it, and a
less Power of resisting, then it can be, when the Temptation is less, and the
Power of resisting it greater. All that can be done therefore in the Case
before us is this, to lay down such general Rules of Distinction between Sins
of Infir-mity, and Sins of Wilfulness, as that thereby every Man, that has the
free Use of his own Faculties may, upon a due Consideration of his Particular
Circumstances, distinguish whether his Sin be wilful or no. For when all is
done every Man must thus far be his own Casuist; it being impossible for
another to determine what Degrees of Will there are in his Sin, unless he knew
under what Circumstances he committed it; because different Circumstances do
vary the Case, and make the Sin to be more or less voluntary.

These Things premised, I come now particularly to state what those Sins are,
upon the Commission of which we cease to be born of God: and these I shall rank
under 3 Heads: 1. Sins of wilful Ignorance. 2. Sins of wilful Inconsideration.
3. Sins against Knowledge and Consideration.

1. Sins of wilful Ignorance; I say wilful, to exclude all invincible and
unaffected Ignorance: By invincible Ignorance I mean such, as we neither do nor
can surmount by the utmost Improvement we can make of our Reason. For sure not
to understand, what we cannot understand, is not all criminal; and if our
Ignorance be innocent, whatever is the necessary Effect of it must be so too;
all necessary Effects being of a common Nature with their Causes. And certainly
no Man breathing can be innocent, if he be not so who acts to the best of his
Knowledge, and knows to the best of his Capacity For so our Savior himself
pronounces concerning the Pharisees; If ye were blind ye should have no sin,
but now you say that you see, therefore your sin remains, John 9. 4.

By unffected Ignorance I mean such as is vincible, but by Reason of some
innocent Hindrances, such as the Obscurity of the Object, or the Weakness of
the Capacity, or the innocent Prejudice and Prepossession of the Understanding,
is not to be removed without extreme Difficulty; which though it be so far
sinful, as it is within the Reach of our Power to be better informed; yet is by
no Means to be accounted a wilful Sin. For if it be wilful Sin not to know and
do the Will of God to the utmost of our Power, there is no Sin in the World but
what is wilful; because it is no Sin at all not to do more than our utmost. But
then there is a wilful and affected Ignorance, which proceeds either from our
profane Contempt and Regardlessness of God, by which we have so far
extinguished our natural Sense of Religion, as not to think it worth the while
to concern our selves about it, and so rudely stop our Ears against all the
Means of Instruction; or else this wilful Ignorance arises from some sinful
Prejudice against the Knowledge of the Truth begotten in us by some darling
Lust, which, that we may quietly enjoy without any Remorse of Conscience, we
industriously shun all the Means of Conviction; and either exclude all Thoughts
of Religion from our Minds lest they should discover to us the Evil and Danger
of our Sin, (which is the way of those who are openly profane, and
irreligious;) or endeavor to wheedle our own Understandings to such false
Opinions as are soft and easy and indulgent to our Lusts, (which is the way of
Hypocrites and false Pretenders to Religion.) Now as for this Sort of
Ignorance, it springs from a wicked Will. and is not so much to be imputed to
the Weakness of our Understandings, as to the Depravedness of our Affections;
they are the impure Vapors from below that cloud the Sky above, and overcast
the intellectual Region with Darkness and Confusion. And if we are ignorant of
our Duty, because we will not be informed; our Ignorance is so far from
excusing our Neglect of it, that it self is inexcusable. If I commit a Sin,
because I am wilfully ignorant, the Wilfulness of my Ignorance makes my Sin to
be wilful. Here the Effect always partakes of the Nature of the Cause, and
derives into its self all its Venom and Malignity; and therefore if my
Ignorance be a wilful Sin, whatever Sins it betrays me into, they must be all
wilful as well as that. And hence our Savior tells us, that this is the
condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather
than light, John 3. 19.

2. Another Sort of wilful Sins are Sins of wilful Inconsideration. I say
wilful, because there are sundry Evils whereinto we are perfectly surprised; as
when Temptations start out so suddenly upon us, as that either for Want of
Time, or the great Hurry and Tumult it puts our Thoughts into, it is not in our
Power to consider and deliberate; in which Case we are not capable Subjects of
Law and Morality. For that which makes us capable Subjects is first, that we
are rational Agents, and so can deliberate what is best to choose. 2. That we
are free Agents, and so can choose what is best upon Deliberation; without
which Madmen and natural Fools are as capable Subjects of Law as we. Whenever
therefore our Circumstances are such that we cannot deliberate, and choose upon
Deliberation, though the Actions we do are materially Evils, yet are they not
formally Sins; because while we do them we are not capable Subjects of the Law
that forbids them, nor consequently accountable to it. As for Instance; it is
doubtless a great Sin and deserves a great Punishment, for a Man to wound his
Friend, or abuse his Benefactor; but yet in a Madman it is no Sin at all,
because when he does it, he is incapable of being governed by the Law that
forbids it. And this I judge is the Case of Men under perfect surprises, when
they are violently hurried into evil Actions in a sudden Distraction and
Confusion of Thoughts; which doubtless may sometimes be the Case of very good
Men, especially under great Pains, or the sudden Appearance of frightful
Dangers, which for the present at least may distract and scare them out of all
Capacity and Deliberation; and at other Times, while their Thoughts are
innocently wandering among the vast Variety of outward Objects, a Temptation may
suddenly break in, and prevail upon them before they have Time to recollect
themselves. For we find by Experience, that the Mind has not that absolute
Dominion over the Will as to make it choose or refuse at its beck upon the bare
Proposal of good or evil Objects; but many Times before it can prevail is fain
to dispute it out with our Passions and Appetites, and to oppose their
Importunities with more prevalent Motives to the contrary; and therefore if it
should so fall out that in that Moment when the Temptation comes, the Mind
should be very much diverted by other Employments, it is in many Cases morally
impossible, but Passion and Appetite should prevail, and obtain our. Consent
before the Mind is aware of it; because that being at present otherwise
employed; and always unable to attend many Things at once, it cannot be ready
in the present Exigence immediately to urge the Arguments on its own side, and
to detect the Fallacies on the other. Though this I confess, will hardly hold in
any gross Acts of Sin, because in these there is generally some Pause and
Interval between the Temptation and the Action, wherein the Mind may easily be
advised with, which if it be a good Mind cannot fail to suggest sufficient
Arguments against it: But if the Temptation does so hurry the Man, as that he
cannot deliberate, he is so far innocent; and if as soon as he considers he
retracts the evil Consent into which his Will was surprised, before it passes
into Action; or if having acted it, before he was aware, he becomes more wary
and watchful for the future, it is not so much his Fault as his Misery. It Is
true, there are surprises of Temptation which are not innocent; but then the
Reason is, because they are not pure surprises, but such as do not incapacitate
us to deliberate; and if when it is in our Power we either do not deliberate at
all, or not enough, but make a rash and foolish Choice, when, if we had used
our utmost Care, we might have chosen more advisedly; our Choice is culpable,
and so is the Action thence proceeding. But seeing ours is the Religion of Men
and not of Angels, and it cannot reasonably be expected, considering our
Circumstances, that we should always do as well as possibly we can, it is to be
supposed that this Religion of ours, which is purposely accommodated to our
imperfect State, admits us to be good in the Main, though we are not so to
Perfection, or which is the same Thing, to the utmost of our Possibility. For
while our Soul is fain to minister to a Body, and has so quick a sense of its
Necessities, and while we are encompassed with so vast a Variety of tempting
Objects, and our Thoughts are so dispersed and squandred among them; it is
morally impossible, but that many of our Actions should be unadvised, and pass
our Watch without a severe Examination: nor can it reasonably be expected, that
we should in all Cases, where it is in our Power, so precisely weigh every
minute Circumstance of our Actions, as to determine exactly on which side our
duty lies: and therefore should our Religion exact this of us without any
Mitigation or Abatement, I doubt that even the best of Men would never be able
to abide the Test of it. But then besides this Kind of Inconsideration, which
is either purely involuntary, and by consequence innocent, or but partly
voluntary, and so excusable; there is another Sort of it, which is absolutely
and inexcusably wilful. And This is twofold, viz. actual and habitual. Actual
is either when, notwithstanding we have been sufficiently forewarned by
precedent Surprises, we are wilfully neglective of our selves, and take no Care
to fortify our Minds by Consideration against them in Case they should return
again upon us; or when upon the Appearance of a prevailing Temptation we either
quench the good Motions of our own Consciences, and refuse to consider the Evil
and Danger of the Sin we are tempted to, lest we should be deterred from
committing it; or purposely contrive to baffle our own Consideration, and to
render it ineffectual by opposing against it either some ungrounded Hope of
Impunity, or some fallacious Promise of future Amendment. In all which Cases
our Inconsideration is apparently wilful, and so consequently must the Sins be,
which follow upon it; and he who pleads his own wilful Inconsideration as an
Excuse for his Sin, does only Apologize for one Fault by another, which instead
of extenuating inflames and aggravates it. And then as for habitual
Inconsideration it is the Effect of our frequent stifling the Convictions of
our own Consciences, whereby we fear them into a deep Insensibility of Good and
Evil, so as that at last we Sin on without Remorse, and return to our Lusts
with a perfect Indifferency without ever considering what we do, or reflecting
upon what we have done. Now as it is no Excuse for our Sin if it proceeds from
a sinful Habit contracted by frequent Acts of wilful Sin, so neither will it
excuse our Sin that it proceeds from an habitual Inconsideration contracted by
often refusing to consider. And as vicious Habits have a proper Evil and
Guiltiness in them distinct from those vicious Acts that produced them, so
habitual Inconsideration has in it a peculiar Venom of its own beyond what was
in those wilful Acts of Inconsideration whereby it was contracted. And
accordingly in Scripture it is described as the most desperate State of
Sinners: it is to be past feeling, which was the Condition of the leudest and
most irreclaimable Gentiles, Ephesians. 4. 19. it is to have a seared conscience, the
Character of Sinners under the last Apostasy, 1 Timothy 4. 2. it is to have a
reprobate mind, which was the Cause and Effect of the foulest Gentile
Impieties, 1 Romans 28, 29. In a word it is to have a hard, and unrelenting
Heart, by which Men are said to treasure up wrath against the day of wrath,
Romans 2. 5.

3. And lastly, another Sort of wilful Sins are such as are wilfully committed
against Knowledge and Consideration. I say again wilfully, to exclude those
known Evils, which either we do not all consent to, or very imperfectly. For it
is a known Evil for a Man to rove in his Devotions, or to think blasphemous
Thoughts of God, or to be drowsy and liftless in our Addresses to him; and yet
many times these are the necessary Effects even of innecent Causes, such as
Melancholy, or Weariness, or antecedent Thoughtfulness; and therefore though they
are evil in the Matter, yet because they necessarily proceed from such Causes
as are not evil, we are no more accountable for them than for the Returns of
our Appetite, or the Palpitation of our Heart: and if we do not indulge our
Drowsiness, nor harbor and entertain our evil Thoughts, but throw them out of
our Minds as soon as we observe them, and keep a more careful Watch to prevent
their Return, our Will is innocent, and so long we may be sure God will not
condemn us for our Weakness. Again, it is a known Evil for a Man to be angry
without a Cause, or to have an unchaste Desire, or to love, or hate, or hope, or
fear, or rejoice, or grieve unreasonably; yet these Evils are such as no Care
can wholly prevent, and against which no Warchfulness is a sufficient Guard.
And though in many of these Instances there be many times so much of our Will
intermingled as to render us culpable, yet this is not sufficient to extinguish
the Principle of our Regeneration, or to degrade us into a State of Wickedness.
But when a Man knows that such an Action is evil, and either actually considers
that it is so, or neglects to consider it through habitual Inconsideration, and
thereupon actually consents to it; he does hereby openly defy God, and
maliciously trample upon his Authority, being desperately resolved to pursue
his sinful Desire let God and his Conscience say what they can to the contrary;
which is such an Height of wilful Malice as no Apology can extenuate. Hence our
Savior pronounces that the servant that knows his Masters will, and does it
not shall be beaten with many stripes, Luke 12. 47. And accordingly St. James
tells us, that he that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is sin;
that is, it is a very great and inexcusable Sin, James 4. 17. and St. Paul
assures us that the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness;
that is, who know the Truth, and yet wilfully sin against their Knowledge, Romans
1. 18. and to name no more Heb. 10. 26. we are told, that if we sin wilfully
after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more
sacrifice for sin; which Words are to be understood according to the general
Analogy of the Gospel [if we sin wilfully] i. e. if we are deliberately guilty
of any known Sin [after we have received the knowledge of the truth] i. e. have
been chatechized and baptized in the Christian Faith [there remains no mere
sacrifice for sin] i. e. unless we recover our selves by Repentance, and
Amendment of the Fact. And seeing that where we sin wilfully the Virtue of the
great Sacrifice for Sin has no Place without a special and particular
Repentance, and consequently there is no other Remedy left for us in the
Gospel, all that remains is what follows in the next verse, viz. a certain
fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery indignation to devour the adversary.
From whence it follows that upon our sinning knowingly and wilfully in any
particular Instance, we fall into a State of Wrath and Condemnation, and
consequently fall from the happy State of our Regeneration, or being born of
God.

And now to conclude this Argument, from the whole I infer the horrible Evil of
consenting to any known Sin, after we have entered into good Resolutions to the
contrary; which will plainly appear upon the following Considerations.

1. Consider the shameful Weakness and Impotency of it. For such Resolutions,
if they are well formed, are grounded on the strongest and most momentous
Reasons in the world; and for a Man to Cancel a Resolution enforced with such
powerful Motives for a mere Vanity, or to gratify some foolish and importunate
Lust, the Pleasure of which dies away in the Enjoyment, argues him to have a
base and prostitute Mind, that has no Strength of Thought, or stedfastness of
Will in it, but is whiffled up and down like a Feather in the Air by every
little Counterblast of Wind.

2. Consider the prodigious Hazard to which we expose our selves by it. For by
every wilful Sin after such a Resolution we throw our selves headlong from the
best into the worst Estate in the world, from a State of Love into a State of
Wrath, from being born of God to being a Son of perdition; and if we thence be
snatched away, before we have recovered our Relapse, (as who knows but we may,)
we shall dye for ever, and by one desperate Act of Folly fall from Heaven into
Hell. But suppose we should survive our Sin, and be allowed a space of
Repentance; yet is it a mighty Hazard whether ever we make a good Use of it.
For when by one wilful Sin we have made a Breach into our good Resolution, in
all probability that will open a Gap for another to follow, and that for
another, till hereby our evil Habits at last recover their full Power, and then
our Will and Practice will be laid open again into a common Thoroughfare of
Iniquity. For when we consented to the first Sin it was with a Promise of
repenting immediately, and upon the same Promise in all probability upon the
next Temptation we shall consent to a second, and so to a third; and by this
Train the Devil will tole us on through a long Course of Sin, till at length
our Will is depraved again, and our Conscience seared, and then we shall lay
aside all Thoughts of Repentance.

3. Consider the great Sorrow and Remorse that must follow upon our Sin, in
Case we should repent of it. For to be sure before we can heartily repent of
it, our Mind must be stung with many severe Reflections upon our own wretched
Weakness and Impotence, and our Falseness and Perfidiousness to our own
Engagements and Resolutions, upon the Affront we have given to our good God,
and the vile Contempt we have offered to his most righteous Authority, and our
ungrateful grieving his holy Spirit, whereby, before we committed this
Wickedness, we were sealed unto the day of Redemption: all which if we have any
thing of good Nature and Ingenuity, and much more if we have any the least
Foot-step or Remains of that divine Seed, by which we were born of God, must
necessarily create in us a most pungent Sorrow and Remorse, whenever we reflect
upon it; a Sorrow that will be much more than equivalent to the highest
Pleasure we can hope for from any wilful Sin: and for a Man to commit such a
Sin upon a Presumption that he shall repent of it, when he cannot but foresee,
if he be in his Wits, that his Repentance will cost him far more sorrow than
his sin will yield him Pleasure, is all Folly and Madness.

4. Consider how much of that Ground we lose back by every wilful Sin which by
hitherto keeping true to our good Resolution we had gotten against our evil
Inclinations. Our Religion can never be easy to us till in some good Measure we
have mortified and extinguished our depraved Inclinations; for till then in the
whole Course of our Religious Practice we shall row against the Stream, and be
continually warring against and doing Violence to our selves. But if when a Man
has once entered into a good Resolution he takes care to pursue it, he will
find by degrees his bad Inclinations decay and wear off; and proportionably, as
they decay, Piety and Virtue will grow more and more natural and easy to him.
But when a Man has for some time faithfully pursued his good Resolution, and
has thereby got a great deal of Ground of his bad Inclinations, if then he
unravels it by any one wilful Act of Sin, his bad Inclinations will thereby
recover all those Degrees of Strength and Vigor which they lost in the past
Course of his Piety and Virtue; so that now he must be forced to begin the
whole Work of his Religion again, and to struggle through all those
Difficulties, which he had before surmounted. Now he must fight over again all
the Victories he had gotten, before he can regain that Command and Empire of
himself, to which he was arrived before he revolted from his good Resolution;
and thus for a Moments Satisfaction he foolishly creates himself a long and
tedious Labor.

5. And lastly consider how by every wilful Sin you will weaken and impair
those comfortable Hopes you had arrived to by persevering in your good
Resolution. While you persevere in Well-doing, your Minds will be all a long
entertained and refreshed with the growing Hopes of your Reconciliation with
God at present, and of a glorious Immortality to succeed; and those blessed
Hopes will every Day improve upon your Hands, till at length they are ripened
into a full Assurance; the Comfort of which will mightily spirit and inliven
all your Religious Endeavors, and carry you on with indefatigable Vigor
through all the weary Stages of your Duty. But now by committing of any wilful
Sin, thereby you throw your selves out of the Arms of God's Favor, and give up
all your Pretensions to eternal Happiness; and though by your serious Repentance
you should afterward recover to the blessed Condition from whence you are
fallen, yet in all Probability it will be a great while before you will be able
to recover those blessed Hopes from whence you are fallen. For the Sense of
your past Lapse, if you have any Modesty in you, will make you very anxious and
doubtful of your selves and render you extremely fearful and suspicious, lest
you should fall again; and so only sin and repent, and repent and sin on, 'till
at length you have sinned your selves beyond all Repentance; and these very
just Fears and Jealousies will very much hinder the Growth of your Hopes, and
cause them to spring by slow and insensible Degrees.

JOHN XIV. 27. Peace I leave with you, my Peace I give unto you: not as the
World gives, give I unto you: Let not your Heart be troubled, neither let it
be afraid.


THese Words are a Part of our Savior's farewell Discourse to his Disciples,
in which after he had given them some necessary Instructions for the
Information of their Faith, and Conduct of their Manners, in which after he had
comforted them with the Assurance that ever long he would return again to them
by his holy Spirit, and assist them in their Work, and support them under their
Troubles, he takes a solemn leave of them, Peace I leave with you Which among
the Hebrews was the usual Form of Salutation when they met or parted, Shalom
Lacha, Peace be unto you; where, by Peace, they meant all manner of Blessings;
so that it was equivalent to all those Three Salutations among the Greeks
(...), in which they wished to each other Satisfaction of Mind, Health of Body,
and Success of Affairs. So that in this Salutation Peace I leave with you, our
Soviour wishes all Good to his Disciples, of which, Peace strictly taken, is
one of the principal Instances. Nor, says he, do I only wish Peace to you in
general, but I give you my Peace, or the Wish and Salutation of my Peace; which
is a much better Peace than that which Men have hitherto enjoyed, an inward
Peace of Mind and Soul founded upon much surer Grounds and better Principles
than those which natural Reason and Philosophy pretend to. And this new kind of
Peace which is properly mine, because founded upon my Principles, I give unto
you: not as the World gives, give I unto you. The Men of the World give the
Salutation of Peace to each other many times out of mere Complement, without
any real Wish, or hearty meaning, and when they mean what they say, it is
commonly nothing but an empty impotent Wish that conduces nothing, or at least,
not enough to the Peace and Satisfaction of those whom they salute. But as for
my part, as I give you the Salutation of Peace, so I heartily mean and wish
that you may enjoy it; nor do I only wish you Peace, but I have also taken Care
to furnish you with such abundant Means, and effectual Principles of Peace, as
that if you are not extremely wanting to your selves, you cannot long be
without it. The Words thus Explained, the Sense of them may be resolved into
this Proposition.

That our blessed Lord as he heartily wishes Peace and Quiet of Mind to all his
Disciples and Followers, so he has taken Care to furnish them with the most
sufficient and effectual Means to obtain it: the Truth of which, evidently
appears upon a full Consideration of these Two Particulars: First, that he has
taken the most effectual Care to remove from us all the Causes of Trouble and
Disquiet of Mind. Secondly, that he has taken Care to supply us with the most
effectual Principles of Peace and Satisfaction of Mind.

1. I begin with the first of these, viz. that our blessed Lord has taken the
most effectual Care to remove from us all the Causes of Trouble and Disquiet of
Mind; and they are principally these Five.

1. The Sense of Guilt. 2. False and extravagant Estimations of the good Things
of the World. 3. Our taking up wrong Measures and Opinions of the Evils of the
World. 4. An effeminate Softness and Delicacy of Temper. 5. Misplacing of our
Happiness in Things that are out of our own Power.
1. One Cause of disquiet of Mind, is the Sense of Guilt. For God has
imprinted such an awful Apprehension of his own invisible Power and Majesty on
our Minds, that whenever we reflect upon the manifold Provocations we have
given him, to arm his Omnipotent Vengeance against us, it must naturally
suggest very anxious and direful Thoughts to our Minds, and fill us with black
and horrible Apprehensions of the fatal Consequents of his Wrath and
Displeasure against us. So that till such time as Men have stupefied their
natural Sense of God by a long Custom, and inveterate Habit of sinning, it will
be as impossible for them to be at Peace under the Apprehension of his
Displeasure, as it is to sleep with an Alarm in their Ears. But till such time
as our Savior had procured for us the new Covenant, by which God has solemnly
obliged himself to pardon us upon our Repentance; sinful Men, though true
Penitents, could never have arrived at that Degree of Security, that God was
reconciled to them, as is necessary to set their Minds at Rest, and free them
from all Anxiety. For though to repent is the best thing a Sinner can do, yet
this does not at all alter the Nature of the Sin he repents of, so as to render
it less evil, or less deserving of Punishment; and so long as the Desert of
Punishment remains, God has a natural Right to execute it, and so long we can
never be certain whether he will exact it or no. Some wavering Hopes a poor
Penitent might have arrived to, upon the Consideration of the infinite
Benignity of the divine Nature, but the utmost Comfort he could have given
himself, was that of the penitent King of Nineveh; who can tell if God will
turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not? Jonah
3. 9. But alas! when a Man's Mind is hagg'd and ridden with his Guilts, who can
tell? is such a poor Relief as must necessarily leave it extremely anxious and
disponding. But now upon our Savior's procuring for us the new Covenant, you
and I, and every one of us can tell, and that with as much certainty as that
God is true, that if we do repent, and turn from our evil Ways, God will turn,
and repent of his Anger, and Displeasure against us. So that now all we have to
do is to reflect upon our selves, and examine whether we are true Penitents or
no, whether we have submitted our Will to Gods, with a full Purpose and
Resolution to fly whatever he forbids, and follow whatever he commands us; and
if we have, we may upon the Terms of the New Covenant, from thence as certainly
conclude that he is reconciled to us, and that his high Displeasure against us,
is all converted into the dearest Kindness and Complacency, as we can that he
is God, or which is all one, that he is true and faithful; which doubtless is
one of the most solid Foundations of Peace and Satisfaction in the World. For
what can disturb me while I feel my self lodged in his Arms and Embraces whose
Wisdom, I am sure, no Craft can out-wit, and with whose Power no Force is able
to contend. Here I dwell as in an impregnable Fortress, where nothing can come
at me, but what is for my good; how then can any thing prove adverse to me,
while he is my Friend, in whose Hands and Disposal every thing that concerns me
is placed?

2. Another Cause of Disquiet of Mind, is our false and extravagant Estimations
of the good Things of this World. The main Spring of those Troubles which
perplex our Minds, is the Goods and Evils that are without us, and without our
Power and Disposal, in which we commonly fancy far more Good and Evil than
really there is. We look upon the good Things of this World as unskilful
Spectators do on Landskips, in which while they stand at a Distance, they fancy
they behold here a smiling Meadow, there a delightful Grove, and there a lofty
Mountain; but upon a nearer Approach, and more considerate View, find all this
goodly Prospect to be nothing but a course Canvas artificially painted with
Colors and Shadows. Thus while we behold the Riches, the Pleasures, and the
Honors of this World at a Distance, to our wild Imaginations there appear vast
Mountains of Happiness in them, fruitful Fields of Pleasure, delightful Groves
of Content and Satisfaction, which while we are in the pursuit of them, fills
our Minds full of Cares, and anxious and solicitous Thoughts about them; but
then as we approach nearer to them, and come to survey them more closely, the
Mountains presently dwindle into Mole-hills, the Fields and the Groves into
empty Shadows; and after all our Labor and Care to possess our selves of them,
our Enjoyment of them amounts not to the Tithe of our Hope, and so we are still
restless and unsatisfied, both while we are in the Quest, and while we are in
the Possession of them. While we are in the Pursuit of them, we are wild and
imaginative; we swell with fantastic Joys, and juggle our selves into
Expectations as great and eager as our own Desires; but as soon as we are
possessed of them, we presently find their Vanity and Emptiness, and perceiving
how little they are able to perform of those vast Things they promised us, our
abused Fancy that had raised it self with such high and swelling Expectations,
falls flat underneath the Disappointments of Fruition, and so while we are
following, we are restless, and when we have overtaken them, we are
dissatisfied; all which arises from those extravagant Estimations we make of
them. Whereas did we but value them as they are, and according to the true
Rules of Reason and Religion, we should pursue them with far more Indifference,
and enjoy them with far more Content. While we are in pursuit of them, we
should look upon them as Things without which we may be happy, and consequently
as Things that have not worth enough in them to deserve of us any mighty Care
or Solicitude, and so we should follow them with a calm and sedate Mind; and
entering into the Possession of them with a moderate Expectation, we should
find every Thing in them, that we hoped for; for all the Good that they
promised, they would be sure to perform, and so we should have no disappointed
Hope to vex and disturb us, but our Expectation would be entirely satisfied in
our Enjoyment. Thus would we take care to fix in our Minds a true Estimation of
the good Things of this World, and to prize them at those Rates that our
Religion sets upon them, they would never be able to give us half the
Disturbance they now do; for then we should look upon them as Things that are
extrinsick to our Happiness, as Things that we may want without Damage, or
enjoy without Advantage to our main Interest; and esteeming them as such, we
should pursue them with much less Concern, and enjoy them with much more
Satisfaction; We should not be vexed with such an impatient Desire of gaining
them, nor alarmed with so many tormenting Fears of losing them; but with S.
Paul we should know both how to want them, and how to abound in them, and to
undergo both Fortunes with a calm, and cheerful Mind.

3. Another Cause of Disquiet of Mind, is our taking up wrong Measures and
Opinions of the Evils of the World. As for those Evils which are only the
Objects of our Faith and Reason, and such are the eternal Evils of the other
World, we are always apt to lessen and diminish them, and flatter our selves
with soft and easy Apprehensions of them; but as for those that strike upon
our Sense, we are ever prone to swell and magnify them; which is the reason
that the former disquiet us too little, and the latter too much, though our
Disquiet for the one is necessary to prevent them, whereas our Trouble for the
other does only serve to render them more grievous and oppressive. For the
greatest Power these outward sensible Evils have to hurt and damnifie us, they
derive from our own Imagination, which oftentimes disguises them in grim and
frightful Vizards, and makes them appear to us a Thousand Times more terrible
than they are, insomuch that the Prospect and Apprehension is generally more
grievous to us, than the Sense and Experience of them, and what we imagine in
them, is far more than what we feel. And thus we turn each Whip into a
Scorpion, and swell our Molehill into a Mountain of Misery; so that the
greatest part of what we suffer, is generally of our own creating, because we
suffer not only the real Evils which are in the Things themselves, but which
are commonly more, the fantastic too which our own Imagination forms and
affixes to them. So that would we but take Care to strip Realities from
Fantastry, it would be impossible for those Evils which we feel or fear to give
us half the Disturbance that they do; and the only way for us to do this, is to
take our Measures of these outward Evils from Religion, which will soon
satisfy us that they are nothing near so formidable in themselves, as we
imagine them. For as for Instance, what mighty Matter is there in the loss of
these outward Goods which are all so extrinsick to our Happiness, which cannot
help us in our greatest Needs, nor make us easy in their fullest Enjoyment,
and which Thousands enjoy not, and yet are a Thousand Times more happy than
those who possess them in the greatest Abundance? Again, what great Evil is it
for a Man to be contemned, and reproached, and vilified? for as for these
Things they are Good or Evil as we please to fancy them, and there is scarce
any other Venom in them, than what our own Imagination does infuse. If we think
them great Evils, they will be sure to vex and discompose us, which is the
greatest Injury they can do us; but if we scorn and despise them, they are
impotent Things, which like Wildfire, do only crack and vanish into Air, but
leave no formidable Effects behind them. To name no more, what mighty Hurt is
there in being persecuted for Righteousness sake? Suppose I were banished from
my Friends and native Country, do I not see Men every Day undertake a voluntary
Exile, and banish themselves into the remotest Parts of the World, only to get
an Estate, or to learn Experience, or satisfy a Curiosity? for all the
difference between one and the other, is only this, that the one is forced, and
the other voluntary, and why the one should be worse than the other, there can
be no other Reason assigned, but only this, that we imagine it so. Could we but
cure our erroneous Fancy, such Banishment would be only a more advantageous
Travel, since doubtless, he who travels to save his Conscience and Innocence,
and secure his Hopes of everlasting Bliss, makes the best Voyage in the World.
Suppose I should suffer a close Imprisonment, and be secluded from human
Conversation; is it such a deplorable Thing for a Man to be kept within Doors,
to be snatched out of the Crowd and Hurry of the World, and be forced to retire
within himself, and converse with God, and Heaven, and his own Thoughts? Are
not these Company enough to entertain our Solitudes, and to supply the Want of
the Noise of the World, in which there is commonly so much of Discord and
Impertinence? But then suppose the worst that you can suppose; that you should
suffer a tormenting Death, and be chased out of the World with the severest
Instruments of human Cruelty. It is certain that ever long you must have died
whether you had suffered Martyrdom or no; only now you die a little sooner, and
so anticipate your eternal Happiness. And if you had died a natural Death,
perhaps the Torment might have been much greater; you might have languished
much longer under the Gout, or Stone, or Strangury, than under the Hands of the
Executioner, and endured the same Degree of Torment, without the Comfort of
dying in a brave Cause, and being assured of an immortal Recompense. Thus
Religion sets the Evils of this World in a true Light, and represents them to
us in their own natural Forms and Colors, without any of that terrible Pomp in
which our Imagination is so apt to dress and disguise them; it assures us that
they are all designed for our good, and are convertible into it, and if we take
Care to make a wise and pious Use of them, we shall be the better for them for
ever; it certifies us that they can deprive us of no Good, but what ever long
will be insignificant to us; and that they can do us no Hurt, but what ever
long we shall be insensible of for ever; and by thus exposing these Evils naked
to us, it shows us their Nakedness, and Impotence, and thereby deprives them of
the Power they borrow of our Fancies to disturb our Tranquillity and Peace.

4. Another Cause of Disquiet of Mind, is an effeminate Softness, and Delicacy
of Temper, arising from our Neglect of exercising those Virtues which naturally
tend to confirm and fortify the Mind against troublesome and disquieting
Accidents; such as Faith, Patience, and Self-denial, Submission and Resignation
to God, which when like so many Guardian Angels they pitch their Tents about
the Soul, are an invincible Defense to her against the Strokes and Impressions
of Misfortune, and without which, she is left altogether naked and unguarded
amidst all the disquieting Accidents that surround her. For in the Absence of
these heavenly Graces, a Man has nothing wherewithal to resist any Evil that
befalls him, but only the insensible Stupidity, and brutal Sturdiness of his
Temper, which can never hold out long under any pressing Calamity; and when
once these are broke by the repeated Strokes and Impressions of unfortunate
Accidents, the Man presently dissolves into Softness and Effeminacy; for now
the natural Brawniness of Temper being worn away like a Stone with the
continual Droppings of Rain, his Mind will become so tender, and sore, and
uneasy, that every little Touch of Misfortune will pain and disturb him; in
which Case he can derive no Relief from his Reason, having all along disused
himself to advise and consult with it; and so every Alarm of Danger from
without, presently raises a Tumult within, and puts his whole Soul into an
uproar, in which his Mind is left naked of all Relief, and utterly abandoned of
those wise and brave Thoughts which should guard and defend it. But now had he
taken Care but to educate his Mind in the School of Christianity, that by
instructing him in all those manly Virtues of Patience and Temperance,
Constancy and Resignation to the Will of God, would have inspired him by
Degrees with such an invincible Stayedness and Firmness of Spirit, as would
have rendered his Peace and Tranquillity impregnable against all the Assaults of
Misfortune. And when all is done, these Virtues are the best Protection we have
against the Power of those calamitous Accidents that surround us. For when by
Temperance a Man has weaned himself from the Pleasures of the Body, when by
Patience he has hardened himself against the Pains and Displeasures of it, when
by Constancy to himself, he has acquired a continual Presence of Mind, and
ready Use of his Reason and Consideration, when by frequent Acts of Resignation
to God he has reduced himself to an Habit of embracing every Accident as a
Token of Love, and bidding every Thing welcome that befalls him; when, I say,
these happy Effects are produced in him, he is as safe and secure from the
disquieting Power of these evil Accidents below, as if he lived in the
uppermost Regions of the Air, where he enjoys a perpetual Calm and Serenity,
where he tramples upon Clouds, and is above all Storms, and with a cheerful and
composed Mind can sit securely, smiling at the rolling Thunder below, whilst it
grumbles and bursts underneath his Feet. Thus will the constant Practice of
these excellent Graces, so steel and harden our tender Minds, that those Evils
will be able to make no Impression on us, which now do wound us to the Heart.
For as the Light of the Sun, and Freshness of the Air which are apt to offend
the Sickly and Tender, are not only tolerable but delightful to Men of hail and
vigorous Constitutions; so many of the little Hardships which trouble and
incommode the Tender and Delicate, are so far from disturbing patient and
temperate Minds, that they rather refresh and divert them

5. And lastly, Another Cause of Disquiet of Mind, is our misplacing of our
Happiness in Things that are out of our own Power. For Happiness is the great
Lodestone that attracts and governs all our Motions, the Mark of all our Aims
and Intentions, and the End of all our deliberate Actions. Whilst therefore we
place our Happiness in Things that are out of our Power, we must be governed by
Things that are out of our Power, and while we are so, we can never be quiet.
For the Things that are out of our Power, being all of them casual and
contingent, such as Honor, and Greatness, and Carnal-Pleasures; we can never
be secure of the Comfort and Happiness we place in them, and consequently, our
Happiness and Misery must be as casual and contingent as the Goods and Evils
are from whence they do arise. And whilst we are governed by such casual Things
as these, we can never be our own Men, but must live in Subjection to a
foreign Power, and be what the Things that govern us will have us; and so long
as the Passions and Appetites that overruled us, are overruled by the Chances
and Contingencies without us, we must be as various, as sickle, and as
multiform as they. Whilst therefore we place our Happiness in these uncertain
Enjoyments, it is impossible our Mind should ever be at rest, but like a Ship
in a tempestuous Sea, must be perpetually tossed and driven to and fro by the
furious Gusts of our own Passions, which can never be calm and sedate, till we
fix upon a Happiness that is certain and Stable: For as our Desires can never
be satisfied till we are completely happy, so our Fears can never be composed
till such time as we are secure of our Happiness. But so empty and fickle is
all worldly Good, that we can never be either happy in it, or secure of it; for
when we have what we did first desire, that only inflames our Thirst, and makes
us gasp for more; and then the Tenure of all is so insecure, that the Accession
of more does only increase our Fear of losing what we have. So that our Mind
must be perpetually ground between these Two restless Millstones, the Desire of
getting more, and the Fear of losing what we enjoy; and therefore seeing it is
impossible for us to alter the Nature of these outward Goods, or to render them
either more secure, or more satisfying, the only way for us to be truly happy,
is to alter the Temper of our own Minds, to wean them from this World, and
determine them to an Happiness that is more Solid and Substantial, and within
our own Disposal; and such a Happiness is that which Christianity proposes to
us, an Happiness that depends upon our own free Acts, and grows out of the
Graces and Virtues of our own Mind. For so that everlasting Heaven which the
Gospel proposes to us is inseparably annexed to the right and good Use of our
natural Liberty, and consequently is as much within our Power, as our own
Resolutions, and voluntary Motions. Whilst therefore we are under the
Government of this Christian Happiness, we are Masters of our own Fortunes, and
do live independently on Chance and the Wills of Men, and it is within our own
Power to be happy without asking leave of any but God and our selves. Now we
are no longer Tenants at Will to the little Casualties and Accidents of the
World, no longer liable to be turned out of our Happiness by Storms, or Fires,
or Invasions, by the Contingencies of Providence, or the Knaveries and
Cruelties of Men; no more exposed like miserable Vagrants to beg our Happiness
from Door to Door, to creep, and cringe, and fawn to the Humors of an
inconstant World, to court its Smiles, or tremble at its Frowns. For if Heaven
be the Happiness we depend on, there is nothing can deprive us of it, but our
own free Acts, and it is as much in our Power not to be miserable, as not to be
wicked; and our Happiness being all embarked in the same bottom with our Piety
and Virtue, they must both of them run the same Fate, and eitherswim or sink
together. If therefore we would be at Peace within our selves, we must put our
selves under the Government of the Happiness of Christians, which is the only
one that we can be sure of, there being no other within our own Power and
Disposal; for till this is done, we are like Men in a Crowd, encompassed about
with so many cross rancountring Accidents as will never let us be at rest, but
be perpetually shoving, and jostling us to and fro, and still as we get free
from one, another will be pressing upon us, and that which thrusts on this,
will still be thrust on by another without any Pause or Intermission; and so
our miserable Minds will be always hurried about, and never want Causes of
Disquiet: But when once we have fixed upon that Happiness above, we shall be so
much above these little Accidents below, and their Force will be so broken,
before they can reach us, that we shall scarce be sensible of their saint
Impressions, and so we shall pass on as quietly and undisturbedly through them,
as we do now through those Crowds of Motes that are always dancing in the Air
about us.

And so I have dispatched the first Thing (...) proposed, which was to show
that our blessed Lord in order to his giving us his Peace, has removed from us
all Causes of Disquiet.

2. I now proceed to the Second, which is to show, that he has also taken Care
to supply us with the most effectual Principles of Peace, and Satisfaction of
Mind; and they are these following:

1. That by the Sacrifice of himself, he has purged away our Guilts, and
thereby given us the most certain Ground of Peace of Conscience.

2. That as he sacrificed himself for us, while he was upon Earth, so now he is
in Heaven, he has the Ordering and Disposal of every Thing that concerns or
befalls us.

3. That he has procured for us a Futurity, sufficiently happy to make us
infinite amends for the worst Evils that can befall us here.

4. That he has established this happy Futurity upon such Terms and
Conditions, as are within the reach of our own Power.

5. That he has taken Care in his Absence to provide for us such Supports as
are proportionable to every Burden he will lay upon us.

1. One Principle of Peace and Satisfaction of Mind wherewith our Savior has
supplied us is this, that by the Sacrifice of himself, he has fully purged
away our Guilts, and thereby given us the most certain Ground of Peace of
Conscience: For he declared that he died in our Persons and stead, and that all
those miserable Things he endured upon the Cross, were in lieu of that
Punishment that was due to God for our sins; that the Blood he spilt there, was
designed by him for the Price of our Redemption, and that the Life he laid down
there, was in exchange for the forfeited Lives of our Souls. And to manifest
God's Acceptance of it, as an Equivalent for our Punishment, he rose from the
dead, and was actually discharged from the Prison of the Grave; by which he
gave us an Acquittance under God's own Hand, purporting, that he had graciously
accepted his Son's Death in lieu of our Punishment, and that if now we would
heartily repent and amend all our past Guilts and Obligations to Punishment
should, in Consideration thereof, be for ever dissolved. Who then can lay any
thing to the Charge of God's Elect, seeing it is Christ that has died, and
thereby tendered a full Ransom for us to God; yea, rather, that is risen again,
and thereby certified us, that the Father of Mercies has graciously accepted
and allowed of it? So that if now we repent, we are as certain of our Pardon,
as we are of the Death and Resurrection of our Savior; which are such Facts,
of which we have as plain Demonstration as the Nature of Things will bear. And
having so certain a Ground of Peace of Conscience before us, what can be more
conducive to the Ease and Satisfaction of our Minds? For a quiet Conscience is
a Paradise within a Wilderness, whereinto a Man may retire when he can find
nothing else to live upon, and live cheerfully and merrily in despite of all
Misfortunes, which, like Showers of Hail falling upon the Tiles of a
Musick-House, are not able with all their Clattering and Noise, to disturb the
grateful Harmony within. As therefore when all is smooth and prosperous
without, a Man may shelter himself there from the Persecutions of his
Conscience, so when all is calm and serene within, he may shelter himself there
from the Persecutions of the World; but when both are bestormed, he has no
Refuge to fly to. And therefore that we may never be left utterly forsaken and
abandoned, our blessed Savior by washing away our Guilt in his own Blood, has
opened to us a safe Retreat within our own Breasts, viz. that of a quiet and
serene Conscience, whereinto we may easily retire, and house our selves when we
are persecuted with Storms and Tempests from without.

2. Another Principle of Peace and Satisfaction of Mind wherewith our Savior
has furnished us, is this, that as he sacrificed himself for us when he was
upon Earth, so now he is in Heaven, he has the Ordering and Disposal of every
Thing that concerns or befalls us. For now he is in Heaven, he intercedes for
us in Virtue of that Sacrifice which he offered on Earth; and in the Virtue of
this his meritorious Intercession, all Power is given him in Heaven and Earth.
And indeed herein consists the Royalty of his Priesthood, viz. that by
interceding for us as a Priest, and continuing so to do, he first obtained, and
still continues vested with a kingly Power and Authority to bestow upon us all
those heavenly Blessings he intercedes for. And hence all the Graces and
Favors of God are in Scripture said to be derived to us in, or by, or through
Jesus Christ; implying, that as it is from God the Father originally, that all
our Mercies flow, so it is through God the Son immediately, that they are
handed and derived to us; and that interceding for us as he does, and always
has done, in Virtue of the powerful Oratory of his Sacrifice, he was first
constituted, and is still continued the royal Distributer of all his Father's
Graces and Favors to Mankind. So that now we are assured, there is nothing
can happen to us good or bad, but by his merciful Disposal; and can we think
any thing bad that comes from his hand, who has evidenced himself so much our
Friend as to die for us? He who loved us to such a stupendous Degree, as to
come down from Heaven, and assume our Natures, and therewith, all our innocent
Infirmities and Miseries, and at last to suffer for us the most grievous and
infamous Death; can he be unkind to us now he is our King, and has the
ordering and disposal of all our Affairs? Whenever therefore any calamitous
Accident befalls us, and we begin to grieve or repine at it; let us remember
that it is through his Permission or Appointment, who was so much our Friend
while he was upon Earth, that he tendered our Welfare far beyond his own Life;
and if this does not set our Hearts at rest, and reconcile us to the worst of
Things that can happen to us, we are beyond the Reach and Influence of Reason
and Discourse. For how can we suspect any thing to be hurtful to us, that is
sent us down from our merciful Redeemer in Heaven, who when he was upon Earth
never thought any thing, no not his own Life and Blood too much, or too dear
for us. How grievous soever therefore any present Accident may appear to us,
the Hand it came from, speaks and declares it to be a Token of Love, since to
be sure nothing but Love can proceed from that Hand whose Heart always loved us
far above its own Ease, and Joy, and Life.

3. Another Principle of Peace and Satisfaction of Mind wherewith our Savior
has supplied us is this, that he has procured for us a Futurity sufficient to
make us infinite Amends for the worst of Evils that can befall us here; for he
has not only purchased for us Life and Immortality at the Price of his Blood,
but has also clearly discovered and brought it to light by his Gospel, the
joyous Prospect of which is abundantly sufficient to support our Spirits under
the most direful Accidents. For now when any melancholy Apprehensions begin to
invade my Mind, this blessed Theme furnishes me with such a mighty Force of
joyous Considerations as are abundantly sufficient to dispel and scatter them,
and cause them to fly away like the Morning Mists before the rising Sun. Hold
out, O my Faith and Patience, it is but a very little while that I have to
suffer: This woeful Dream that now lies hovering over my Imagination will vanish
as soon as I awake in Eternity, and be as if it had never been at all. There
all these sad Remembrances shall in one Moment be for ever lost, and swallowed
up in one continued everlasting Joy; there I shall unload my self at once of
all my present Sighs and Griefs, and in their room take up eternal Songs of
Praise and Hallelujahs; there I shall be placed far above all these Clouds and
Storms in a calm and quiet Region, where there is nothing but Light and
Harmony, nothing but Peace, and Joy, and Love; from thence I shall ever long
look down upon this dark unquiet Atmosphere, and remember with Joy all the foul
tempestuous Weather I here endured, and have now surmounted, and the glad
Remembrance of what is past will then serve only as a Foil or Shadow to set off
that blessed State of Things, and render it more charming and illustrious. Why
then art thou cast down, O my Soul, under the Sense of these short-lived
transitory Evils of which within these very few Moments thou shall be sure to
take leave for ever? Though this Night be dark it is but short, and then will
follow an everlasting Day. Though thy Voyage be foul, it is not long; it is only a
short days Sail to a blessed Eternity, from whose happy Shores thou will a
little while hence be looking back upon this boisterous Sea, and blessing those
angry Storms and Waves that drove and hastened thee to that happy Port; where
every Moments Enjoyment will be sufficient to recompense thee a thousand-fold
for all the Hardships under which thou art now suffering and complaining. Such
Thoughts as these that blessed Futurity our Savior has purchased for us do
naturally suggest to our Minds, which mingling with the utmost Griefs and
Anxieties that any Evil from without can raise within us are abundantly
sufficient to compose and calm them, and to create a happy Serenity in our own
Breasts, while all without us is stormy and tempestuous. For what outward Evil
is there weighty enough to sink a Mind, that has the hope of an everlasting
Heaven to support it?

4. Another Principle of Peace and Satisfaction of Mind wherewith our Savior
has supplied us is this, that he has established this happy Futurity upon
such Terms and Conditions as are within the Reach of our own Power; that is,
upon Faith in Christ, and Repentance from dead Works; which though in this
degenerate State of our Nature it be not immediately in our Power to perform,
yet mediately it is by those Helps and Assistances which God has promised to
us, and inseparably annexed to our making a good Use of our own natural Power.
For since God by his own free Promise has entailed the Assistances of his
Grace upon our honest Endeavor, his Grace is as much at our devotion as our
own Faculties, and it is as much in our Power to perform what we cannot without
his Grace, as it is to perform what we can; and therefore seeing by his
Assistance we can perform the Conditions of eternal Life, it is in our Power to
perform them, because it is no less within our Power to oblige him to assist us
than it is to oblige our selves to exert our own Power and Endeavors; the
Conditions of our Happiness being through the Grace of God within our own
Power, our Happiness is so too; which if duly considered is a mighty Support
under all Afflictions from without. For why should we grieve that it is in the
Power of Men and a thousand adverse Accidents to rob us of our Ease and our
Wealth, our Liberty and Reputation? God be praised our main Happiness consists
not in these Things, but in Heaven; there lies the Treasure of our Hearts, and
the Hope of our Lives, of which there is none but our selves can disappoint us.
If we will be happy in the eternal Possession of that inexhaustable Mine of
Bliss, we may, and all the Hardships and Inconveniences we may endure on the
Way to it are neither able to obstruct our Passage, nor hinder our safe
Arrival; unless by a base Surrender to them we betray our selves. So that now
we may give a bold Defyance to all the combining Malice of Men and Devils, and
tell them that we will be happy, eternally happy in despite of the worst they
can do to us, seeing the matter wholly depends upon our own Courage and
Resolution backed and assisted by the never-failing Grace of God. There is
nothing that Men or Misfortune can deprive me of but I can live without, and
maintain my self in a happy and glorious Post for ever. Why then should I
grieve to see my Drugs flung overboard, which within a few Moments hence will
be of no Use or Value to me, so long as it is in my Power to save all my
precious and immortal Freight; and thereby to secure my self of a most happy
and prosperous Voyage? Whenever therefore we are threatened with sad
Contingencies, or with the Power or Malice of Men, we have this Answer ready to
return to them; God be praised, our main Happiness depends not upon you; we
can, if we will, go to Heaven in despite of you, and when once we are there we
shall be far beyond your Reach, and then these light Afflictions which you now
lay upon us, and which are but for a moment, will be found unworthy to be
compared with that eternal Glory which shall be revealed to us. Which
Consideration closely applied, and deeply imprinted on our Minds, is of
sufficient Virtue to ease and relieve us under the most calamitous
Circumstances; for while our main Chance and Interest is safe, all is well with
us, and then we are secure none can prejudice us but our selves.

5. And lastly, another Principle of Peace and Satisfaction of Mind wherewith
our Savior has supplied us is this, that he has taken Care, during his
Absence from us, to provide for us such Supports as are proportionable to every
Burden he will lay upon us. For so he tells his Disciples, when he was
departing from them, that it was expedient for them that he should go away,
because until he went, according to the divine, Economy, the Comforter was not
to come; but when I depart, says he, I will send him unto you, Jo. 16. 7. And
accordingly when he departed he sent down his holy Spirit to represent himself
and act as his Vicegerent in his heavenly Kingdom, and to do all that for us
which he himself would have done had he continued personally present with us.
So that though now he is a great way off from us in Person, yet by his Spirit he
is still present with us; present with all that tender Affection, and with all
those yerning Bowels of Compassion that he expressed toward us while he was
upon Earth. And whereas had he continued among us in Person he could have been
present with us only at such determinate Places and Distances, he is now
present with us wherever we are, in every Place, and at every Distance by his
immense Spirit, which like an Omnipresent Soul being diffused through all his
Mystical Body gives Life and Motion to every Part and Particle of it. And
having thus taken Care to supply his personal Absence from us with this divine
Presence, which is every way co-extended to the utmost Diffusion of his Church,
we may depend upon it that wherever or in what Circumstances soever we are,
he is by us, and with us, beholding all our Needs with a compassionate Heart,
and ready to extend to us whatever Aids and Supports we stand in need of. How
then can we droop in his blessed Presence? How can our Hearts sink while he
stands by us? What Evil is there can scare or distract our Minds, whilst we
consider that the Almighty Spirit of the blessed Jesus our Friend is always and
every where with us, ready bent to stretch forth his helping Hand to support us
under every Oppression? Alas! I am afraid this Burden will at length grow too
heavy for me, that my Strength and Courage will at last be forced to yield, and
sink underneath it. Well, though you fear your own Strength, yet sure you cannot
doubt the Strength and Power of the Spirit of God, and his Strength is yours to
all necessary Purposes as much as it is his own; and therefore unless you
apprehend your Burden to be too heavy for his Power as well as yours, you have
no Reason to dread that you shall sink underneath the Weight of it. You are
afraid lest you should be called forth to suffer for Righteousness sake, and
lest under the Rage and Violence of Persecution your Faith and Constancy should
shrink and yield. Why consider with your selves, are there not Thousands of
Christians that have suffered before you, suffered as terrible Things as you
can possibly dread, and this not only with Patience and Constancy, but with Joy
and Triumph? Why then should you suspect that blessed Spirit which supported
them, to be less able or willing to bear up you? He who has so often enabled
so many tender Virgins, delicate Matrons, infirm and aged Bishops to sing in
the midst of Flames, to smile upon Racks, to triumph upon Wheels and Catasta's;
and in short, to endure such long and dolorous Martyrdoms, as many times they
did, when their Tormentors took their Turns from Morning to Night, and plied
them with all Kinds of Cruelties till many times they were forced to give over,
and confess that they had not Heart enough to inflict the Tortures which those
poor Sufferers had Courage enough to endure: He, I say, who has thus far
enabled them, can he not as well enable you? Is his Arm shortened that he cannot
save, or his Ear grown heavy that he cannot hear you as well as them? Consider
then, you have the same Right that they had by the same neverfailing Promise to
this his enabling Power, which by so many glorious Instances has demonstrated
it self sufficient to support you under the heaviest Oppressions; and therefore
you have all the reason in the world to expect the same Aids and Supports from
it if ever you should be reduced to the same Extremities. Our great Care
therefore ought to be that we do not desert our Savior, either by wilful
Apostasy from his Faith, or Disobedience to his Laws; for so long as we
continue faithful to him he cannot leave and desert us; our main Concern ought
to be that we do our Part, and not that he does his; for he cannot fail, though
we may. If we prove true to him we may assuredly depend upon it that he will
prove true to us, and not leave us destitute of any Help or Support that in any
Condition is necessary for us. If therefore to serve the wise and holy Ends of
his Providence he should at any time think it meet to call us to suffer, we may
set our Hearts at rest upon this Assurance, that so long as we take Care to
maintain our Integrity he must take Care to maintain our Strength, and not
permit us to sink under any Burden he lays upon us for want of any degree of
Comfort and Support that our State and Condition requires. Which Consideration
duly applied cannot fail of giving a great deal of Ease to our anxious and
desponding Minds.

Having thus shown at large what abundant Provision our Savior has made for
the Peace and Satisfaction of our Minds, I shall conclude all in a very few
Words. Our blessed Savior has long since told us that in this World we shall
have Trouble, but that in him we shall have Peace; which, though it were more
eminently true in those early Days of Suffering and Persecution, does yet hold
most certainly true not only in Times of Peace, but even in the most prosperous
Circumstances of humane Life. For we cannot but know that we are dependent upon
Chance; we cannot but know that it is in the Power of ten thousand
Contingencies to disturb us, and this in despite of us will create a great many
anxious Thoughts, and vex us with melancholy Apprehensions of our Futurity: And
though at present we may hush them with Jolity and Mirth, upon the next
Reflection they will be sure to awake again, and to revenge themselves upon us
for those Moments of Ease we ravished from them; and then when any evil
Accident threatens or approaches us we can give our selves no certain Assurance
of escaping it. For when we have done all that lies within the Compass of our
Wisdom and Power, there may a thousand Crosses arise in our way which it is
impossible for us either to foresee or prevent, and turn our most promising
Designs upon our selves, and hasten the Evil upon us by those very Means which
we choose to prevent it; the Sense of which must necessarily cause many a
stinging Thought to swarm about our Minds, and to vex and disturb us in our
deepest Security. Thus in our best Estate we are poor and indigent Creatures,
fain to seek abroad, and to go a begging for our Happiness from Door to Door;
to depend upon Chance, and live insecure of every thing we either possess, or
desire, or hope for. And considering how prone we are to be alarmed with the
Prospect of a sad Futurity, and to magnify distant Evils in our own
Apprehensions, and to aggravate present ones by our Impatience and Despair; and
in a word, to pall our best Enjoyments by expecting more from them than their
Nature will afford; considering these Things, I say, it is the greatest
Nonsense in the World for Men to expect Peace and Satisfaction of Mind from any
thing here below. And if we are thus liable to Disturbance in our best Estate,
alas, what are we in our worst! When Calamities come rolling upon us like the
Waves of the Sea upon the back of one another, and we have no Harbor in View
to put in at. In this vast Tumult of things therefore whither shall we betake
our selves for Tranquillity and Peace? If we go into the World, every thing in
it tells us it is not in me. If we go out of the World into Deserts and
Solitudes, the Stings we shall either find there or carry thither with us will
soon convince us that it is not in them. Where then can we hope to find Peace,
but only in Jesus the Prince of Peace? To him therefore let us go with an
humble Faith and obedient Will, with a resolved Mind to adhere to his Truth,
and submit to his Laws, and wholly to resign our selves to his Conduct and
Government. And if in him you do not find all that Peace and Satisfaction you
have hitherto sought in vain, never give Credit to anything that is sacred
more. I am sure it is to be found in him if we wisely, and honesty, and
industriously seek it: Thousands have found it in him, who could find it no
where else; and having found it have enjoyed themselves all their Days after in
sweet Content and Peace, and at length have breathed out their Souls to him in
Praises for the happy Discovery. And therefore if it be not our own fault we
may soon add our selves to this blessed Number, by devoting our selves to him
as they did, and surrendering our Lives and Interests to his Government and
Disposal. And when once we have performed this with a sincere and resolute
Intention, we shall by degrees perceive these Tempests within us quieted and
abated, and our stormy Minds clearing up into an happy Serenity; and still as
we more and more subdue our Wills and Affections to him we shall feel and
experience our selves more and more at Ease, until at length we shall arrive to
such a settled Peace and Tranquillity of Soul as that it will be beyond the
Power of any outward Concern to disturb us. And now our Mind will be a Paradise
to it self, a Paradise wherein it will be able to live contented and happy, and
to breath calm and gentle Thoughts how tempestuous soever its Condition is
without. And finding all composed and quiet within, we shall lead a Life far
more easy, and even, and consistent than ever; for now we shall no longer
reserve our selves to follow Fortune and the Turns of outward Affairs, to
comply with all the Mutabilities of the Wind, and still to transform our selves
into new Shapes as we are running through the stillchanging Fashions of the
World. Now we shall no longer perplex and entangle our selves by Knavish Tricks
and sordid Complyances, by being forced still to study how to act a new Part,
and to put on a new Garb of Humor and Conversation upon every new Alteration
of Affairs; but our Way will ly even, easy, and direct before us, and
whatsoever happens to us from without, whether it rains or shines, proves calm
or tempestuous, the inward Peace and Satisfaction we shall find in following
Jesus by our firm Adherence to his Truth, and Obedience to his Laws, will carry
us safely through all Events, and render us far more happy even in our persecuted
sincerity than we can reasonably suppose to be in the most prosperous
Hypocrisy. Wherefore if ever you intend to be at Rest within, and to enjoy
your selves in Peace and Tranquillity; go to Jesus the Prince and Author of
Peace; Take with you Words and say, O blessed Jesus, hitherto we confess other
Lords have had Dominion over us, such as Pride and Ambition, Lust and Avarice;
and these have all proved unmerciful Tyrants to us, they have continually
harrased and oppressed our Minds; they have laid waste all our Peace, stripped
and plundered us of our Self-enjoyment, and almost worn out our Lives in
perpetual Troubles and Anxieties. Wherefore now at last we return unto thee
weary and heavy laden, not only with Guilts but Vexations, resolving for the
future that thee alone we will serve. O do not reject us thy oppressed and
miserable Creatures, who are driven unto thee for Refuge from those cruel
Taskmasters that have hitherto reigned over us; but permit us to spend the
Remainder of our Days under thy happy Government. We know thy yoke is easy, and
thy Burden light; and therefore suffer us now at last, we beseech thee, to
come unto thee that in thee we may find rest for our Souls, who have sought it
in vain in everyThing but thee. And having thus surrendered up our selves to
him, let us by our constant Perseverance in Well-doing endeavor to subdue our
selves more and more to his Will in this full Assurance that from our hearty
and punctual Conformity thereunto, we shall reap not only Peace and Tranquillity
here, but also immortal Glory and Happiness hereafter: Which we beseech thee to
grant us all of thy infinite Mercy, O blessed Jesus; to whom with thy great
Father and eternal Spirit be ascribed of us and all the World all Honor and
Glory and Praise from this time forth and for evermore.

Amen.
JAMES I. 8. A double minded Man is unstable in all his Ways.
BY a double-minded Man here we are to understand (as is plain from the
Context) an insincere Man, one who pretends to Religion, and has a good
Inclination toward it, but is not arrived to a firm and prevailing Resolution
of adhering to it, maugre all Temptations to the contrary; that bears some
faint and ineffectual Regard to the Rules of his Duty, and the Dictates of his
Conscience, but not such as has the Superiority over him, and does command and
govern his Life and Conversation; not such as has that prevailing Influence
upon him, as to hinder him from being ordinarily counter-swayed by his
Appetites, or Passions, or secular Interests to the Commission of unlawful and
irregular Actions. So that the single-minded Man is one who has no other Mind,
no other prevailing Purpose and Resolution, but to adhere to God in the
Profession and Practice of true Religion, and upon every Emergency, is ready
fixed to perform what God demands of him by the Voice of Revelation and right
Reason; and in a Word, that lives under no other commanding Principle but this,
I will always do what God will have me: and so on the contrary, the
double-minded Man is one that fluctuates between Two Minds and Wills, a Will
for God, and a Will for the World; and is governed sometimes by one, and
sometimes by another, but is never true or constant to either. In short, he is
one who being yet unsubdued to the commanding Power and Influence of Religion,
has no fixed no determined Mind or Resolution; but is not only of several
Minds upon several Occasions, but also of contrary Minds upon contrary
Occasions. For his Heart is so divided between his God and his Interest, his
Duty and his Lust, that like a Needle between Two Load-stones he is always
wavering too and again, and pointing alternately to both, but is never fixed to
either. And of this Man the Apostle tells us, That he is unstable in all his
Ways. Where by Ways according to the Hebrew Phraseology, he means Actions; he
is unstable in all his Actions, that is, he always acts with an anxious,
doubtful, and misgiving Mind; he knows not where to find himself, nor many
times which way to turn himself; he leads a very uncertain, insecure, and
unquiet Life, being all along perplexed and entangled in the whole Course of
his Actions. The Words thus explained may be resolved into this Proposition;

That whilst Men's Minds are divided between God and their Lusts, and are not
entirely subdued to his Will; they must necessarily lead very anxious,
insecure, unstable Lives: That till such time as we Act from an entire
Submission of our Souls to God, we can never act steadily and securely, but
must be always fluctuating in great Anxiety and Uncertainty.

The Wise Man tells us, that, He that walks uprightly, walks surely Prove.
10. 9. He goes on in a direct, secure, and even Course of Action, wherein there
is no Perplexity, or Intanglement; whereas the Life of a double-minded
Hypocrite whose Heart is divided between God and the World, is a perpetual Maze
and Labarinth, wherein the farther he goes, the more he is lost and confounded.
And this will evidently appear upon the following Considerations.

1. That he acts upon no fixed or certain Principles. 2. That the Way and
Course of his Actions is all obscure and intricate. 3. That he is always fain
to live in a Disguise, and is therein insecure of Concealment. 4. That he is
always at odds with himself, and in perpetual Variance with his own Reason. 5.
That he is at a miserable Uncertainty as to the present Events and Issues of
his own Actions. 6 That he has a most dismal Prospect before him of the final
Issue, and Event of all.
1. The double-minded Man acts upon no fixed or certain Principles. For the
Principles he proceeds upon are such as have no Foundation in the Nature of
Things, but, like Castles in the Air, are built upon mere Dreams and Delusions,
which whenever his Reason awakes, will sink and disappear. For either he lives
upon no Principles at all, but acts like the Beasts that Perish, upon blind
Instincts, and the unaccountable Impulses of his brutal Sense; or upon such
Principles as these, that there is no such Being in the World as an eternal,
and invisible, almighty Power; or that if there be, he lives retired from us,
and takes no Notice of what we do; or that if he does, it is as an unconcerned
Spectator to whom it is purely indifferent whether we do Good or Evil; or that
if he be at all pleased with our good Deeds, and displeased with our bad, yet
it is not to any such Degree, as to intail any future Rewards upon the one, or
Punishments on the other; or that if there be any such Rewards and Punishments
prepared by him, they are so slight and inconsiderable, that the Loss of the
one, and Sufferance of the other, are abundantly compensated by the present
Pleasure of a sinful Life; or in fine, that if neither the one nor the other
prove true, yet we may securely enjoy these Pleasures while we are able, and by
repenting at last when we are old or dying, and are able to enjoy them no
longer, may entitle our selves to those Rewards, whatsoever they are, and
secure our selves from those Punishments. This is the Cham of Principles, upon
which bad Men live and act, if they act upon any at all, and which are all of
them grounded upon such doubtful Presumptions, such thin Pretenses, and
unsatisfactory Reasonings, as no Man in his Wits can ever be thoroughly secure
of. For besides that they contradict the best and wisest Part of the World, the
current Sense of humane Nature, and the common Consent of all Mankind, which
are such Prejudices against them, as must necessarily render them very doubtful
at least; besides all this, I say, they have so strong a Current of Evidence
against them, and are overpowered with such a Force of Arguments from all the
Quarters of Reason and Religion, and the contrary Principles are so much more
agreeable to all the Appearances of Things, to the sacred Oracles, to human
Society, and to the very Frame of human Nature; and in a Word, have every way
so vast an Over-weight of Reason on their side, that it is impossible for any
Man in a cold Mind to be confident that they are true, how much soever it may
be his Interest to wish them so. So that whereas the sincere and upright Man
living, as he does, upon well-tried Principles that for their Truth have been
always found most agreeable to Reason, and for their Usefulness always approved
by constant Experience, treads firmly and boldly, being secure of the Ground he
goes upon; the double-minded Hypocrite, being all along uncertain of the
Grounds of his Action, walks like a benighted Traveller in a dangerous Road,
where he is fain to feel out his way, and to tread tenderly, and cautiously,
lest his next step should be into a Bogg or a Precipice. And so long as he is
insecure of the Principles upon which he acts, he can never be secure that he
acts safely. He knows that if the Principles he goes upon prove false, he is
undone, and whether they will prove so or no, he is at best uncertain; and so
through the whole Course of his Sin and Life, he walks with an anxious and
misgiving Mind, and goes trembling on between Hope and Fear to the final Issue
and Event, which for all he knows may prove such as will put an end to all his
Hopes for ever. For maugre all his Confidence, he cannot be sure but that when
he dies, he may find all the Principles he acts on, baffled by a woeful
Experience; he may then feel that there is a God to whom Vengeance belongs, and
an eterternal Life of Rewards and Punishments; and if he should, how will it
blank and amaze him, to find himself, instead of being reduced to an insensible
Substance, landed on a strange inhospitable Shore, inhabited with ghastly
Furies, and miserable Ghosts, and shut up with them by a vast surrounding Gulf
in everlasting Horror and Despair: and therefore seeing he can have no
Security, but that such may be the fatal Close of his sinful Life, he must,
when ever he cooly reflects, be miserably anxious, and uneasy, and expect the
mighty Event with Dread, and dire Abodings.

2. The Way and Course of a double-minded Man's Actions is all obscure and
intricate. For whereas the Course of an honest, upright Man is for the main of
it chalked out to his hands, both by divine Revelation, and the natural and
eternal Reasons of Things, and that so plainly, and clearly, that as soon as he
opens his Eyes, he may easily discern it without any great Reach of Wit, or
Depth of Judgment; the Rule of his Actions being open and direct, without any
dark Subtilties, or intricate Windings and Turnings; the false pretending
Hypocrite lives in a Maze, wherein having no certain Rule to go by, he is very
often at a loss which way to direct himself. For having forsaken the plain
Paths which God has described to him, he is put upon inventing a Way for
himself, of studying his own Steps, and groping to his End through a Labyrinth
of popular Errors and Mistakes; in which he is oftentimes so lost and
bewildered, that he knows neither where he is, nor whither to go next; and
sometimes the Way that he takes lies quite cross to his Ends, and sometimes
leads him about in such a wide Compass, that by that time he arrives at them,
they are not worth his Travel; and even when he thinks himself most in the
right, and goes on with the fullest Assurance, Time and Chance many times cast
up so many Difficulties and perplexing Intercurrencies in his Way, as do puzzle
all his Wit and Contrivance how to break through them. Thus when men leave
God's Way which is a plain, a sure, and infallible one, and commit themselves
to the Conduct of their own blind Wills and short-sighted Reason; they forsake
the Light of the Sun to follow a Night-fire, which instead of conducting them
in the plain and direct Way, carries them at random about in the Dark, leads
them hither and thither, backwards and forwards, over Hedges and Ditches,
through Breaks and Bogs, till they are lost and mazed in their own Wanderings.
While they walk in God's Way, they have God's Wisdom for their Guide, which
cannot mislead them; there they have nothing to do, but to follow the easy
Directions of an infallible Mind, to receive his Commands, and to obey them;
there they are free from all the Trouble of forming new Resolutions, and
inventing new Measures of Action upon new Emergencies; there they see their way
plainly described to them, and are resolved once for all to pursue it through
all Events, without any further Pause or Deliberation, being fully satisfied in
themselves, that it is much safer for them to follow God's Will, which acts
from infinite Goodness, by infinite Wisdom, with infinite Power, than to follow
their own which they know by woeful Experience is so liable to be imposed upon
by false Shows and Appearances; and to mistake Poison for Physic, and Evil for
Good. Thus while they are in God's Way, they find all things direct, and plain,
and easy to them, but when they divert into their own, there they have nothing
to guide them bat a vain foolish Mind that is easily tricked and imposed upon,
and a blind Appetite that is conducted by a roaving Imagination; there they are
fain to live by their Wits, upon extemporary Shifts and Evasions, and still to
invent new Ways upon new Occasions, and to wander about in a mysterious
Labyrinth of little Tricks and Contrivances, which instead of extricating them
out of the Difficulties of Life, do commonly but more and more perplex and
entangle them. And hence, as the Path of the Just is in Scripture described to
be as the shining Light Prove. 4. 18. to have nothing froward or perverse in
them, and to be plain to him that understands Prove. 8. 8, 9. and to be an
even Place, where none of his Steps shall slide. Psalm. 26. 12. compared with
37. 31. So on the other side the Paths of the Wicked are said to be dark and
crooked, Prove. 2. 13. 15. and to be uneven and slippery Jer. 23. 12. And in
such a way as this, how is it possible for a Man to walk firmly and stably?

3. The double-minded Man is always fain to live in a Disguise, and is therein
very insecure, of Concealment; and this also renders him unstable in all his
ways: Though considering what a false and ill-natured World we live in, it is
many times an honest and necessary Prudence for a Man to reserve his Mind, and
not proclaim even his fairest Intentions in every ones Ear with whom he
converses. But for a Man to live in a continual Disguise, and always look one
Way, and row another, to counterfeit and dissemble, and mask his real
Intentions with contrary Appearances, is a very uneasy Way of living; for
there is twice the Difficulty in every Thing that he aims and drives at, as
there is in an honest and above-board, Procedure. Here honest Ends are pursued
by direct Means, without need of any Color or Artifice; whereas, there
commonly more Art is required to justify the Means, than to manage them; and
to dissemble the Ends, than to obtain them, For whilst the Ends a Man proposes
be foul and dishonest, he must in his own Defense pretend quite contrary to his
own Intentions; and to form and manage his Pretensions so artificially, as to
conceal his bad Intentions under them, till they are executed, is commonly the
greatest Difficulty in the Execution of them. For though Men may be foolish
enough, yet they are not good-natured enough to be always imposed upon by fair
Pretenses; their very ill Nature makes them jealous and suspicious, and their
Jealousy and Suspicion makes them prying and inquisitive. And what a deal of
Art must it require for a Man to conceal himself, and carry on his ill Aims
with any plausible Color, when he has so may jealous and inquisitive Eyes
upon him? And then for a Man to dissemble, is an outrage to himself, it is to
act against the Grain of his own Nature by making an outward Show and
Appearance of that which he inwardly hates. For while a Man pretends to be that
which he is not, he must seem in his Actions to be that which he is most averse
to, and all the while he does so, he thwarts himself, and acts directly
contrary to his own Inclinations. If his wicked Aims did not force him to hide
himself, while he is making a formal Show of Mortification, he would much
rather be satiating his hungry Lusts; while he is hanging down his Head like a
Bul-rush to disguise his Pride and Ambition, he would much rather be strutting,
insulting, and domineering; while he is giving his Alms to be seen of Men, he
would much rather be grinding and oppressing the Poor; and whilst in order to
his devouring Widows houses he is making long Prayers, he would much rather be
glutting his Avarice with the Spoil. So that all the while he pretends to be
the contrary to what he is, he must practice the contrary to what he is
inclined, and while he does so, he offers a perpetual Force and Violence to
himself. Now what an uneasy Way of living must this be, for a Man to be always
studying how to conceal himself, and to be forced to live in a Disguise that he
hates? and yet this is the Life of the double-minded Man that trains between
God and the World. And then that which adds to his Uneasiness is, that after
all he can never be secure of his Disguise; he knows that if he should be
discovered through it, it would quite spoil his Game, and instead of setting a
Gloss upon his foul Intentions, it would only render them more ugly and odious;
there being nothing can render Wickedness more ugly than it is, but the
Discovery and Appearance of it through the Vail of Sanctity. So that if ever
his wicked Intentions should happen to be discovered, they will be sure to fare
the worse for their being disguised, and it is a Thousand to One, but first or
last some Accident or other detects and unmasks them; and then they are for
ever baffled and disappointed. So that this double-minded Hypocrite walks like
a Malefactor in a Vizard, afraid of every one that looks wishly upon him,
jealous of being betrayed even by his own Voice, or Shape, or Deportment, full
of anxious Thoughts, lest by some Accident or other his Vizard should drop off
and discover him; being conscious to himself, that if ever the Mystery of his
Iniquity should be unfolded, and what he has acted behind the Curtain should
be brought to Light, he shall not only lose all the Credit and Advantage of the
Part he has hitherto so artificially acted, but also be hissed off the Stage
with Scorn and Infamy. And how then is it possible for a Man to walk steadily
under such slippery Circumstances, when he dances upon a Rope as it were, where
if he trips he falls, and if he falls is ruined.

4. He is always at odds with himself, and in perpetual Variance with his own
Reason. There is a Sense in Men's Souls that does as naturally distinguish
between Good and Evil, as their Taste does between bitter and sweet, and is
equally pleased or offended by them. Whilst therefore this Sense remains alive
within us, and in any Degree quick and perceptive, every Touch and Impression
of Evil will more or less pain and aggrieve it, and till with the customary
Impressions of Evil a Man has seared and stupifi'd his Sense of it, he will
never be able to sin in quiet for it, but upon every cold Reflection on his own
ill Courses, will feel a sensible Remorse and Compunction. And this is
inevitable to the double minded Man, who divides himself between God and his
Lusts; for he retains so much of God, as will always keep his Sense of Good and
Evil alive, and together with it, he retains so much of his Lusts, as will
always disturb and offend it: so that at once he takes effectual Care both to
preserve his Sense of Evil quick and vigorous, and to be perpetually vexing it
with the painful Impressions of Evil, and so treats himself, as heretofore the
Tormentors did the suffering Martyrs, who gave them Cordials to keep them
alive, only to enable them to sustain more Torments. If he would wholly abandon
God he might thereby extinguish his Sense of Evil, or if he would wholly
abandon his Lusts, he might thereby prevent his sensation of Evil; but while he
retains both, he retains both Sense for his Torment, and Torment for his Sense,
and at once cherishes the Evil that afflicts his Sense, and preserves his Sense
alive to endure the Affliction. There are no Two Things in the World can less
endure one another in the same Breast than a sensible Conscience and a wicked
Will, which like Fire and Water will be continually struggling till either the
one is quenched, or the other evaporated. The Will will not let the Conscience
be quiet, nor the Conscience the Will; and so those Two Commanding Powers of
our Souls will live in perpetual Variance, and admit of no other Intercourse
but mutual Violences and Outrages, till either the one is extinguished, or the
other subdued. Whilst therefore a Man's Mind is double and divided, his Soul is
in a State of War, there being Two irreconcilable Parties perpetually
struggling within his Breast; a Law in his Mind fighting against the Law in his
Members, his Reason against his Appetite, his Conscience against his Will; so
that he can take neither Part without doing Violence to himself. If he sides
with his Conscience, he outrages his Will, if he sides with his Will he forces
his Conscience; If he take part with his Appetite, he makes War with his
Reason; if he complies with his Reason, he bids defiance to his Appetite Thus
which way soever he determins himself, he is sure to determine against one Part
of himself; and it can never be otherwise till one of these adverse Parts of
himself are subdued, and his double Mind is reduced to a single one. When he
has but one Mind, whether it be a good or a bad one, he will be at Peace and
Unity with himself; but before he can have one good Mind, he must form a good
Resolution, and follow it till he has entirely subdued his Will and Appetite
to his Reason and Conscience, and then the intestine War will conclude in a
happy Peace; and so on the contrary, before he can have one bad Mind, he must
abandon himself to all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and continually drink in
Iniquity as the Horse drinks in Water, till he has intoxicated his Reason with
it, and stupefied his Conscience; and then the intestine Struggle will conclude
in a lethargick Quiet and Insensibility: But to arrive at this, is far more
difficult than it is to acquire the former; for while a Man contends with his
Reason and Conscience, he contends with his original Nature, and to vanquish
that, is far more difficult than to subdue his wicked Will, and inordinate
Appetite, which are but his acquired Nature, and consequently does not so
inseparably adhere to him, nor is so inveterate. But till his Conscience and
his Reason are entirely vanquished, they will be struggling and contending; and
whilst they do so, he will be continually at Odds and Variance with himself. He
must act all along with a Selfcondemning Mind, and be content to endure the
Reproaches of his Reason, and the Clamours of his Conscience; and while he does
so, he can never act steadily and securely. For whilst his Reason, which is to
be his Guide, is dissatisfied with his Way, it is impossible for him to walk on
without Dissidence and Anxiety; at every Step he must tread with Distrust, and
proceed with a trembling Heart, lest the Ground should sink under him; and
while he thus walks with a misgiving Conscience, and an ill-aboding Mind, it is
impossible but he must be unstable in all his ways.

5. He is at a miserable Uncertainty as to the present Event and Issue of his
Actions. He knows, or at least he shrewdly suspects, that there is a wise and
all-seeing, a just and Almighty Providence that overrules all Causes, and
disposes of all Events, and without which there is nothing can succeed how
wisely soever it is designed and projected. He knows that in this
superintending Power and Providence there is an essential Goodness and
rectitude of Nature, which invariably inclines it to love and bless Goodness
and Righteousness, and to hate and curse their contraries in whomsoever it
finds them; and being thus persuaded he cannot but conclude himself insecure
whilst he either aims at unjust Ends, or uses unjust Means to obtain them, both
the one and the other being infinitely odious to that overruling Power upon
which his Success depends. For he must either imagine that the most probable
Way to* oblige this Power to succeed him is to brave and hector it into a
fawning Compliance with his Wishes, than which there is nothing more absurd and
unreasonable; or be at least infinitely jealous and suspicious that the wicked
Courses he takes will, instead of obliging it to prosper them, arm its
Vengeance against them, and provoke it to determine them in some dire Event.
For if God has the disposal of all Events whether good or evil, it is
certainly every whit as reasonable a Project for a Man to drink deadly Poison
to obtain his Health, or to commit high Treason to escape hanging, as to
endeavor to obtain any Good, or to escape any Evil by such Courses as God
hates and abhors. For if the Way to obtain his Favor is to please him, and the
Way to please him is to do what is pleasing to him, as most certainly it is;
then it is as evident as any Proposition in the Mathematics, that he who
endeavors by such Courses as he knows are displeasing to him to obtain any
Good or avoid any Evil with God's disposal, uses the most contrary Means to
effect his Ends, and only spends his Pains to thwart and countermine himself.
The double-minded Man therefore being conscious to himself that he has rendered
God his Enemy can never be reasonably secure in his own Mind of obtaining any
Good, or escaping any Evil that is in God's disposal. For though to serve the
wise Ends of his Providence God many times gratifies bad Men, and gives them
their own Hearts desire, yet for them to expect any Good at his hands, whilst
the whole Course of their Actions is a continued Provocation of him, is the
most unreasonable Presumption in the World; it is to suppose him not only
insensible of Affronts and Injuries, but also fond of them, pleased and
delighted with them to that Degree as to own himself obliged to crown and
reward them with his Favors; For unless it be this, there is nothing they can
fancy in the Nature of God that can incline him to be kind to them. While
therefore they are in Pursuit of any Good, or in Flight from any Evil, if any
wise Thought arise in their Mind concerning the Event, it must be very anxious
and desponding. There is such a Good in my View which I would fain enjoy, and
am resolved to use my utmost Endeavor to compass; but alas it is in the
Disposal of God who is the Sovereign Arbitrator of my Fate, and unless he will
be so kind as to award it to me, my utmost Skill and Conduct in the prosecution
of it will prove insignificant; But how can I hope that he will succeed my
Design, who has so many Reasons to be my mortal Enemy; and if he will not, he
has ten Thousand Accidents under his Command by any one of which he can baffle
and defeat me; and if he should gratify my Desire, I have no reason to believe
that it is out of Kindness; and if it be not, instead of a Blessing it will
prove a Curse to me. There is such an Evil hangs over me that I would fain
escape, and am resolved to employ my utmost Care and Industry to prevent it;
but when I have done all, it is in the hand of God whose Vengeance I have armed
against me by a Thousand Provocations; and if he will bring it upon me (which I
have too much cause to fear) he can do it by those very Means whereby I am
endeavoring to prevent it. And if he should succeed my Endeavors, I have just
Ground to suspect that it will be in Displeasure to me; and then it will prove
but the Removal of a less Evil to make way for a greater. Thus if he truly
reason with himself concerning the Events of his own Actions, it must create in
him infinite Despondence and Anxiety. And whilst a Man thus lives in Fear of
the Event it will be impossible for him to act with any Steadiness or security.
This therefore is the Case of the double-minded Man, who being conscious to
himself that all Events are in God's Disposal, whom he has so many ways
provoked to be his Enemy, must necessarily act with a dubious and trembling
Mind, being so uncertain within himself whether that which he is doing will
issue in his Benefit or Bane.

6. And lastly, He has a most dismal Prospect before him of the final Issue
and Event of all. Whenever he casts his Eyes beyond this present Scene of
Things, wherein his Mind is tossed to and fro in such infinite Uncertainties;
there he sees nothing but dismal Horror and Tragedy, nothing but Darkness,
Wretchedness and Despair; nothing but Famine to his Appetites, Anguish to his
Mind, and Torment to his Conscience; nothing to accompany him but Devils and
damned Ghosts, nothing to entertain him but horrible Thoughts and dire
Reflections; which woeful Prospect; if he has not out sinned all Sense, must
necessarily alarm all his Fears, and strike his very Soul into an Agony. And
when a Man thus feels his present State bad, and foresees that the future will
be ten Thousand Times worse, he must be a perfect Sot or a miserable Wretch.
Whilst he is walking through this short Enclosure of Time here, at every Step
he feels himself pricked and torn by his own Cares, and Fears, and Anxieties,
which like Briars and Thorns grow up round about him; and when he looks over
the Pale into the vast Field of Eternity, there he sees nothing but dire and
horrid Spectacles, nothing but burning Wrath and Vengeance attending to
persecute him to eternal Ages. So that whether he looks backwards or forwards,
or but just before him, his Eyes can find nothing but uncomfortable Objects.
That which is past is all tastless and insipid; that which is present is mostly
nauseous and unpalatable; but that which is to come is all dire and
intolerable; and this is the sting of his Misery. Were his past or present
Circumstances far worse than they are, they were easy to be born in the
Prospect of a more comfortable Futurity; but when this is worse, ten thousand
times worse than the worst of what is either past or present, for a Man to pass
through all these sad Things together with any Patience or Content requires the
Hardiness and Insensibility of a Stone. It is sad enough, God knows, to walk
through the Cares, and Fears, and Disquietudes which naturally attend a false
and double Mind; but to walk through all these within full view of Hell, and at
every Step to perceive ones self approaching nearer and nearer to it; is to
pass through a most dismal Expectation to a more dismal Experience, which is
doubtless the most woeful Condition that humane Life can be exposed to. And yet
this is the Condition of the double-minded Man; who acts his Sin with an
Expectation of suffering eternally for it, and robs within sight of the Place
of Execution. And when with that Persian Judge he is thus condemned to sit out
all his Days with the Sword of eternal Vengeance hanging over him by a frail
Thread of Life, which is every moment in danger of breaking; how is it possible
he should enjoy himself in any tolerable Degree of Peace and Security of Mind.
Doubtless if he has any sense of danger, the Foresight of so great a one as
this of being miserable for ever, must necessarily create in him a
proportionable Fear and Anxiety, and consequently render him very unstable in
all his Ways.

What then remains but that seeing the State of Hypocrites and double-minded
Men is so wretched, and miserable, and insecure, we all of us from henceforth
resolve, as we tender our own Ease and Quiet, to lay aside all Hypocrisy and
Double-dealing, and act through the remaining Part of our Lives with Plainness,
Integrity, and Simplicity of Mind. Of which way of living if you would once be
persuaded to make a through Experiment, I dare engage you would find it
abundantly more secure, and easy, and comfortable than that which you have
hitherto pursued. And to convince you of the Truth of this, I will crave leave
in a few Words to represent to you the Reverse of the double-minded Man's Life,
and to show you the opposite Advantages of living honestly and uprightly.

1. He who lives uprightly goes upon firm and stanch Principles, such as these,
that there is a God that governs the World, that inspects all the Thoughts and
Actions of Men, and will reward or punish them with eternal Happiness or
Misery; which being founded upon as full Evidence as the Nature of the Thing
will bear, and attested by the inmost sense of humane Nature, by the Consent of
wise Men of all Ages, Nations, and Religions, and in short by the unanimous
Vote of Mankind, are such as will endure the Test of our severest Reason, and
give ample Satisfaction of their Truth to the most inquisitive Minds. The
upright Man therefore proceeding upon such Principles as these treads upon firm
ground, which he is secure will never sink under him, and which is more, if it
should will in the End leave him in as good Condition as those who proceed upon
the contrary Principles. For whereas if their Principles prove false, their
acting upon them will prove their eternal Ruin, if his should prove so, he will
live more at Ease for them, more suitably to his Nature, and more satisfied
with himself; and when he dies, he will only be left in the same Condition with
them, in a State of eternal Sleep and Insensibility. So that if his Principles
should prove false, he can never be the worse for acting upon them; but if they
should prove true, he will be infinitely the better. And it is a vast security
to the Mind to proceed upon such Principles as, if they prove false, will leave
us safe and at rest, and if they prove true will leave us eternally happy.

2. The upright Man walks in a plain, easy, and direct Way. Those eternal
Tracts of Righteousness and Goodness wherein he walks are so plainly
characterized upon his Heart and Conscience by the Finger of God, and described
and inculcated in the divine Oracles with so bright a Sunbeam, that if he
honestly enquire he cannot miss them, and when he has found them he cannot
easily swerve from them. For whereas Wickedness is a boundless Wilderness whose
Paths do all thwart and cross one another, all Vices consisting in Extremes
which are direct Contraries, and being either the Defects or Excesses of some
Virtue; so that there are not only two Vices to every one Virtue, but both are
Extremes running counter to one another: the Paths of Virtue lie straight
forward between these vicious Extremes, and like parallel Lines never
interfere. So that here a Man may walk on safely without any great Reach of
Wit, or laborious Diligence of Enquiry, and needs do no more than follow
Solomon's Direction; Let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eyelids look
straight before thee. Turn not to the right hand, nor to the left. Prove. 4. 24.
27. Here, according to the Prophet, is an highway, called the way of holiness;
the wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein, Isaiah 35. 8. And having
so plain and direct a way before him he needs neither tire himself in the
search of it, nor rack his Brains with any anxious Deliberations in the Choice
of it, nor grate his Mind with Scruples and galling Regrets in the Pursuit of
it; but may always find it with Ease, and follow it with Security.

3. The upright Man acts openly and without fear of Discovery; for being
conscious to himself both that his Intentions are clear, and his Prosecutions
of them fair and honest, he could be well enough content that he had a Window
into his Breast that all the world might see through him. He knows that his
Thoughts and Actions are such as will endure sounding, and bear sifting to the
Bottom; and therefore takes no care to disguise himself in false shows and
Appearances. For he who can reflect upon himself with Satisfaction and
Complacency may look all the World in the face with Confidence and Assurance;
as knowing that the more curiously he is watched, and the more exactly he is
scanned, the more highly he shall be approved by all that are wise and good.
And though his Reputation may for a while be clouded by Malice or Mistake, yet he
is fully satisfied that one time or other the very Light of Things will scatter
these Mists, and clear these Misprisions, and that then he shall shine the
brighter for being over-cast. And being thus satisfied he walks openly through
the World with a bare Face, and in the sight of the Sun, having no Occasion to
Skulk into Coverts and Retirements.

4. The upright Man lives in Peace with himself, and in an amicable Accord with
his own Reason and Conscience. For he who follows his Reason, and makes his
Conscience his Guide (as every upright Man does) can neither be reproached by
the one, nor condemned by the other; And having to all his Aims and Actions the
full Approbation of his Reason and Conscience in reiterated Ecchos resounding
after him, he has always good Weather within and a clear Sky above him,
wherein his Mind breaths none (...) and wholesome Thoughts, and has a (...)
Confidence, and a cheerful Satisfaction in every Thing he does, as being
agreeable to his own Reason, conformable to his Duty, and worthy of himself.
And being thus crowned with the Applauses of his own Conscience, he goes on
through all the Difficulties of Life with Alacrity and Courage, having nothing
from within to countermand or control him, no Sting of Remorse for what he
has done, nor Check or Struggling against what he is doing; nothing to pull him
back from his way, or to cause him to halt in it, or any way to disturb and
distract him in his Motion. And when at any time he is balk'd and defeated in
any of his honest Designs and Prosecutions, he goes on with an exact Mind under
the Disappointment, triumphing in the Integrity of his Heart and the Innocence
of his Procedure, having a Paradise within him where he lives at Ease, and
enjoys himself in Serenity and Peace; let Things be never so stormy and
tempestuous without.

5. The upright Man is secure of the good Issues and Events of his honest Aims
and Prosecutions. Not that he is confident that Things shall always succeed
according to his present Aims and Desires; but this he is sure of, that they
shall always succeed as God would have them, who is wiser than he, and loves
him better than he loves himself. He is satisfied with this, that God will
never cross him but for very good Reasons; such Reasons, as if he himself did
fully comprehend, would make him heartily wish that God in his tender Mercy
would cross and disappoint him; and living under this Persuasion, he is secure
in his own Mind that he shall either have what he desires, or something better
in Exchange. He builds upon this, that if what he is projecting be good for
him, it shall certainly succeed according to his Wishes; but that whether it be
good for him or no, God knows better than he, and therefore if it does not
succeed, it is well for him that it does not; because God certainly knew that
it was not good for him that it should: And to be disappointed of those Hopes
which he fancies are good for him, is a Thousand Times more for his Interest
than to be gratified, which God knows will be hurtful to him; because he is
certain, both that he may be mistaken, and that God cannot. Wherefore let the
worst that can arrive, (or that which through his Blindness and Folly he
esteems the worst;) this he depends upon, that matters being rightly stated, he
shall in the Issue of Things come off very well, so as to be a Gainer in the
foot of the Account; and being thus persuaded, his Mind is not harrased like
other Men's, with anxious Thoughts concerning the Event, but let what will
happen, he goes on with a calm and satisfied Mind, and embraces his Fortune
with Satisfaction and Complacency.

6. And lastly, He has a fair and glorious Prospect before him of the Issue
and Events of all. The Sense of his own Integrity and Uprightness has raised
him to a glorious Hope, whereon he stands, like Moses on the Top of Pisgah,
surveying the heavenly Canaan, whose fruitful Soil abounds with every Good, and
flows with everlasting Pleasure: From whence with joyful Eyes he sees the happy
Period of his tedious March through this barren Wilderness of Life: He sees the
blisful Mansions and Abodes, that the God of Love has prepared to receive him;
he sees them most richly furnished with all the Delights that his vast hungry
Desires can crave or swallow to eternal Ages. He sees that there is nothing but
a short momentary Death, that like the River Jordan, separates this Wilderness
from that heavenly Land, and that as soon as ever he has past and forded this,
his Travel will conclude in endless Rest and Pleasure, in the Accomplishment of
all his Hopes, and the full Satisfaction of all his Wishes. With the
Prospective of his Faith and Hope he beholds the illustrious Orders of Angels,
the glorious Company of Apostles, the goodly Fellowship of Prophets, the noble
Army of Martyrs, with Crowns of Glory and Blessedness on their Heads, beckoning
to him from the farther Shore, to make haste thither, and come into the joyous
Participation of their Society and Happiness. The sight of all which glorious
Things, inspires his Heart with such an Addition of new Life and Vigor, as
carries him on with Cheerfulness and Alacrity through all the weary Stages of
his Life; for he who walks with Heaven in his Eye, is a Thousand Times happier
in his Expectation, than if he had all the Goods this World affords in his
Possession. The upright Man therefore having this blessed Expectation before
him, he goes on with a bold and secure Mind, and in his Course is steadfast and
immovable, always abounding in the Work of the Lord; for as much as he knows
that his Labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. Seeing therefore the vast
Advantages Integrity and Uprightness has of Double-dealing, as we tender our
own Ease and Security, let us all study for the Future, to lead the Remainder
of our Lives in exact Sincerity, and Simplicity of Heart; which will not only
extricate us from the greatest Difficulties and Perplexities of this present
Life, but also crown us with immortal Ease and Happiness in the Life to come:
Which God of his infinite Mercy grant, to whom be Honor, and Glory, and
Praise, from this time forth and for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
Books Printed for Walt. Kettilby at the Bishop's- head in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
DR. Scott's Christian Life; 4 Vol. 8o Mysteries in Religion vindicated, or the
Filiation, Deity, and Satisfaction of our Savior asserted against Socinians
and others, with occasional Reflections on several late Pamphlets; by Luke
Milburn a Presbyter of the Church of Engl.

Allen's Works; 4 Vol. 8o

Of Trust in God, or a Discourse concerning casting our Care upon God in all
our Difficulties; together with an Exhortation to patient suffering for
Righteousness; in a Sermon on 1 Pet. 3. 14, 15. by Nath Spinks M. A. a
Presbyter of the Church of England.

A Discourse concerning Lent, in Two Parts; the first, an Historical Account of
its Observation; the second, an Essay concerning its Original: this subdivided
into Two Repartitions; 1 st Preparatory, and shows that most of our Christian
Ordinances are derived from the Jews; the 2d conjectures that Lent is of the
same Original; by George Hooper D. D. Dean of Canterbury, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to His Majesty 8o.

An Essay to revive the ancient Charity and Piety; wherein God's Rights in our
Estates, and our Obligation to maintain his Service, Religion, and Charity, is
demonstrated and defended against the Pretenses of Covetousness and
Appropriation, in Two Discourses; written to a Person of Honor and Virtue: by
George Burghope Rector of Little Gaddesden in the County of Hertford, and
Chaplain to the Right Honorable John Earl of Bridgewater. 8.


