A SPEECH MADE BY Sir William Scrogg, ONE of His MAJESTY'S SERGEANTS at LAW, To
the Right Honorable the Lord High Chancellor Of ENGLAND, At his Admission To
the Place of One of His Majesty's Justices Of the Court of COMMON PLEAS.

LONDON: Printed for Samuel Lowndes, near Exeter-House in the Strand.
M.DC.LXX.VI.

Sir William Scrogg HIS SPEECH.
MY LORD,
THat the King's Favor is the effect of the duty I have paid Him, (which your
Lordship is pleased to call Service) is the most welcome and pleasing part of
His kindness; and I trust We shall still see such times, that no man shall hope
to have it, or keep it on any other account. The right application of Rewards
and Punishments, is the steady Justice of a Nation; where, though the Rewards
of Kings exceed what a Subject can merit, they should never reach him that
demerits. To return Good for Evil may be an obligation of Charity; It is never
of Bounty. And the taking off (as they call it) of an Ambitious, and therefore
a Factious man, by Favors, is the worst way to stop or open his mouth; for he
will whisper one way louder, than he will speak the other: And when you think
you gain one Enemy, you make many.

On such an occasion as this, I think it very proper to give your Lordship some
account, what considerations I have had, in order to the discharge of my duty
in this place, since the King's first intimations of His pleasure.

And that respects Matters, either as they stand betwixt the King and his
People, or betwixt Man and Man.

For the first,

I know that the Law gives such Prerogatives to the King, that to endeavor
more were to desire worse; and it gives to the People such Liberties, that more
would be licentious.

What then has a man to do that has Courage enough to be honest, but to apply
his Understanding to the Ministration of those Laws justly to both: Wherein I
may say, that the Cases will be rare that will be difficult in themselves. They
may be made so from sinister Causes; when men thinking to serve a Turn, or like
Pilate, to please the People, deliver up that which is right to be crucified.
Then they are fain to rack their Fancies to make good their Faults. This makes
such nice Distinctions, and such strained Constructions, till they leave
nothing plain in the world. Whereas in truth, the Duty we owe to the King and
his People, is like the Duty we owe to God, not hard to understand, whatever it
is to practice.

This Court, my Lord, it is true, is properly a Court of Meum and Tuum, where
Prerogative and Liberty are seldom Plaintiffs or Defendants. But yet it is
certain, that even in private Causes, matter of Government many times
intervenes, and the Public is concerned by Consequence. And therefore I think
it fair, and like English honesty and plainness, something to unveil one's self
in that particular, that men may know beforehand what they may expect. And
herein I do declare, I would no more wrong or lessen the People's Liberties,
than I would sacrifice up my Son. But then I will no more derogate from the
King's Prerogative, than I would betray my Father.

My Lord, In times when Faction is so bold as to be barefaced; and false and
seditious News is openly talked, and greedily embraced; when the King's
reasonable Demands are disputed, and turned into Cavils, and those that oppose
'em talk confidently; and those that should maintain 'em speak fearfully and
tenderly; when the Reverence we owe to the King is paid to the People; the
Government is beset, the King is in danger, and there is nothing wanting but
opportunity.

But when to prevent that opportunity, men are afraid, and hold it dangerous to
avoid the danger; when we dare not call a Crime by its right name; and for
some, find none; and a Mischief must be effected, before we will think it one:
When dangerous Attempts are minced, and by some trivial difference Treason is
distinguished into a Trespass; when men are forward and venturous enough in
what thwarts the Government, but in supporting it seem grave and cautious, nice
and timorous, and so filled with Prudentials, till they are as wise as fear can
make 'em; The Law is enervated, and becomes useless to its greatest end, which
is, the preservation of the whole.

It Is true, in Public Causes, the same Integrity is necessary as in Private;
But that is but part of a Judge's Duty. He must be Magnanimous as well as
Virtuous. And I acknowledge it to be a main and principal part of my duty, as
it relates to the King and his People, with hearty resolution to suppress all
open Force, and private Confederacies; not thinking any thing little that
attempts the Public Safety; for when the Motives are small, the Danger is
greater; when Discontents exceed their Causes.

And for the discharge of my Duty betwixt Party and Party, it is impossible to
be performed without those two Cardinal Virtues, [Temper] and [Cleanness of
Hands] Temper comprehends Patience, Humility, and Candor. It seems to me that
saying, Be quick to hear, and slow to speak, was made on purpose for a Judge.
No Direction can be apter, and no Character becomes him better: and he that
would not be said to have but one Ear, methinks should be ashamed to have
none. And I appeal to your Lordships experience, if a patient Attention,
accompanied with indifferent Parts, and a competency in the Law, with a mind
fairly disposed for Information or Conviction, will not, as to use and common
benefit, exceed the profoundest Knowledge, and most towering Understanding,
that is attended with an impetuous haste, either out of a glory of Speaking, or
too great a fullness of himself.

And for Humility, Though I will not say that every Impatient Man is proud,
(because that may arise from other causes) yet every Proud Man is impatient,
sometimes of Information, always of Contradiction; and he must be violent to
maintain his own Imperiousness.

Harshness is a needless and unbecoming Provocation: It makes Men hate where
they should fear and reverence: And yet by Gentleness I understand, not
Tameness, but Moderation; not without Rebukes, but without Taunts.

For Corruption, that Perverter of Law and Destruction of Property, that leaves
in the World neither Bonum nor AEquum; for when he does Right, he does not
Justice; and he that sells Justice, will sell Injustice. It Is not only to be
avoided, but abhorred; and not alone in its direct Approaches, but in Relatives
and Servants, those By-ways of Bribery; and it becomes every Man so manifestly
to detest it, that it may scare even the attempt: for no Man is sufficiently
safe unless to his power he avoids the suspicion as well as the fault. Practice
does one; and that which makes me speak this, a public Profession against it,
is the way to do the other.

And where Gifts prevail not; yet if Fear, Relations or Popularity sway, it is
the same thing. If there be a Bias put to a Man, it matters not of what it is
made. Nay, these are worse than Corruption by Money; for there both sides may
have the same Tools, when a Man cannot make himself a Kin, nor his Cause
Popular.

And now give me leave, My Lord, to show why I thought it fit, nay extremely
necessary to say something on the Particulars I have mentioned.

First, To satisfy your Lordship and the World I undertake not this Place
without due Considerations of the Duty belongs to it. Next, It is some Tie upon
a Man not to commit those Errors he has in public declaimed against: for he
must add Impudence to his Crime, to have his own words fly in his face, with
which every Man will upbraid, and no Man can excuse him.

My Lord, In a Discourse on such an Occasion as this, where Men are concerned
in Point of Interest, (for so they are when a Judge is made) my Aim is not to
say what will please their Humors, but what should satisfy their Minds:
Neither am I so vain as to think I shall do that with all; nor much concerned
though it fall out so. If Reputation and a Good Name can be got by doing my
Duty, it is welcome; but if it must be sought by other Arts, I will be no
Seeker; especially considering that the Applause of the Multitude, that
Contingent Judge of Good and Bad, rather attends the Vain than the Virtuous;
and is oftener sought by such too. The Approbation of the Wise, which are the
Few; and of the Honest, by which I intend, Men heartily affected to the
Government, I acknowledge I earnestly covet: For them that are otherwise, I
court not their good opinion, because I fear not their bad; and would not draw
that suspicion upon my self, that Men may say, What Ill has he done, that those
Men speak so well of him? I never was of their Party, nor never will be. And to
be even with them, I think as meanly of them as they do of Loyalty; whose
Misfortunes are more to be esteemed than their Triumphs. The good words of such
as truly love their Country, (which no Man ever did that does not love his
Prince) indeed I highly prize, and will endeavor to deserve; though your
Lordship at this time has been beforehand with me in that Particular, by
bestowing them upon me first; and so many, that I am ashamed I have been no
better to have made 'em good: But because your Lordship is willing and able to
render any Man much better than he is, they ought to be esteemed as the Proceed
of a Generous Nature, and an Indulgent Prudence; which by telling me what I am,
does but kindly insinuate what I should be.

My Lord, I will waste no more of your time, though I omit those usual Returns
of formal Thanks; for they are of course; or extreme wondering at the great
Surprizals of the Kings Favor; and those humble, yet high Debasements of ones
Self, which look like Modesty, but is a sort of Bravery.

My Thanks shall be paid in (what the KING likes best) Service to His People.
The Wonder will cease by that time I get to the Bench: And my Defects are best
confessed by endeavoring to amend them.

FINIS.

