A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD MAYOR, AND Court of
Aldermen, AT THE GUILD HALL CHAPEL, The 16th of December, 1683. By JOHN SCOTT
Rector of St. Peter's Poor, London.

LONDON, Printed by Ralph Holt, for Robert Horn at the South Entrance of the
Royal Exchange, and Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1684.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sr Henry Tulce, LORD MAYOR OF THE CITY OF LONDON.
My LORD,
IN Obedience to your Commands, I present this mean Performance to your
Lordships perusal, which out of the known Candor and Goodness of your Nature,
you were pleased not only to pardon, but accept; and it is no wonder that a
Discourse of this Nature, how defective soever in the Composure, should find
Acceptance from such a Loyal Audience, as My Lord Mayor, and the Court of
Aldermen, who had the Courage to be Loyal, when Loyalty was grown almost out of
fashion, and to stemm the overflowing Tide of a Popular Faction in the height
of all its Fury and Violence. I profess to your Lordship* with the same
Sincerity, that I would confess my Soul to God, that my Design in this
Discourse, was only to promote the Peace and Happiness of Men; for I thank God,
I know no man in the World, whom I do not heartily wish well to, and whom how
widely soever he may dissent from me in Matters of Religion I would not most
willingly render any good Office I am able, so far as it consists with my Duty
to the Church and Government; and had I not thought it an exceeding good Office
to all, and particularly to the Dissenters and their Adherents (whose
Discontents render them of all men most obnoxious to factious impressions) to
warn them in such a Time and Juncture of Affairs as this of the manifold
Mischiefs of Faction, I had not troubled your Lordship, or the World with a
Discourse of this Nature.

As for the Style of it, if it be in some Places a little smart and severe,
it is wholly Owing to the Matter it treats of, which cannot be naturally expressed
without Severity, and when men will do such things as cannot be represented in
their own natural Colors, without reproaching and upbraiding them, they must
blame themselves, and not the Expression; and yet all that looks severe in this
Discourse, aims only at the Patrons and Agitators of Faction, whose Business it
is, to seduce the Simple and well-meaning from their Duty and Safety; and in
such a case the keenest Satyr is Charity; for how can it but move a Charitable
Mind to see so many Innocent Souls led by the Nose into Ruin by a Company of
pretending Demagogues, who have no other Design in it, but to gratify their
own Revenge and Ambition, and if I should have been a little passionate in
giving them warning of their danger, sure no wise man would be offended at me
for endeavoring to pluck him out of the fire, though it be by the hair of the
head* but if instead of taking this Charitable Warning, those whom it concerns
should be so disingenuous as to inveigh against it, I fear their own woeful
Experience of those mischievous Effects of Faction here discoursed of, will
force them one day to repent of it, and God grant it be not too late; all that
I shall farther add, is my hearty Prayers that God may prosper your Lordships
Faithful Endeavor for the Peace and Happiness of this Renowned City, and
render your Government a Blessing to all that are under its Influence. I remain,

My LORD, Your Lordships most faithful and obedient Servant, JOHN SCOTT.

A SERMON Preached before the Lord Mayor, etc. December. 16. 1683.
PROVERBS. 24. 21. And meddle not with those that are given to Change.
I Shall not trouble you with the various Acceptations of the Hebrew Word
Schonim, which the Chaldee render Fools, or, as we say, Changelings; and which
our Translators more sutably to what goes before, render, those that are given
to Change: for in the former part of the Text, he advises his Son to fear the
Lord, and Honor the King; that is, to reverence and obey the Supreme Lord and
Governor of the World, and in reverence to him, to be Dutiful and Obedient to
the King, who is his immediate Vicegerent, and Representative upon Earth, and
upon that account ought to be Honored and Obeyed: And therefore my Son (says
he) as thou would be secured, from all Disloyalty and Disobedience to thy
King, in contemning whose Authority thou openly affrontest the Supreme Lord of
the World, whose invisible Majesty he personates; meddle not with those that
are given to Change, i. e. who either out of a swelling Ambition of being
uppermost, or a private Revenge against their Superiors, or a restless
peevishness and impatience of Rule, or affectation of Novelty, or design to
repair their broken Fortunes out of the public ruins, are for introducing
Changes, and Alterations in the Government: with such as these do not mingle
thy self, no not so much as to listen to their Insinuations, or to credit or
propagate their Reports; or to support and countenance their Cause, either with
thy Tongue, or Pen, or Money, or Suffrage, or to be any other way aiding or
assisting to their factious and seditious Designs. In the Prosecution of this
Argument I shall endeavor, First, to represent to you the great folly, and
danger of engaging with such as are given to Change, that is, with Parties, and
Factions against the Government. And 2ly, To give you the proper Marks and
Characters of such Parties, and Factions, by which all well-minded Men may know
them, and avoid intermedling with them.

First, I shall endeavor to represent the great folly, and danger of engaging
with Factions against the Government, of which I shall give you these five
Instances.

First, It exposes our Understanding to the most Erroneous Prejudices and
Misrepresentations of things. Secondly, It exposes our Will to the blackest and
most Diabolical Affections. Thirdly, It tempts us to an high neglect of, and
Indifferency in the greatest and most necessary things of Religion. Fourthly,
It involves us in the most indirect Courses, and then trains us on, from bad to
worse. Fifthly, It ordinarily snares and entangles us in the greatest temporal
Mischiefs and Calamities.
First, Our engaging with Factions against the Government, exposes our
Understanding to the most erroneous Prejudice; for it is the constant Method of
all Factions, to prejudice the Minds of the People, with false and spiteful
glosses upon the Actions of their Superiors, with scandalous Forgeries, or soul
misconstructions of their fairest meanings, and most honorable Designs;
without which base Arts, it would be impossible for them to disaffect the
Vulgar to any tolerable Government, or to Alarm their Passions, and Fears, and
Jealousies, which are the usual Train by which they give fire to all public
Disorder and Confusion. When therefore a Man ingages in a Faction, he does in
effect prostitute his Understanding, to all the Cheats and Delusions, that
busy and contriving Knaves can impose on it; for having once Wedded his
Affections to the Interest of the Faction, they will quickly bribe his
Understanding into a belief of every thing that favors it; and let the opinion
or the story be never so improbable, it will find an easy Access to such minds,
as are already feed by their Affections to entertain it; and provided it be but
serviceable to the Party he is engaged in, that will prevail with his
Understanding, against a thousand good Reasons to the contrary; let him but
hear his Prince reproacht, with never such wild and improbable stories, he
shakes his head and swallows all for Gospel. Tell him that the King is deeply
engaged in a Plot against his own Life, and Crown and Dignity; Alas what a
dismal Story is this, that a Man should thus fall out with himself, and dote
upon his own ruin! But though his Faith thus glibly swallows Camels on one
side, yet it is strange to see how it will strain at a Gnat on the other: for tell
him on the other side, with never so much Evidence and Demonstration, that the
Traitorous design he talks of is hatching under the Wings of his own Faction;
and though you show him the very Association, and Band of the Bloody
Conspiracy, upon the Principles whereof they have Murdered one King already,
and so may reasonably be presumed to be acting the Tragedy of another,
especially when they act the same things over again, Scene after Scene, so
exactly in the same Garb, and Plot, and Language, that had one who dyed 40
years ago, arose from his Grave, but 2 or 3 years since, he would doubtless
have concluded, that 42 was not yet expired; yea though you produce a fresh
Conspiracy, proved upon the Party by undeniable Evidence, and even by the free
Confessions of the dying Conspirators themselves, yet it is next to impossible
to persuade him, that ever such wise Men should be so mad, or such good Men so
Wicked, as to engage in such a desperate Villainy. But I need not tell you, who
have seen the Transactions of these last six years, how many fulsom Lies have
been confidently believed, and notorious Truths dashed out of Countenance,
through blind Partiality to a Faction. And indeed when once a Man is engaged in
a Faction, it is thenceforth impossible for him to judge impartially of things,
because now his Faith must see through his Affections, and his Affections must
follow the interest of his Party, and if that be engaged in ill designs, it
will need ill Principles to countenance it; and his Affections being
pre-ingaged to the Interest of the Faction, will easily bribe his
Understanding, to assent to any Principles that are needful to support it.
Wherefore if you have any reverence for your own Understandings, if you would
not be played upon by Impostors, and Deceivers, and choust and abused, and lead
by the Nose through all the wild Mazes of folly and falsehood, meddle not with
those that are given to change.

Secondly, By engaging our selves in Factions against the Government, we shall
in all probability, insensibly contract the most black and Diabolical
Affections; for this is the Natural Process of all Faction, it begins in Pride
and Self-conceit, in an arrogant Presumption that we are much wiser than those
above us, and fitter to Rule and Govern; and then having once entertained this
overweening Opinion of our selves, we look upon all that are superior to us,
with Envious and Malignant Eyes, and think our selves highly injured and
affronted, that we are not placed at the upper end of the World; and then from
Envying we proceed to hating our Governors, and from hating them to Impatience
of their Government; to ease our selves of which we soon imbody into Factions,
where we whet our Malice and Arrogance upon one another, by applauding each
other in censuring those above, in running spiteful Descants on their Actions,
and Arraigning their Male-Administrations at the Tribunal of our Majesty; than
which there is nothing can more effectually humor and gratify our Vanity: For
what a Glorious thing is it for a little Shopkeeper or Mechanic to perk up a
mighty Politician, and sit in Judgment on his Governors, to expose the Folly
of their Conduct, and find out the soft places of their Ministers of State? how
much greater and more Magnificent is this, than to be Dull and stay at home and
mind ones own Business? And when by thus humouring our Pride we have blown it
up into Insolence, this swells our Envy, and that inflames our Malice against
all that are above us, or opposite to us; for by this time our mind is so
bloated that we cannot bear the least Contradiction, but are ready to run down
with Clamor, and hard Names, every thing that thwarts our imperious Dictates;
and in matters of Religion every thing is Popery that agrees not with the Model
of our Reformation, and in matters of State every thing Tyranny that opposes
the Platform of our Government; and unless all things be framed according to
our Humor, and bend to the Dictates of our Oraculous Pride, Heaven and Earth
will come together, the Gospel, and Liberty and Property will vanish, and the
whole Frame of things sink into Confusion. And while we thus make our Pride and
Self-conceit the Standard of the World, and expect that all things should
comply with and truckle to it: We shall be so impatient of Contradiction, that
'twill be little better than Treason, or Blasphemy to oppose us; so that
whosoever presumes to give Check to our Insolence, is sure to be made the mark
of our Malice, and to be persecuted with all the Reproach and Opprobrium that
the most inveterate Rancour can invent. Thus Faction, you see, is impregnated
with the very Nature of the Devil, and carries in it all the Pride and Envy,
Rancour and Malice that sunk down the Angels of Light from Heaven, and
converted them into Fiends and Furies. Wherefore as you would not expose your
Natures to Spoil and Ravage, to be overspread with the most Poisonous
Affections, and drowned in the Passions of Hell, Meddle not with those that are
given to Change.

Thirdly, By engaging our selves in Factions against the Government, we shall
be mightily tempted to neglect the great and necessary things of Religion; for
generally the Foundations of all Factions against Government are laid in little
Disputes about matters of Religion, which are usually started by the Leaders of
the Faction, for no other end but to engage the honest Zeal of the People
against the established Religion, that thereby they may engage them against the
established Government. And could they* but make them as Zealous for the Mass as
for the Directory, 'twould be all one to them, which of the two they advanced
against the public Establishment; their Design in these hot Disputes about
Religion, being only to lay a Train to blow up the Government; and since the
Zeal of the People is the Tool they must Work with, it is their Interest to
sharpen it, and render it as Keen and Active as may be; so that when once you
have engaged your selves in their Faction, to be sure they will employ their
utmost Endeavors to bigot your Minds to their Opinion, and to engage all your
Zeal for the little Modes and Circumstances they Contend for; they will so
represent the Matter to you, as if the Life and Substance of Religion were in
Dispute; as if God, and Jesus Christ, and the Gospel were all at stake upon the
Controversy, and your Souls were to sink or swim with their Opinions; and your
Zeal being engaged by these Arts, for the trifling Opinions of your Party, you
will by degrees grow remiss and neglective of the great and weighty Things of
Religion: For the mind of Man being finite in all its Acts, can never operate
diverse ways at once, with equal Force and Vigor; but whatsoever Time and
Attention we bestow upon one thing, we must necessarily substract from another;
and so by degrees as we grow more and more Zealous for the little Modes and
Opinions of our Party, we shall grow more and more remiss in the main and
necessary Duties of Religion, till at last we degenerate into perfect
lukewarmness: And accordingly how many are there among our selves, the very
Spirit of whose Religion is evaporated into a noisie busy and blustering Zeal
for Parties, who are wondrous Nice and Scrupulous about the Rites and
Ceremonies of Religion; and yet can swallow Lies and Perjuries, Treasons and
Rebellions without the least Straining or Remorse? O did but these men love God
and their Neighbors in the same Proportion, as they do a Conventicle! Did they
but hate Impiety and Immorality, but half as much as they do Bishops and
Liturgies, what excellent Christians would they be? But Alas, their Zeal is
swallowed up in their Faction; the Current of it is diverted out of those
proper Channels of Piety and Virtue, into the little wranglings of their Party,
where it flows Headlong, and makes a Clamorous noise, to no other purpose but
to disturb the World: Wherefore as you would not be Tempted into a gross
neglect of the Substantials of Religion, to convert your Piety and Virtue, into
Bigottry and stickling for Parties, Meddle not with those that are given to
Change.

Fourthly, By engaging our selves in Factions against the Government, we shall
in all Probability insensibly involve our selves in indirect Courses, and be
trained on from one Evil to another, into the most Flagitious Villainies. When
first men list themselves into Parties, their Designs perhaps are fair and
innocent: They are told that their Religion, their Liberties, and Properties
are in danger; and finding such a Party of men set up for forward and zealous
Assertors of them, they mingle with them with no other intent but to concur
with them, in all honest and lawful Endeavors, to preserve and secure those
invaluable Blessings. But Alas poor Souls! they see where they begin, but God
knows where they will end; for now they must move by the measures of the
Faction, and see with its Eyes, and hear with its Ears, through which to be
sure all the Actions and Designs of their Governors, will be represented to
them in the blackest Colors; by which their Passions being inflamed with
contempt and hatred of them, will soon blaze out at their Mouths, or Pens into
seditious Talk or Factious Libels; and then such is the nature of contempt and
hatred, that the very venting of them fans and irritates them, till at last
they settle into inveterate rancour, and then they are capable of any mischief;
for all along as their passion is growing, they mistake it for a pious zeal for
God and Religion, and the public good, and under that Notion cherish its
irregular transports, concluding that nothing can be amiss, that proceeds from
such a sanctified Principle; and so though they lie, and slander, and backbite,
and perjure themselves over and over, yet it is all well, because they do it out
of Zeal for the Glory of God, and the true Protestant Religion: For when once
intemperate zeal gets ahead, it bears down all considerations of Reason and
Religion before it, and hurries us on into the foulest Enormities; and then
when once our outrageous Zeal has transported us into illegal and
unjustifiable Actions, we shall many times be tempted to proceed, through mere
despair of a safe retreat, and to shelter our selves from the Punishment of one
Crime, by committing another: For so in all Factions Men, do commonly so
involve themselves, that when they have done ill, they have no other way to
save themselves, but by doing worse: Thus when by their Seditious Behavior,
they have incensed their Governor against them, its necessary for them to
Associate; and when they are Associated, its necessary to Rebel; and when they
have drawn the Sword, its necessary to fling the Scabbard to the Devil: for I
make no doubt, but many of those Wretches that Murdered the late King, would
have trembled at the thought of it, when they first engaged in the Faction; but
their zeal having once transported them into Sedition, they had no other way to
escape but by Rebellion; and being engaged in Rebellion, they had no other
Sanctuary but Regicide. As therefore you would not expose your Innocence and
Virtue to these and such like dangerous Temptations, mingle not with such as
are given to Change.

Fifthly, and Lastly, By engaging with Factions against the Government, we
shall in all probability, entangle our selves in the greatest Temporal
Mischiefs and Calamities: For Faction is naturally forward and Pragmatical, it
fills Men's heads with Projects and Chymera's, with Mysteries of State and
Models of Government, and sends their thoughts after the Fools eyes, roving to
the ends of the Earth, to Parliaments and Privy Councils, and high
Consultations about Affairs of Government. And when once their Minds are got
abroad, their Bodies cannot stay long behind, but away they must to some
Coffee-House, or Public Refectory, to vent their Politics, and advise about
Affairs of State, discharge their Consciences to the Public, by directing how
things ought to be managed, and showing where the Ministers of State are out,
and by what Measures they ought to steer the Helm of Government; and in the
mean time while they are Governing abroad, the Shop is neglected at Home, and
the Trade decays, and they and their Families sink insensibly into Beggary; for
though for a very small charge they may sit and govern an hour or two together,
yet hereby their time is not only wasted, which is much more precious then
their Money, but their heads are filled with so many Politic Whimsies, that
when they come home they cannot mind their business, their Shops are grown too
little for their Minds, and they can neither think nor talk beneath Affairs of
Empire: And when once Men are got into this vein, it is time for their Creditors
as well as their Governors to look after them; for it is too too much for one
Man to Govern a Kingdom, and to mind a Trade; while he is busy abroad, he must
be Idle at home, and when his Faction has reduced him to Idleness, his
Idleness will soon bring him to Beggary; of the truth of which the Age we live
in affords us too many woeful Instances, of such as have been thrust on by a
Factious and Pragmatical Temper, to inter-medle with Affairs of Government;
which by degrees have so ingrost their Thoughts and Cares, and Time and
Activity, that they could scarce ever be at leisure to attend their own
Business; and so like the foolish Astronomer, whilst they have been Gazing at
the Stars, and troubling their Heads about Affairs above them, they have been
utterly Regardless of their own Concerns, and tumbled into the Ditch of Ruin
unawares. But suppose they escape this Rock, yet there is another very
dangerous one attends them; and that is, the Law, aginst which in all
Probability they will one time or other split themselves in Pieces: For Faction
naturally renders men Bold and Confident of their own understanding, so that if
they have but attained some little smattering of Law, they make no doubt but
that they fully understand it, and the utmost bounds of it, and how far they
may venture without incurring its Penalties; and so many times they Dance
themselves into a Noose, and like silly Flies play about the Candle till they
have singed their Wings in the Flame of it. For when out of an ignorant
Confidence men will venture as far as they imagine they may, it is a thousand to
one but they venture farther than they should, and either prate or scribble
within the reach of the Penalty, or through their own inconsiderate Rashness,
are insensibly decoyed into Seditious and Treasonous Conspiracies. Where
notwithstanding all Engagements of Secrecy, and Hopes of future Advancement,
their Lives and Fortunes are at Pawn in the hands of their fellow Conspirators;
who being prompted, either by Drunkenness or Vanity, or Fear, or Conscience,
will in all Probability one time or other betray them; or if they do not, yet
their Cabals may be observed and suspected; their Councils may be overheard,
or their own Guilty Looks, or Affectation of Secrecy, may discover them, and a
thousand other Accidents may unfold their dark Intrigues, and conclude their
mighty Hopes in a Halter. And considering that there is an All-seeing
Providence that super-intends the Affairs of the World, and has a peculiar
Regard to the Safety of Princes, it is ten thousand to one against them, but
that one time or other, they are caught in their own Snares; for so it follows
immediately after my Text, For their Calamity shall rise suddenly, and who
knows the Ruin of them both? That is, both of those that move the Rebellion,
and of those that Associate with them?

I now proceed to the second thing proposed; which is, to give you some Signs
and Tokens, by which you may distinguish such as are given to Change, in Order
to your avoiding them.

One would think indeed, considering our Circumstances, it should be needless
to warn us of engaging in Factions against our Government; which is not only in
it self the most gentle and easy in the World, but also Administered with
anunparallel'd Lenity and Goodness, by a most Gracious and Merciful Prince, a
Prince that has been indear*d to us by the most signal Favors of Heaven, by
so many Wonders of Providence, and strange repeated Deliverances, and under
whose Gracious Influence and Protection we have hitherto sat quietly under our
own Vines, whilst all the Nations round about, have been involved in Blood and
Confusion: so that for us to list our selves in a Faction against him, who has
been the Author of so much Happiness to us, and this after so many Repulses of
Divine Providence, which has so manifestly stood by him, and owned him for its
Darling and Favorite; would be to fight, not only against our selves, and our
own Happiness; not only against God's express Will, and visible Authority, but
against his bare and naked Arm too. Notwithstanding all which it is too too
visible, how apt we are to be impressed and wrought upon, by the Seditious Arts
and Insinuations of Evil-minded men: Wherefore in such an Age as this, wherein
even Well-meaning men are so often practiced on, and their honest Zeal is so
apt to be abused, and ridden by a Company of designing Malcontents, it must
doubtless be very seasonable to give some Signs and Tokens to the World, by
which those that are given to Change may be known, and discovered, and avoided.
Of these, therefore, I shall give you the following Particulars.

First, When men, who have Actually changed the Government already, begin to
re-advance their old Principles, Methods and Pretenses, it is a certain Sign
they are given to Change; for either they have repented their Subversion of the
Government, or they have not; if they have, the Fruits of it will appear in
their future Behavior, they will be the more Peaceable, and Modest, and
Obedient for the time to come, and keep at a greater distance from those
Seditious Arts, by which they were inveigled, or did inveigle others, into the
past Rebellion. But if they have not repented, and do still continue of the
same mind, advancing their old Principles and Pretenses, you may be sure they
are aiming at their old Mark, and 'twould not be Charity but Sottishness, to
believe the Gamester who Rookt ye once before, does not design the same again,
when you see him throw the same false Dice. When therefore you hear the Cry of
Popery, and Arbitrary Government renewed, by a Party that have once blown up
the Throne with it already, you may conclude upon it that they are Playing the
Old Game over again. For whatsoever Cause there may be, to dread either Popery
or Tyranny; these of all Men, were they truly Penitent for what is past, would
be the most cautious how they Alarmed men's Fears and Jealousies again,
considering what horrid Mischiefs they did by their false Alarms heretofore:
When therefore you see them forward and industrious, and raise to propagate
their old Clamor afresh, you may without breach of Charity conclude, that they
are the same Men they were, and are driving at the same Design.

Secondly, When men make that a Pretense for public Clamor and Bustle which
themselves have little or no Claim to, or Regard for, it is a certain sign they
are given to Change; for it is not to be imagined that men should be heartily
concerned for those things wherein they have no share or interest: Should you
hear two Persons earnestly contending about the Division of the Lands in the
World in the Moon, you would hardly believe they were in Earnest, because
whether there be Lands there or no, you are sure these men can have no Interest
in them; and therefore you must either conclude that they are Mad, or that
whatever they pretend, the Foundation of their Quarrel lies below the Moon.
Thus for Instance, When you hear a Company of profligate Debochees, that live
in open Defiance to all Religion, raise a Clamor for Religion, in which they
are no more interested or concerned than in those up-land Countries, in the
World of the Moon; you may be sure the real Cause of their Clamor is
something, in which they are more nearly Concerned, and that this Pretense of
Religion is only a plausible Mask to their Covetousness, or Revenge, or
Ambition: And so again, when you hear a Company of Bankrupts or
Stript-Sequestrators, raise a Cry for Freehold and Property, against the
Government, you may depend upon it, that this is not the real Mark they aim at;
for what should make these men so Zealous for Property, that have nothing of
their own to lose? it is a plain Case therefore that they Love your Properties
so well, that they would fain have a share in them; and in Order thereunto they
would raise a Storm upon the Government, that so in a Common Rack they may
enrich themselves with the Division of the Spoil, and wrest their Old
Usurpations out of the hand of the rightful Possessors. Wherefore while you
Live, have a Care of inter-mingling your selves with Atheists and Beggars in
their Contentions with the Government for Religion and Property.

Thirdly, When men pretend Religion or public Reformation, but pursue it by
sinful and indirect Means, it is a certain Token that they are given to Change;
for they who heartily espouse the Interest of Religion, are Enemies to all
things that Religion is an Enemy to. And therefore if I hate the Corruptions of
Religion, for Religions sake I must hate all sinful ways of Reforming it,
because those Sinful ways are as contrary to Religion as the Corruptions I
would reform by them. As for Example; Religion is as great an Enemy to Lying
and Rebellion, as it is to Popery; and therefore if I truly love Religion, I
shall be as great an Enemy to the one as the other: Wherefore if I see men
Attempt to reform Religion from Popery, by Lying or Rebellion; I am sure it is
not to serve Religion that they do it, but to serve themselves by unhinging the
Government: For had they the sincere Zeal to Religion they pretend to, they
would be as forward to obey its Commands of speaking the Truth, and submitting
to their Governors, as they are to comply with its Prohibitions of Worshipping
Images, and Consecrated Waters, because its Authority is equally concerned in
both: And besides, they would Consider, that by using unwarrantable Means to
purge or defend it, they shall much more prejudice its Cause, than the best
Reformation can promote it. And Consequently, that it is much more for the true
Interest of Religion, to be Persecuted by Popery, than to be reformed by
Rebellion: whereas by using wicked Arts to defend it, they only rescue it from
one Enemy to betray it to another; and to Vindicate its Honor from
Superstition and Idolatry, sacrifice it to Rebellion and Murder. When therefore
you find any Party of men driving on a Pretense of Religion or Reformation,
with Lies and Perjuries, Backbiting and Slanders, Tumults and Insurrections: As
you tender, either your Virtue, or Welfare, have nothing to do with them; for
you will most certainly find a Faction of Hypocrites, that only make a show of
Reforming Religion to undermine the Government.

Fourthly, When under a Pretense of Reforming the Government, men reproach and
vilify the Persons of their Governors, and are forward to believe Ill, and
backward to believe Well of them, it is a certain sign that they are given to
Change; for if they design no more than the Reformation of some Faults, or
Errors in the Government, they would only apply themselves to those in whose
Power it is to correct them, and with all Humility endeavor to convince them
of, and persuade them to rectify them: But to make it our business to speak
ill of them where they cannot hear us, and proclaim and magnify their Faults
in our common Conversation, what other end can this serve, but, First, to Arm
the Passions, and then the Hands of their People against them? To what purpose
should you tell me a Tragical Story, of the ill Actions or Designs of my
Prince? You know very well, I am neither his Tutor, nor his Counselor, and so
no way capable to Correct, or Reform him. All that you can effect, therefore,
is to raise an ill Opinion of him in my mind, and what other Influence can my
ill Opinion have, but to prepare me to list my self in any Mischievous Design
against him? When therefore you find men addicted to Whisper, or Proclaim the
Faults of their Governors, to Magnify their Faults, and Conceal or lessen
their good Conduct and Success, you may depend upon it, that their Designs are
Mischievous, that they rejoice in the Faults they exclaim against, and are glad
things are so bad, and do heartily wish they were worse, that so they might
exclaim against them with the better Grace and Countenance; that they lament
nothing so much, as the wise and good Deeds of their Governors, and that the
worst News they can hear, is the Prosperity of the Public, under the happy
Influence of their Government: For how can I delight to imblazon the Faults I
am sorry for, and do wish were amended? How can I take Pleasure in making them
worse than they are, did I not wish they were so? Why should I be so forward to
believe any ill of them, but that Facile credimus quod volumus? Why so
backwards to believe any Good, but that we heartily wish there were no Cause
for it? Wherever, therefore, you find any Persons of this Character, avoid
them as you would the Air of a Pesthouse; for assure your selves whatever they
pretend, it is not the Reformation of the Government they aim at, but the
Destruction of the Governors.

Fifthly, When Men shift their Principles with their Interest, and to serve a
Turn can comply at one time, with that which they condemn at another, it is a
sure sign they are given to Change; for if Conscience be the motive of our
noncompliance with the Government, those reasons which sway us, when it is for
our Interest, will as well sway us when it is against it; because our
Conscience is nothing but the reason of our Mind directing us what to do, and
what to avoid; and though outward Changes may alter our Interest, yet it is only
better reason that can alter our Reason, and whether it be better or no, is not
to be determined by our mutable Interests, but by Scripture, or the immutable
Natures of things. When therefore you see any Party of Men, that dissent from
the Government, shift their Principles and Practices, according to their
variable Exigencies of their Affairs, Conform to day, and Non-conform to
morrow, go to Church and receive the Sacrament to avoid a Penalty, or qualify
themselves for an Office, and when that Turn is served revolt to a Conventicle,
and pretend Conscience against our Worship and Ceremonies: When you hear them
curse Toleration whilst themselves are in the Saddle, and as soon as they are
dismounted declaim for Liberty of Conscience, cry up the Prerogatives of the
Crown while it indulges, and cry them down again, as soon as it restrains them;
in a Word, when you hear them bitterly exclaiming against Equivocation,
Rebellion, and Treason in a Papist, and yet practice it themselves upon Popish
Principles when their own Cause and Interest invites them; when, I say, you see
these, or any such like Shiftings and Doublings in any Party dissenting from
the Government; you may certainly conclude that it is not their Conscience
sways, but their Faction.

Sixthly and Lastly, When men who in the ordinary Course of their Conversation,
are proud and quarrelsom, and impatient of Contradiction, set up Pretenses of
Religion against the Government, it is a certain sign that they are given to
Change: for a great part of that which men call Religion, is nothing but the
Workings of their natural Temper into such Principles and Practices as are most
suitable to it. Thus the Pharisees, for instance, were Men of a very haughty,
sower, Pragmatical, and untractable Nature, and this Temper of theirs wrought
it self by degrees into a suitable Religion; for so their Pride issued into
Affectation of Singularity, and that into those distinguishing Garbs, and
Rites, and Gestures, which were the Badges of their Faction; so their Austerity
and Sowerness discharged it self in long Prayers, frequent Fasts, and
unnecessary Severities, and that into an uncharitable Opinion of every one that
prayed not as long, and fasted not as often as they; and this into a sullen
Separation from their Neighbors both in Civil and Sacred Society; and in a
word, so their surliness and untractable Humor, workt out into a factious
scrupulosity about Matters of Civil Obedience, and that into Seditions, and
sometimes open Rebellions, upon slight and trifling Occasions; and when upon
such Principles as were most agreeable to their own ill nature they had formed
themselves into a Sect, all the ill-natured People, both in Town and Country,
were easily converted to it; and some good People too, perhaps, were so far
imposed on by the mighty show it made of Zeal and Sanctity, as to imbody with
it, the candor of their Natures not permitting them to suspect a rotten Core
under so fair an outside; till at length being poisoned themselves, by the ill
Principles of the Party, they became as ill-natured as the rest of their
Brethren; and so as ill Nature begot the ill Principles in some, so the ill
Principles begot ill Nature in others: So that though this Pharisaical Religion
made a mighty Show, and looked with a most demure and sanctified Countenance;
yet it is plain that the only Foundation of it was baseness and ill Nature; and
since thus it has been, thus it may be again: For in all dissenting Religions,
such as the Pharisees was, there is something very grateful to proud and
untractable Natures: it is a mighty gratification to our Pride to Dissent and be
Singular in our Opinion and Practices, because it looks as if we were wiser
than the rest of the World; it wonderfully tickles a cross-grained surly Nature
to be opposite in Opinion to that which is uppermost: And therefore, before you
side with any Party that advances a Pretense of Religion against the
Government, it concerns you strictly to observe whether in their ordinary
Conversation they are Modest and Gentle, Humble and easily to be Entreated; and
if so, you may justly conclude that their Religion, whether it be True or
False, is founded in their Reason and Conscience. But if on the contrary, you
perceive in them a Fierce, Proud, Froward, and Inflexible Nature; if in their
ordinary Converses they are Cross and Unsociable; if they affect Contention in
the Neighbourhoods and Societies wherein they are engaged, and are hot and
impatient of Contradiction: you may without breach of Charity conclude, that
their Dissent proceeds not so much from the Convictions of their Reason, as
from the Pride and Crossness of their Humor. And therefore, wherever you find
such as these contending with the Government; as you would not be made the
Tools of their Perverseness, stand off, and have nothing to do with them. For
when Men have the Seeds of Sedition in their Natures, they are thereby inclined
to entertain Dissents from the established Religion, merely because those
Dissents are opposite to the Government; and though, if the Principles of their
Dissent are ill, they will the more inflame their ill Nature against the
Government; yet their ill Nature which tempted them to espouse those
Principles, would have rendered them untractable to the Government, whether
they had espoused them or no. And thus, with all Plainness and Integrity, I
have endeavored to Characterize those that are given to Change, that so honest
Men may know them when they see them, and avoid them: And if herein I have
Reflected upon any ill Men, or ill Party of Men; it was with no other Design,
but to warn others from Intermingling with them; and surely, to Admonish Men of
a Danger that threatens Ruin both to their Souls and Bodies, and show them the
Way to Peace, Security, and Happiness, is such a friendly Office as can give
Offense to none but such as are resolved never to be Honester or Wiser. I
confess, of all the Offices that belong to a Preacher, I am naturally the most
averse to that of Reprehension, I do not love to expose Men's Faults, to probe
and rake into their Sores; and it is not only my Charity to Mankind, but the
Indisposition of my Nature to find Fault, that makes me wish that all Men were
so good as to need no Reprehension, that so we might have nothing to do, but to
praise and encourage them, to excite them to go on with the Comforts of
Religion, and the just Applauses of well doing. But alas, we live in an Age
would make a Stone speak, and force any honest Man in despite of all the Candor
and Modesty of his Nature, to Cry aloud against the fulsom Hypocrisies and
Impostures that look through our most glorious Pretenses to Religion: For what
a nauseous Shame is it, to see Men set up for Reformers, and disturb a wise and
excellent Establishment with endless Scruples about indifferent Things, whose
Consciences, as they call 'em, are as tender as their Eyes on one side, and yet
as hard as their Foreheads on the other; cannot endure the weight of an
innocent Ceremony when their Obedience is required; and yet to serve the
Interest of a Faction, can dance under loads of Perjury and Treason? and yet,
God help us, such as these have been the Captains of all our Factions against
the Government; Men of ill Lives and Atheistical Principles, that pretend to
Grace without Morality, and to Religion without believing in God, and yet make
a mighty Noise against the Government for true Religion, pure Ordinances, and a
thorough Reformation, and therewithal have drawn in our discontented Sects into
their Party, and listed them Volunteers to their Revenge and Ambition: And
indeed, while Men live in Dissent from the established Religion, it is
impossible but their Minds should be in some measure prejudiced against the
Government, especially if they are restrained from propagating their Dissents,
as they must expect to be under all wise Governments; for to be sure, this
Restriction will be accounted by them an injurious Persecution, and 'twill be
hard for them to refrain hating their Governors, whilst they look upon them as
their Persecutors; and when once their Passions are armed against the
Government, they are half way onwards to an open Rebellion: And 'twill be an
easy matter for any Cashiered Grandee, or Politic Demagogue that has but Wit
enough to Chafe their Discontents, and Credit enough to head their Cause, to
form them into a resolute Faction against the Government; so that it will be
impossible, either for the Government to be safe, or for us to be secure from
the Mischiefs of Faction, whilst we affect to dissent from the established
Religion. And therefore it concerns every Dissenter, as he vallues his own
Safety and Innocence, to use all honest ways to satisfy his Conscience in the
Communion of the established Church, where he will not only be secured from
those Disaffections to the Government, which he is liable to, whilst he
continues in any discountenanced Sect; but also instituted in such firm
Principles of Loyalty, as if he follows, will for ever secure him from engaging
in Factions: For this is the Doctrine of our Church expressed in the Homily of
Obedience, We may not in any wise withstand violently, or rebel against the
Rulers, or make any Insurrection, Sedition, or Tumult, either by force of Arms,
or otherwise, against the Anointed of the Lord, or any of his Officers; but we
must in such case (that is, when we are commanded unlawful things) patiently
suffer all Wrongs and Injuries, referring the Judgment of our Case to God: And
in this, as well as in her other Doctrines, her Government and Discipline, our
Church does exactly copy after the Primitive Christianity: If therefore we
believe this Doctrine, our Consciences will never consent to our listing our
selves against the Government; but if instead of Believing it, we openly
Contradict and Oppose it, as all those do, who pretend Religion for their
Faction, we are so far Dissenters from the Church of England; for Conformity to
a Church consists not merely in frequenting its Prayers, and Sermons, and
Sacraments, and complying with its Rites and Discipline, but also in believing
its Doctrines, or at least, not openly Opposing and Contradicting them: But
whosoever sides with a Faction against the Government, upon pretense of
Religion, does thereby openly renounce the Doctrine of our Church, and becomes
a professed Nonconformist, how Conformable soever he may be in other
particulars. So that tho there are too many Men, who to credit their ill
Designs against the Government, shelter themselves under the Wings of the
Church; yet it is evident they are either Non-conformists to the Church, or
Conformists that act against their own Principles, which is such a Fault as no
Church can prevent, so long as there is such a thing as Free Will in the World:
Wherefore, as you would preserve your selves from those manisold Mischiefs that
Faction draws after it, do not found your Loyalty upon Humor, or Fashion, or
Interest, which are fickle and variable things; but upon the Religious
Principles of the Church, whereof you are Members, which will keep us steadfast,
and immovable amidst all the Mutabilities of the World: For whilst you have no
Principles to lead you, and you reserve your selves to follow Fortune, and the
Turns of outward Affairs; you will be shifting your selves upon every Change,
and in a very unscriptural Sense, putting off the Old Man, and putting on the
New. And whilst you thus transform your selves into a Thousand several Shapes,
as you run through the still Changing Fashions of the World, besides that it
will expose ye of all sides to the Odious Character of Turn-Coats and
Runagadoes that are constant to nothing, and to the Bosom Satyrs and secret
up-braidings of your own Consciences: Besides this, I say, it will Eternally
perplex and entangle your Lives. For upon every new Alteration of Affairs, you
must act a new part, and put on a new Garb of Conversation: And whilst you thus
shift sides upon every turn, new shape your Humors, and jump from one extreme
to another; you will be always doing violence to your Natures, because you will
act no part long enough, to render any natural and easy to ye; so that when
all is done, the easiest way of Living, is to Live honestly, that is, to set
down honest Principles in our Minds, and then resolve to follow them through
all Events; so shall we live Consistently with our selves, and whatsoever
happens from without, be always the same, and in all Conditions still know
where to find our selves; because we shall always act upon the same Principles,
and so there will be no Cross Deliberations in our Minds, no Mazes or Intrigues
in our Lives, no By-ways of Actions upon (...) Emergencies; but whatsoever
happen we shall still be going on through the same Path toward the same end,
and whatsoever befalls us from without, whether it Rains or Shines, Prove Calm,
or Tempestuous, we shall never be at a loss how to behave our selves, but our
Principles will still Chalk us out the way we are to walk in; and though in
following them we may sometimes endanger our worldly Interest, and fall under
the disgrace of a Rabble and the Persecutions of a prevailing Faction: Yet our
very Enemies will be forced to revere and honor us, to acknowledge that we are
Constant and brave honest, and resigned to our own Principles; and which is
better than that, we shall revere our selves, and be supported under our
Sufferings with the Applauses of our Conscience, and the Hopes of a Glorious
Immortality; which will render our Condition not only Tolerable in it self, but
much more desirable than the Crowns and Triumphs of prosperous Hypocrites; and
which is best of all, God himself will Honor us before Angels and Saints, and
plead our Cause, and Vindicate our Innocence, and reward our Sufferings for
Righteousness sake; thus, by persuing the honest Principles of our Religion, we
shall be inviolably secured against all the mischiefs of Faction, and immovably
confirmed in our Loyalty, both to God and the King, which in all Probability
will render our Lives secure and easy in this World, but to be sure
Everlastingly happy in the World to come.

FINIS.

