A SEASONABLE MEMENTO Both to King and People Upon this CRITICAL JUNCTURE OF
AFFAIRS.

Nullo modo eis Artibus placatur Divina Majestas, quibus Humana Dignitas
inquinatur.

Aug. de Civ. Dei. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1680.

A SEASONABLE Memento, etc.
IT is grown into a Custom (I know) to smooth the way for the Gross of the
Subject in Agitation, by some preliminary Apology or Complement to the
Courteous Reader; but yet, for reasons best known to my self, I shall at this
time pass over the Ceremonious Flourish of an Introduction, and without Welt or
Guard (as they say) fall upon my Province, which is to make out, That neither
upon pretext of Religion, Personal Vices, Excesses in Government, or any other
Color whatsoever, the Subjects of the Crown of England may withdraw their
Obedience, or make Hostile Resistance to King Charles our present Sovereign;
being by right of Inheritance justly possessed of the Crown; his Title no way
depending either upon his Divine or Moral Virtues; and the said Subjects having
received him, and acknowledged him for their Only Supreme Governor, done him
Homage, and sworn to him Faith and Allegiance, Absolutely and without Condition.

AS for other Princes and Potentates, whether Elective Kingdoms, or such as (at
the Erection of them) were received by the First King upon Express Covenant,
and only with a Conditional Obedience; (as is pretended by those of Aragon, and
Others;) of These I shall not here discourse. Neither shall I speak of those
Kings and Princes who acknowledge (in Spiritual Matters) a Superior
Jurisdiction in the Pope over them; who further stickleth (by necessary
Relation and Dependency of the Temporal upon the Spiritual) to have also a
Temporal Power over them, in ordine ad Spiritualia; And has often put this his
Claim in Practice, by accompanying his Spiritual Censure of Excommunication,
with the Sentence of discharging Subjects of their Obedience to their Princes,
and so consequently of Deposing them. Herewith I shall not meddle; None of
These Cases being applicable to This in question of King Charles, who is no
Elective King, but holds his Crown by an Unquestionable Title of Succession,
derived to him by Descent from his Ancestors, for the space of more than Six
hundred years: Neither was there ever any Pact or Condition with Him, or any of
his Progenitors, of Forfeiture; (which in This Case neither was, nor ever can
be justly pretended.) True it is, that his Ancestors and Himself have been
pleased to limit and restrain their Legal Right by many Concessions and Laws,
in some Cases; as the making of Laws without Consent of Peers and People, the
Levying of Money, etc. which he cannot Violate without great Injustice, as
shall be after shown: But no such Pact or Covenant can be produced, whereby,
upon Breach, he Forfeiteth his Sovereignty, or makes it Justifiable for his
Subjects to take up Arms against, or to inflict Punishments upon his Person,
either by Dethroning, Death, or Imprisonment.

THE Case likewise of Roman Catholic Princes no way concerns Him, who
acknowledges not in a Pope any such Superior Authority: So that whatsoever
Pretenses may be in some Cases, concerning such Princes as I have above
specifyed; (wherein I shall not presume to deliver my Opinion) yet in the
Present Case of Our King, there can be no colorable Pretense of taking Arms
against Him, or of Deposing Him; which I understand to be (in effect) when he
is divested of his Just Regal Power; Or of the Imprisoning of his Person, which
I understand to be not only when he is actually in Bonds, or locked up in a
Room; but also when the Liberty of Going, and the Freedom of Speaking is
restrained, to such Places, or Persons, as Others shall please; and he remain
under a Guard, not of his Own choosing, but imposed upon him by Others.

IT must be acknowledged, that the Kings of England derive their Title and
Right from William the Norman; who, although he came in by Conquest, yet his
Successors (considering that a Right Acquired by Force, may likewise be
Recovered by Force, by those upon whom the forcible Intrusion was made) were
pleased, by way of Pact and Stipulation, to limit and qualify that (Imperium
Absolutum) Absolute Dominion which is acquired by Conquest: And the People of
England thereupon did submit themselves to his Government; and thereby was
Constituted Imperium Legitimum, a Just and Rightful Sovereignty; the Kings
remaining with Supreme Power, and the People with Common Right; whereby they
were freed from the Servitude of Conquest, and remained under a Free
Subjection; whereunto they had by their voluntary Consent submitted themselves.

THE Kings likewise did recede from Absolute and Arbitrary Power, and remained
with Supreme, but not with Absolute Empire.

BY Free Subjection, I understand when a People live under Laws to which they
have given a Free Consent, and not under the Mere will of the Prince; and that
they retain such a Propriety in that which is their Own, that without Their
Assent, or Legal Forfeiture, it cannot be taken from them: And this is a true
difference betwixt a Free Subject, and a Slave or Servant. Quicquid acquirit
Servus, acquirit Domino; Liber, quod acquirit, acquirit Sibi; Whatsoever a
Slave gets, he gets for his Master; but what a Freeman gets, is for Himself.
And so although the Dominion of All belongs solely to the Prince, yet Propriety
refers to Every man; Dominium Totius apud Caesarem, Proprietas apud Singulos.

THE Difference that I understand betwixt a Supreme, and an Absolute Empire,
is, That in Absolute Empire the Rule of the Peoples Obedience is only the
Sovereigns Will. So it is in Turkey, Muscovy, and all such Princes as retein
Entire the Right of Conquest; and was in some sort under the Roman Emperors
after the Lex Regia was established by the Peoples Consent; whereby they
transferred their Entire Right unto Him.

Supreme Empire I understand to be, when a King has a Supremacy and Sovereignty
over all, but his Absolute Power is limited and restrein'd by reciprocal Pacts,
Laws, and Stipulations betwixt Prince and People; which is the Case of the
Crown of England: and to these Pacts the King and People are equally bound
before God and man; and the King is as much bound to Justice, to the Protection
of his Subjects, and to the Observance of the Laws, (not only out of Religion,
but even of Moral Honesty also) as the Subject is to Obedience. And he is not
only accountable to God, but even his People have certain Just and Legal ways
to seek Redress, wherein he shall do Wrong; notwithstanding that Axiom of our
Common Law, That the King can do no Wrong; which is false in many senses, and
may very well be called Fictio Juris, a kind of Metaphysicall Fiction: Le Roy
ne fait Tort, being only to be understood in the ordinary Course of Justice;
which the King administering by his Ministers, and not in Person, it is They
that are the Wrong-doers, and not the King; and the Subject, against Them, is
to seek his Remedy. For Kings may do Wrong, and be as wicked as Other men,
commit Murder, and wrongfully take away Other men's Estates; which no Fiction
of the Law can make not to be Wrong; although his Person be exempt from
Punishment. And that Abstract Consideration of the King, for his just Power and
Office, as it has often, Heretofore, been ill used in way of Ostentation; so,
in our Late Troubles, there was as ill use made of it, on the Other hand; when
the taking up Arms and the Fighting against him, was pretended not to be
against the KING, but only against CHARLES STVART. But (to speak in plain
Intelligible Terms) a King both may do Wrong, and the People may seek their
Redress, in such sort as the Law of the Land allows. And the difference
betwixt King and Peoples Failing in their Reciprocal Duties, is not but that
they do wrong alike, offend God alike, and are both of them liable to be
questioned, according to the Extent of the Law, by both their Consents
established. The Subjects transgressing the Law, shall be punished according to
the quality and measure of the Offense: Felony, by the Loss of their Goods and
Chattles, and by a Milder Death; Treason by a more Severe Death, and
Confiscation both of Goods and Inheritance. But hereof they must be Convict,
per Pares, by People of their own Condition, and adjudg'd by a Superior
Jurisdiction; which can be derived Only and Singly from the King. So that the
King, not having his Peer, nor any of his Own Condition, cannot have a Legal
Trial; and having no Jurisdiction Superior to Himself, cannot be Adjudg'd or
Sentenced by any: for neither the Extent of the Law, nor any Condition of the
Pacts, or Stipulation, do reach to the Punishing of the Person of the King, or
the Forfeiture of his Dominion over us. Certain it is that (in Civil things)
Trials may be, (and often are) brought against the King; and Kings do give way
that the Judges be sworn to do Equal Justice betwixt Them and their Subjects:
and in points of Oppression and wrong, we may Remonstrate our Grievances, and
challenge Redress by our Petitions; which, if they be not condescended unto, we
may insist upon them as our Right, and claim them as a Due, and not as of
Grace: But yet we must do it by way of Petition, as being a Dutiful Form of
Subjects bringing their Plea against the King; for in other sort He ought not
to be Impleaded. Beside these Petitions of Right, we may also Remonstrate,
enter our Protestations, and take all those Courses which the Laws allow.
Neither ought the King to take Offense at these Legal Contestations with him;
because, by his Assent unto the Laws, he has Assented unto Them: Nay he ought,
in Them, to do us Right; being obliged thereunto by the Law of God, by his
Oath, and by Moral Honesty and Justice. But yet if he fail in all these
Duties, Our Jurisdiction reaches not to his Personal Punishment. Therein he
is Sub Nullo nisi sub Deo, under none but God; and the Law stops There, and
tells us, Satis sufficit ei ad paenam, quod Deum habet Vltorem, that it will be
a sufficient punishment to him that he has God for an Avenger. Yet are we not
altogether left without Remedy; for Kings although they be God's Vicegerents,
yet they cannot work as God does, saying Fiat, and it was done; Kings must work
by Mediate Instruments; and if they command Illegal Things, the Executioners of
them are Responsible, and must make satisfaction to the Parties injured. And
therefore the King ought not Immediately to Imprison, nor in Person to Execute
any thing; because that in case of Wrong-doing, the Subject would then be
destitute of all means of Redress, in regard the King's Person is not to be
Impleaded by Law. I know the usual Objections, In case Kings will do that which
they ought not to do, and will, by their own immediate Warrants Commit, and be
the Personal Actours of the Injuries, or not suffer the Executioners of their
Illegal Commands to be Legally proceeded against; shall the Subject be left
wholly without Remedy, and debarred the Benefit of that Right of Nature,
inbred in all Creatures, of self Preservation? Yes; we must be contented with
that Condition wherein God has placed us; and wherein, by our Own Consents,
and Stipulations of Subjection, We have placed our selves; and may only right
our selves by those means which, by the Laws, (whereunto we have given our
Consent) are permitted unto us: Neither is our Native Liberty hereby ravished
from us; but as we have parted with it by our own Voluntary agreement, so
neither can we resume it, but by those ways which we have reserved in the
Stipulations of our Submission. And beside that herein there is no Injury, for
that Volenti non fit Injuria; it would be more Hurtful to Mankind, if it were
Otherwise: for there is a necessity that in all sorts of Governments, as well
as in Monarchy, there should be an Impunity, and Power, somewhere, of not being
questioned; otherwise all would be hurled into Anarchy and Confusion; Neither
could there be any final Determination of Controversies, if there were not a
Derniere Ressort, and Last Appeal, wherein we are bound to Acquiesce. Now this
Power must be trusted in some hand, and That must of necessity be, where the
Sovereign Power remains; otherwise, there must be supposed a Superior Power
to that Sovereign Power, and so in Infinitum, until we come to some such Power
as has nothing above it; and then That must be entrusted, and be submitted to,
without being accountable to Any but to God; because on Earth there can be to
it no Superior Jurisdiction. And this Power is in the King of England in all
things, such only excepted, wherein Himself or his Ancestors have, by Laws
and Stipulations, limited their Absolute Power; as was said before. And This we
are by the Law of God, and of the Land, bound to Obey, and not to make any
Resistance, but what the Law allows us: We must, in the Rest, have recourse
unto God, if our Princes be Wicked; neither may we Mutiny, or Repine at God,
when we have Ill Kings, more than when he sends Diseases, Plagues,
Caterpillars, Blightings or Blasts. For wicked Kings are but Blastings of the
People that God is pleased to Punish: neither must we think Our Condition worse
than that of Wicked Kings; (notwithstanding their Temporal Impunity) for
certainly it is much Better, both in regard of Punishment in the World to Come,
and commonly in This. For the Next World as Their Sin is greater; so it is
declared that their Punishment shall be greater also, Hear, Oye Kings, and
Understand, etc. Because, being Ministers of Gods Kingdom, you have not judged
aright, nor kept the Law, nor walked after the Counsel of God; horribly and
speedily shall he come upon you, for a sharp Judgment shall be to them that are
in High Places, for Mercy will soon pardon the Meanest, but Mighty men shall be
mightily Tormented. Wisd. 6. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Whereas Subjects, who suffer
with Patience, because they are so commanded by God, make him their Debtor by
their Sufferings; and he always pays faithfully, who says, that if we suffer
with Christ, we shall also Reign with him. And for this World, their Wickedness
and Oppression is still accompanied with these Fears, Destractions, and Horrors
of Conscience, which have ever been inseparable from Tyrannies; by which their
Lives are rendered more uncomfortable, than the Unhappiest of their Subjects.
And for the most part, their Ends are as miserable as their Lives; for what
they Fear, and by their Tyranny seek to prevent, does commonly fall upon them:
Their People do Revolt and Rebel; and although they be never so well
Chatechized in the points of Obedience; yet their Natural Inclination to
recover their Liberty, much more to cast off Unjust Burdens, and Oppressions,
is such, that slight and weak Arguments will easily persuade them to that,
whereunto they are so strongly inclined, and the least pretense of Religion, or
Color of Reason or Lawfulness, countenancing or tolerating the Freeing
themselves from Subjection, in any Case, will be more prevalent with them, than
the most passitive Precept of God's Word, enjoining Obedience. If in any case
taking up Arms be admitted, theirs shall ever be that Case. And if the
Wickedness of their Prince shall be allowed as a ground of their Rebellion,
their Prince shall ever be the most Wicked: Of all this, all Ages have produced
many Examples, and especially these Later Times, through all the Estates of
Christendom. And wicked Princes will find, that Precepts in this ease will not
serve the Turn; for though Hostile Resistance against the King be expressly
prohibited by the Word of God, both in the Old and New Testament; tho it be
against the Doctrine and Practice of the Primitive Church, and the present
Tenets, and Confessions of Faith, of all the Reformed Churches in the World,
though it be contrary to the Solemn Oath of Fidelity, and Allegiance sworn to
the King; the Laws of the Land (which make it Treason) and Moral Honesty and
Justice; yet will it be in this point of Resistance (as Tacitus says of
Divinations in Rome) which was a Wickedness that had been, and ever would be
forbidden, yet ever would be Retained: Semper Vetabitur, and semper
retinebitur. And so to Princes that will highly Oppress, and make their Will,
and not the Laws, the Rule of their Government, although (I say) to resist be a
Wickedness, and that it be against the Law of God and Man to do it; yet where
the Wrongs are Great, and a Fair Opportunity offered of Prevailing, it will be
ever done: For that amongst men, there are a Thousand for One, that prefer
their own Interest or Inclination, before Duty or Conscience. And certainly, a
Prudent and Foreseeing Prince, that will impartially examine things, cannot but
expect it should be so. For why should he suppose, that Other men will be more
Honest, or more Religious than Himself? And when he breaks through all the
Bonds and Ties of Oaths of Divine Precepts and Moral Justice, only to stretch
and extend his Power and Greatness; why should we not expect, that Subjects
should make as bold to transgress the same Duties, in hope of Recovering
Liberty; with even the False show, whereof People are apter to be further
transported, than by any Earthly Desire whatsoever? Neither will the Fear of
Death or Danger restrain them; because they will not Attempt, until
Opportutunity make them hopeful of Prevailing; and then they consult by Power
to provide for their own Impunities.

BUT besides this Proneness in People to be easily led and persuaded into
Rebellion, under the false and specious Show of recovering Liberty; the great
Monarchs and Princes of Christendom have been (in great part) the Fomenters and
Upholders of it, and their Doctors have not so much by their Preaching and
Wriing beaten it down, as the Kings themselves have, by their Examples and
Actions, given Encouragement unto it; for although I shall ever speak with
Reverence of Princes and their Proceedings, yet I shall hope that the humble
Representation of this, Truth will receive a fair Interpretation. For it is
undeniably true, that in this latter Age, all the great Monarchies and States
of Christendom have been rendered unhappy by Intestine Wars, which have been
encouraged (if not contrived and designed) by one Christian Prince against
Another, every one countenancing and indulging Rebellion, until it become his
Own Case, and then he is offended. Of this I shall give no particular
Instances, the Notariety of it is too great, and I fear every State may too
easily apply it to what themselves have done: And it may be apprehended, that
the sad Condition of many States of Christendom, at this present day, may
exhibit something of Gods Judgments, upon that Account, who has said; With
what Measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again. Mat. 7.12.

AND wicked Kings, as they are sure they shall not 'scape the severe Judgment
of God in the next World (if they do believe the Scripture) so (if they will
believe ancient Histories of what has past in former Times, or their own
Experience of what they see daily with their Eyes; or that they do believe that
God will repay unto them that which they have either countenanced or contrived
against others) they must expect to have troublesome and uncomfortable Lives,
accompanied with Hatred, Hazard, and Infamy. And if these Considerations will
not restrain them, yet We must not be Wicked, because They are so: Neither will
God admit of Recrimation for our Excuse. Our Duty of not resisting is Positive,
upon pain of Damnatition; from which no good Success or Prevailing, can keep
us, although it may save us from the Gallows. Beside this great Hazard of our
Souls, Moral Prudence teaches us, that a Civil War which (I hope yet we have
no great reason to fear) is commonly a Cure much worse than the Disease: For no
Oppression, nay no Tyranny, brings with it half those Miseries and Calamities,
which of Necessity, do ever accompany an Intestine War. Wicked Kings may be
cruel, covetous and licentious; yet their Oppressions and their Lusts are
restrained to some Wickednesses, and to some Persons: But in a War, Rapes,
Murders, Robberies, Sacriledges, and all manner of Impieties break in, and all
sorts of People are made miserable, which the poor Kingdom of England has found
true by sad Experience; where, in the Space of five years only, (from 1641 to
1646) more was taken from the Subject, than would have been exacted by
Subsidies, Projects, or any unjust Taxes whatsoever, by the worst of Kings, in
the Space of a Hundred and so were all other Wickednesses increased
proportionably.

I SHALL conclude this Discourse with my humble and hearty Prayers to God
Almighty to avert his heavy Displeasure (which the Multitude of our Sins may
give us just Cause to dread) from this Nation; at present the most prosperous
and flourishing of any in Europe; and that the public Calamities that befell
the Kingdom in the late unhappy War, and the lamentable Distractions, and
Confusions that were wrought by our Dissentions, both in Church and
Commonwealth, may be a Lesson to the People to value and esteem Peace, and not
so wantonly to engaage themselves afresh in New Miseries.

THE END.

