A Second LETTER to a Member of Parliament, touching the Growth and Increase of
Popery in England.
SIR,
THE First Letter to a worthy Member of your House this Session, touching the
Growth and Increase of Popery in this Kingdom, having found a deservedly kind
Acceptance with all Lover^ of the Religion, Laws and Liberties of their Native
Country, I could not but cast in my Mite (toward the Preservation of what so
nearly concerns us all) both as a Supplement to the Forme^ Letter, and also as
a Confirmation of it, not doubting but you will take my Well-meaning in this
Address, in good Part, who have already given such early Proofs of a Zeal, as
well as a Knowledge beyond your years.

It Is no small satisfaction to every Honest English Man, and True Protestant,
to see the Nation begin to awaken from that dead Sleep, in which it has, for
some years past, laid [I mean as to the Ground that Popery has gotten since the
happy Revolution in the ever Memorable Year 88.] till within a few day^ one of
another, the Two Proclamations that lately came forth, and the Resolves of your
Honorable House (in the Votes of Febr. 21. last) do seem to put it beyond all
doubt, that the Court, and the Parliament o^ England, do now begin in good
earnest, to Resolve, before it is too late, to prevent the further Mischief that
threaten Us from that Quarter.

The Petition of the Clergy of the County Palatine of Lancaster, lately laid
before your Honorable House, shows you (no doubt) the great Reason there is to
Complain of the Insolence of the Popish Emissaries that swarm in every Corner
of the Land, and give out, That they have now greater Hopes, than for many
years past, to Extirpate the Northern Heresy, and to Establish their
Idolatrous Worshi^ in these Kingdoms. The Truth of which, those that live near,
or have any Conversation with, our pretended English Catholics, in any Part of
the Kingdom, can Testify; and questionless you would hear more of this Matter
from all Quarters, were there but a sufficient Security, and a fitting
Encouragement given to such, whom, as things stand, either Fear or Interest
discourages from the Discharge of their Duty to their Country, in this regard.

You know well Sir, the Romanists (who know their own Strength and Numbers but
too well) are none of the best Neighbors: Their very Mercies are therefore
Cruel, because their Malice and Resentment know no Bounds. They are bigoted by
a blind Zeal, and neither can nor will forget or forgive any such as have
either the Courage or the Honesty to Oppose them in their pernicious Ways; so
that it is left with the Wisdom of the Nation, Whether the First Step to Curb
the Insolence of the Popish Party, be not to make some Effectual Provision for,
the Security and Indemnity of such Persons of known and approved Honesty,
Integrity, and good Reputation, as shall adventure (for as things now stand,
it is an Adventure with a witness) to Inform your Honorable House of the
Practices of the Popish Faction in this Kingdom.

And if such Effectual Provision may not be made in this Juncture of Affairs,
we must hereafter even thank our selves, if we are led blindfold into Popery
and Slavery, from which it is true, we were not many year^ since delivered
almost miraculously, though now, at this day, such our Deliverance is almost
forgotten; partly by our own base Ingratitude, and partly by the Management of
our subtle Adversaries, whose politic Artifice it is to turn all Events
(whether for, or against them) upon Us: So that, the Emissaries of the Court of
Rome are confessedly Retainers to St. Peter in this, (it in nothing else) that,
in the worst sense they are expert Fishers of Men.

To demonstrate this, I need carry you Sir, no further abroad than our own
Country, nor further back than what is yet fresh in our Memories; I mean the
Plot discovered in 78. It Is true, Coleman, some few Priests, and one Lord,
suffered their deserved Punishment, but for all that, They soon ordered the
Matter so, as to turn the Plot upon the Protestants, and quickly so improved,
as to get ground by it, as appeared by their carrying their Grand Point; [I
mean the Succession] for which this Nation has since been plentifully drained,
both of her Blood and Treasure too. And yet, considering who Governed all at
Court then, it is no wonder that they weathered that Storm so soon as they did.
But it is surprising to consider, how fatal a Blunder they made in the following
Reign, when they had the Game entirely in their own hands. There was a Time,
when all, but their own Party, attributed their Miscarriage to the immediate
hand of God. But the greatest Riddle is behind, That after so conspicuous a
Turn of Providence, as scarce any Age or History can parallel, when every body
thought that Popery had been laid in its winding sheet, and past all hopes of
Recovery on this side of the Water; and that under so Excellent a Prince as our
present Gracious King William, who is both in his Interests and Affections too,
the most averse to Romish Superstition and Idolatry; and who in his Nature,
abominates Popish Tyranny and Cruelty: I say, that under such a Prince, and
such a Government as Ours is, the Papists should get ground among Us, and
pervert multitudes of people of all Ranks and Degrees, seems incredible, did it
not too evidently appear in fact to be true. It looks as if that Infatuation,
which under the Last Reign attended them, was in This fallen upon Us.

It Is true, during the Continuance of the late War with France, the Romanists,
generally speaking, (for some Desperado's there were who pushed at all, having
nothing but a worthless Life to lose) (...) themselves more upon the reserve
than they have done since the Conclusion of the General Peace. The only
Discouragement they have hitherto lain under, (and in which they are not alone)
is the Double Tax; which, as their Estates have been very much undervalued by
their Creatures, Tools, or Dependents, has been reduced to near the Half Value,
and consequently. They have paid no more than their Neighbors (if so much, in
some places especially) where their Estates at Rack-Rent have been Assessed in
the Tenants Name, if a Protestant. Nay, though the Papists occasioned the War,
and the Consumption of the Treasure, which year by year the War required:Yet so
merciful was the Government to them all along, as to leave it to their own
Choice, whether they would pay double Taxes or not, when some people thought
they had not been too hardly dealt withal, if so be their Estates had been
Confiscate toward the Charge of the War whilst it continued, and till the
Nation was out of Debt, even in the Time of Peace too.

If this seems to sound a little too harsh, (as why should it? seeing, as I
said, they occasioned the War) what should hinder, if there were due
Encouragement, and Security for such as shall discover them, but all the
Jesuits, and other Seminaries Lands in England and Wales, bought up with their
Moneys, only ^n Trust, and in the Names of the pretended Catholics, should be
seized, and sold for the Use of the Public? Considering that these Vermin do
plant themselves here among us, to no other end, but to ruin and destroy us.
If, in our own Defense, we may not disable such Adversaries, as (if let alone)
will soon grow upon us, and trample us under their feet, and show us no more
Mercy than a Turk showed a Saracen, then are we in a piteous Case. They deal
not so tenderly by their old Refugees, nor by their suspected New Converts
abroad, as we deal by them; but if the same Measure was given them nearer home,
that they give the poor Protestants in other Countries, they were served but in
their kind, though our Holy Religion will not suffer us so far to Unman our
selves.

They were not so bold and assuming (as I hinted even now) before the late
Peace was concluded, but they have been much more so since; as they concluded
('it is probable) that the former Alliance was in effect broken, upon Conclusion
of a General Peace: And the E. and K. of Sp. might probably be brought over,
etc. And besides, since the Peace, the Ports have been more open on both sides
of the Channel, than in the time of War; so that they have chused, and rechused
(almost at pleasure) and by that means have filled our Lands with such Locusts
and Caterpillars as you may every Day hear Complaints of (and very deservedly
too) from every Quarter.

Above an Year and half since their pretended Bp. Gifford visited the Western
Parts of England, and confirmed Multitudes, and that so openly too, that almost
every body in the Neighborhood where he came, knew to what intent he was come,
and what he did at his several Stages, how he was regaled like a Prince by the
Grandees of his Party, and even adored by the common People.

Since which their Ignorant Admirers are possessed with a Conceit, that at the
beginning of the following Age, 1700. they shall see Popery settled here, and in
other Countries, and the Protestant Religion every where utterly rooted out.
Now Sir, though this seems to be only a foolish Surmize of theirs, and not much
to be regarded by us; yet, being once entertained with a Credulity that is
peculiar to That Party (as the Vulgar are easily brought to believe that it
will be, which they would have be) and being improved by their crafty Priests,
who as they are Masters of the Consciences and Purses too of their deluded
Partisans; so they never let their Spirits sink (if they can by any means keep
them up) under any pressure, they by experience find will work Wonders, and
have the like effect among their People, that the Doctrine of Fate has among
the Turks; that is, 'twill make the One as freely run their Heads against a
Wall, as the Other go boldly up to, and charge, even at, the mouth of a fiered
Canon.

And though their Creatures and Proselytes are obliged on an implicit Belief, and
without Examination, to take down in the Lump whatever their Guides infuse into
them, and to believe it (though Contradictious to the Reason of all Mankind
besides) as firmly as if it were Gospel: Yet it is not to be doubted but they (I
mean their blind Guides) do designedly encourage their credulous People with
certain hopes of succeeding in their accursed Enterprises upon this Church and
Nation, by filling their Heads with some plausible ground upon which such hopes
and expectations are built: And such probably are the restless Endeavors of
the Jesuits abroad, to break the Old Confederacy or Alliance, and to set on
Foot and Confirm a New One; by which two sticks (not to say more) may be made
One, and therewith they imagine they shall one Day quit their old Scores with
us, and Cudgel us obstinate Heretics into better manners.

Another ground they build much upon (as well they may) is our unhappy
Divisions, and unreasonable Heats and Animosities at home, within our selves;
and the no good Terms the Protestant Princes abroad are at, one with another;
for if the Emissaries of that Church, who are Masters of that cursed
Matchiavilian Policy, can but once divide a People within themselves, they
never despair of compassing their Ends upon them, at some time or other.

Besides the over-easie Carelessness and Security of many well-meaning People
among us, who have been too sanguine, and thought that all danger of the return
of Popery and Tyranny was over; when K. J. and the pretended Pr. and Fa. Peter's
were once scamper'd; have been wonderfully improved to our hurt by the Romish
Party, for more than 10 Years together last past.

To which if we add the unparalleled Tenderness and Compassion of the
Government hitherto, and of many of the inferior Magistracy (in all parts of
the Kingdom) toward them [the Papists] and that too, at a time when the
Protestants Interest has sensibly been sinking every where abroad, and its
Professors persecuted even to Death, the Galleys, Bonds and Imprisonments; I
say, where so little Opposition has for so many Years (through a mistaken pity,
or something worse) been made, to put a stop to its Increase and Growth, That
so many of our People have been perverted by their indefatigable Emissaries, is
so far from being a wonder, that it may rather seem very strange to one who
shall seriously reflect on these Things, that they have not before now made
themselves Masters of both our Place and Nation too.

But (to speak to the Merits of the Cause) if the real Advantages the Romanist
have on their side, be examined and looked into, it must needs be said that the
Wonder will still increase, how we have hitherto escaped that utter
Destruction, which for the Course of so many Years, they, under so many various
Disguises, and by manifold Ways and Means, have all along since the
Reformation, been attempting to accomplish and bring about.

I shall Sir, with your patience, but just mention some of the most obvious
Methods they have taken, and the unhappy Success (as to us) that those Methods
have met with, as to the promoting of their grand Design upon us. All which I
humbly submit to the grave Judgment, and Consideration of our Representatives
in Parliament, that they in their great Wisdom may take such speedy and
effectual Course to put a stop to the progress of the Evils complained of, as
they shall think fit.

It cannot then be denied but the Papists have a vast Advantage over us, in
respect of their Unity within themselves; for by the Authority their Priests
usurp over their Consciences, they are all as one Man in their common Cause,
which is the pulling us down, and setting themselves up. To accomplish which,
their Oaths of Secrecy bound upon them by Sacraments too, do make it almost
impossible for Man to penetrate into their hidden Works of Darkness; their
Doctrines of Merit, and of blind Obedience to their Superiors without reserve,
do stand them in great stead too: And so does the vast Number of their several
Orders in that Church; and the Multitude of designing Men in every one of those
Orders, who stick at no Difficulties, and leave nothing unattempted to effect
our utter Extermination. In order to which they turn themselves into all manner
of Disguises, strike in with all sorts of Factious, or ill disposed Persons,
create Divisions and Misunderstandings among Protestants, and blow them up into
a Flame, and then make their Advantages upon both the contending Parties. The
Poet's Proteus himself could never appear in greater variety of Shapes, than
the Romish Priests do amongst us, assume at this Day. They can act the parts of
Non Jurors in the Church; of Officers in the Camp; of Merchants on the
Exchange; and so down from the fine Beaux to the meanest Mechanics. And by
this means do they herd, and mingle, with all sorts of People, and make
themselves Masters of their Tempers, Humors and Inclinations, and then they
tamper with, and work upon, them accordingly.

And this they are the better enabled to do, because most of their Orders have
not only Lands of their own (as I intimated before) but also mighty Sums of
Money to each Order belonging, so that by Virtue of the Banks they have in most
Countries in Europe; the Jews themselves have not a better Credit for
Remittances to any parts of the World, than they. By which means they do not
only buy up as many necessitous People as come in their way, if they find them
fit for their purpose; but are enabled also to buy off all such Punishments
too, as, upon discovery, their Crimes expose them to, (if they can meet with
any Persons of so prostitute a Conscience, as to expose their very Souls, and
much more than their Country, to Sale for Money) and thus do they sometimes
strike off old Scores, and run up new ones forthwith, and that with Impunity
for the most part.

But besides these, they of the Romish Persuasion are said to have not a few of
their Party, who, as Fitton and Allybone heretofore did, study the Common Law
in our Inns of Court, the better to enable them to defend their own Party, and
to offend us too, whose Security, under God, lies in those very Laws which
those Romanists, who are suffered to intrude into those Societies, do only
study to elude, or overthrow. And besides, those who do thus by Connivance:
find Admission into our Inns of Court, (not very much for the Credit of those
otherwise very Honorable Societies) there to acquaint themselves with the
Theory of the Law; they have many others both in City and Country too, who are
bred up to the Chicanerie, or wrangling part, or the Practice of the Common
Law, and became Solicitors, Petty-Foggers and Make-bates, who set honest People
together by the Ears, that they may pick their Pockets. This is not only a
Discouragement to Protestants, who are duly qualified for that Calling, and
whose Bread those Popish Solicitors do eat out of their Heads: But that Party
makes a vast Advantage, (not to say many) by the Practice of such Solicitors,
who by conveyancing, and letting out peoples Money, by making their last Wills,
and soliciting in all sorts of Business, do well know the Strength or Weakness
of all the Country round about them, and are by those Means acquainted with the
Humors, Tempers and Dispositions of the several Parties, with, or for whom
they are concerned. And the Consequence is, that such little Busie-Fellows from
time to time, give in an Account unto their Superiors of their Knowledge and
daily Observations by them made. By which Means, the Heads of that Party in
England, do very probably know better than our selves, our Strength and
Weakness, and who are for, who against them too. And no Body can teach them,
how to make such Information turn them to very good Account. And it is too well
known to be denied, that some of those sly Popish Factors have so cajoled those
poor deluded people (though Protestants) among whom they live, as scarce to have
paid, in Eleven Years together, so much as a single Poll-Tax of Twelve pence.
But that other some of the same Stamp and Character, should for 5 Years
together, continue their practice without satisfying the World, that they have
ever taken the Oath of Fealty, as required, after the Assassination plot, by an
Act of Parliament, is such a barefaced and open Defiance to the Laws of the
Land, and to the Legislative too, by whom they are Enacted, as is perhaps
without all president. However, it is to be hoped now that the Honorable House
of Commons is upon retrenching the Number of Attorneys and Solicitors, that
they will in their Great Wisdom begin with such as I have been speaking of,
whose Insolence is intolerable, and whose Impudence is, any other way,
incureable.

There Is another Advantage the Papists make by the pretended Merit of good
Works, or a feigned Show of Charity to Protestants: For though they mortally
hate all those (not of their own way) upon whom they bestow their treacherous
Mock-Charities, as they curse us at the least once in the Year in their solemn
Devotions, by Bell, Book and Candle: Yet, they throw out a fine gilded Bait
under a deadly insidious Hook, to catch the ignorant, unsteady common people,
who judge only by the outside of things. Thus the Schooling of some poor
Protestants Children is paid in some places, even by Jesuits themselves, upon
Condition that such Children shall read only in such Books, (of which you may
be sure the Bible is not one) as those their Benefactors shall at free cost
furnish them withal. In other places up and down, they have Midwives, and
Women-Doctresses, who dabble in Physic and Chyrurgery, who, under pretense of
much Tenderness to those Bodies, which they could, were it in their power,
consume in a Smith-field Bonfire, do lay in wait for, and sometimes catch in
their Snare, an ignorant unstable Soul: Which having perverted, they make
twofold more a Child of Hell than themselves. Under this Head, (had I not been
prevented by the worthy Author of the first Letter) I should have exposed their
bold practices in haunting, and tampering with, such persons as are sick or
declining (especially if their bypast Lives have been such, as to need a
Feather bed to carry them to Heaven upon) and their ransacking of Prisons, and
their gleaning or picking up of Proselytes at the very Gallows; by all which we
may plainly perceive, that they stick not to compass Sea and Land, so they may
obtain their Ends upon us.

I have but one Thing more Sir, to trouble you at this time withal. I am well
satisfied of your Stedfastness in the established Religion, and of the due
respect you always show to such of our Clergy as are an Ornament to their
Station, by the Constancy of their Faith, (...)larity of their Lives, the
diligent Discharge of their Functions, and their Loyalty to the present King,
our Gracious Sovereign Lord William the Third, etc. Now Sir, these are the Men
that of all others are the Objects of the Papists mortal Hatred; and if it be
the Misfortune of any honest Clergyman of such a Character, to have a popish
Patron; he is sure, to live as uneasy in his Post, as They and their Agents
can (or durst attempt to) make him. I make no doubt therefore, but you will
permit me to intercede for all such of the Clergy as suffer upon the aforesaid
Account; nor can I in the leas^ distrust Their having as many Advocates, as
Friend, in your Honorable House. It Is the general Concern of the established
Church, that the Right of Patronage of Ecclesiastical Benefices should be
placed in other Hands, than Theirs, whose only purpose it is to root out and to
destroy the Church of England; Their Benefices are either Sold, or bestowed so,
as to be made rather a Snare, than a free Gift to the Procurer. There Is no
great harm in the First, (provided the Governors of the Church could be
assured well of this, that the wealthiest Clerks would always make the best
Parsons, Vicars, or Curates) so in this case, if the Danger of Simony be
avoided, a Man may (if he thinks fit) part with his Money to those Patrons, or
their Agitators, and yet preserve his Liberty. Whereas, the other way, a Man is
shuckled of course; for either through want of Learning or Parts, Morality of
Honesty (as the choice is commonly made) the (...) such Tools as cannot, or
else such, as through Fear or Feebleness of Spirit, or some other mean and sordid
consideration, will not stand their Ground, and defend their Flocks, when they
see the Wolf a coming to worry and to devour them. To remedy which
Inconveniences, two Acts of Parliament have been made (the latter in or about
the Year 90) to invest the Livings of all Recusants in Both the Universities.
For what reason they have not thought fit to look after Their Concern in it,
they do best know, it concerns not me to enquire. However this Their tacit
Disclaimer has encouraged such Patrons as are Recusants to elude the Law, and
to laugh at it, and the Universities too. Nay, since that Act last mentioned,
it is well known, that the Market runs higher than ever in all parts of England.
And yet it is thought the next or reversional Presentations of most of their
Livings are disposed of, many of them at excessive Rates too. But admitting
they are so, yet what should hinder, but some Care may be taken of Posterity?
Or why might not these Livings be invested in the K by Act of Parliament, and
Commissioners appointed, as to ratify such Grants as are already on Foot, so
to dispose of the Remander or perpetual Advowson? And considering the Hardships
those Incumbents have submitted to, who have obtained succedaneous
Presentations after others, or after themselves; why might not such be allowed
the Preemption or First Refusal? And next to them any other person qualifyed by
Law, that is, being a professed Protestant, and having taken the Oaths, etc. By
this means the Preferments would soon be placed in better Hands, and the
Inconveniences before mentioned in a great Measure, (if not altogether) would
be removed, and a considerable Sum advanced, either to augment the poorer
Vicarages and Curacies, or for such other charitable Uses, as His Majesty and
Both Houses of Parliament shall think fit to appropriate or apply it to.

If it be objected, That to strip Recusants of the Right of the Patronage of
their Livings, is an Hardship upon them. This is soon Answered: First, That
such Patronage, or Right to fill a Church when vacant, is a great Trust, for
GOD, and His Church, or People: Now where this Trust is gotten into such hands
as cannot but abuse it, and prostitute is to the most scandalous and vile
purposes; there such incureable Abuse of a Trust, does in many like cases
forfeit the Trust; and if so, Why not in this case? especially if the
consequence, weight, and moment of the Abuse be duly considered. Secondly, It Is
plain, that the KING, Lords, and Commons, have more than once, by the Laws even
now mentioned, virtually declared a Forfeiture of such Trust in the Popish
Patrons, by transferring their Right of Presenting to, and Investing them in,
Both the Universities. And therefore, Thirdly, The same Supreme Authority may
Invest them other where, if it thinks fit, upon the Incureable Abuse of this
Great Trust; so that their Right of Presenting may as justly be transferred to
the King, as to the Universities: Neither is it enough to say, that in this
case, there is an Hardship upon some particular persons, which is inconsistent
with Justice; For, Fourthly, a private Good, must (in Reason) give way to a
public One: Now the Hardship does really lie upon the whole Church of England,
if the particular Churches are ill-provided for: The Injury in such Case
redounds to a far greated number of private persons (as it may happen) in one
particular Cure or Parish, than there are popish Patrons in the whole Kingdom.
In fine, Sir, if those Recusant-Patrons do follow the Direction of their
Family-priests indisposing of their Benefices (as no Body can doubt but they
do.) I suppose it will be granted, that their Priests will not have so much
Tenderness for Ours, as to scruple the drawing them into Simony; but if there is
nothing of that, but only a reversional Presentation is bought [the Incumbent
being alive and in good health,] then if (as most people think it does) the
Money goes to the Priest, it is soon made a part of their Corban, or the
Treasure of their Church, and how far that is employed to ruin Ours, you have
been told before. So that our abused Clergy do just as wisely in this case, as
those Traders did in the late War, who furnished France with Lead and
Saltpeter, the better to enable them to destroy our Armies, to annoy our
Coasts, to burn our Towns, to take our Shipping, and to ruin us in our Trade.

I fear Sir, I have exceeded my bounds (though there is still in reserve, and
behind, what would swell this Letter into a Volume, should I descend to
particulars) however if these general hints, or any one of them, shall, in any
thing, advantage the public, (which is the only aim of this paper:) Then I
shall neither despair of obtaining Your Pardon, nor repent of running any other
Hazard, but that of offending Your Self; not so much for my Zeal in this Cause,
as for the meanest of my Performance. And yet I have no great reason to fear,
but that if your discerning Judgment approves of the One, Your great Candor
and Ingenuity will put a favorable Censure upon the other. I am,

SIR, Your most Humble and Obedient Servant.

London: Printed for Brabazon Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill, 1700.
Price 2d.


