A SEASONABLE DISCOURSE AGAINST COMPREHENSION.

Occasioned by a late PAMPHLET Entitled The Peaceable Design, Being a Modest
Account of the Non-Conformists Meetings, with some of their Reasons for
Nonconformity: And the way of Accommodation in the Matter of Religion. Humbly
proposed to Public Consideration by some Ministers of London, against the
Sitting of Parliament, in the Year, 1675.

Titus 1.13. Rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the Faith.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1676.

A Discourse against Comprehension.
IT IS an amazing Reflection (but that nothing seems strange in these last and
worst of Days) that Persons otherwise of undoubted Loyalty, should so far be a
Contradiction to themselves and their former Actions, as out of a vain
compliance with some People, and thereby to obtain the Title of Moderate Men,
to be encouragers of those Designs, which, if duly prosecuted according to
some Men's intentions, are inevitably destructive both to Church and State.

That there should be Ambitious, Covetous, Discontented Persons, who having
flourished under the late Rebellion, do endeavor to repeat it, is no wonder.
But that any of those Loyal Sufferers, who have sufficiently smarted under the
late Troubles, that those should so tamely contribute to their own and the
Church's ruin, is not so easily understood.

That the N. C. have formerly found Friends and Favorites amongst some
Privy-Counsellors, and others of the Nobility, Page 2.
is easily granted. (And therefore the Author of Good Will amongst Protestants,
who so boastingly urges this Topic, might if he pleased, have kept his
Quotations in his Common-Place-Book.)

The generous disposition of those noble Spirits, naturally Compassionate
toward all suffering Parties, and the great comparative Meekness and Innocence
that appeared in those first Dissenters, are a ready Apology for the Indulgence
that was then showed them. But now since by their Fruits we do know them: Since
their Principles are explained into such dismal Practices (of which it were a
happy thing if the sad experience of these Kingdoms would suffer us to be
ignorant) the Loyal Nobility and Gentry, much less the Clergy, have little
cause to be fond of these People, who are still disturbing Authority with their
impertinent, I pray God they do not prove destructive, Clamours.

That this may not be rejected as the melancholy reflection of a discontented
Brain, I shall consider the intended Relaxation with all imaginable strictness.

The Matter of Fact is this.

The Non Conformists have moved, that two Declarations in the Act of
Uniformity, may be dispensed with. They are these,

I A. B. do here declare my unfeigned Assent and Consent to all, and every
thing contained, and prescribed in, and by the Book, Entitled, The Book of
Common Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and
Ceremonies of the Church, according to the use of the Church of England;
together with the Psalter or Psalms of David, pointed as they are to be Sung
or Said in Churches; and the form or manner of Making, Ordaining, and
Consecrating of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.

I A. B. do declare, that it is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever, to
take Arms against the King; and that I do abhor that Traitorous Position of
taking Arms by his Authority against his Person, or against those that are
Commissionated by him; and that I will Conform to the Liturgy of the Church of
England, as it is now by Law established. And I do declare that I do hold,
there lies no Obligation upon me, or any other Person from the Oath, commonly
called the Solemn League and Covenant to endeavor any Change or Alteration of
Government, either in Church or State; and that the same was in it self an
unlawful Oath, and impoposed upon the Subjects of this Realm, against the known
Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom.

What Private designs are hereby promoting, we must leave to Almighty God and
the Event of things: But as to the Public, there can be no warrantable Reason
for such Dispensation; but either the unlawfulness or inexpediency of these
Declarations.

The unlawfulness of them will never be pretended by any true Son of the Church
of England. For this were in short to give up the whole Cause; and to lay the
charge of Schism at our own Doors. Because, that Church which requires any
thing unlawful, as a condition of her Communion, is doubtless Schismatical.

But since those Laws and Constitutions, which were at first Legally
established, may by the alteration of Circumstances, be very burdensome to the
Subject, and as such ought to be Repealed; let us consider the justness of
their pretenses herein. And if upon inquiry it do appear, that the continuance
of these Declarations is as necessary for the preservation both of Church and
State as their first enforcement; I do then humbly petition Authority to
consider the excellent words of this present Votes of the House of Commons,
Feb. 5. 1662. against Indulgence.
Parliament.

It will no way become the Gravity or Wisdom of a Parliament, to pass a Law at
one Session for Uniformity, and at the next Session (the Reasons of Uniformity
continuing still the same) to pass another Law to frustrate or weaken the
Execution of it.

It will expose your Majesly to the restless importunity of every Sect or
Opinion, and of every single Person also, who shall presume to dissent from the
Church of England.

As to these Declarations; the Assent and Consent in the former, and the
Renunciation of the Covenant in the later, are thus rationally grounded.

The end and design of Government is, Salus Publica; it is to take care, Ne
quid detrimenti capiat communitas: Or in the Apostles phrase, That we may live
a quiet and peaceable Life in all Godliness and Honesly. For the obtaining of
which happy end, his Sacred Majesly, who is Cuslos utriusque tabulae, out of a
due care of his People, by the advice of his Council, has Enacted: That no Man
be admitted into any Office Sacred or Secular, who, when his Place requires it,
ref^seth by Oaths, Subscriptions, or Declarations, to give assurance to the
Public, that he is Orthodox and Peaceable.

Now since different Opinions and Practices in matters of Religion (especially
when cherished and indulged) do naturally improve into contentious Disputes;
and those Disputes, if not restrained, break out into Civil Wars. For, Mr.
Newcomes Sermon. before Parl. Sept. 12.1644. page 36.
Men will at last take up Swords and Spears instead of Pens; and defend by Arms
what they cannot do by Arguments. Since things are thus; It Is at least
Prudence, if not Duty, in the Supreme Power, to remove the occasion of this
Ruin, by enjoining the Public practice of these Duties in one Uniform way;
that all his Subjects may speak the same thing; and that there be no Divisions
amongst them, persectly joined together in the same Mind and in the same
Judgment.

And therefore the Act for Uniformity most prudently enjoyneth, That no Man be
permitted the public Exercise of his Ministry, till in this first Declaration,
he has given his unfeigned Assent and Consent to the use of all and every
thing in the said Book contained and prescribed: I say unfeigned; Hypocrisy
being hateful both to God and Man, and destructive to humane Society.

As to the other Declaration in brief thus.

It being notoriously known with what design the Covenant was first Imposed;
even the ruin of that Covernment which the Kings of England in their
Goronation-Oath do swear to Maintain: And the sad Effects being as Obvious, to
which that League was in a great measure Instrumental, Authority could do no
less, without being wanting to its own Preservation, than to require an
assurance from all Persons to be admitted into the Ministry; that there lies no
Obligation from this Oath, to endeavor any Alteration of Government either in
Church or State. In which words whoever refuses to declare does in effect
assure us; That though at present restrained, yet he is still obliged, when
occasion shall offer it self, in his Place and Calling to root out Popery,
Prelacy, i. c. Government by Arch Bishops, Bishops, Deans, Chapters, etc.

If it be replied, That there is no Alteration of Government intended by these
moderate Dissenters, whose Comprehension is desired; but that it is another
Clause in the Declaration, which justisieth their refusal, viz. There lies no
Obligation on me or any other Person, etc. Which, say they, cannot safely be
declared, because, though they do not approve the whole Oath; yet there are
several indispensable Duties contained in it, which can never be renounced.

To this I Answer:

The Alcoran, Romish Breviary, or Missal, may by any one that has subscribed
them be lawfully renounced; and yet doubtless there are in them several Duties
of Morality, whereto he was obliged before, and to which he was further obliged
by his own Personal act in subscribing, as being a part thereof. Yet may he
renounce In hac forma. And so it is with the Covenant; which may in like manner
be renounced, notwithstanding those good things that are contained in it. The
reason is, Because Subscription was to the Totum complexum, i. c. to the whole
Frame of the Covenant as such; and therefore the Abrenunciation of it must be
to the whole as such: The Obligation whereof being renounced, must reach to
every Branch and Clause therein; so as no Man stands obliged to the
performance of any one Branch thereof (though otherwise not only lawful, but
even necessary upon some other account) as it is a Branch of the Covenant.

As to that trifling Scruple; That though they themselves are not obliged by
it, yet it is too much considence to declare; There lies no Obligation on any
other: This, I say, scarce deserves Confutation. For, since Nemo t^netur ad
impossible, and Juramentum non est vinculum iniquitatis; if it be in it?self
an unlawsul Oath (as has upon occasion been sufficiently proved) it can
neither oblige them, nor any other whatsoever, to any thing but Repentance.

But the most plausible Pretense in behalf of these Dissenters (and which it
seems has influene'd some loyal Noble Breasts) is this.

The Union of Protestants in his Majesty's Kingdom's, is a very bleassed and
desirable Work; and accordingly it is the Duty of every good Subject, in his
Place and Calling, faithfully to promote it: This being the most effectual
Method to suppress the common Enemy the Papists; who are doubtless more
encouraged by our Divisions, than any other Motives or Endeavors of their own
Party. And therefore were there but some little Relaxation granted, whereby the
most eminent Presbyterians might be received into the Church; What a
consternation would this strike into the Papal Faction? What signal Service
might the Church of England receive from these famous Champions, whose Zeal and
Learning are so notorious to the World?

This is their Plea: The weakness of which may thus easily appear.

The Union of Protestants, Reformation of abuses of Religion, with such like
specious Names, being the usual Vizards wherewith Men of insatiable Avarice or
Ambition disguise their base unworthy Intentions, that the ugliness thereof may
not appear to vulgar Eyes: It concerns Authority to be very deliberate in their
Councels, and not be too forward, upon every slight pretense, to innovate good
Laws, for the sad consequents of which Change they can never be answerable to
Church and State.

Few are of so weak Capacity, but public evils they easily epsy; fewer so
patient, as not to complain, when the grievous inconveniences thereof work
sensible Smart, says judicious Mr. Hooker. Hence it is that the very name of
Reformation carries with it a great deal of outward Glory and Luster, silling
the Hearts of Men with expectation of much Happiness to ensue, and in that Hope
is evermore entertained with general Applause, especially of the Vulgar sort:
And therefore Covetous, Ambitious, Disconted Persons, have always improved this
Inclination to their own advantage. So that seldom has any Sacrilegious or
Seditious attempt appeared abroad in the World, and been countenanced either by
the Great ones, or the Many, which has not been uther'd in by this piece of
Hypocrisy; although upon the Post-fact we have sadly experienced; that the
pretense of a thorough Reformation serves as a Foil to set off the blackest
Crimes that ever the Christian World was guilty of.

This general Consideration first premised (and it is no unseasonable
Reslection) to the present Proposal, I thus

Answer.

That the Union of Protestants is indeed a very blessed and destreable Work, as
being the most effectual Method to suppress the common Enemy the Papist; and
accordingly that it is the Duty of every good Subject in his Place and Calling
faithfully to promote it. Thus far is easily granted. But then whether this
Comprehension be so suitable a method to promote that blessed Work; or wether
these Presbyterians would be so considerable a support to the Protestant Cause,
were the Walls of the Church, like those of Troy, pulled down to receive them,
may best be judged by their own Confession. For now they begin to speak plain.
The Mask of Hypocrisy by long wearing is grown so thin and useless, that it is
fit for nothing but to be thrown by. That which so falsely and invidiously has
been objected against the Prelates, is too sadly true of these Presbyterians,
They have a Pope in Their Belly.

This, you will say, is a very harsh and uncharitable Reslection: And I do
acknowledge the Charge, were I not able thus to prove it.

In this very Pamphlet, called the The Peaceable Design, p. 71, I sind these
words.

Such a Toleration only is desired, as is consistent with the Articles of
Faith, a good Life, and the Government of the Nation.

But what shall we say then to the Papists, which is the Objection hit still in
their Teeth, that plead for Moderation? Why, we will not baulk the delivery of
our Opinion.

There are two part we profess of that favor or condescension we seek from the
higher Powers: The one consisting of a Composition with those, whose Principles
are fit and capable of it: And the other consisting of Forbearance toward
those, whose Principles will allow them no more. The Papist in our account is
but one sort of Recusants, and the conscientious and peaceable among than must
be hold in the same Predicament with those among our selves, that likewise
refuse to come to Common Prayer. And a little after -- But as for the Common
Papist, who lives innocently in his way, he is to us as other Separatists, and
so comes under the like Toleration.

From whence I thus Argue.

Those who affirm Popery to be consistent with the Articles of Faith, a good
Life, and the Government of the Nation, these are no faithful Friends to the
Protestant Cause.

But these Presbyterians, who desire this Comprehension, they affirm Popery to
be consistent with the Articles of Faith, a good Life, and the Government of
the Nation.

Therefore, these Presbyterians who desire this Comprehension, they are no
faithful Friends to the Protestant Cause.

The Major I think cannot be denied. For, the Articles of our Faith being
designedly Established by our first Reformers, in opposition to Popery (most of
the Popish Tenets being condemned therein) those who affirm Popery to be
consistent with them, are Betrayers of the Reformation.

The Minor is thus proved.

Those who admit a Toleration of Popery, and yet at the same time-profess; That
such a Toleration only is desired, as is consistent with the Articles of Faith,
a good Life, and the Government of the Nation; those affirm Popery to be
consistent with the Articles of Faith, a good Life, and the Government of the
Nation.

But these Presbyterians who desire this Comprehension, they admit a Toleration
of Popery; And yet at the same time profess that such a Toleration only is
desired as is consistent with the Articles of Faith, a good Life, and the
Government of the Nations.

Therefore these Presbyterians, who desire this Comprehension, they affirm
Popery to be consistent with the Articles of Faith, a good Life, and the
Government of the Nation.

The Major is clear and imquestionable, as likewise the Minor, which is thus
proved from their own words.

That they admit of a Toleration of Popery, is plain from the forecited
Expressions, viz. Peaceable Design. page 72.
* As for the common Papist, who lives innocently in his way, he is to us as
other Separatists, and so comes under the like Toleration.

That such a Toleration only is desired, as is consistent with the Articles of
Faith, a good Life, and the Government of the Nation (the latter part of the
Minor) these are the very words of the Pamphlet.

This acknowledged agreement betwixt Popery and Presbytery, does deservedly
require some further Reflections, which I shall give my Reader in the words of a
most Learned, and (if I am not misinformed) Right Honorable Person; by
transcribing part of his Letter; the Title of which is as follows.

A LETTER Sent from beyond the SEAS To one of the CHIEF MINISTERS OF THE
Nonconforming PARTY By way of Reply to many Particulars, which he sent to the
Author in a Letter of News.

Useful for these Distempered Times.

By a Lover of the Established Government both of Church and State.

Anno. Dom. M.DC.LXXIV.

(...) a Toleration as that was, knowing that it must needs tend to the ruin
of the Church of England, which is the principal Butt of all their Envy and
Malice; as being the main Support and Credit of the Reformed Religion every
where, and the only Hedge against Popery it self in our unfortunate British
Isles.

We meet with not a few Priests of several Orders, that have the confidence (in
our most familiar Conferences) to tell us; that by the just Judgment of God
upon our Church, the time of her Ruin is at hand: The Nation it self being
overspread with Schism and Atheism, and the Hearts of the Faithful being
disposed by the Spirit and Providence of God to reembrace the holy Catholic
Truth. And therefore they freely confess, that this time of Distraction is
their Harvest; and withal express their Intentions and Zeal to transport
themselves into England at the Critical time of Toleration, that they may be
Fellow Laborers with your selves in that Harvest. They seem to Lament as much,
and Complain as fast, of the prodigious increase of Schism and Atheism among
us, as you are wont to do of the daily growth of Atheism and Popery.

And whilst you both complain alike, and in the formality of your complaints
both alike reflect upon the Church of England; it is She only that is the
Sufferer, and She only that truly laments the Growth, and at the same time sets
up Banks to hinder the perfect Inundation of all the three among us.

As for Schism among Protestants, you were the first Fathers, and continue the
chief Fautors thereof; all the inferior Sects having sprung from you, and
dividing both from you, and one another, under pretense of the same Reasons,
for which you profess to divide from the Church. And it is from you, that even
the Quakering Sect it self (the Dregs of Schism) have learned to talk of
Illumination, and the Spirit. And therefore if you be not Schismatics, then
(...)make themselves Popular and Powerful; that they may afterward act with
good Color whatsoever their Interest shall suggest.

And furthermore to consider; That the great pretenders of the Spirit, and
power of the Christian Religion (which with respect to Magistrates teaches
nothing but to Obey or Suffer) should notwithstanding Preach up Rebellion
against their Lawful Prince; Fight him from Field to Field; remove him from
Prison to Prison, and at last most Barbarously put him to Death; is such an
absurdity against the Principles of right Reason; so repugnant to the Laws of
our own Nation, and so inconsistent with the Peaceable Doctrine of the Gospel;
that besides the Atheists it has made, it has, and ever will constrain Men of
honest Principles and just Resentments, to Persecute you with Satyrs and
Exclamations to the end of the World.

I am consident, I do not unjustly charge you in any particular, especially
with the Murder of the King. For there were no Accessaries in the Marther of
that sacred Person; neither was it the last stroke only that felled the Royal
Oak; but you and the Independants, like the two Sacrilegious Priests of
Jupiter, are equally g^ilty of the Crime; the one for binding the direful
Victim, and the other for putting the Knife to his Throat.

But to be short; where I am so unacceptable, I Will conclude my Argument with a
Fable. A principal Ship, which for many years had been Sovereign of the Seas,
was at last Attaqued by a Tempestuous Wind, which the Devil raised, and
notwithstanding all the help that could be made to save her, was driven by the
force of that malignant Wind, and split upon a Rock. The very same instant she
dashed upon the Rock, the Wind ceased; and being afterward cursed by the
Seamen, for the Wrack of the Royal Charles (for so the Capital Vessel was
called) answered: You charge me most unjustly, my Friends; it was not I, but
the Rock, as you saw, that split your Ship,

The Moral of this Parable is very obvious; and if the Application thereof, or
any thing else that I have written, may conduce to awaken your Conscience, and
reclaim you from Schism, I shall think my pains well bestowed. But if you and
your Seditious Brethren will still persevere to assault the Church on one hand,
as fast as the Romish Priests do undermine Her on the other, Her day's are like
to be but few and evil; and except God incline the Heart of our Magistrates to
put the Laws in Execution against them, and find some effectual means to reduce
you, you may live to see her Ruin accomplished, which you both alike desire
and expect.

How numerous you are, the World can gess; and if the Accounts, which we
receive from the Fathers of Intelligence, of several Orders, be credible; there
are at least three Thousand of them, which find entertainment and success in
our Nation. But in the mean time, till her hour is come, she strugleth against
both, like her Savior against the Pharisees, whose true Disciples in part you
both are: They representing those sworn Enemies of the Gospel, by the Gabala of
their ridiculous and impious Traditions; and you representing them in their
Hypocrisy, Pride, Envy, Evil-speaking, moross and censorious Dispositions,
etc. (which are sins scarce consistent with Humanity, much less with Grace) as
likewise in observing many Fasts, and making long Prayers, with design not to
serve God, but to delude the People. And therefore I wonder not that you are
such malignant Enemies to the Church of England, since that Pharisaical spirit,
which reigns so much amongst you, is a wicked Pusillanimous spirit, that
affects to be seen in the Head of Parties, and Dictate amongst the Ignorant;
and loves as much to Rule, as it hates to Obey.

But would you once be so sincere, as to subdue your Pride; lay aside your
Prejudice; inform your Ignorance; and forsake your dearly beloved Interest for
the Truth: It would not be long ere we should see you join with the Church of
England, without troubling our Senators to bring you in, with an Act of
Comprehension.

Your Pride appears in Heading of Parties, and in the Pleasure you are seen
to take in the Multitudes, that run after you; and in your Boasting, that
without you, the Souls of People would starve for want of Knowledge.

Your Prejudice is an effect of your Pride, and discovers it self together with
your Ignorance, in not submitting to those Invincible Reasons which you cannot
answer.

And as for your Interest, the greatest Paradox of all, that is evident enough
to me, who have so often heard many of you glorify your selves in the Number
and Riches of your Followers, boast of their Affection to your sacred Persons,
and brag of the great Sums you have Collected in your Congregations; which
makes the King's Chapels (as you Arrogantly call your Conventicles) better
Places than most of the Churches of which he is Patron. And therefore never
complain that you live either worse, or at greater uncertainties than you did
before.

For by your pretensions to Poverty and Sufferings, and by other unworthy Arts,
you have so wrought your selves into the esteem of your Disciples, that few of
them are either so Covetous or so Poor, but they will Pinch at Home to supply
you.

There are several Orders of Franciscans here, who have renounced not only
Parsonages, but all Temporal Estates, and Possessions whatsoever; and by their
Vainglorious Sanctity and Austerities, they have got, like you, such fast hold
on the Souls of the People (which is the fastest hold of all)that they can
easily make most of them dispose of their Children, Cashier their Servants, and
settle their Estates as they please; and by these Tricks do more effectually
promote the Interest of Rome, than all the Parish Priests within the Pale of
that Church.

And really, when I consider what Influence these Sanctimonious and
Self-denying Zealots have over all Families in all Places where they live; how
they steal away the Hearts of the People from their Parish Priests, and Drain
their Congregations; and how the deluded People had rather give them the worth
of a Shilling, than the Dues of Two pence to their own Cures; it makes me often
run the Parallel between you and them, and think; what a Politic and gainful
Pretense you have got to renounce your Livings, for to secure your Consciences,
and to Preach the Word like the Primitive Apostles; when God knows, it is not
out of Love to the People, but to your selves.

And I protest to you, were I a Man to be Maintained by the Pulpit, and
consulted my Prosit more than the Goodness of my Cause, I should take the same
Courses that you do; I should rather be Mr. M. than Dr. A. of Plymouth; and
should choose the plentiful Income of that dull Zealot Dr. Manton, before that
of his most Learned and Religious Successor of Covent Garden.

But though you Live very well, and better indeed than most of the Ministers of
the Church, yet the Mischief of it is, you are incapable of Dignities; which
makes you such Acrians, and upon all occasions opens your Throats as wide as
Sepulchers, against the Bishops and the Church.

You know what an History of Bishops Mr. Prin has wrote, and what a fair
Collection the Learned Smec. has taken out of him; as if when a Bishop is
defective, either in Piety, Learning, or the Skill of Government, it were not
the deplorable Unhappiness, but the fault of the Church of England.

Should an Heathen, or Mahumetan, make such an Historical Collection of
scandalous Christians, either in this or former Ages, you would not be
persuaded for all that, to prefer the Alcoran before the Gospel, or the most
exalted Paganism whatsoever, before the Christian Religion.

Therefore Wise and Sober Men will make no Inference but this, from such a
malicious enumeration of Particulars: That Corruptions will creep into
Government, notwithstanding all the care that can be used to the contrary; and
that by the favor of Princes (who hear with other Men's Ears, and often receive
undeserved Characters of Men) sometimes Ambitions, sometimes Ignorant, and
sometimes Slothful, Imprudent, or Debauched Persons, will be preferred to the
most Honorable Dignities in the Church. But this, as often as it happens, is
the Misery of the Church of England, which all true Church Men lament; though
the Men of the short Cloak take all such occasions to expose her to the Scorn
of the Common People, who judge by Sense and not by Reason; and who are taught
by you, to make no distinction between the Bishops and the Church.

But were all her Bishops the best Ghristians, the best Scholars, and the best
Governors in the World; and should the Royal hand place her Miters on the
Heads of none but Jewels, Whitgift's, Andrew's, Hall's, Usher's, Morton's,
Taylor's, and Sanderson's, yet that Unchristian spirit of Envy and Discontent,
which informs the Non-Conformists, would still sly upon her with open Mouth,
like Beasts upon the Saints of old condemned to the Amphitheater; and make her,
as she has already been for almost Forty years, a Spectacle to God, to Angels,
and to Men.

The wicked Lives of scandalous Bishops and Priests, if there be any such, are
her sad Misfortune, but cannot justify the Schism you are guilty of; who are
bound to hear even them, as much as the Jew's were bound to hear the Scribes
and Pharisees, those Hypocrites that sat in Moses's Chair.

-- If either this, or any thing else, a thousand times better than I am able
to Write, may prove effectual to reclaim you from Schism; I shall be as glad,
as to see some other of our Friends reformed from Drunkenness, Swearing, and
Uncleanness: Which are very grievous and dreadful Sins, but yet not more
damnable in their Nature, nor more destructive to the Christian Religion, nor
more deeply rooted in the Soul of Man, than that of Schism. From which I pray
God by the Power of his Grace to Preserve me, and Reform you, through Jesus
Christ our Lord; to whose Protection I commit you and rest,

Your most Affectionate Cousin, and Humble Servant.
Saumur, May, 7. 1674.
FINIS.

