A SECOND LETTER TO A MEMBER Of this Present PARLIAMENT, AGAINST Comprehension.

By the Author of the former Letter for Liberty of Conscience.

London, Printed in the Year 1668.

A Second Letter TO A MEMBER Of this present PARLIAMENT.
SIR,
I Conceive an universal indulgence in Point of Religion not only to be
advantageous to the Trade and strength of this Nation, and agreeable to the
suggestions of each private man's breast, as well as natural Justice, and the
determinations of the Scripture and primitive Church: but it is particularly
prudential to his Majesty that now Reigns. For, whatever some persons may say,
all Monarchies subsist by the counter-ballance of Factions; and he who must see
with other peoples eyes, and hear with their ears, and act by their Councils,
(as great Monarchs must always do) becomes obnoxious, and a prey to his
followers, and Counselors, if they too strictly correspond. During the
Ministry of the late Chancellor how palpably was this truth seen! How did he
usurp not only all Power unto himself, but even the ostentation of it; and
having by the uniformity of the Church obliged to his Sentiments the Bishops,
how did he establish himself, and separate the Church of England from that
correspondence which it ought to have had with its Head? In the like manner
almost, when the Bishops under Queen Elizabeth abandoned the Interest of the
Crown to pursue that of the Pope, that excellent Queen had been deprived of all
Sovereignty thereupon, had she not fomented the Puritan-Party. And it is very
remarkable that she was very well served in her Wars, and in her Councils, as
long as she upheld the two Parties of Puritans and Conformists in some
balance; but after that she suffered the Episcopal Party to depress the other,
and almost totally subvert it, she was neither well served any where, nor much
regarded: Her Bishops forgot their Pastoral Cures; her Clergy grew lazy and
dissolute; the Papists increased; the Protestant Religion declined; and she
lived to see her self as little regarded, as is the declining Sun: Whilst
despair drove the Puritans to Court the presumptive Heir: and the growing hopes
of the Papists directed them also thitherwards to secure their growth; and
Prudence or Court-subtilty made those into whose Power she had put her self to
forecast how they might continue with her successor those Dignities and
Emoluments her favor had promoted them unto, and her indiscretion had
incapacitated her of bestowing upon others. This she too late discovered, and
repented of when it was too late to redress it: Albeit she had endeavored by
all means to obscure the pretenses of all Heirs apparent, and intrigue the
Succession as far as it lay in her Power. I do therefore say it is peculiarly
necessary for a Monarch to establish his authority by such a balance of
Factions, as many Pseudo-Politicians decry now, who little apprehend how
undeniable a Truth this is in a Monarchy supported by Laws and not Arms; and
in which the supreme Authority is more mixed then in despotical Governments,
and yet in the last sort of Governments this course is prudential.

And further, Liberty of Conscience will infinitely contribute to the security
of his Majesty's Government. Upon this account the Nation is very well
satisfied with him, as it is evident by their acquiescing, notwithstanding the
several opportunities, which the Landing of the Dutch, the Fire of London, and
other junctures of affairs presented them with. How willingly have they paid
their Taxes? How courageously have several that were Sectaries fought against
the Dutch? Besides, the falsehood and baseness of their former Leaders, has
made the followers of the several Parties so jealous of them, that they would
willingly abandon all those suspicious adhaerencies, to live peaceably
according to their Consciences under his Majesty: not being willing to be
cheated a second time by specious pretenses. And this is a thing evident to any
that shall consider how the leading Persons of England have lost their
followers, so as not to be able to engage them implicitly to any action, or fix
them to follow their fortune by any personal affection. If it be thus; why do
you go about to give these persons a strength, and force under their shelter a
Party so formidable, whether they will or no? These great, these leading
persons, that now seem so powerful will be but so many single persons, and of a
suspected honesty, if you establish but Liberty of Conscience. All Parties will
adhere to the King as their Patron, to the Monarchy as their Protection, and
avoid a Commonwealth, which can never be established by men of so corrupt
Principles, as those old Leaders of theirs have showed themselves to be.

I shall now present you with those further considerations (I promised you)
about Comprehension upon equivocal subscriptions and condescentions; and
illustrate further the ineffectualness of general Confessions to be subscribed
unto. Consider that when the Question about the Divinity of Christ was fiercely
agitated in the Church, there was a Council called at Nice All this is manifest
out of the Hystor^es of those times: particularly out of Mariana his Spanish
History: and the Writings of St Hilary, who was an enemy to the Arrians, and
lived in those times.
, where the Nicene Creed was made: Three hundred and eighteen Bishops there did
determine the controversy, and framed a Creed, to which all that were
accounted Orthodox should subscribe. This was so far from establishing the
peace of the Empire, that it divided it more. The Arrians got another general
Council at Ariminum All this is manifest out of the Hystor^es of those times:
particularly out of Mariana his Spanish History: and the Writings of St Hilary,
who was an enemy to the Arrians, and lived in those times.
, and there determined the Point quite otherwise concerning the Trinity; and by
630 Bishops decreed another Creed and Test of Orthodoxy. This uniformity was as
troublesome to the prevailing Arrians, as the other had been to the
Orthodoxarians. After this another Council was called at Sirmium All this is
manifest out of the Hystor^es of those times: particularly out of Mariana his
Spanish History: and the Writings of St Hilary, who was an enemy to the
Arrians, and lived in those times.
, there Hosius, Bishop of Corduba did publicly ask forgiveness for having
troubled the Church with the disputes about the Triuity, and the distinctions
of Essence and Person in the Deity. Another kind of comprehensive Creed was
framed, to which both Parties might agree, and be reputed Orthodox All this is
manifest out of the Hystor^es of those times: particularly out of Mariana his
Spanish History: and the Writings of St Hilary, who was an enemy to the
Arrians, and lived in those times.
. But behold the fate of this Comprehension! neither Party was satisfied;
neither Party abandoned their Sentiments; but grew up as Factions, and the
Empire was divided, and distracted, and weakened, till Theodosius the great
restored a perfect Liberty of Conscience: and the very memory of the Council of
Sirmium, and it is Comprehensive Creed, is almost totally extinguished.

I will trouble you with another instance under Charles the fifth, when the
Lutherans, Zuinglians, Calvinists, Carolstadians, Anabaptists, and other Sects
divided and distracted the Popish Empire of Germany: after sundry Wars and
Factions which weakened the Empire against the Turks and other neighboring
Enemies, several conferences were had, as betwixt Bucer and Julius Pflugg;
betwixt Luther and Cardinal Cajetan, and others about some way of moderation
for healing those Ecclesiastical breaches: Several things were condescended
unto on both sides, and forms agreed unto sometimes in order to a mutual
accommodation of that Schism. But with what success? Each party thought the
other rather to design the subversion then Conversion of the other; each was
jealous of the other that they would but temporise at best; and perhaps only
make use of those ambiguous concessions, or condescentions, to the prejudice of
the other: So that they always became ineffectual. At length some moderate and
Pious persons contrived a mixed Religion out of Popery and Protestancy, in
which Godly Melanchton, as well as Cassander, had an hand; but this displeased
all parties, and the interested persons in framing of it became hated and
detested by their followers. How many successeless contrivances have there been
to reconcile the Lutherans and Calvinists; and have not both Parties at last
found that the most assured way for them to live peaceably together, was not to
confound the two parties by uniting Churches, but by living comfortably
together under different Confessions, Ceremonies, and Church Government? Put
case here in England some Presbiterian Ministers, that are now leaders of that
party, should be admitted into the Ministry upon such conditions as have been
proposed: Can any man who knows that party imagine the peace of this Nation
secured? Nay, can any man think it so secure as it is now? If these
postliminary Divines must declare they conform to the Service, and less
offensive Ceremonies, and Episcopacy, as convenient in themselves; or only
because imposed, though otherwise a Directory, and the old Synodical way were
better? If the former, then they conform only as so many single persons, and
the acquests of such men is not worthy of the concessions; If the latter; it is
evident, that the peace of the Nation is more endangered then ever, when we
give a sort of men opportunity to inform the souls incharged to them, that
Episcopacy is useless, and of humane (if not Antichristian) constitution; that
all these Ceremonies and the Service of the Church are unnecessary and
impertinent, or steril acts of Devotion, to which they submit on no better
terms then Peter du Moulin offered to Preach the reformed Religion upon at
Rome; he avowed he would be content to Preach in a fools Coat so the Pope
would but let him Preach there. If they give their flocks this testimony of
their Zeal, that they will upon such difficult terms submit to become their
Pastors: Let every man examine if it will not unavoidably follow that these
obliged Parishoners shall endeavor to discharge their Pastors from such
impositions as are burdensome to them in carrying on the work of the Lord; and
hinder them in that edification, unto which were these Episcopal Courts, and
Church Ceremonies, and Service removed: Or can we think ambition, or pretenses
of Zeal will be so extinguished in them, that they will not go about to
signalize themselves in their old formalities of propagating the Gospel,
whereby to draw upon them the eyes of the Nation for their exemplary pains and
Piety? and if this happen, what circumstances is the Government of this Nation
reduced unto? If they be preferred, the National Church of England, is ruined,
and all the Gentry and Nobility: If they be not, then what clamours must we
expect from the populace for the contempt and disregard of Godly and Orthodox
men? I conceive the best way to avoid these difficulties, is by establishing
the Church of England as it is, with its public emoluments and honors, with
the due regulation of the Episcopal Clergy, the discountenancing of
Arminianisme, and a pious and laborious Catechizing, I am confident one age
will restore us to our ancient glory: It is but just that public Churches
should be like public Highways, at the Kings disposal, and not for every man
to build upon: So the demesnes and revenues belonging thereto, ought to be
continued without grudging: since no particular man is damnified by them: The
Tithes are no particular man's loss; being not bought, nor sold, nor any part of
his lease: So that no Sect ought to refuse this payment. But, continuing this,
let them maintain their Teachers and Churches themselves, if they will decline
the public assemblyes of the English Church. By this Toleration we shall reap
these benefits: First, the Episcopal Clergy will be reduced to a greater
diligence in Preaching, and Catechizing, a more exemplary life then is now
found among them: Next the Presbiterians and others not having the disposal of
their Parsonages to their creatures, will not be able to give those
encouragements to them that are factiously bent, which they will have by this
comprehension: And they will be so watched by the Sectaries on one hand (who
must fall, if they rise) and the Church of England on the other, as never to be
able to sway the balance of this Nation. And the Sectaries will acknowledge
their subsistence to be so dependant upon the prosperity of the Church of
England, that they will reckon the enemies of the Church to be theirs. And all
Parties will be zealous to protect and support this balance of the Nation,
under this Monarchy, least any other Governor or Government should alter their
condition: All will strive to advance trade, all will strive to serve so
gracious a King, all will decline or endeavor to suppress any growing faction
by which they may run an hazard of ruin. No ambition will move the
generality, who will have all they can desire, except the power to oppress
others: And for the Grandees, they must be quiet and public spirited; when all
pretenses of grievances upon the people are removed: which is the only course
they can take to inviegle a party to follow them, since all other obligations
of villenage is extinct. Thus the King shall reign absolutely over the persons
and hearts of his subjects; and be as much redoubted abroad, as beloved at
home: Riches and plenty shall be the consequences of his united strength;
unconstrained piety shall flourish, hypocrisy vanish, and Morality be restored
again. But if this course be not taken, the Dutch and New England will draw
from us the trading and industrious part of our Nation, with their stocks: our
reputation and foreign leagues will decline with our interest and strength:
Continual fears and jealousies will posses^ the Land; the Episcoparians will
not be able to bear up against the Presbyterians; and the Sectaries will
contribute to their own and the general ruin, whilst the Land may become in
fine a prey to the powerful and ambitious French; or be overrun by the rich,
united, active, subtle Papists, betwixt whom and any Protestant there is no
tie Religious, Moral, or Generous.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
I Thought fit to remark unto you (that there may be no mistake in any that
have a mind to object to my former Letter) how considerable a Party of
Dissenters were tolerated by the Jews: For in all they are computed under
Solomon to be above 150000 men, besides women and children, 2 Chronicles. 2.17. a
fair Number for Non-conformists to be in two or three English Counties.

If any are displeased at Calvin's saying St. George was an Arrian, I am afraid
they will be more angry with Hottingerus, who (I think) in his Oriental
History (page 100.) does demonstrate from the Turkish Writers, that St. George
was a Mahumetan; is one of the Turkish Saints: he was cut in pieces, and put
into a pot to stew, and after that (say they) revived and lived as a miraculous
confirmation of the Musulmens Faith.

Thus is our Calender filled with Jews, Turks, and Papists, whilst our Prisons
are filled with Protestants.


