A REPLY OF Lewis Sabran OF THE Society of JESUS, TO THE ANSWER given to his
LETTER Written to a Peer of the Church of England, by a Nameless Member of the
same.
SIR,
MY Letter to a Peer of the Church of England, which you pretend to answer in
that which I now receive from you, has cleared me sufficiently in the Opinion
of all Men of Sense, of the Mistake you charged me with; However, I am willing
to cast away half an Hour in minding you more justly, and more Charitably of
your disingenuous Cavils; after which I resolve never to take any notice of
such unknown Masks, or Persons who conceal their Names, that their Errors when
bafl'd, their Calumnies when cleared, may not put them to the Blush.

That Part of the Debate betwixt us, which you maintain still, is whether your
accusing me, of great Ignorance, or notorious Forgery, for citing a Form of
Prayer to the Blessed Virgin, as made by St. Augustine, being taken out of the
35 Sermon de Sanctis, printed in the 10th Tome of his Works; And the Proofs you
support your Charge with, evince my Guilt; or rather cast and retort that Blame
upon you, and discover your inconsiderate itch of Scribbling, tho it be but to
nible at three Lines of the Introduction of a Sermon, the Discourse whereof,
tho it plainly sets out how unwarantable the Schism of your Church was from
Catholic, Unity, you have prudently thought fit to leave untouched.

To make out your Charge against me, you offered these three Proofs.

The First, That the Title of that Sermon, in the Feast of the Assumption, does
not agree at all to any thing that is near St. Augustins Time.

I answered that your Meaning must be either, That no Feastday of the Blessed
Virgins Assumption was kept in St. Augustin's Days; or else, That nothing was
piously believed or thought of then concerning her Assumption: If the First
meaning was yours, I proved that Instance to be of no Force; because that
Titles of a far fresher Date than most Sermons of the Holy Fathers bore, have
been affixed to them, which were preached on the Days of such Mysteries, or
Saints Deaths, as were not then kept holy: Of this I produced several Instances.

As for the Second meaning of those Words, I discovered the Error, of taking
those Words, on the Assumption, in the Sense they now vulgarly bear, whereas in
the Holy Fathers Language, when applied to Saints or the Blessed Virgin, they
only signified the Day of their Death; of this I brought again many and plain
Proofs; next I produced many others, (to which I have more that may be added)
to evince that in the Fourth and Fifth Century it was piously believed, that
the Blessed Virgin was assumed in Body into Heaven, tho it was not looked upon
as a certain Truth, made out from any Text of Scripture, unquestionable
Tradition from the Apostles, or Decision of the present Church. I conceived
this to be so full an Answer to your first Proof, as would have forced any one
less obstinate than I find you, to have owned it of no value: But let us examine
what you reply.

You tell us First, That your meaning was to deny any Belief of the Assumption
of the B. Virgin to have been in St. Augustins Time, nor consequently any
Sermon on that Subject, which this evidently is. Secondly that if Day of
Assumption do but almost ever signify the Day of a Saints Death, why may not
this be the Exception? Thirdly, that it cannot be the meaning of this Title,
since the Sermon speaks of Assumption of the Blessed Virgin, and that it was
the Custom of the Church to believe, that the Virgin Mary was on the Day of
that Solemnity assumed into Heaven.

This is all you add to support your first Proof, that is, first a new Error,
next a false Inference, then a plain Cheat and Contradiction.

It Is an Error that there was not in St. Augustins time a general pious Belief
(tho uncertain) of the Blessed Virgins Assumption: I have made it out in my
first Letter, by many Proofs, which (as it is usual with such Writers) you have
not been pleased to take notice of, and I think unnecessary to repeat: If you
desire others, you may find them in Natalis Alexandres Censure, of the Book
ascribed to the Holy Bishop Meliton.

It Is a false Consequence to say, Assumption does not always signify the Death
of a Saint, therefore here it may signify the Corporal Assumption of the
Blessed Virgin, therefore it does; yet this is your Inference, when you bring
that word in that Sense against me, without any Proof for it. It Is a wilful
Mistake of yours, by which you make me say: That in the Ancient Writings, Feast
or Day of Assumption when applied to Saints did only almost always signify the
Day of their Death: It always bore that meaning applied to them, tho we
sometimes find that in a different Sense it signified the Festival kept on the
Day of the Coronation of Princes, or inthroning of Bishops.

' It Is a Cheat imposed upon vulgar Readers to insinuate that the 35th Sermon
cited by me, does not speak of the Blessed Virgins Death, but of her Assumption
in the Sense which that word now vulgarly bears. The Author of it Plainly
expresses the contrary in Words, like to those we find in all the Writings of
the ancient Fathers on this Subject. They be these: The World is honored by so
great a Virgins Departure, in what Order or Manner she passed hence to Heaven,
the Catholic Church does no way recount: neither is her Body found on Earth,
neither is her Assumption in the Flesh, (as it is read in the Apocrypha's found
in the Catholic Church; this is the true Opinion concerning her Assumption,
that not knowing whether in her Body or out of it, as the Apostle has: We
believe her assumed above the Angels. Now what a Contradiction is it or a plain
Cheat, to say that this Sermon was preached, when the Church did believe, that
the Virgin Mary was in the Day of that Solemnity assumed into Heaven.

Next you make a large flourish of 30 lines and an Essay of a Schoolboys
Rhetoric, which moves me to believe that it is not long since you are come from
it. Your Subject is my gross Error in saying the 14th Sermon de Sanctis was
allowed by all, that the Title of it was, In the Feast of all Saints, the
Subject, the Praises of a Virgin and Martyr; you took great Pains to find it
out as you assure us, thinking there might have been in the Citation some
Errors of the Press; but in vain, and therefore you lay it to my Charge. So
many particulars as were cited by me, would have sufficiently directed any one
that was not resolved to mistake me, that he might fancy something to object
against. There are but two 14th Sermons de Sanctis, that of the first ancient
Collection, and that in the other Compilation of 17, made by the Divines of
Paris, the 14th of these I cited, its Title is, In the Feast of all Saints,
it is on a Virgin Martyr, and that you may mistake it no more, take the first
lines of it. We are put in mind by the Solemnity of a Sacred Virgin which bore
Witness to Christ, and received it from Christ publicly put to Death,
privately Crowned, etc. Pray, Sir, be hereafter somewhat less rash in your
Rhetorical Declamations, which may do your Work in your Pulpits; but are ever
unbeseeming in a Controversy Letter, when so empty of all Reason.

Your Second Objection was, That the Divines of Lovain tell us how in several
MSS. this Sermon was entitled Fulbertus Camosensis.

I answered, this was no Proof in this Case; St. Ambrose's Sermons, St. Peter
Chrysologus's, and others being not less unquestionably owned to be theirs, tho
some ancient MSS. entitled others to them. I gave several Instances of this
Truth, which I conceived to bear away all Force from your Objection, which is
all pretended unto, being in Possession of the ancient and general Persuasion
that 'this Sermon was St. Augustins genuine Work.

You have in your Answer, brought to support your weak proof, First, that I
omitted to take any notice of half of it, to wit, That the Benedictins of Paris
had MSS. in which this Sermon had no Authors name prefixed. Secondly, you ask
me whether I would prove, because St. Ambrose his Sermons have appeared in
ancient MSS. under other Authors Names, that therefore this Sermon must be St.
Augustin's, though it bears not his Name either in the MSS. used by the Lovain
Doctors, or the Benedictins of Paris. Thirdly, you say that ancient Fathers
Sermons are known to be theirs, from their Style, or because asserted to them
by the most and best MSS. Your first Answer is ridiculous, your second of no
force, and besides evidently false and contradictory; the third against your
self.

Were it not ridiculous, after a positive Witness produced for a Plaintiff, who
challenges for his, Goods found in another hands; when such an Evidence is
proved of no force, to present another, who only says, that he knows not to
whom such Goods belong? Were it not a pleasant folly, to value much such a
Witness, and pretend the adverse party must be much afraid he should be heard?
I pitied your weakness, Sir, in bringing such an additional proof, and pass it
by, because I love not to insult on an erring Adversaries patent mistake.

But does it follow from several Fathers Sermons appearing in MSS. under others
Names, that this 35th. Sermon must be St. Augustin's? No, Sir; but it evidently
follows, that it may be, for all the reason you offer to disprove it. But with
what disingenuity and real forgery do you insinuate ( page 7.) That this Sermon
bears not his (St. Augustin's) Name either in the MSS. used by the Lovain
Divines, or by the Benedictins; when you own your self, that the Lovain Divines
only say it is not in several of their MSS.?

But do you not egregiously destroy your own Cause, when you appeal to most
ancient MSS. and the known Style of the Author? Was not that eminent Doctor of
the Catholic Church, St. Thomas of Aquine, better acquainted with St.
Augustin's Style, (being called Augustinus Contractus) than you dare, (if yet
there be any thing you dare not attempt) presume your self to be? Had he not as
great a plenty, He and all his Contemporaries, and of fresher Manuscripts?

Your last Instance was, That Isidore being quoted in that Sermon, ' it is
certain that it was not written two hundred years after St. Augustine, and
probably not till a thousand years after Christ, being Fulbertus his work.

I answered, That it was evident, the Isidore quoted there could not be him you
mean, or any of that Name that lived after St. Augustine, and therefore must be
some one of those many and illustrious Isidores who lived in and before his
time. This I proved evidently from the following words of this very Sermon in
debate. In our time no Author amongst the Latins can be found, who treating of
the Blessed Virgins Death has been positive and express; for no one could be
ignorant of what so famous an Author as St. Gregory Fur. had in his History
plainly and fully written in the sixth Age, or of that Sermon cited under the
Name of St. Hierom, and certainly written by one who lived near the time of the
fourth General Council; a Sermon cited by the famous Hinkmar Bishop of Rhemes
in the ninth Century. J. Odilo, and several others of the same Age of
Fulbertus, or of the Book adscribed to St. Meliton, which was piously valued by
many, as John Camosensis, Contemporary to Fulbertus, acknowledges. This was a
full Answer; but you must attempt to disprove it.

First, you say, That I cannot prove that any of those Isidores who were before
St. Augustine were Writers. Secondly, that had I looked into the Lovain Edition
of St. Augustine, I should have seen out of what Book of that Isidore, who lived
in the seventh Century, the passage is taken. Thirdly, That my believing this
Sermon to be St. Augustin's, because Thomas Aquinas (who is no less eminent a
Saint for your refusing to call him so) believed it, after the Judgment of the
Lovain Divines, and present Benedictins of Paris, is an unbecoming obstinacy.
Your first Answer is childish; your second was answered in my first Letter;
your third a proof of a most proud rashness, in slighting the Authority of a
Doctor so eminent, that above one half of the Divines of the Christian World do
own him for Master, and bind themselves to maintain all he has taught.

After I have proved that the Sermon, in which one Isidore is cited, must of
necessity have been made in or about St. Augustin's time; is it not a childish
Answer, to pretend that I must besides prove some Isidore before his time was a
Writer, before I can make out that it was not that Isidore (who lived not of
two hundred years after him) that he cited in his Writings?

I have also in my Letter to the Protestant Peer showed that the Citation of
Isidore could not be made out to be taken out of the Book cited by the Lovain
Doctors, the doubt there proposed being obvious, having been made before St.
Augustin's time, by St. Epiphanius, etc.

But pray, Sir, by what Equivocation will you excuse him who shall say, No body
writ of such a subject positively, only meaning that what was written was not
true? yet thus you make the holy Bishop Fulbertus to speak. I never said (as
you intimate) that St. Bernard disbelieved the blessed Virgins Assumption, his
Epistle 174. shows he piously believed it, though not as certain. Let me add,
That if you will but read the Sermon in debate, and Fulbertus his second Sermon
of the Nativity of the B. Virgin, you will be forced to own the same could not
be Author of both; the One assuring us, that the Church taught nothing of the
Corporal Assumption of the Virgin; the Other teaches, that Christian Piety (all
pious Christians) believed that Christ raised gloriously his Mother, and placed
her above the Heavens; and that even St. John Baptist did partake of her Glory.

As for the 18th. Sermon de Sanctis, which I said was owned by the Lovain
Divines, let me tell you, that you impose upon less thinking Readers, when you
represent that my assertion as false. Natalis Alexandre, one of the latest
Critics, acknowledges they own it, and on that score cites it. But your proof,
I confess, forced a smile from me; it is that they put this Note before it, Some
attribute this Sermon to Fulgentius. Your Inference has as little of common
sense, as this following one would have of force against me; that I own some
have attributed the 35th. Sermon de Sanctis to Fulbertus, therefore I do not
believe it to be St. Augustin' s. This Inference is to me a piece of very new,
and very rare Logic.

Here, Sir, I part with you, hoping I have satisfied all reasonable men that I
had ground enough to cite this 35th. Sermon of St. Augustin's, without
ignorance or forgery, and that my charge against you. That the Church of
England is condemned by your own words, as guilty of Schism, for separating
from the Church of Rome on that account of the Invocation of Saints, which was
taught by St. Augustine, and all the Fathers of his Age, and the precedent
Century, is evidently made out beyond the possibility of a seeming Answer, or
it would have had it, from One who has Time and Confidence enough to nibble at
a short Prayer set in the entrance of a Sermon, though not on design to clear any
point there debated; and to accuse me of Forgery and Disingenuity, without any
proof in hand to make good so heavy a charge, and to justify his most insolent
boasting. I am sorry, Sir, that you force from me harsher words than I would
ever use, except in the defense of Truth, which you unavoidably put me upon,
who nevertheless shall ever so far distinguish betwixt the Man and his Errors,
as to be equally a constant Enemy to These, and,

SIR, Your true Friend and Servant, LEWIS SABRAN, of the Society of Jesus.

LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty
for his Household and Chapel; And are to be sold at his Printing House on the
Ditchside in Black-Fryars. 1687.


