A Seasonable Discourse SHOWING The Necessity of UNION AMONGST PROTESTANTS In
Opposition to POPERY, As the only Means (under God) to preserve the Reformed
Religion

ALSO, The Charge of Persecution, lately maintained against the Established
Religion by W. P. H. C. and other Insignificant Scriblers, detected; Proving it
to be the Ministers of State, and not the Church, tha^ Prosecuted the Penal
Laws on Protestan^ Dissenters.

PRINTED in the Year, 1688.

THE known saying in the New Testament, That a Kingdom divided cannot stand, is
very seasonable at this Juncture, by all Protestants to be seriously
considered: And if ever Unity (if not in Worship, yet in Love and Affections)
will be necessary, it must certainly be Now; when the Common Enemy is seeking,
by all means imaginable, to correct such Divisions amongst Protestants, as if
possible to tender them irreconcilable One to the Other. And though the
Differences are not extraornary; yet it has been the Polity of those that
delight in the Division and Destruction of Heretics, (as they call them) to
widen the Breaches, and, as much as possible, divide the Interest of
Protestants. To effect this Design, how often have we heard of the many
Disguises and Shapes they have appeared in, among all sorts of Protestants
(none excepted); and it is lamentable to think, how great an effect they have
had on Passionate Men, of all Persuasions. But now, considering the
circumstances of Things, and how darkly they appear to Judicious and discerning
Eyes, it is high time for all Parties to lay aside Pride, Passion, or Division;
and, as far as possible, agree to Love and Serve each Other. The doing of
which, is the only effectual Means to establish a lasting Union among
Protestants, and to subvert the Designs of Plotting-Men, who would gladly
over-turn our Religion and Laws. The Considerations abovementioned, caused me
to give the best Advice I could: I must confess, not only my inability, but
also my engagement in Business, very much prevented my Design: But however,
what I here offer, comes from a sincere Desire for allaying the Heats, and
uniting the Interests and Affections of Protestants in general. I hope, I shall
not offer any think contrary to Reason, and the Public Good of Mankind. I
shall begin with the Church of England.

Worthy Sirs, The former Passion and Violence of some few Rash Men amongst you,
together with their Zeal to serve an ungrateful sort of Men, rendered almost the
whole Body obnoxious to the hard Opinion and Censure of many Worthy Men;
insomuch, that those who were really Members of the Church, as by Law
established, were at a stand, and did not know what to think of the strange and
unaccountable Speeches and Actions of many, both Clergy and Laiety: But, as
this Fault can be imputed to but a small part of you, so I have that Charity to
hope, they are, by this time, fully convinced of their Error, and will act more
Prudently for the future. The heat of a few Rash Men ought not to bring so
Venerable a Body of Men into contempt; for by that Rule, the most Innocent
would be liable to answer for the most Guilty; the Injustice of which, cannot be
sufficiently declared with Abhorrence.

My humble Advice is; As you have always manifested your Loyalty to the King;
so continue Obedient Subjects, as far as the Laws of God and the Land, warrant
your Obedience, and no farther are you actively obliged to Obey; (as to your
Passive Obedience, ye are no Strangers to the meaning of it; therefore, I wave
it:) Let your Obedience to the Divine and Human Laws, thereto agreeing, be
without the least Hesitation or Reluctance: But, if any thing be commanded by
Man, you must always remember your prime Obedience is due to God; and no
Commands, Threats, or Allurements, ought to Influence you so, as to violate the
Laws of God, or the Land; always have an Eye to the Divine, which infinitely
supercedes any Command or Human Law. For Instance, if at any time you are
required to renounce your Sense and Reason, and believe Transubstantiation, or
to Worship Images, Invocate Saints and Angels, or any other thing, contrary to
Scripture; or to change your Holy, Pure, and Sound Religion, to embrace
another, abounding with Novelties, full of Human Inventions and Absurdities;
and that has little or no foundation on Scripture or Reason: You are not, on
any pretense whatsoever, to forsake your certain Religion, for the embracing of
One, not only dubious but dangerous: And let me assure all wavering Christians,
(who, for Worldly Interests and Preferments, care not what Religion they are
of) That they cannot Answer it to God, if they make Shipwreck of a good
Conscience, by turning from a safe and rational Religion, to that which is not
only unreasonable, but very ridiculous, in the judgment of all Good Christians.
Since the Protestant Religion is founded on Reason and Truth, consonant to the
Holy Scriptures, the practice of the Apostles, and Primitive Christians, in all
Ages; you, and all that desire to approve themselves sincere Protestants, ought
to continue steadfast in that Divine Faith, you profess your selves Members of.
If your Religion was built only on the Sandy Foundations of Tradition,
Infallibility, etc. you might have some tolerable Plea for altering your
Opinion; but as long as your Religion teaches you Obedience in all Things to
God, and likewise to your Sovereign, in which you have sound Expositions of the
Divine Truths, the Sacraments duly and truly administered in both kinds,
according to Christ's Institution; the Scriptures no ways Locked up from Clergy
or Laiety, (Because all these, and whatever more is necessary for the ordering
of a Christian's Conversation, is to be found in the Protestant Religion) I
cannot conceive, why any one should change his Profession. Worldly Interests,
Troubles, or Temptations, ought to have no sway or force with us, when they
come in competition with our pure Religion. I have enlarged the more on this
Head, by reason now is a time of greater trial than formerly: and that some,
who not long since esteemed themselves Pillars of the Protestant Faith, have
now, for sinister Ends, without Reason, departed from it. But let them
seriously consider, there is a God above, who will not be Mocked. Such unstable
Souls I shall leave to that God, who judges all Men, and rewardoth All
according to their Deeds, whether Good or Evil.

In the next place, Let the Laws of the Land be your Rule; Be sure give no
advantage to the Common Enemy, either by a partial Execution of them, or by
doing less than the Laws allow: neither strain them too high, nor let them be
as a Cipher, which will signify nothing, without the Figure of Execution. As
the public Good and Welfare of Mankind, was the design of all Laws; so the
Conformity to, and Execution of them, ought to have the same tendency. To
strain any Law beyond the designed Good, or Intent of the Legislators, is a
most severe and unjust Oppression; and to suspend, or let wholesome and
beneficial Laws lie dormant, without all due Execution for the Public Good,
does not only show the unfaithfulness of the Magistrate, to whom the Executive
Power appertains; but also, how little he minds his Sworn Duty, which is to see
the Laws duly put in Execution; and Justice, according to them, equally
distributed without Partiality; and how any can Answer the nullifying them,
without a Lawful Abrogation, by the same Power that Enacted them, I cannot
possibly conceive; for the common approved Maxim is, That Power only that made
any Law, has sufficient Authority to suspend or repeal the same. The Laws of
the Land, so long as they are founded on Reason, and found beneficial to the
Public Peace and Welfare of the Kingdom, ought to be kept Inviolable, and
maintained by All; but more especially by those that have any share in the
Execution of them. We should reckon him a Madman, that should un-tile his
House, under pretense of keeping out the Rain. Likewise, if a Governor of a
well Fortified City, who wanted for no Accommodations requisite for the defense
of it, should, without any just cause of Fear of his Inconsiderable Enemies,
either out of Cowardice or Perfidiousness, betray the City, and make himself
and them, not only void of Power, but in effect Slaves to the Will and
Pleasures of that part of Men, to whom he and they might have bid defiance.
What can we say or think of such Esau's, that are ready to sell their Birth
Rights for a Mess of Pottage, but that they shall not deserve any Compassion?
and if they undergo the greatest Evils, they will have the just Reward they
have deservedly Merited. I should not pity any Man, that, under pretense of
keeping out Thieves and Robbers, should open the Door, and let them in; wholly
trusting to their good Breeding, Kindness, and Honesty; not in the least
believing they would be so unmannerly, as not only to secure him, by binding
his Hands and Feet that he could not help himself, but also Rob him of all that
was worth their carrying away; stopping his Mouth that he could not complain of
his hard Usage, or call for any help, to free him out of his miserable
Condition. I wish, in the Land of Vtopia, there were not too many, that would
show the same kindness to those kind Hearted Christians, that should divest
themselves of the Power and Security the Law gives them, and merely trust to
their good Nature, for their Religion, and all their Liberties and Properties.
Any Man, with whom the Administration of Justice is Entrusted, or that has the
Honor to be Elected a Member of Parliament, for the Service of his King and
Country; for such a Man to betray his Trust, either by parting with those
wholesome Laws, that long experience tells us, are absolutely necessary, and
most beneficial to the Commonwealth; or by condescending to the unreasonable
Desires and Endeavors of an inconsiderable sort of Men; or by not obstructing,
but consenting to the Enacting of New Laws, destructive to the Common Good; He
is most unworthy of the Trust reposed in him, and deserves the severest
Punishment the Law will admit of: No Contempt, Disgrace, or Derision, can be
bad enough for such a Man, that to serve his own particular private Interest,
will Sacrifice the Public. All Members of Parliament, when they design to make
any Laws, ought thoroughly to consider, what Good or Benefit will accrue to the
Subjects thereby; and if, upon mature Consideration, they see a necessity of
Enacting such Laws, by no means ought they to be omitted, or laid aside. On the
other side, if former Parliaments had, for weighty Reasons, made several Acts
for the security of our Religion and Laws; before these Laws be made void by a
Repeal, due respect ought to be had to the circumstances of Things and Times;
and, after a strict and impartial Enquiry be made, if it shall appear that the
Repealing those Acts will not only very much injure, but really endanger the
Public Peace and Welfare of the Kingdom; then, notwithstanding the
Solicitations of a Party, whose Interests oblige them to desire it, they ought
not to part with Laws which will prove as an impregnable Bulwark against our
Enemies. To make void an useful and necessary Law, under a pretense of doing
Good to the Public thereby, is like the taking up of a Sluice to prevent an
Inundation of Water. I may rather compare it to the throwing of Combustible
Matter into an House on Fire, thinking thereby to Extinguish the Flames; which
is so far from putting a period to them, that, on the contrary, it heightens
the Flames, that they are not (if at all) easily Mastered. I have heard our
necessary Laws compared to the most useful Damms and Banks in Holland, to
prevent the raging Sea from overwhelming them. It Is well known to Travelers,
of what a vast Importance those Defenses are: for, should there be a
considerable Breach made in any of those Damms, that secure them from the
violence of the Water; not only many Souls, Beasts, and many other valuable
Things would be lost; but it would be an Immense Charge to repair them: But,
though the damage to the Netherlands would be very great, should such a bad
accident happen; yet it is the Opinion of Wise men, (and not without good
grounds) that should Englishmen and Protestants part with those Laws, that are
like a strong and impregnable Defense to them, and their Religion, in one
Respect it would be of a far worse consequence to them; that is, the lose would
be irrepairable; and Ten Thousand to One, if ever the like Security can be
obtained. Countrymen have an Old, but True saying; that is, If you love to be
free from a Broken Head, keep fast the Staff in your own hand; so may you not
only prevent your being beaten by your own Weapon, but, in case of an Assault,
you may, by being in a posture of Defense, easily defend your self from violent
Hands; whereas on the contrary, a Naked Man may easily be Captivated; and,
whether he will or no, he will be constrained to submit to the Mercy of his
Insulting Enemy. It Is farther observed, That after the Rich Farmer has, with
much difficulty, gotten a good Estate, he remembers how hardly he Labored,
Toiled, and Sweated, before he brought things to so good an Issue; and the
calling to mind his former Indefatigable Labor, has this effect on him, That
since he obtained his Riches or Substance with no small Care and Industry, he
is resolved, because he neither got it easily, nor can he dispense with the
want of it, that he will not do like Prodigal Sons, who being Born to their
Estates, and wholly Ignorant of their Parents Care and Trouble to provide for
them, quickly squander away vast Fortunes: but though he may love his Children
or Friends with all the real Affections imaginable; yet, says he, Charity
begins at home; I must not make my self a Beggar, and stand to the Courtesy of
Children or Friends, for what I shall want to sustain me, so that I may
comfortably end those days that remain. For woeful Experience too frequently
informs us, That Children and Friends too soon forget their Du^y, and the
innumerable Kindnesses of their tender Parents. Since things are thus, let
common Prudence dictate better things to us, than to part with what of right
belongs unto us, or to let go that lawful Security we have, for all that is
dear unto us; and by so doing, we may easily prevent our being made a Prey to
our implacable Enemies, from whose tender Mercies, Good Lord deliver us. I
might much more enlarge on this particular but, should I proceed to enumerate
all the manifest Dangers and Inconveniences that I could easily insist on, I
should cry out with the Poet, Tantae molis erat Romanam condere gente^.

In the third place, Let your Zeal for your Holy Religion continue, and let
your Moderation be seen by your very Enemies; and let not the worst of them,
have any just cause of laying any severe or unbecoming Actions to your charge.
How will it please your Enemies, to see you differing and dividing your
Interest and Affections with those? That a Worthy, and most Learned Member of
your Church, in my hearing; lately Preached against excluding by
Excommunication, from Communion with you, for indifferent Things, which may be
left, undone, and yet Salvation obtained. The reasons he gave for loving them
were, Because there were many good Christians among them; and because they
protested against the same Errors, believed the same Articles of Faith, and
hoped for the same common Salvation by Christ, that you do. You cannot but be
deeply sensible, how many Eyes are fixed on you, and what desires your Enemies
have of seeing you exposed to Public Shame and Contempt: Have Charity toward
all Men, especially to all those of the Protestant Religion, that in any
tolerable Measure conform to the Rules of it. As for your Dissenting
Neighbors, (like the Reverend Doctors, Till. and Ten.) let your Love and
Moderation be so great toward them, as if possible, though you cannot make
them satisfied with your Reasons for Conformity; yet let your Christian Charity
and Affection to them as Protestants and Members of the same Body you profess
to be, have such an Influence over them, as to expel any Malice or prejudice
they might have entertained against your Persons; and who knows, but such
Methods as these, may have a great Influence toward a farther Conformity. It Is
my Opinion, (and not without Reason) That the bitter Invectives not long since,
in and out of the Pulpit, created greater and fiercer Enemies against the
Church of England, than otherwise she would have had; but as this has sometime
since ceased, so Charity ought to be exercised, in forgeting what was amiss; in
hopes the like may never be heard again.

My Advice to you Dissenting Protestants, is, for the most part, the same I
gave to the Church of England: I need not enlarge any farther on the absolute
necessity of Unity and Charity among Protestants at this Season, when it is
very manifest, that nothing is more delightful or acceptable to those that have
the Protestant Interest, than to see one Protestant rending, tearing, and
backbiting another: It being too apparent, that these Fishers of Men delight
in troubled Waters, knowing it to be the fittest time and opportunity to
overcome their Heretical Enemies, (for so they call Protestants) when their
Dissentions among themselves are greatest. Therefore, I earnestly persuade and
entreat you, as you tender the Peace and Welfare of the Kingdom; and the
establishing your sound Religion, to put on a Spirit of Meekness, Charity, and
Compliance, as far as possible, with the Church of England; and if you cannot
receive satisfaction enough from her Learned Members, thoroughly to Conform; yet
let not your Charity be so narrow, as to have a bad Opinion of those Worthy
Men, that are abundantly satisfied with the reasonableness of their Conformity.
As you desire no harsh Censures be past on you for Nonconformity; so be sure
you avoid reflecting on those Pious Men, that hold it lawful to assent and
consent to all the Articles of the Church of England. If possible, have Peace
with all Men, especially with those of the same Household of Faith you profess.
Strongly endeavor to prevent bitter Invective Speeches against that Church;
which, in all probability, is like to be the only Invincible Bulwark against
Popery: And I am the more inclined to be an earnest Advocate for the Church of
England, nor only because I have hopes she has laid aside those bitter Things,
formerly, with some Truth, laid to her charge; but chiefly because a vast
number of her Worthy, and eminently Learned Members, have, with great Learning
and Solidity defended our Holy Religion, from the Heresy, Schism and Novelty
falsely charged on it by the Church of Rome. All Persons that Study any thing to
the purpose, of the Controversy betwixt us and them, must certainly perceive,
how admirably they have confuted the unreasonable and unaccountable Doctrines
of that pretended Infallible Church; clearly proving the Truth and Excellency
of the Protestant Religion; and that we are not (as they pretend) beholding to
them for it: But evidently making it appear, that the Protestant Faith is most
ancient, and that its Doctrine is consonant or agreeable to the Word of God,
and the practice of the purest Christians, in the Primitive Times. This very
consideration alone, is sufficient to clear the Body of that Church from being
Popishly affected.

A second Reason to Love and Esteem them for, is, their firm adhering to the
known Laws of the Land; for whatever a few unfound Members of her Communion
have done to the contrary, yet she is not accountable for them; the greatest
and most considerable part, having been found very faithful on that account.

A third Thing, for which you ought to value the Members of the Church of
England, viz. Their steadfast adhering to the Rights of the People, and
especially of the Clergy. Their Consciences have been so just, that
notwithstanding the Angry Frowns of Majesty have taken hold of ^h^m, and that
they have, and are likely to suffer very much by it; they rather choose to
trust God with their Temporal Felicity and Comfort, than sinfully violate those
Sacred Oaths they have so Solemnly taken, by betraying (in the least) the Trust
reposed in them; notwithstanding the Frowns or Allurements of the greatest Men.
This only single Instance of their signal Fidelity to God and Man, ought to
have no small sway or Influence with all considering Persons. He that orders
his Conversation according to the Divine Rule, and faithfully Studies to
preserve the just Rights and Lawful Liberties of Mankind, deservedly Merits the
greatest Love and Affection imaginable. But he that makes no Conscience of his
Duty to God, and designedly makes Shipwreck of the Lawful Rights and
Privileges of any Party or Society, and that will Sell his Birthright for an
inconsiderable Value, deserves not the Name of a Man, or to be admitted into
the Society of Mankind. I desire you would imitate the Church of England, in
all those things for which I justly commend her. In the first place, Follow her
Loyalty as far as you can, and not break the Laws of God nor Men, thereto
corresponding. In the second place, Be servent and constant in the Sacred
Religion you profess your selves Members of. You know, without doubt, the
greatest part of you, the Transcendent Excellency of your Religion; and
therefore, if any of you should, for Interest or Preferment, turn from Truth to
Falsehood, from Light to Darkness from a Sound to a Corrupt Religion; How great
and unpardonable would so wilful a Sin be? And, to speak the Truth, I must do
you the Justice to commend you for your firmness in your Holy Profession, in
that I have heard few or none, that have either gone over, or been perverted to
the Communion of the Church of Rome, notwithstanding the alluring Favors of
that Church toward you, and practice of her Clergy and Laiety to gain
Proselytes among you. What I shall say on this Head, is, Go on, and Prosper;
and, without doubt, the Spirit of Truth will guide and direct you for the best.
In the third place, Imitate their Fidelity to the Laws of the Land: You cannot,
but with admiration, perceive how steadfastly they labor to preserve them, and
all the reasonable Rights and Privileges of the People. As you are Rational
Men, professing the Protestant Religion, and render the Public Good, let not
any uncertain Transitory Interest prevail with you so far, as basely to give up
your Religion, and the known useful Laws of the Land, be sure, you neither
consent to the suspending, or taking away any, that (to all Intelligent Men)
are like to prove your only Security. When the Countryman designs to preserve
his Grain, from those Creatures that would Eat it up, or otherwise spoil it, he
is far from rooting up the Fence that secures it: So ought you carefully to
preserve the Laws, for your own and the Public Safety. Things at present look,
to you perhaps, with a good Aspect; I wish, they may long continue in that
condition: But, if the course of things should mightily alter, and these
Halcion Days (of which you have no assurance) should not long continue, how
greatly would your hopeful expectations be frustrated? Therefore, be sure you
do not imprudently purchase your present Liberty, and seeming Favors, at too
dear a rate; for such Acts may wholly deprive you of the Favors, that you may
otherwise expect from the next Successor, etc. But strenuously endeavor to
manifest to the World, that your former great out cries against the least
Invasions of your Religion, Liberties, Properties, and the Laws of the Land,
were really in earnest and, that as then you truly hated those that were in any
measure guilty of them; so now, it something lies in your Power, you will not
by the greatest Persuasions and Promises of Kindnesses, be wrought on, to part
with the Laws of the Land because you cannot well be Ignorant of the fatal
consequence of so doing. If you either give us the Laws, or cease to execute
those that are most necessary, you not only highly serve and gratify your
known Enemies; but by betraying your Trust you will render your selves
extraordinary Odiou^ in the Opinion of most Men; in that you are unfaithful to
what you formerly so much cried up, viz. That the Laws might flourish, and
Justice might duly and impartially be distributed, and all Men, quietly possess
what of right belongs to them. No Honest Man, or good Christian, will dissuade
you from Serving or Obeying your Sovereign, as f^r as i^ Lawful: But, in all
Obedience, strict recourse must be had to the Divine and Human Laws, that the
Limits of neither be Transgressed; and then the Issue of such Obedience, will
be of no ill consequence to you or the Public; Such Obedience will redound to
your Immortal Honor.

Fourthly, Consider, if the the Papists in England were not of a rigid,
violent, and ambitious Nature, they would not make all this stir about the
Test, which debars them from a share in the Government. In Holland we know,
that though the Papists are very Peaceable, and have given many Years
Testimonies of their good Behavior, under a Protestant Power; yet the States,
for their own and the Public Safety, will admit none of them into any Offices.
I am of Opinion, and not without Reason, Roman Catholics here, cannot give so
good an account of their Peaceable and Christian Behavior, as those in Holland
can: Therefore, greater Arguments may be produced, why no Power ought to be
granted to them in England: It being notoriously known, that though their
Prince be a Just Man, valluing his Word, yet a restless Zeal moves the Papists
(manibus pedibusque) to advance what they call Catholic Interest; which,
without any Restraint, will not keep within the bounds of Moderation.

But if the Laws are taken off, I know not of any Obstruction they can meet
with; then we must expect to be Governed wholly by Papists, and the consequence
of such a Government must be terrible to Protestants; for what can they expect
less than Popish Lords and Commons; and from such a Parliament, what less than
a perfect establishing of Popery by a Law; and, without doubt, when such Laws
are Enacted in favor of that Religion, as severe will be made against the
growing of Protestant Heresy in England, from such Laws, and such Times, God
in Mercy deliver England. Pray, therefore, consider, if you once give the
Papists so much Power, whether, so soon as they have it, they will not make
severer Tests against Protestants, than ever were made against the Church of
Rome? The late Famous Actions of the French King, and the Marian Kindness of
old, to Heretics, are convincing Evidences of the Lenity and Moderation of a
Government, wholly in the hands of Papists. As for the Happiness, and
flourishing of Kingdoms or Republics, under the Papists, See the contrary in
Dr. Burnet's Travels.

The Romanist's great Ambition, and eager desire to be in Eminent Places of
Trust, is enough to convince any Rational Man, that for no mean or
inconsiderable Enterprises, do they contend for them: They think if once they
can get into the Saddle, with greater ease they may Ride the poor Heretics. I
would advise you to Ponder, with great deliberation, the Natures, Dispositions,
and especially the Interests of those Men, that with might and main labor to
take off the Test. And if it shall appear, (as doubtless it will) it is a
grievance to those only, that espouse a Foreign Interest, directly contrary to
yours; and that the Test is a strong defense to preserve you. I hope you will
manifest your real Love and Kindness to this Nation, by undergoing, for a time,
as great Severities as ever, rather than in any degree be Instrumental in
ruining of this now happy Kingdom (I mean in her Laws). I would gladly know of
any ambitious Papist, Whether it would not be more unreasonably bold for him to
desire a share in that Government, from which he is Legally excluded, than for
a Hugonet in France, where, as I never heard, were any Laws to exclude him, to
desire to be preferred to no small Offices: I am verily persuaded the Body of
the Papists there, would be very unwilling to be Governed by him; I think the
case is not parrellel, and that the Protestants ought to insist much more on
the same Privilege in England.

In the Fifth place, Seriously think of the professed Kindness of your new
Friends of the Church of Rome, you may and ought to consider, Cui bono, For
what good or design, is so great Friendship pretended, and so many Favors now
on a sudden conferred and accumulated on you; who, not long since, were
esteemed unwo^hy of Life: You may well enquire, what occasioned so great a
Calm, after so violent and Tempestuous a Storm. It must, certainly, be matter
of the highest admitation to you, to see the wonderful Moderation and Clemency
of the Roman Catholics at this time to you obstinate Heretics; especially
since the Members of that Church are now in so great Power: I say, to see a
Church, whose Principles are directly opposite to the Protestant Interest, so
caress the strictest sort of them; when as, not long since, the greatest
Violence and Cruelty imaginable, to extirpate them, was thought not only
lawful, but necessary; it is well if you find these Kindnesses real, and not to
make you, what you hate to be, Tools for a Design both dangerous and
dishonorable: To see Men, one while, breath out nothing but Invectives against
the Reformed; at another time, if it more serves their purposes, fawning and
courting Heretics, is enough to put considering Men on their Guard. Such
unexpected Kindnesses may put you on enquiry.

First, Whether you come nearer in Belief or Practice to that Church now? or,
whether you be as guilty of Heresy (as she calls it) as ever?

Secondly, Whether the usual Spirit of Persecution, and Antipathy to
Protestants (though at present in England restrained) be not as predominant in
France, and other places, as ever? It Is well if Roman Catholics can Act
contrary to their known and beloved Principles, in putting on a Moderation and
Temper suitable to the Gospel. If it be clearly evinced, that Protestant
Dissenters have not in the least obliged the Papists, by their receeding or
departing from their own Principles; or by their favorable construction of the
Articles and Opinions of the Church of Rome; then it is visible their designs
are (since the Church of England will not serve their turn) if possible, to
make the Dissenters their Tools, they being the last Refuge they can fly to, in
order to their Assistance. The late Actions of the Papists, toward you,
bespeak your favorable Opinion: But the too well known Maxim amongst the
Romanists, That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics, does justly cause
Protestants to expect no real or greater Kindnesses from them, than consists
with their Interests or Designs to manifest. If the Papists show you outwardly
great Respect; and, for Sinister Ends, treat you as Friends for a while, till
you have served their turn, by taking off the Test and Penal Laws, that they
might be on as equal Terms as you: It Is not only Mine, but the Opinion of Ten
Thousand more; that not only you, but the Nation will dearly pay for the
Kindnesses you have received from them: And, let me tell you, if things are so
ordered, you may Whistle for any place of Trust in the Government: And when all
the Administration of Justice is wholly in the Romanists (as doubtless then it
will be) you Heretics must be content with such as can be got: For I know not
where you can expect any Redress, or to whom you can appeal. These
Considerations, I hope, will make you perceive as great a necessity of
continuing those Laws, as ever there were of Enacting them: especially the
Test. Pray God direct you, that you may act Prudently, for your own Credit, and
the Nations Good. I have great cause to hope well of you, because, for the most
part, you are Men of Consideration and Understanding, that scorn to be
Accessaries, much less the chief Actors, in subverting the happy Constitution
of our Government.

I make no question but your w^se Carriage, at this time, by being faithful to
your King, your Religion, and the Laws, will so far reconcile you to the favor
of the Church of England, that when ever a seasonable Opportunity shall offer
for the easing of you in a Legal way, her Members, will readily consent to it;
for they will not be so void of all Gratitude, as wholly to forget your sumness
to your Religion, and the necessary Laws of the Land; but if you Act contrary
to the Interest of Protestants, and of the Nation, you can expect only the
short Favors of the Church of Rome; and not easily to be admitted into the
favorable Opinion of the Church of England, nor receive those Kindnesses from
her, which otherwise you might expect. And I must profess, you will deserve
none of her Favors, if you study more to serve the Roman, than the Protestant
Interest: But I hope better things of you.

I shall not enlarge, having (I hope) writ enough to have convinced you
already. I shall Answer one grand Objection, relating to the Penal Laws; The
Test (as I can understand) being not much Insisted on; unless by some Mercenary
Men, whose Writings are all they have to depend on. The popular Argument, for a
present Repeal, with some timorous and passionate Dissenters, is this, That the
Members of the Church of England, are of a Persecuting Spirit; and as one, the
other end of the City, said, That while these Rods (meaning the Penal Laws) are
in their hands, they will be continually lashing Protestants: Therefore, it is
(as he said) the highest piece of Prudence to take them off, while it is in
their Power. I always heard a great account of the Gentleman, that his Memory
was very good, his Parts very eminent: If so, I cannot but admire he forgets, or
at least understands not, from whence those severe Orders, for ruining
Dissenters, came: Nay, farther, for what Ends and Designs things were so
violently carried on. Perhaps it may farther be Objected, That many of the
Divines of the Church of England, often Zealously pressed this Persecution.
I Will grant the Accusation in part; but I can the better excuse those hot Men,
when I consider what Motives, Incentives, and Promotions came from that end of
the City, that now so much condemns the Church of England for her Zeal to Serve
the King in that particular: Since things were so carried, that no Clergymen
were esteemed or preferred unless he would comply with Courtly Orders, in
Thundering against Dissenters. As there are, amongst Men of all Persuasions,
Ambitious, Indigent Men; so, I confess, there were some few such as Mr.
Thompson of Bristol, among the Church of England Divines: But for the Richer
and more Learned part of that vast Body, I am fully convinced, few, if any,
were of that Persecuting Spirit. Farther, The Worthy Members of the Church of
England are grateful Understanding Men; and I have that Charity for them, as
not to imagine, That if the Dissenters be, to their Power, Friendly and
Serviceable to the Church of England now; if it should ever lie in her Members
Power hereafter, but that a trebble return of Kindness and Gratitude would by
them be made.

Lastly, To conclude, I must profess, that I hate a Persecuting Spirit in Men,
pretending to Christianity; and I do freely declare, I should heartily rejoice,
if this time were a fit opportunity to relieve the Dissenters; but, were I in
their condition, as I had already undergone much, so, by the Assistance of God,
I would Suffer much more, rather than, like Sampson, who, when he had lost part
of his Strength, for Revenge, with what he had left, pulled down the House, not
only on the Philistines, but on his own Head. Such a Foolish Revenge would be
but a poor satisfaction to a Rational Man: How aptly the comparison is made, I
leave to understanding Dissenters to consider.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Had almost forgot Two weighty Considerations; The first is, You ought to
consider, and seriously reflect on Courtly Favors and Promises; and how the
Court opposed the Kindnesses designed for you by the Westminster Parliament: I
must acquaint you, That Three Parts in Four, of that Parliament, were strict
Church of England-Men; and that they had such a respect for you, that they
unanimously passed a Bill for easing of Protestant Dissenters; And I cannot
conceive, why it was by the Court obstructed, unless because it did not extend
to the Papists, as well as Dissenters: However, for Reasons best known to
themselves, instead of Presenting the Bill to King Charles the Second, to have
his Royal Stamp, it was lost (a thing never heard of before): This Act will
sufficiently clear the major part of the Church of England, from that Odious
Accusation of being Promoters of that Persecution, then so vigorously carried
on: And since it clears them, it must fall heavy somewhere: I do not affirm,
the Papists had any hand in losing that Bill; but I know not what to think of
it. No Man can doubt, but that great Kindness to Protestant Dissenters, was
really by that Parliament designed: But there was a considerable Party then in
being, with whose Interests, Designs, and Glory, such Lenity could not then
consist, what ever it may do now.

Secondly, Some great Advocates for Repealing the Test, pretend to an Expedient
for it; and declare, they will part with it, provided such Security as can be
proposed, may be gotten: As an Expedients, in another Case, was thought Odious
and Ridiculous; so now, a Nominal, and not a Virtual Obligatory Law, ought to
have the same Fate. It Is my Opinion, If the pretended Expedient be as Valid and
Secure to Protestants as the Test, it would be equally indifferent for the
Papists to let you keep what you have: And some think, if you must have a Test,
it will not be grateful to the Roman Catholics. Wherein lies the Kindness of
the King, if he parts with any Law, and at the same time grants another as
severe, to Exclude his Subjects, (whom He thinks Worthy) from all public
Places of Trust. I must freely tell you my Mind, If you are concerned for
preserving your Religion, and what is dear to you, and us All, Remember, and
abide by that common Proverb, One Bird in Hand, is worth Two in the Bush. You
would reckon a Purchaser (though he were sure of a Penniworth) very imprudent,
if he should Pay the full Value for his Land, before he were sure to receive a
satisfactory Title from the Vender. As to the Promoters and Patriots of an
Expedient, in lieu of the Test, In the first place, are they sure such a thing
will be granted? I put the Quaery, because, if I am not misinformed, the
Draconical Author had no Thanks for proposing it, in his Answer to the Letter
to a Dissenter.

To Conclude, I shall give you my Sentiments in a plain Intelligible Instance:
I can as soon be wrought upon to believe an Ignorant Pretender, that shall
pretend to take out my Sound Teeth, and put in a better Set in the room of
them, as to Credit the Promoters of an Expedient: As I should admire at the
Confidence of the former, so I should be amazed at the Ignorance of the latter.
I believe the impossibility of my getting new substantial Teeth, and their
getting as firm Security for the Protestant Religion, in place of the Test,
will be alike equal: Therefore, be Prudent, and consider the danger of altering
a well-Establish'd Government: For, it is manifest, when things are in
Confusion, it is a hard matter to set them right again.

FINIS.

