A Seasonable Discourse, Showing the Unreasonableness and Mischeifs OF
IMPOSITIONS In Matters of RELIGION, Recommended to Serious Consideration.

By a Learned Pen.

LONDON, Printed and are to be Sold by R. Baldwin. 1687.

A SEASONABLE DISCOURSE
THE Christian Religion, as first Instituted by our Blessed Savior, was the
greatest security to Magistrates by the Obedience which it taught, and was
fitted to enjoy no less security under them by a Practice conformable to that
Doctrine. For our Savior himself, not pretending to an Earthly Kingdom, took
such case therefore to instruct his Followers in the due Subjection to
Governors; that, while they observed his Precepts, they could neither fall
under any Jealousy of State as an ambitious and dangerous Party, nor, as
Malefactors upon any other account, deserve to suffer under the Public
Severity: So that in this only it could seem pernicious to Government, that
Christanity, if rightly exercised upon its own Principles, would render all
Magistracy useless. But although he, who was Lord of all, and to whom all Power
was given beth in Heaven and in Earth, was nevertheless contented to come in
the form of a Servant, and to let the Emperors and Princes of the World alone
with the use of their Dominions; he thought it good reason to retain his
Religion under his own cognizance, and exempt its Authority from their
Jurisdiction. In this alone he was imperious, and did not only practice it
himself against the Laws and Customs then received, and in the face of the
Magistrate; but continually seasoned and hardened his Disciples in the same
confidence and obstinacy. He tells them, They shall be brought before Kings and
Governors for his Name, but sear them not, he will be with them, bear them
out, and justify it against all Opposition. Nor that he allowed them hereby to
violate their Duty to the Puplick, by any resistance in defiance of the
Magistracy; but he instructed and animated them in their Duty to God, in
dispight of Suffering.

In this manner Christanity did at first set out, and accordingly found
reception. For although our Blessed Savior, having fulfilled all
Righteousness, and the time of his Ministry being completed, did by his Death
set the Seal to his Doctrine, and show the way toward Life and Immortality to
such Belivers as imitate his Example: yet did not the Heathen Magistrate take
the Government to be concerned in Point of Religion, or upon that acount
consent to his Execution. Pontious Pilate, then Governor of Judea, though he
were a Man unjust and cruel by Nature, and served Tiberius, the most tender,
jealous and severe in point of State or Prerogative, of all the Roman Emperors;
though he understood that great multitudes followed him, and that he was grown
the Head of a new Sect that was never before heard of in the Nation, yet did
not he intermeddle. But they were the Men of Religion, the chief Priests,
Scribes and Elders, and the High Priest Caiphas. And yet, although they accused
him falsely, That he taught that Tribute was not to be given to Caesar, that he
was a Fifth Monarch, and made himself a King, and (as it is usual for some of
the Clergy to terrify the inferior Magistrates out of their duty to Justice,
out of pretense of Loyalty to the Prince) threatened Pilate, that if he let that
Man go he was not Caesar's Friend; he understanding that they did it out of
Envy, and that the Justice and Innocence of our Savior was what they could not
bear with, would have adventured all their Informing at Court, and first have
freed him, and then have exchanged him for Barrabas; saying, that he found no
fault in him: but he was overborn at last by humane weakness, and poorly
imagined that by washing his own hands he had expiated himself, and wiped off
the Guilt upon those alone who were the occasion, But, as for Tiberius himself,
the growth of Christianity did never increase, his cares of Empire at Rome, nor
trouble his sleep at Capreae: but he both approved of the Doctrine, and
threatened the Informers with Death; nor would he have staid there, but
attempted, according to the way of their Superstition, upon the intelligence
from Pilate, to have received Christ into the number of their Deities. The
Persecution of the Apostles after his Death, and Martyrdom of Stephen, happened
not by the interposing of the Civil Magistrate in the Matter of Religion, or
any Disturbance occasioned by their Doctrines: but arose from the High Priest
and his Emissaries, by suborned Witnesses, stirring up the Rabble in a brutish
and riotous manner to execute their cruelty. How would the modern Clergy have
taken and represented it, had they lived in the time of St. John Baptist, and
seen Jerusalem, Iudaea, and all the Region round about Jordan go out to be
baptized by him! Yet that Herod, for any thing we read in Scripture, though he
wanted not his Instillers, apprehended no Commotion: and had not Caligula
banished him and his Herodias together, might in all appearance have lived
without any change of Government. It Was she that caused John's imprisonment for
the convenience of her Incest. Herod indeed feared him, but rather reverenced
him, as a just Man and an holy, observed him, and when he heard him, he did
many things and heard him gladly. Nor could all her subtilty have taken off his
Head, but that Herod thought himself under the obligation of a Dance and an
Oath, and knew not in that Case they ought both to be dispensed with. But he
was exceeding sorry at his death, which few Princes are if Men lived to their
jealousy or danger. The killing of James, and imprisonment of Peter by that
Herod, was because he saw he pleased the people, when the Priesls had once set
them on madding: a Complaisance to which the most Innocent may be exposed, but
which partake more of Guile then Civility or Wisdom.

But to find out what the disinteressed and prudent Men of those days took to
be the wisest and only justifiable way for the Magistrate to proceed in upon
Matters of Religion; I cannot see any thing more pregnant than the concurrent
Judgment of three Persons, of so different Characters, and that lived so far
asunder, that there can be no danger of their having corrupted one another
Understanding in favor to Christianity. Gamaliel, the Deputy of Acaia, and the
Town Clerk of Ephesus; the first a Jewish Doctor, by Sect a Pharisee, one of
the Council, and of great Authority with the People, who (when the chief Priest
had cast the Apostles in Prison, and charged them for preaching against the
Command he had before laid upon them) yet gave this advice, confirming it with
several fresh Precedents, Acts 5. That they should take heed to themselves what
they intended to do with those Men, and let them alone; for if this Counsel,
says he, or this Work be of Men, it will come to naught, but if it be of God
you cannot overthrow it, lest ye be found fighting with God. So that his
Opinion grounded upon his best experience, was that the otherwise unblameable
Sect of Christianity might safely, and ought to be left to stand or fall by
God's Providence under a free Toleration of the Magistrate. The Second was
Gallio, Acts 18. a Roman, and Deputy of Achaia. The Jews at Corinth hurried
Paul before his Tribunal, laying the usual Charge against him, That he
persuaded Men to worship God contrary to the Law, which Gallio looked upon as
so slight and without his Cognizance, that although most Judges are willing to
increase the Jurisdiction of their Courts, He drove them away, saving Paul the
labor of a defense, and told them, If it were a Matter of wrong or wicked
lewdness, reason would that he should bear with them; but if it be a question
of Words and Names, and of your Law, look ye to it, I will be Judge of no such
Matters: and when he had so said, Paul was released; but the Greeks that were
present took Barnabas, and before the Judgment Seat beat Sosthene; the chief
Ruler of the Synagogue, and Ringleader of the Accusers. His Judgment therefore
was that, to punish Christians merely for their Doctrine and Practice, unless
they were Malefactors otherwise, was a thing out of the Magistrates Province,
and altogether unreasonable. The third Case was no less remarkable: For one
Demetrius, that was a Silversmith by Trade, and made Shrines for Diana, stirred
up all the Freemen of his Company against Paul, and indeed he stated the Matter
very fairly and honestly, assigning the true Reason of most of these
Persecutions: Ye know that by this Craft we have our Wealth, but that by Paul'
s Preaching that they be no Gods which are made with hands, not only our Craft
is in danger to be set at naught, but also the Temple of the great Goddess and
her Magnificence, whom all Asia and the World worship, should be despised and
destroyed. And it is considerable, that even the Jews, tho of a contrary
Religion, yet fomented, as it usually chances, this difference, and egged the
Ephesians on against the Apostle and his followers. But when they had brought
Alexander, one of Paul's Companions, into the Theater, the Recorder of Ephesus
(more temperate and wise than some would have been in that Office) would not
make an Inquisition upon the matter, nor put Alexander upon his trial and
desence, but (although he himself could not have born that Office without being a
great Dianist, as he declared too in his discourse) he tells the People, They
had brought those Men which were neither robbers of Churches, nor blasphemers
of their Goddess, (for that Judge would not condemn Men by any Inferences or
Expositions of old Statutes, which long after was Iulian's practice, and since
imitated); and therefore if Demetrius and his Craftsmen had any matter against
them, the Law was open, and it should be determined in a lawful Assembly; but
that the whole City was in danger to be called in question for that Vproar,
there being no cause whereby they might give account of that concourse. And by
this he plainly enough signified, that if Paul and his Companions had stolen the
Church Plate, they might well be Indicted; but that Demetrius had no more
reason in Law against them, than a Chandler might have had, if by Paul's
preaching Wax Tapers as well as Silver Candlesticks had grown out of fashion.
That it is matter of Right and Wrong, betwixt Man and Man, that the Justice of
Government looks too: but that, while Christianity was according to its own
Principle carried on quietly, it might so fall that the disturbers of it were
guilty of a Riot, and their great City of Ephesus deserved to be fined for it.
And taking this to have been so, he dismissed the Assembly, Acts 19.

After these Testimonies which I have collected out of the History of the Acts,
as of greatest Authority, I shall only add one or two more out of the same
Book, wherein Paul likewise was concerned before Heathen Magistrates of greater
eminence, Acts 23. Ananias the High Priest (these always were the Men) having
countenanced and instigated the Jews to a Conspiracy, in which Paul's life was
endangered and aimed at; Lysias the chief Captain of Jerusalem interposes and
sends him away to Foelix then Governor of Iudaea; signifying by Letter, That he
had been accused only of Questions of their Law, but he found nothing to be
laid to his Charge worthy of Death or of Bonds; whereof Foelix also, tho the
High Priest was so zealous in the prosecution, that he took a Journey on
purpose, and had instructed an exquisite Orator Tertullus to harangue Paul out
of his Life, as a pestilent Fellow, a mover of Sedition, and a Ringleader of
the Sect of the Nazarenes, not omitting even to charge Lysias for rescuing him
by great violence from being murdered by them, was so well satisfied of the
contrary, upon full hearing, that he gave him his liberty, and a Centurion for
his guard, with command that none of his Acquaintance should be debarred from
coming and ministering to him. But being indeed to leave his Government
afterward, left him in Prison, partly to show the Jews and their High Priest
another piece of complaisant policy, which, it is possible they paid well for,
seeing the other Reason was, because tho he had sent for Paul the oftener, and
communed with him, in hopes that he would have given him Money to be discharged,
there came nothing of it. Which was so base a thing in so great a Minister,
that the meanest Justice of the Peace in England would scarce have the face to
do so upon the like occasion. But his Successor Festus, having called Agrippa
and Bernice to hear the Cause, they all three were of opinion, that it was all
on the Jews side calumny and impertinence, but that Paul had done nothing
worthy of Death or of Bonds, and might have been set free, but that having
appealed to Caesar, he must be transmitted to him in safe Custody. Such was the
sense of those upon whom the Emperors then relied for the Government and
security of their Provinces: and so gross were their Heathen understandings,
that they could not yet comprehend how Quietness was Sedition, or the innocence
of the Christian Worship could be subject to Forfeiture or Penalty. Nay, when
Paul appeared even before Nero himself, and had none to stand by him, but all
forsook him: he was by that Emperor acquitted, and permitted a long time to
follow the work of his Ministry. It Is true, that afterward this Nero had the
honor to be the first of the Roman Emperors that persecuted Christianity;
whence it is that Tertullian in his Apologetick says; We glory in having such
a one the first beginner and Author of our Punishment, for there is none that
has read of him, but must understand some great good to have been in that
Doctrine, otherwise Nero would not have condemned it.

And thenceforward Christianity for about three hundred Years lay subject to
Persecution. For the Gentile Priests could not but observe a great decay in
their Parishes, a neglect of their Sacrifices, and diminution of their Profit
by the daily and visible increase of that Religion. And God in his wise
Providence had so ordered, that, as the Jews already, so the Heathens now
having filled up their measure with iniquity, Sprinkling the Blood of his
Saints among their Sacrifices, and the Christians having in a severe
Apprentiship of so many Ages learned the Trade of Suffering, they should at
last be their own Masters and admitted to their Freedom. Neither yet, even in
those times when they lay exposed to Persecution, were they without some
Intervals and catching seasons of Tranquillity, wherein the Churches had
leisure to reap considerable advantage, and the Clergy too might have been
inured, as they had been Exemplary under Affliction, so to bear themselves like
Christians when they should arrive at a full prosperity. For as often as there
came a just Heathen Emperor and a lover of mankind, that either himself
observed, or understood by the Governors of his Provinces, the innocence of
their Religion and Practices, their readiness to pay Tribute, their Prayers for
his Government and Person, their faithful Service in his Wars, but their
Christian valor and contumacy to Death, under the most exquisite Torments, for
their holy Profession; he forthwith relented, he rebated the Sword of the
Executiner, and could not find in his heart or in his power to exercise it
against the exercise of that Religion. It being demonstrable that a Religion
instituted upon Justice betwixt Man and Man; love to one another, yea even
their Enemies, Obedience to the Magistrate in all Humane and Moral Matters, and
in Divine Worship upon a constant exercise thereof, and as constant Suffering
in that cause, without any pretense or latitude for resistance, cannot, so long
as it is true to it self in these things, fall within the Magistrate's
Jurisdiction.

But as it first was planted without the Magistrates hand, and the more they
plucked at it, so much the more still it flourished, so it will be to the end
of the world, and whenever Governors have a mind to try for it, it will by
the same means and method sooner or later spoil them, but if they have a mind
to pull up that Mandrake, it were advisable for them not to do it themselves,
but to choose out a Dog for the Employment. I confess whenever a Christian
transgresses these bounds once, he is impoundable, or like a Waif and Stray
whom Christ knows not, he falls to the Lord of the Manor. But otherwise he
cannot suffer, he is invulnerable by the sword of Justice: only a Man may swear
and damn himself to kill the first honest Man he meets, which has been and is
the case of all true Christians worshipping God under the power and violence of
their Persecutors.

But the Truth is, that even in those times which some Men now, as often as it is
for their advantage, do consecrate under the name of Primitive, the Christians
were become guilty of their own punishment, and had it not been, as is most
usual, that the more Sincere Professors suffered promiscuously for the Sins and
Crimes of those that were Carnal and Hypocrites, their Persecutors may be
looked upon as having been the due Administrators of God's Justice. For (not to
go deeper) if we consider but that which is reckoned the Tenth Persecution
under Dioclesian, so incorrigible were they after nine preceding, what other
could be expected when, as Eusebius l. 3. c. 1. sadly laments, having related
how before that the Christians lived in great trust and reputation in Court,
the Bishops of each Church were beloved esteemed and reverenced by all mankind,
and by the Presidents of the Provinees, the Meetings in all the Cities were so
many and numerous, that it was necessary and allowed them to erect in every one
spacious and godly Churches; all things went on prosperousty with them, and to
such an height, that no envious Man could disturb them, no Devil could hurt
them, as long as walking yet worthy of those Mercies they were under the
Almighty's care and Protection: after that our Affairs by that too much
Liberty, degenerated into Luxury and Laziness, and some prosecuted others with
Hatred and Contumely, and almost all of us wounded our selves with the Weapons
of the Tongue in ill Language, when Bishops set upon Bishops, and the People
that belonged to one of them, stirred Sedition against the People of another;
then horrible Hypocrisy and Dissimulation sprung up to the utmost extremity of
Malice, and the Judgment of God, while yet there was liberty to meet in
Congregations, did sensibly and by stops being to visit us, the Persecution at
first discharging it self upon our Brethren that were in the Army. But we
having no feeling of the Hand of God, not endeavoring to make our Peace with
him, and living as if we believed that God did neither take notice of our
Transgressions, nor would visit us for them, we heaped up Iniquity upon
Iniquity. And those which seemed to be our Pastors, kicking under-foot the
Rules of Piety, were inflamed among themselves with mutual Contention, and
while they minded nothing else but to exaggerate their Quarrels, Threats,
Emulation, Hatred and Enmities, and earnestly each of them pursued his
particular Ambition in a Tyrannical manner, then indeed the Lord, then I say,
according to the Voice of the Prophet Jeremy, he covered the Daugheer of Sion
with a cloud in his anger, and cast down from Heaven to Earth the beauty of
Israel, and remembered not his footstool in the day of his Anger. And so the
pious Historian pathetically goes on, and deplores the Calamities that in sued,
to the loss of all that stock of Reputation, Advantage, Liberty and Safety,
which Christian people had by true Plety, and adhering strictly to the Rules of
their Profession formerly acquired and enjoyed, but had now forfeited, and
smartly and defervedly suffered under Dioclesian's persecution. And it was a
severe one, the longest too that ever happened, ten Years from his beginning of
it, and continued by others: by which time one might have thought the Church
would have been sufficiently winnowed, and nothing left but the pure Wheat,
whereas it proved quite contrary, and the holiest and most constant of the
Christians being blown away by Martyrdom, it seemed by the succeeding times, as
if nothing but the Chaff and the Tares had remained. But there was yet such a
Seed left; and notwithstanding the defection of many, so internal a virtue in
the Religion it self, that Dioclosian could no longer stand against it, and
tired out in two Years time, was glad to betake himself from rooting out
Christianity to gardening, and to sow Potherbs at Salona. And he with his
Partner Maximiamus, resigned the Empire to Galerius and Constantius, the
excellent Father of a more glorious and Christian Son, Constantine the Great,
who in due season succeeded him, and by a chain of God's extraordinry
providence, seemed to have been let down from Heaven to be the Emperor of the
whole World, and as I may say, the Universal Apostle of Christianity.

It is unexpressible the Virtue of that Prince, his Care, his Indulgence, his
Liberality, his own Example, every thing that could possibly tend to the
promotion and encouragement of true Religion and Piety. And in order to that he
thought he could not do better, neither indeed could he, then to show a
peculiar respect to the Clergy and Bishops, providing largely for their
subsistence, had they too on their part behaved themselves worthy of their High
Calling, and known to make right use of the advantages of his Bounty to the
same ends that they were by him intended. For if the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5. 17.
requires that an Elder, provided he rule well, be accounted worthy of Double
Honor, especially those who labor in the Word and Dactrine, it excludes not a
Decuple or any further proportion, and indeed there cannot too high a value be
set upon such a Person: and God forbid too that any measure of wealth should
render a Clergyman uncanonical. But alas, Bishops were already grown another
Name and Thing, than at the Apostles Institution; and had so altered the
property, that Paul would have had much difficulty by all the marks in the 1 Timothy 3. to have known them. They were ill enough under Persecution many of
them, but that long and sharp Winter under Dioclesian, being seconded by so
warm a Summer under Constantine, produced a Pestilence, which as an Infection
that seizes sometimes only one sort of Cattol, diffused it self most remarkably
through the whole body of the Clergy. From his reign the most sober Historians
date that New Disease which was so generally propagated then, and ever since
transmitted to some of their Successors, that it has given reason to enquire
whether it only happened to those Men as it might to others, or were not
inherent to the very Function. It showed it self first in Ambition, then in
Contention, next in Imposition, and after these Symptoms broke out at last like
a Plague Sore in open Persecution. They the Bishops who began to vouch
themselves the Successors of Christ, or at least of his Apostles, yet pretended
to be Heirs and Executors of the Jewish High Priests, and the Heathen Tyrants,
and were ready to prove the Will. The Ignorant Jews and Infidels understood not
how to Persecute, had no Commission to meddle with Religion, but the Bishops
had studied the Scriptures, knew better things, and the same, which was Cruelty
and Tyranny in the Heathens, if done by a Christian and Ecclesiastical hand,
was allowed to be Church Government, and the care of a Diocese. But that I may
not seem to speak without book, or outrun the History, I shall return to
proceed by those degrees I newly mentioned, whereby the Christian Religion was
usurped upon, and those things became their crime which were their duties.

The first was the Ambition of the Bishops, which had even before this, taken
its rise, when in the intervals of the former Persecutions the Piety of the
Christians had laid out ample provisions for the Church; but when Constantine
not only restored those which had been all consiscate under Dioclesian, but was
every day adding some new Possession, Privilege, or Honor, a Bishopric
became very desirable, and was not only a Good Work, but a good Thing,
especially when there was no danger of paying as it was usual, formerly their
Firstfruits to the Emperor by Martyrdom. The Arts by which Ambition climes, are
Calumny, Cruelty, Bribery, Adulation, all applied in their proper places and
seasons; and when the Man has attained his end, he ordinarily shows himself
then in his colors, in Pride, Opiniastry, Contention, and all other requisite
or incident ill Qualities. And if the Clergy of those times had some more
dextrous and innocent way than this of managing their Ambition, it is to be
lamented inter Arts Deperditas, or lies enviously hid by some musty Book-worm
in his private Library. But so much I find, that both before, and then, and
after, they cast such Crimes at one another, that a Man would scarce think he
were reading an History of Bishops, but a Legend of Devils: and each took such
care to blacken his adversary, that he regarded not how he smutted himself
thereby, and his own Order, to the laughter or horror of the Bystanders. And
one thing I remark particularly, that as Son of a Whore is the modern Word of
Reproach among the Laity, of the same use then among the Clergy was Heretic.
There were indeed Heretics as well as there are Bastards, and perhaps it was
not their fault, (neither of 'em could help it) but the Mothers or the Fathers;
but they made so many Heretics in those days, that it is hard to think they
really believed them so, but adventured the Name only to pick a Quarrel. And
one thing that makes it very suspicious, is, that in Ecclesiastical History,
the Ringleader of any Heresy is for the most part accused of having a mind to
be a Bishop, though it was not the way to come to it. As there was the damnable
Heresy of the Novatians, against which Constantine, notwithstanding his
Declaration of general Indulgence at his coming in, was shortly after so
incensed, that he published a most severe Proclamation against them; Cognoscite
jam per legem hanc quae a me sancita est, O Novatiani, etc. prohibiting all
their Meetings, not only in public, but in their own private Houses; and that
all such P^aces where they assembled for their Worship, should be rased to the
ground without delay or controversy, etc. Eus. 1. 3. c. 6. de vita Constantini.
Now the Story the Bishops tell of Novatus the Author of that Sect, Eusebius. 6. l.
6. c. 42. is in the words of Cornelius the Bp of Rome, the very first line; But
that you may know that this brave Novatus did even before that affect to be a
Bishop, (a great Crime in him) that he might conceal that petulant Ambition, he
for a better cover to his Arrogance, had got some Confessors into his Society,
etc. and goes on calling him all to naught; but then (says he) he came with
two Reprobates of his own Heresy into a little, the very least, Shire of Italy:
and by their means seduced three most simple high-shoon Bishops, wheedling them
that they must with all speed go to Rome, and there meeting with other Bishops,
all Matters should be reconciled. And when he had got thither these three silly
Fellows, as I said, that were not aware of his cunning, he had prepared a
company of Rogues, like himself, that treated them in a private Room very
freely; and having thwack'd their bellies and heads full with meat and drink,
compelled the poor drunken Bishops, by an imaginary and vain Imposition of
Hands, to make Novatus also a Bishop. Might not one of the same Order now
better have concealed these things, had they been true? but such was the
discretion. Then he tells, that one of the three returned soon after, repenting
it seems next morning, and so he received him again into the Church, unto the
Laick Communion. But for the other two, he had sent Successors into their
places. And yet after all this ado, and the whetting of Constantine, contrary
to his own Nature, and his own Declarations against the Novatians, I cannot
find their Heresy to have been other, than that that were the Puritans of those
times, and a sort of Non-conformists, that could have subscribed to the Six and
thirty Articles, but differed only in those of Discipline: and upon some
Enormities therein separated, and (which will always be sufficient to qualify
an Heretic) they instituted Bishops of their own in most places. And yet
afterward, in the time of the best Homoousian Emperors, a sober and strictly
Religious People did so constantly adhere to them, that the Bishops of the
Church too found meet to give them fair quarter; for as much as they differed
not in the Fundamentals, and therefore were of use to them against Heretics
that were more dangerous and diametrically opposite to the Religion. Nay
insomuch, that even the Bishop of Constantinople, yea of Rome, notwithstanding
that most tender Point and Interest of Episcopacy, suffered the Novatian
Bishops to walk cheek by joul with them in their own Diocese; until that, as
Socr. l. 7. c. 11. the Roman Episcopacy having, as it were, passed the boands
of Priesthood, slipped into a Secular Principality, and thenceforward the Roman
Bishops would not suffer their Meetings with Security; but, though they
commended them for their consent in the same Faith with them, yet took away all
their Estates. But at Constantinople they continued to fare better, the Bishops
of that Church embracing the Novatians, and giving them free liberty to keep
their Conventicles in their Churches. What, and to have their Bishops too,
Altar against Altar? A Condescension, which as our Nonconformists seem not to
desire or think of, so the Wisdom of these time; would, I suppose, judge to be
very unreasonable, but rather that it were sit to take the other course; and
that whatsoever Advantage the Religion might probably receive from their
Doctrine and Party, it is better to suppress them, and make havoc both of their
Estates and Persons. But however, the Heretics in Constantine's time had the
less reason to complain of ill Measure, seeing it was that the Bishops meted by
among themselves. I pass over that Controversy betwixt Cecilianus the Bishop of
Carthage, and his Adherents, with another set of Bishops there in Africa; upon
which, Constantine ordered ten of each Party to appear before Miltiades the
Bishop of Rome, and others, to have it decided. Yet after they had given
Sentence, Constantine found it necessary to have a Council for a review of the
Business, as in his Letter to Crestus the Bishop of Syracuse, Eusebius. l. 10. c.
6. Whereas several have formerly separated from the Catholic Heresy, (for that
word was not yet so ill natured, but that it might sometimes be used in its
proper and good sense); and then relates his Commission to the Bishop of Rome,
and others; But forasmuch as some having been careless of their own Salvation,
and forgetting the reverence due to that most holy Heresy, (again) will not yet
lay down their enmity, nor admit the Sentence that has bin given, obstinately
affirming, that they were but a few that pronounced the Sentence, and that they
did it very precipitately, before they had duly enquired of the Matter; and
from thence it has happened, that both they who ought to have kept a brotherly
and unanimous agreement together, do abominably and flagitionsly dissent from
one another; and such whose Minds are alienated from the most holy Religion, do
make a mockery boih of it and them. Therefore I, etc. have commanded very many
Bishops, out of innumerable places, to meet at Arles, that what ought to have
been quieted upon the former Sentence pronounced, may now at least be
determind, etc. and you to be one of them; and therefore I have ordered the
Prefect of Sicily to furnish you with one of the public Stage-Coaches, and so
many Servants, etc.

Such was the use then of Stage-Coaches, Posthorses, and Councils, to the
great disappointment and grievance of the many, both Men and Horses, and
Leather being Hackney, Hackney, jaded, and worn out upon the Errand of some
contentions and obstinate Bishop. So went the Affairs hitherto, and thus well
disposed and prepared were the Bishops to receive the Holy Ghost a second time,
at the great and first general Council of Nice, which is so much celebrated.

The occasions of calling it were two. The first a most important Question, in
which the Wit and Piety of their Predecessors, and now theirs successively had
been much exercised and taken up: that was upon what day they ought to keep
Easter; which tho it were no Point of Faith that it should be kept at all, yet
the very Calendary of it, was controverted with the same zeal, and made as
heavy ado in the Church, as if both Parties had been Heretics. And it is
reckoned by the Church Historians, as one of the chief felicities of
Constantine's Empire, to have quieted in that Council this main Controversy.
The second cause of the assembling them here, was indeed grown, as the Bishops
had ordered it, a Matter of the greatest weight and consequence to the
Christian Religion; one Arrius having, as is related* to the disturbance of the
Church, started a most pernicious Opinion in the Point of the Trinity.
Therefore from all parts of the Empire, they met together at the City of Nice,
250 Bishops, and better, says Eusebius a goodly company; 318 say others; and
the Animadverter too, with that pithy Remark, Page 23. Equal almost to the
number of Servants bred up in the House of Abraham. The Emperor had
accommodated them every where with the public Posts, or laid Horses all along
for the convenience of their Journey thither; and all the time they were there,
supplied them abundantly with all sorts of Provision at his own charges. And
when they were all first assembled in Council, in the great Hall of the
Imperial Palace, he came in, having put on his best Clothes, to make his Guests
welcome; and saluted them with that profound Humility, as if they all had been
Emperors, nor would sit down in his Throne; no, it was a very little and low
Stool* till they had all beckoned and made signs to him to sit down. No wonder
if the first Council of Nice run in their Heads ever after, and the ambitious
Clergy, like those who have been long a-thirst, took so much of Constantine's
Kindness, that they are scarce come to themselves again, after so many Ages.
The first thing was that he acquainted them with the Causes of his summoning
them thither, and in a grave and most Christian Discourse, exhorted them to
keep the Peace, or to a good Agreement, as there was reason. For (says Russin.
1. 1. c. 2.) the Bishops being met here from almost all parts, and as they use
to do, bringing their Quarrels about several matters along with them, every one
of them was at the Emperor, offering him Petitions, laying out one another
Faults, (for all the good advice he had given them) and were more intent upon
these things, than upon the business they were sent for. But he, considering
that by these Scoldings and Bickerings, the main Affair was frustrated,
appointed a set-day by which all the Bishops should bring him in whatsoever
complaint they had against one another. And they being all brought, he made
them that high Asiatick Complement; God has made you Priests, and has given
you power to judge me, and therefore it is in you to judge me righteously; but
you cannot be judged by any Men. It is God only can judge you, and therefore
reserve all your quarrels to his Tribunal. For you are as Gods to me, and it is
not convenient that a Man should judge of Gods, but he only of whom it is
written, God standing in the Congregation of the Gods, and discerns in the
midst of them. And therefore setting these things aside, apply your Minds,
without any contention, to the concernments of God's Religion. And so, without
opening or reading one Petition, commanded them altogether to be burnt there in
his presence. An Action of great Charity and excellent Wisdom, had but some of
the words been spared. For doubtless, tho they that would have complained of
their burden, grumbled a little; yet those that were accusable were all very
well satisfied: and those expressions, You can judge me right eously, and, you
cannot be judged by any Man; and, God only can judge you. You are Gods to me,
etc. were so extremely sweet to most of the Bishops Palates, that they believed
it, and could never think of them afterward, but their Teeth watered; and they
ruminated so long on them, that Constantine's Successors came too late to
repent it. But now the Bishops having mist of their great end of quarelling one
with another, betake themselves, tho somewhat aukwardly, to Business. And it is
necessary to mine, that as shortly as possible for the understanding of it, I
give a cursory account of Alexander and Arrius, with some few others that were
the most interessed in that general and first great Revolution of
Ecclesiastical Affairs, since the days of the Apostles. This Alexander was the
Bishop of Alexandria, and appears to have been a pious old Man, but not equally
prudent, nor in Divine things of the most capable, nor in conducting the
Affairs of the Church very dextrous, but he was the Bishop. This Character that
I have given of him, I am the more confirmed in from some passages that follow,
and all of them pertinent to the matter before me. They were used, Sozem. l. 2.
c. 16. at Alexandria, to keep yearly a solemn Festival to the memory of Peter,
one of their former Bishops, upon the same day that he suffered Martyrdom,
which Alexander having celebrated at the Church, with public Devotion, was
sitting after at home, expecting some Guests to dine with him, Sozom. 1. 2. c.
16. As he was alone, and looking toward the Seaside, he saw a pretty way off,
the Boys upon the Beach at an odd Recreation, imitating it seems the Rites of
the Church, and Office of the Bishops; and was much delighted with the sight,
as long as it appeared an innocent and harmless representation: But when he
observed them at last how they acted, the very administriation of the Sacred
Mysteries, he was much troubled; and sending for some of the chief of his
Clergy, caused the Boys to be taken and brought before him. He asked them
particularly what kind of Sport they had been at, and what the Words, and what
the Actions were that they had used in it. After their fear had hindered them a
while from answering, and now they were afraid of being silent, they confessed
that a Lad of their Play-fellows, one Athanasius, had Baptized some of them
that were not yet initiated to those Sacred Mysteries: Whereupon Alexander
inquired the more accurately what the Bishop of the Game had said, and what he
did to the Boys he had baptized; what they also had answered or learned from
him. At last, when Alexander perceived by them, that this Pawn Bishop had made
all his Removes right, and that the whole Ecclesiastical Order and Rites had
been duly observed in their Interlude, he by the advice of his Priests about
him, approved of that Mock-baptism, and determined that the Boys, being once in
the simpliciey of their minds dipped in the Divine Grace, ought not to be
Rebaptized, but he perfected it with the remaining Mysteries, which it is only
lawful for Priests to administer. And then he delivered Athanasius and the rest
of the Boys that had acted the parts of Presbyters and Deacons, to their
Parents; calling God to witness, that they should be Educated in the Ministry
of the Church, that they might pass their lives in that Calling which they had
chosen by imitation. But as for Athanasius, in a short while after, Alexander
took him to live with him, and be his Secretary, having caused him to be
carefully Educated in the Schools of the best Grammarians and Rhetoricians; and
he grew, in the opinion of all that spoke with him, a discreet and eloquent
person, and will give occasion to be more than once mentioned again in this
Discourse; I have translated this, in a manner, word for word from the Author.
This good-natured old Bishop Alexander, that was so far from Anathemising, that
he did not so much as whip the Boys for the Profanation of the Sacrament
against the Discipline of the Church, but without more doing, left them, for
ought I see, at liberty, to regenerate as many more Lads upon the next
Holy Day, as they thought convenient: He Socr. l. 1. c. 3. being a Man that
lived an easy and gentle life, had one day called his Priests, and the rest of
his Clergy together, and fell on Philosophizing divinely among them, but
something more subtily and curiously (though I dare say he meant no harm) than
was usual, concerning the Holy Trinity. Among the rest, one Arrius, a Priest
too of Alexandria, was there present, a Man who is described to have been a
good Disputant; and others add, (the Capital Accusations of those times) that
he had a mind to have been a Bishop, and bore a great pique at Alexander, for
having been preferred before him to the Sea of Alexandria; but more are silent
of any such matter; and Sozom. l. 1. c. 14. says, he was in great esteem with
his Bishop. But Arrius, Socr. l. 1. c. 3. hearing his discourse about the Holy
Trinity, and the Unity in the Trinity, conceived that, as the Bishop stated it,
he had reason to suspect he was introducing afresh into the Church, the Heresy
of Sabellius the African, who Fatebatur unum esse Deum, and ita in unam
essentiam Trinitatem adducebat, ut assereret nullam esse vere subjectam
proprietatem personis, sed nomina mutari pro eo atque usus poscant, ut nuncde
illo ut patre, nunc ut filio, nunc ut spiritu sancto disseratur: And thereupon,
it seems, Arrius argued warmly for that opinion which was directly contrary to
the African, driving the Bishop from one to a second, from a second to a third
seeming absurdity, which I studiously avoid the relation of; that in all these
things I may not give occasion for Men's understandings to work by their
memories, and propagate the same errors by the same means they were first
occasioned. But hereby Arrius was himself blamed as the maintainer of those
absurdities, which he affixed to the Bishops opinion, as is usual in the heat
and wrangle of Disputation. Whereas Truth, for the most part, lies in the
middle, but Men ordinarily seek for it in the extremities. Nor can I wonder that
those ages were so fertile in what they called Heresies, when being given to
meddling with the mysteries of Religion, further than humane apprehension, or
divine revelation did or could lead them, some of the Bishops were so ignorant
and gross, but others so speculative, acute, and resining in their conceptions,
that there being moreover a good fat Bishopric to boot in the case, it is
rather admirable to me how all the Clergy from one end to another, could escape
from being, or being accounted Heretics. Alexander hereupon, Soz. l. 1. c. 14.
instead of stilling by more prudent Methods this new Controversy, took
doubtless with a very good intention, a course that has seldom been
successful: makes himself judge of that wherein he had first been the Party, and
calling to him some oothers of his Clergy, would needs sit in public, to have
a solemn set Disputation about the whole Matter. And while Arrius was at it
Tooth and Nail against his Opposers, and the Arguments flew so thick, that they
darkened the Air, and no Man could yet judge which side should have the Victory;
the good Bishop for his part sat hay now hay, neither could tell in his
Conscience of a long time, which had the better of it; but sometimes he leaned
on one side, and then on the other, and now encouraged and commended those of
one Party, and presently the contrary; but at last, by his own weight, he cast
the Scales against Arrius. And from thenceforward, he excommunicated Arrius for
obstinacy; who writing in behalf of himself and his Followers to the Bishop,
each one stating his own, and his Adversaries case, with the usual candor of
such Men in such Matters; the Bishops too all over began to divide upon it, and
after them their People. Insomuch, that Constantine, out of a true paternal
sense and care, found necessary to send a very prudent and eminent Person to
Alexandria, to try if he could accommodate the Matter, giving him a Letter to
Alexander and Arrius: How discreet, how Christian-like, I never read any thing
of that nature equal to it, it is too long for me here to insert; but I gladly
recommend my Reader to it, in the 2 Eus. de vito Constable. c. 67. where he begins,
I understand the Foundation of the Controversy to have been this, That thou
Alexander did inquire of the Priests concerning a Passage in the Scripture;
nay, did ask them concerning a frivolous quillet of a question, what was each
of their Opinions: And thou Arrius did inconsiderately babble what thou
neither at the beginning could conceive; and if thou had conceived so,
ought not to have vented, etc.

But the Clergy having got this once in the Wind, there was no beating them off
the Scent. Which induced Constantine to think the convening of this Council the
only Remedy to these Disorders. And a woeful ado he had with them, when they
were met, to manage and keep them in any tolerable decorum. It seemed like an
Ecclesiastical Cockpit, and a Man might have laid Wagers either way, the two
Parties contending in good earnest, either for the Truth or the Victory; but
the more unconcerned, like cunning Betters, sat judiciously hedging, and so
ordered their Matter, that which side soever prevailed, they would be sure to
be the Winners. They were indeed a most venerable Assembly, composed of some
Holy, some Grave, some Wise, and some of them Learned Persons: And Constantine
had so charitably burnt the Accusations they intended against one another,
which might otherwise have depopulated and dispirited the Council, that all of
them may be presumed in one or other respect, to have made a great Character.
But I observe Soz. l. 1. c. 16. that these great Bishops, although they only
had the decisive Voices, yet thought fit to bring along with them, certain Men
that were cunning at an Argument, to be auxiliary to them when it came to hard
and tough Disputation; besides, that they had their Priests and Deacons ready
at a dead lift, always to assist them: So that their Understandings seemed to be
sequestered, and for their daily Faith, they depended upon what their Chaplains
would allow them. And in that quality Athanasius there waited upon Alexander,
being his Deacon, (for as yet it seems Archbishops nor Archdeacons were
invented). And it is not improbable that Athanasius having so early personated
the Bishop, and seeing the declining Age of Alexander, would be careful that
Arrius should not step betwixt him and home upon Vacancy, but did his best
against him to bar up his way, as it shortly after happened; Athanasius
succeeding after the Council in the Sea of Alexandria. In the mean time you may
imagine Hypostasis, Persona, Substantia, Subsistentia, Essentia, Coessentialis,
Consubstantialis, Ante soecula Coaeternus, etc. were by so many Disputants
picked to the very Bones, and those too broken afterward, to come to the
Marrow of Divinity. And never had Constantine in his Life so hard a task, as to
bring them to any rational Results; Meekly and patiently (Eusebius. l. 3. c. 13.
de Vita Constable.) listening to every one, taking every Man's Opinion, and without
the Acrimony with which it was delivered, helping each Party where they
disagreed, reconciling them by degrees when they were in the fiercest
Contention, conferring with them apart courteously and mildly, telling them
what was his own Opinion of the Matter: Which tho some exceptious Persons may
alledg to have been against the nature of a free Council, yet truly, unless he
had taken that course, I cannot imagine how possibly he could ever have brought
them to any conclusion. And thus this first, Great, General Council of Nice,
with which the World had gone big so long, and which looked so big upon all
Christendom, at last was brought in Bed, and after a very hard Labor,
delivered of Homoousios.

They all subscribed to the new Creed, except some seventeen, who it seems had
rather to be Heretics than Bishops. For now the Anathema's were published, and
whoever held the contrary, was to be punished by Deprivation and Banishment,
all Arrian Books to be burned; and whoever should be discovered to conceal any
of Arrius his Writings, to die for it. But it fared very well with those who
were not such fools as to own his Opinion. All they were entertained by the
Emperor at a magnificent Feast, received from his hand rich Presents, and were
honorably dismissed, with Letters recommending their great Abilities and
performance to the Provinces, and enjoining the Nicene Creed to be henceforth
observed. With that stroke of the Pen, ( Socr. l. 1. c. 6.) For what three
hundred Bishops have agreed on, (a thing indeed extraordinary) ought not to be
otherwise conceived of, than as the Decree of God Almighty, especially seeing
the Holy Ghost did sit upon the Minds of such and so excellent Men, and opened
his Divine Will to them. So that they went, I trow, with ample satisfaction;
and, as they could not but take the Emperor for a very civil, generous, and
obliging Gentleman, so they thought the better of themselves from that day
forward. And how budg must they look when they return back to their Diocesses,
having every one of 'em bin a principal Limn of the Ecumenical, Apostolical,
Catholic, Orthodox Council! when the Catacheristical Title of the Church and
the Clergy were so appropriate to them by custom, that the Christian People had
relinquished or forgotten their Claim; when every Hare that crossed their way
homeward, was a Schismatic or an Heretic; and if their Horse stumbled with
one of them, he incurred an Anathema. Well it was that their Journeys lay so
many several ways, for they were grown so cumbersom and great, that the
Emperor's Highway was too narrow for any two of them, and there could have
been no passage without the removal of a Bishop. But soon after the Council was
over, Eusebius the Bishop of Nicomedia, and Theognis the Bishop of Nice, who
were already removed, both by Banishment, and two others put in their places,
were quickly restored upon their Petition; wherein they suggested the Cause of
their not Signing to have been only, because they thought they could not with a
safe Conscience subscribe the Anathema against Arrius, appearing to them both
by his Writings, his Discourses, and Sermons, that they had been Auditors of,
not to be guilty of those Errors. As for Arrius himself, the Emperor quickly
wrote to him. It is now a considerable time since I wrote to your Gravity to
come to my Tents, that you might enjoy my Countenance; so that I can scarce
wonder sufficiently why you have so long delayed it: therefore now take one of
the public Coaches, and make all speed to my Tents; that, having had
experience of my kindness and affection to you, you may return into your own
Country. God preserve you, most dear Sir. Arrius hereupon (with his Comerade
Euxoius) comes to Constantine's Army, and offers him a Petition, with a
Confession of Faith, that would have passed very well before the Nicene
Council, and now satisfied the Emperor, Socr. l. 1. c. 19, and 20. insomuch
that he writ to Athanasius, now Bishop of Alexandria, to receive him into the
Church: but Athanasius was of better mettle than so, and absolutely refused it.
Upon this Constantine writ him another threatening Letter: When you have
understood hereby my Pleasure, see that you afford free entrance into the
Church, to all that desire it: for if I shall understand that any who desires
to be admitted into the Church, should be either hindered or forbidden by you, I
will send some one of my Servants to remove you from your Degree, and place
another in your stead. Yet Athanasius stood it out still, tho other Churches
received him into Communion: and the Heretic Novatus could not have bin more
unrelenting to lapsed Christians, than he was to Arrius. But this, joined with
other Crimes, which were laid to Athanasius his Charge, at the Council of Tire,
(though I suppose indeed they were forged) made Athanasius glad to fly for it,
and remain the first time in Exile. Upon this whole Matter, it is my impartial
Opinion that Arrius, or whosoever else were guilty of teaching and publishing
those Errors whereof he was accused, deserved the utmost Severity which
consists with the Christian Religion. And so willing I have been to think well
of Athanasius, and ill of the other, that I have on purpose avoided the
reading, as I do the naming of a Book that I have heard, tells the story quite
otherwise, and have only made use of the current Historians of those Times, who
all of them tell it against the Arrians. Only I will confess, that as in
reading a particular History at adventure, a Man finds himself inclinable to
favor the weaker Party, especially if the Conqueror appear insolent; so have I
been affected in reading these Authors, which does but resemble the reasonable
pity that men ordinarily have too, for those, who, though for an erroneous
Conscience, suffer under a Christian Magistrate. And as soon as I come to
Constantius, I shall for that reason change my compassion, and be doubly
engaged on the Orthodox party. But as to the whole matter of the Council of
Nice, I must crave liberty to say, that from one end to the other, though the
best of the kind, it seems to me to have been a pitiful humane business,
attended with all the ill circumstances of other wordly affairs, conducted by a
spirit of ambition and contention, the first, and so the greatest ecumenical
blow that by Christians was given to Christianity. And it is not from any
sharpness of humor that I discourse thus freely of Things and Persons, much
less of Orders of men otherwise venerable, but that where ought is extolled
beyond reason, and to the prejudice of Religion, it is necessary to depreciate
it by true proportion. It is not their censure of Arrianism, or the declaring
of their Opinion in a controverted point to the best of their understanding,
(wherein to the smalness of mine, they appear to have light upon the Truth, had
they likewise upon the measure) that could have moved me to tell so long story,
or bring my self within the danger and aim of any captious Reader, speaking
thus with great liberty of mind, but little concern for any prejudice I may
receive, of things that are by some Men idolized. But it is their Imposition of
a new Article or Creed upon the Christian world, not being contained in express
words of Scripture, to be believed with Divine Faith, under Spiritual and Civil
Penalties, contrary to the Privileges of Religion, and their making a
Precedent followed and improved by all succeeding Ages for most cruel
Persecutions, that only could animate me. In digging thus for a new deduction,
they undermined the fabric of Christianity, to frame a particular Doctrine,
they departed from the general Rule of their Religion; and for their curiosity
about an Article concerning Christ, they violated our Savior's first
Institution of a Church, not subject to any Addition in matters of Faith, nor
liable to Compulsion, either in Belief or in Practice. Far be it from me in the
event, as it is from my Intention, to derogate from the just authority of any
of those Creeds or Confessions of Faith that are received by our Church upon
clear agreement with the Scripture: nor shall I therefore, unless some men's
impertinence and indiscretion hereafter oblige me, pretend to any further
knowledge of what in those particulars appear in the ancient Histories. But
certainly if any Creed had been Necessary, or at the least Necessary to have
been Imposed, our Savior himself would not have left his Church distitute in a
thing of that moment. Or however, after the Holy Ghost, upon his departure, was
descended upon the Apostles, and they the Elders and Brethren (for so it was
then) were assembled in a legitimate Council at Jerusalem, it would have seemed
good to the Holy Ghost and them to have saved the Council of Nice that labor,
or at least the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 2, and 4. who was caught up into
Paradise, and heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for any Man to
utter, having thereby a much better opportunity than Athanasius, to know the
Doctrine of the Trinity, would not have been wanting, through the abundance of
that revelation, to form a Creed for the Church, sufficient to have put that
business beyond controversy. Especially seeing Heresies were sprung up so
early, and he foresaw others, and therefore does prescribe the mothod how they
are to be dealt with, but no Creed that I read of.

Shall any sort of Men presume to interpret those words, which to him were
unspeakable, by a Gibbrish of their Imposing, and force every Man to Cant after
them, what it is not lawful for any Man to utter? Christ and his Apostles speak
articulately enough in the Scriptures, without any Creed, as much as we are or
ought to be capable of. And the Ministry of the Gospel is useful and most
necessary, if it were but to press us to the reading of them, to illustrate one
place by the authority of another, to inculcate those duties which are therein
required, quickening us both to Faith and Practice, and showing within what
bounds they are both circumscribed by our Savior's Doctrine. And it becomes
every Man to be able to give a reason and account of his Faith, and to be ready
to do it, without officiously gratifying those who demand it only to take
advantage: and the more Christians can agree in one confession of Faith, the
better. But that we should believe ever the more for a Creed, it cannot be
expected. In those days, when Creeds were most plenty and in fashion, and every
one had them at their fingers end, 'twas the Bible that brought in the
Reformation. It Is true, a Man would not stick to take two or three Creeds for a
need, rather than want a Living; and if a Man have not a good swallow, it is but
wrapping them up in a Liturgy, like a Wafer, and the whole dose will go down
currently; especially if he wink at the same time, and give his Assent and
Consent without ever looking on them. But without jesting, for the matter is
too serious: Every Man is bound to work out his own Salvation with fear and
trembling, and therefore to use all helps possible for his best satisfaction;
hearing, conferring, reading, praying for the assistance of God's Sprit: but
when he has done this, he is his own Expositor, his own both Minister and
People, Bishop and Diocese, his own Council; and his Conscience excusing or
condemning him, accordingly he escapes or incurs his own internal Anathema. So
that when it comes once to a Creed, made and imposed by other Men as a matter
of Divine Faith, the Case grows very delicate; while he cannot apprehend, tho
the Imposer may, that all therein is clearly contained in Scripture, and may
fear, being caught in the expressions, to oblige himself to a latitude or
restriction, further than comports with his own sense and judgment. A Christian
of honor, when it comes to this once, will weigh every word, every syllable;
nay fruther, if he consider that the great business of this Council of Nice was
but one single letter of the Alphabet, about the inserting or omitting of an
Iota. There must be either that exactness in the Form of such a Creed, as I
dare say, no Meu in the world ever were or ever will be able to modulate: or
else this scrupulous private judgment must be admitted, or otherwise all Creeds
become mere instruments of Equivocation or Persecution. And I must confess,
when I have sometimes considered with my self the dullness of the
Non-conformists, and the acuteness on the contrary of the Episcoparians, and
the conscientiousness of both; I have thought that our Church might safely wave
the difference with them about Ceremonies, and try it upon the Creeds, which
were both the more honorable way, and more suitable to the method of the
ancient Councils, and yet perhaps might do their business as effectually. For
one that is a Christian in good earnest, when a Creed is imposed, will sooner
eat fire, than tak it against his judgment. There have been Martyrs for Reason,
and it was manly in them: but how much more would Men be so for Reason
Religionated and Christianized! But it is an Inhumane and Unchristian thing of
those Faith-stretchers, whosoever they be, that either put Men's Persons, or
their Consciences upon the torture, or rack them to the length of their
Notions: whereas the Bereans are made Gentlemen, and Innobled by Patent in the
Acts, because they would not credit Paul himself, whose Writings now make so
great a part of the New Testament, until they had searched the Scripture daily,
whether those things were so, and therefore many of them believed. And
therefore, although where there are such Creeds, Christians may for Peace and
Conscience Sake acquiesce while there appears nothing in them flatly contrary
to the words of the Scripture; yet when they are obtruded upon a Man in
particular, he will look very well about him, and not take them upon any Humane
Authority. The greatest Pretense to Authority, is in a Council. But what then?
shall all Christians therefore take their Formularies of Divine Worship or
Belief upon trust, as writ in Tables of Stone, like the Commandments, delivered
from Heaven, and to be obeyed in the instant, not considered; because three
hundred and eighteen Bishops are met in Abraham's great Hall, of which most
must be Servants, and some Children; and they have resolved upon it in such a
manner? No, a good Christian will not, cannot atturn and indenture his
Conscience over, to be Represented by others. It is not as in Secular matters,
where the States of a Kingdom are deputed by their fellow Subjects to transact
for them, so in spiritual: or suppose it were, yet 'twere necessary, as in the
Polish constitution, that nothing should be obligatory as long as there is one
Dissenter, where no Temporal Interests, but every Man's Eternity and Salvation
are concerned. The Soul is too precious to be let out at interest upon any
humane security, that does or may fail; but it is only safe when under God's
custody, in its own Cabinet. But it was a General Council. A special General
indeed, if you consider the proportion of three hundred and eighteen to the
Body of the Christian Clergy, but much more to all Christian Mankind. But it
was a General Free Council of Bishops. I do not think it possible for any
Council to be free, that is composed out of Bishops, and where they only have
the Decisive Voices. Nor that a Free Council that takes away Christian Liberty.
But that, as it was founded upon Usurpation, so it terminated in Imposition.
But it is meant, that it was Free from all external Impulsion. I confess that
good Meat and Drink, and Lodging, and Money in a Man's purse, and Coaches, and
Servants, and Horses to attend them, did no violence to 'em, nor was there any
false Article in it. And discoursing now with one, and then another of 'em in
particular, and the Emperor telling them this is my opinion, I understand it
thus; and afterward declaring his mind frequently to them in public; no force
neither. Ay, but there was a shrewd way of persuasion in it. And I would be
glad to know when ever, and which free general Council it was that could
properly be called so; but was indeed a mere Imperial or Ecclesiastical
Machine, no free agent, but wound up, set on going, and let down by the
direction and hand of the Workman. A General Free Council is but a word of Art,
and can never happen but under a Fifth Monarch, and that Monarch too, to return
from Heaven. The Animadverter will not allow the second General Council of Nice
to have bin Free, because it was overaw'd by an Empress, and was guilty of a
great fault (which no Council at liberty he says could have committed) the
Decree for worshipping of Images. At this rate a Christian may scuffle however
for one point among them, and choose which Council he likes best. But in good
earnest, I do not see but that Constantine might as well at this first Council
of Nice, have negotiated the Image Worship, as to pay that superstitious
adoration to the Bishops, and that Prostration to their Creeds was an Idolatry
more pernicious in the consequence, to the Christian Faith, then that under
which they so lately had suffered Persecution. Nor can a Council be said to
have been at liberty, which lay under so great and many obligations. But the
Holy Ghost was present, where there were three hundred and eighteen Bishops,
and directed them, or three hundred. Then, if I had been of their Council, they
should have sat at it all their lives, lest they should never see him again
after they were once risen. But it concerned them to settle their Quorum at
last by his Dictates; otherwise no Bishop could have been absent, or gone forth
upon any accusation, but he let him out again: and it behooved to be very
punctual in the Adjournments. It Is a ridiculous conception, and as gross as to
make him of the same substance with the Council. Nor needs there any stronger
argument of his absence, then their pretense to be actuated by him, and in
doing such work. The Holy Spirit! If so many of them, when they got together,
acted like rational men, 'twas enough in all reason, and as much as could be
expected.

But this was one affectation, among many others, which the Bishops took up so
early, of the style, privileges, powers, and some actions and gestures
peculiar and inherent ot the Apostles, which they misplaced to their own behoof
and usage; nay, and challenged other things as Apostolical, that were directly
contrary to the Doctrine and Practice of the Apostles. For so, because the Holy
Spirit did in an extraordinary manner preside among the Holy Apostles at that
Legitimate Council of Jerusalem, Acts 15. they, although under an ordinary
Administration, would not go less whatever came on it: nay, whereas the
Apostles, in the drawing up of their Decree, dictated to them by the Holy
Spirit, said therefore no more but thus: The Apostles, Elders, and Brethren,
send greeting unto the Brethren of, etc. Forasmuch as, etc. It seemed good to
the Holy Ghost and us, to lay upon you no greater burden than these necessary
things; that ye abstain from, etc. from which if ye keep your selves, you shall
do well. Fare ye well.

This Council denounces every Invention of its own, (far from the Apostolical
modesty, and the style of the Holy Spirit) under no less than an Anathema. Such
was their arrogating to their inferior degrees, the style of Clergy, till
custom has so much prevailed, that we are at a loss how to speak properly,
either of the Name or Nature of their Function. Whereas the Clergy, in the true
and Apostolical sense, were only those whom they superciliously always call the
Laity: The word Clerus being never but once used in the New Testament, and in
that signification, and in a very unlucky place too, 1 Pet. 5. 3. where he
admonishes the Priesthood, that they should not lord it, or domineer over the
Christian People, Clerum Domini, or the Lord's Inheritance. But having usurped
the Title, I confess they did right to assume the Power. But to speak of the
Priesthood in that style which they most affect, if we consider the nature too
of their Function, what were the Clergy then, but Laymen disguised, dressed up
perhaps in another habit? Did not St. Paul himself, being a Tentmaker, rather
than be idle or burthensom to his People, work of his trade, even during his
Apostleship, to get his living? But did not these, that they might neglect
their holy Vocation, seek to compass secular Imploiments, and Lay-Offices? Were
not very many of them, whether one respect their Vices or Ignorance, as well
qualified as any other to be Laymen? Was it not usual, as often as they merited
it, to restore them, as in the case even of the three Bishops to the
Lay-communion? And whether, if they were so peculiar from others, did the
Imposition of the Bishop's hands, or the lifting up the hands of the Laity,
confer more to that distinction? And Constantine, notwithstanding his
Complement at the burning of the Bishops Papers, thought he might make them,
and unmake them, with the same Power as he did his other Lay-Officers. But if
the inferior Degrees were the Clergy, the Bishops would be the Church: although
that word in the Scripture-sense, is proper only to a Congregation of the
Faithful. And being by that title the only Men in Ecclesiastical Councils, then
when they were once assembled, they were the Catholic Church, and, having the
Holy Spirit at their Devotion, whatsoever Creed they light upon, that was the
Catholic Faith, without the believing of which, no Man can be saved. By which
means there rose thenceforward so constant Persecutions till this day, that,
had not the little invisible Catholic Church, and a People that always
searched and believed the Scriptures, made a stand by their Testimonies and
Sufferings, the Creeds had destroyed the Faith, and the Church had ruined the
Religion. For this General Council of Nice, and all others of the same
constitution, did, and can serve to no other end or effect, than a particular
order of Men by their usurping a trust upon Christianity, to make their own
Price and Market of it, and deliver it up as often as they see their own
advantage.

For scarce was Constantine's Head cold, but his Son Constantius, succeeding
his Brothers, being influenced by the Bishops of the Arrian Party, turned the
wrong side of Christianity outward, inverted the Poles of Heaven, and Faith (if
I may say so) with its Heels in the Air, was forced to stand upon its Head, and
play Gambols, for the Divertisement and Pleasure of the Homoieusians. Arrianism
was the Divinity then in Mode, and he was an ignorant and ill Courtier, or
Churchman, that could not dress, and would not make a new Suit for his
Conscience in the Fashion. And now the Orthodox Bishops (it being given to
those Men to be obstinate for Power, but flexible in Faith) began to wind about
insensibly, as the Heliotrope Flower that keeps its ground, but wrests its neck
in turning after the warm Sun, from daybreak to evening. They could look now
upon the Synod of Nice with more indifference, and all that pudder that had
been made there betwixt Homoousius and Homoiousius, etc. began to appear to
them as a Difference only arising from the Inadequation of Languages: Till by
degrees they were drawn over, and rather than lose their Bishoprics, would
join, and at last be the head-most in the Persecution of their own former
Party. But the Deacons, to be sure, that steered the Elephants, were
thorow-paced; Men to be reckoned and relied upon in this or any other occasion,
and would prick on, to render themselves capable and Episcopable, upon the
first Vacancy. For now the Arrians in grain, scorning to come behind the
Clownish Homoousians, in an Ecclesiastical Civility, were resolved to give them
their full of Persecution. And it seemed a piece of Wit rather than Malice, to
pay them in their own Coin, and to Burlesque them in earnest, by the repetition
and heightning of the same Severities upon them, that they had practiced upon
others. Had you the Homoousians a Creed at Nice? we will have another Creed for
you at Ariminum, and at Selucia. Would you not be content with so many several
Projects of Faith consonant to Scripture, unless you might thrust the new word
Homoousios down our Throats, and then tear it up again, to make us confess it?
Tell us the word, ('it was Homoiousios) we are now upon the Guard, or else we
shall run you through. Would you Anathemize, Banish, Imprison, Execute us, and
burn our Books? You shall taste of this Christian Fare, and as you relish it,
you shall have more on it provided. And thus it went, Arrianism being
Triumphant, but the few sincere and stomachful Bishops, adhering constantly,
and with a true Christian Magnanimity, especially Athanasius, through all
Sufferings, unto their former Confessions, expiated so in some measure, what
they had committed in the Nicene Council.

Sozomen, 1. 4. c. 25. first tells us a Story of Eudoxius, who succeeded
Macedonius, in the Bishopric of Constantinople; that in the Cathedral of
Sancta Sophia being mounted in his Episcopal Throne, the first time that they
Assembled for its Dedication, in the very beginning of his Sermon to the People
(those things were already come in Fashion) told them: Patrem impium esse,
Filium autem pium; at which then they began to bustle; Pray be quiet, says he;
I say, Patrem impium esse, quia Colit neminem, Filium vero Pium quia colit
Patrem; at which they then laughed as heartily, as before they were Angry. But
this I only note to this purpose, that there were some of the greatest Bishops
among the Homoiousians, as well as the Homoousians, that could not reproach one
another Simplicity, and that it was not impossible for the Many to be wiser
and more Orthodox than the Few, in Divine matters. That which I cite him for as
most Material, is, the Remark upon the Imposition then of Contrary Creeds:
Which verily, says he, was plainly the beginning of most great Calamities,
forasmuch as hereupon there followed a Disturbance, not unlike those which we
before recited over the whole Empire; and likewise a Persecution equal almost
to that of the Heathen Emperors, seized upon all of all Churches. For although
it seemed to some more gentle, for what concerns the torture of the body, yet
to prudent persons it appeared more bitter and severe, by reason of the
Dishonor and Ignominy. For both they who stirred up, and those that were
afflicted with this Persecution, were of the Christian Church; and the
grievance therefore was the greater and more ugly, in that the same things
which are done among Enemies, were Executed between those of the same Tribe and
Profession: But the holy Law forbids us to carry our selves in that manner,
even to those that are without, and Aliens. And all this mischief sprung from
making of Creeds, with which the Bishops, as it were at Tilting, aimed to hit
one another in the Eye, and throw the opposite Party out of the Saddle. But if
it chanced that the weaker side were ready to yield, (for what sort of Men was
there that could better manage, or had their Consciences more at command at
that time than the Clergy?) Then the Arrians would use a yet longer, thicker,
and sharper Lance for the purpose, (for there were never Vacancies sufficient)
that they might be sure to run them down, over, and through, and do their
Business. The Creed of Ariminum was now too short for the Design; but, says
the Historian, they affixed further Articles like Labels to it, pretending to
have made it better, and so sent it through the Empire with Constantius his
Proclamation, that whoever would not subscribe it, should be Banished. Nay,
they would not admit their own beloved Similis Substantia; but to do the work
thoroughly, the Arrians renounced their own Creed for Malice, and made it an
Article; Filium Patri tam substantia, quam Voluntate, Dissimilem esse. But this
is a small matter with any of them, provided thereby they may do Service to the
Church, that is their Party. So that one (seriously speaking) that were really
Orthodox, could not then defend the Truth or himself, but by turning of Arrian,
if he would impugn the new ones; such was the Subtilty. What shall I say more?
As the Arts of Glass Coaches and Perriwigs illustrate this Age, so by their
Trade of Creed-making, then first invented, we may esteem the Wisdom of
Constantine's, and Constantius his Empire. And in a short space, as is usual
among Tradesmen, where it appears gainful, they were so many that set up of the
same Profession, that they could scarce live by one another. Socr. 1. 2. c. 32.
Therefore uses these words. But now that I have tandem aliquando, run through
this Labyrinth of so many Creeds, I will gather up their number: And so reckons
Nine Creeds more, besides that of Nice, before the death of Constantine, (a
blessed Number.) And I believe I could for a need, make them up a dozen, if Men
have a mind to buy them so. And hence it was that Hilary, then Bishop of
Poictiers, represents that state of the Church pleasantly, yet sadly, Since the
Nicene Synod, says he, we do nothing but write Creeds. That while we fight
about words, whilst we raise Questions about Novelties, while we Quarrel about
things doubtful, and about Authors, while we contend in Parties, while there is
difficulty in Consent, while we Anathematize one another, there is none now
almost that is Christ's. What a Change there is in the last years Creed? The
first Decree commands that Homoousios should not be mentioned. The next does
again Decree and Publish Homoousios. The third does by Indulgence excuse the
Word Ousia, as used by the Fathers in their simplicity. The fourth does not
Excuse, but Condemn it. It is come to that at last, that nothing among us, or
those before us, can remain sacred or inviolable. We Decree every year of the
Lord, a new Creed concerning God; Nay, every Change of the Moon our Faith is
altered. We repent of our Decrees, we defend those that repent of them; we
Anathematize those that we defended; and while we either condemn other Men's
Opinions in our own, or our own Opinions in those of other Men, and bite at one
another, we are now all of us torn in pieces. This Bishop sure was the Author
of the Naked Truth, and 'twas he that implicitly condemned the whole Catholic
Church, both East and West, for being too presumptuous in her Definitions.

It is not strange to me, that Julian, being but a Reader in the Christian
Church, should turn Pagan: Especially when I consider that he suceeded Emperor
after Constantius. For it seems rather unavoidable that a man of great Wit, as
he was, and not having the Grace of God to direct it, and show him the Beauty
of Religion, through the Deformity of its Governors and Teachers; but that he
must conceive a Loathing and Aversion for it, Nor could he think that he did
them any Injustice, when he observed that, beside all their Unchristian
Immorality too, they practiced thus against the Institutive Law of their
Galilean, the Persecution among themselves for Religion. And well might he add
to his other Severities, that sharpness of his Wit, both Exposing and
Animadverting upon them, at another rate than any of the Modern Practitioners
with all their study and Inclination, can ever arrive at. For nothing is more
punishable, Contemptible, and truly Ridiculous, than a Christian that walks
contrary to his Profession: And by how much any man stands with more advantage
in the Church for Eminency, but disobeys the Laws of Christ by that privilege,
he is thereby, and deserves to be the more Exposed. But Julian, the last
Heathen Emperor, by whose cruelty it seemed that God would sensibly admonish
once again the Christian Clergy, and show them by their own smart, and an
Heathen-hand, the nature and odiousness of Persecution, soon died, as is usual
for Men of that Employment, not without a remarkable stroke of Gods Judgment.

Yet they, as they were only sorry that they had lost so much time, upon his
death strove as eagerly to redeem it, and forthwith fell in very naturally into
their former Animosities. For Iovianus being chosen Emperor in Persia, and
returning homeward, Socr. 1. 3. c. 20. The Bishops of each party, in hopes that
theirs should be the Imperial Creed, strait took Horse, and rode away with
Switch and Spur, as if it had been for the Plate, to meet him; and he that had
best Heels, made himself cock-sure of winning the Religion. The Macedonians,
who dividing from the Arrians, had set up for a new Heresy concerning the Holy
Ghost, (and they were a Squadron of Bishops) Petitioned him that those who
held, Filium Patri dissimilem, might be turned out, and themselves put in their
places: Which was very honestly done, and above-board. The Acacians, that were
the refined Arrians, but, as the Author says, Had a notable faculty of
addressing themselves to the Inclination of whatsoever Emperor, and having good
Inteligence that he balanced rather to the Consubstantials, presented him with
a very fair Insinuating subscription, of a considerable number of Bishops to
the Council of Nice. But in the next Emperors time they will be found to yield
little Reverence to their own Subscription. For in matter of a Creed, a Note of
their Hand, without expressing the Penalty, could not it seems bind one of
their Order. But all that Iovianus said to the Macedonians, was; I hate
Contention, but I lovingly embrace and reverence those who are inclined to
Peace and Concord. To the Acacians, who had wisely given these the precedence
of Application, to try the truth of their Intelligence, he said no more (
having resolved by sweetness and persuasions to quiet all their Controversies)
but, That he would not molest any man whatsoever Creed he followed, but those
above others he would Cherish and Honor, who should show themselves most
forward in bringing the Church to a good Agreement. He likewise called back all
those Bishops who had been Banished by Constantius, and Julian, restoring them
to their Sees. And he writ a Letter in particular to Athanasius, who upon
Iulian's death had entered again upon that of Alexandria, to bid him be of good
courage. And these things coming to the Ears of all others, did wonderfully
assuage the Fierceness of those who were Inflamed with Faction and Contention:
So that, the Court having declared it self of this Mind, the Church was in a
short time in all outward appearance peaceably disposed, the Emperor by this
means having wholly repressed all their violence. Verily, concludes the
Historian, the Roman Empire had been prosperous and happy, and both the State
and the Church (he puts them too in that Order) under so good a Prince, must
have exceedingly flourished, had not an Immature death taken him away from
managing the Government. For after seven Months, being seized with a mortal
Obstruction, he departed this Life. Did not this Historian, trow you, deserve
to be handled, and is it not, now the Mischief is done, to undo the Charm,
oecome a Duty, to Expose both him and Iovianus? By their ill chosen Principles,
what would have become of the Prime and most necessary Article of Faith? Might
not the old Dormant Heresies, all of them safely have Revived?

But that Mortal Obstruction of the Bishops, was not by his death (nor is it by
their own to be) removed. They were glad he was so soon got out of their way,
and God would yet further manifest: their intractable Spirit, which not the
Persecution of the Heathen Emperor Julian, nor the Gentleness of Iovianus the
Christian, could allay or mitigate by their Afflictions or Prosperity. The
Divine Nemesis executed Justice upon them, by one another hand: And so heinous
a Crime as for a Christian, a Bishop to Persecute, stood yet in need, as the
only equal and exemplary Punishment, of being revenged with a Persecution by
Christians, by Bishops. And whosoever shall seriously consider all along the
Successions of the Emperors, can never have taken that satisfaction in the most
judicious Representations of the Scene, which he may in this worthy Speculation
of the great Order and admirable conduct of wise Providence; through the whole
contexture of these Exterior seeming Accidents, relating to the Ecclesiasticals
of Christianity.

For to Iovianus succeeded Valentinian, who in a short time took his Brother
Valens to be his Companion in the Empire. These two Brothers did as the
Historian observes, Socr. l. 14. c. 1. (alike, and equally take care at the
beginning, for the advantage and government of the State) but very much
disagreed, though both Christians, in matters of Religion: Valetinianus the
Elder being an Orthodox, but Valens an Arrian, and they used a different Method
toward the Christians. For Valentinian (who chose the western part of the
Empire, and left the East to his Brother) as he embraced those of his own
Creed, so yet he did not in the least molest the Arrians: But Valens not only
labored to increase the number of the Arrians, but afflicted those of the
contrary Opinion with grievous Punishments. And both of 'm, especially Valens,
had Bishops for their purpose. The particulars of that heavy Persecution under
Valens, any one may further satisfy himself of in the Writers of those times:
And yet it is observable, that within a little space while he pursued the
Orthodox Bishops, he gave Liberty to the Novatians, (who were of the same
Creed, but separated from them, as I have said, upon Discipline, etc.) and
caused their Churches, which for a while were shut up, to be opened again at
Constantinople. To be short, Valens (who outlived his Brother, that died of a
natural Death) himself in a Battle against the Goths, could not escape neither
the fate of a Christian Persecutor. For the Goths having made application to
him, he, says Socrates, not well foreseeing the Consequence, admitted them to
Inhabit in certain places of Thracia, pleasing himself that he should by that
means always have an Army ready at hand against whatsoever Enemies; and that
those Foreign Guards would strike them with a greater Terror, more by far than
the Militia of his Subjects. And so slighting the ancient Veterane Militia,
which used to consist of Bodies of Men, raised proportionably in every
Province, and were stout Fellows that would Fight Manfully; instead of them he
levied Money, rating the Country at so much for every Soldier. But these new
Inmates of the Emperors soon grew Troublesome, as is customary, and not only
infested the Natives in Thracia, but Plundered even the Suburbs of
Constantinople, there being no Armed Force to repress them: Hereupon the whole
People of the City cried out at a public Spectacle, where Valens was present
neglecting this matter, Give us Arms and we will manage this War our selves.
This extremely provoked him, so that he forthwith made an Expedition against
the Goths: But Threatened the Citizens if he returned in safety, to be Revenged
on them both for those Contumelies, and for what under the Tyrant Procopius,
they had committed against the Empire; and that he would Raze to the Ground,
and Plow up the City. Yet before his departure out of the fear of the Foraign
Enemy, he totally ceased from persecuting the Orthodox in Constantinople. But
he was killed in the Fight, or Flying into a Village that the Goths had set on
fire, he was burnt to ashes, to the great grief of his Bishops; who, had he
been Victorious, might have revived the Persecution. Such was the end of his
Impetuous Reign and rash Counsels, both as to his Government of State, in
matters of Peace and War, and his Manage of the Church by Persecution.

His death brings me to the Succession of Theodosius the Great, than whom no
Christian Emperor did more make it his business to Nurse up the Church, and to
Lull the Bishops, to keep the House in quiet. But neither was it in his power
to still their Bawling, and Scratching one another, as far as their Nails
(which were yet more tender, but afterward grew like Tallons) would give them
leave. I shall not further vex the History, or the Reader, in recounting the
particulars; taking no delight neither my self in so uncomfortable Relations,
or to reflect beyond what is necessary upon the Wolfishness of those which then
seemed, and ought to have been the Christian Pastors, but went on scattering
their Flocks, if not devouring; and the Shepherds smiting one another. In his
Reign, the second General Council was called, that of Constantinople, and the
Creed was there made, which took its name from the place: The rest of their
business, any one that is further curious, may observe in the Writers. But I
shall close this with a short touch concerning Gregory Nazianzen, then living,
than whom also the Christian Church had not in those times (and I question
whether in any succeeding) a Bishop that was more a Christian, more a Getleman,
better appointed in all sorts of Learning requisite, seasoned under Iulian's
Persecution, and exemplary to the highest pitch of true Religion, and Practical
Piety. The eminence of these Virtues, and in special of his Humility (the
lowliest, but the highest of all Christian Qualifications) raised him under
Theodosius, from the Parish-like Bishopric of Nazianzum, to that of
Constantinople, where he filled his place in that Council. But having taken
notice in what manner things were carried in that, as they had been in former
Councils, and that some of the Bishops muttered at his promotion; he of his own
mind resigned that great Bishopric, whis was never of his desire or seeking;
and, though so highly seated in the Emperors Reverence and Favor, so acceptable
to the People, and generally to the Clergy, whose unequal Abilities could not
pretend or justify an envy against him; retired back for more content, to a
Solitary Life, to his little Nazianzum. And from thence he writes that Letter
to his Friend Procopius, wherein. p. 418. upon his most recollected and serious
reflection on what had fallen within his observation, he uses these remarkable
words: I have resolved with my self (if I may tell you the Naked Truth,) never
more to come into any Assembly of Bishops: for I never saw a good and happy end
of any Council, but which rather increased than remedied the mischiefs. For
their obstinate Contentions and Ambition are unexpressible.

It would require too great a Volume to deduce, from the death of Theodosius,
the particulars that happened in the succeeding Reigns about this matter. But
the Reader may reckon that it was as stated a Quarrel betwixt the Homoousians,
and the Homoiousians, as that between the Houses of York and Lancaster: And
there arose now an Emperor of one Line, and then again of the other. But among
all the Bishops, there was not one Morton, whose industrious Brain could or
would (for some Men always reap by Division) make up the fatal Breach betwixt
the two Creeds. By this means every Creed was grown up to a Test, and under
that pretense, the dextrous Bishops step by step hooked within their Verge, all
the business and Power that could be catched in those Turbulences, where they
mudled the Water, and Fished after. By this means they stalked on first to a
Spiritual kind of Dominion, and from that incroached upon and into the Civil
Jurisdiction. A Bishop now grew terrible, and (whereas a simple Layman might
have frighted the Devil with the first words of the Apostles Creed, and I defy
thee Satan) one Creed could not protect him from a Bishop, and it required a
much longer, and a double and treble Confession, unless himself would be
delivered over to Satan by an Anathema. But this was only an Ecclesiastical
sentence at first, with which they marked out such as sinned against them, and
then whoop'd and hallowed on the Civil Magistrate, to hunt them down for their
Spiritual Pleasure. They crept at first by Court Insinuations and Flattery into
the Princes favor, till those generous Creatures suffered themselves to be
backed and ridden by them, who would take as much of a free Horse as possible:
But in Persecution the Clergy as yet, wisely interposed the Magistrate betwixt
themselves and the People, not caring so their end were attained, how odious
they rendered him: And you may observe that for the most part hitherto, they
stood crouching and shot either over the Emperors back, or under his belly. But
in process of time they became bolder and open-fac'd, and Persecuted before the
Sun at Midday. Bishops grew worse, but Bishoprics every day better and
better. There was now no Eusebius left to refuse the Bishopcick of Antiochia,
whom therefore Constantine told, That he deserved the Bishopric of the whole
World for that Modesty. They were not such Fools as Ammonius Parates, I warrant
you, in the time of Theodosius. He, Socr. l. 6. c. 30. being seized upon by
some that would needs make him a Bishop, when he could not persuade them to the
contrary, cut off one of his Ears, telling them that now should he himself
desire to be a Bishop, he was by the Law of Priesthood incapable: but when they
observed that those things only obliged the Jewish Priesthood, and that the
Church of Christ did not consider whether a Priest were sound or perfect in
limb of Body, but only that he were entire in his manners; they returned to
seize on him again: But when he saw them coming, he swore with a solemn Oath,
that if, to Consecrate him a Bishop, they laid violent hands upon him, he would
cut out his tongue also; whereupon they fearing he would do it, desisted. What
should have been the matter, that a man so Learned and Holy, should have such
an aversion to be promoted in his own Order; that, rather than yield to be a
Compelled or Compelling Bishop, he would inflict upon himself as severe a
Martyrdom, as any Persecutor could have done for him? Sure he saw something
more in the very Constitution, than some do at present. But this indeed was an
Example too Rigid, and neither fit to have been done, nor to be imitated, as
there was no danger. For far from this they followed the precedent rather of
Damasus and Vrsinus, which last, Socr. l. 4 c. 24. in Valentinian' s time,
persuaded certain obscure and abject Bishops (for there were it seems of all
sorts and sizes) to create him Bishop in a Corner, and then (so early) he and
Damasus, who was much the better Man, waged War for the Bishopric of Rome, to
the great scandal of the Pagan Writers, who made Remarks for this and other
things upon their Christianity, and to the Bloodshed and Death of a multitude
of the Christian People. But this last I mentioned, only as a weak and
imperfect Essay in that time, of what it came to in the several Ages after,
which I am now speaking of, when the Bishops were given, gave themselves over
to all manner of Vice, Luxury, Pride, Ignorance, Superstition, Covetousness,
and Monopolizing of all secular Employments and Authority. Nothing could escape
them: They meddled, troubled themselves and others, with many things, every
thing, forgetting that one, only needful. Insomuch that I could not avoid
wondering often, that among so many Churches that with Paganick Rites they
dedicated to Saint Mary, I have met with none to Saint Martha. But above all,
Imposition and Cruelty became inherent to them, and the power of Persecution
was grown so good and desirable a thing, that they thought the Magistrate
scarce worthy to be trusted with it longer, and a mere Novice at it, and either
wrested it out of his hands, or gently eased him of that and his other burdens
of Government. The sufferings of the Laity were become the Royalties of the
Clergy; and, being very careful Christians, the Bishops that not a word of our
Savior might fall to the ground, because he had foretold how men should be
persecuted for his Names sake, they undertook to see it done effectually in
their own Provinces, and out of pure zeal of doing him the more Service of this
kind, enlarged studiously their Diocesses beyond all proportion. Like
Nostrodamus his Son, that to fulfill his Father's prediction of a City in
France, that should be burned; with his own hands set it on fire. All the
Calamities of the Christian world in those Ages, may be derived from them,
while they warmed themselves at the Flame; and like Lords of Misrule, kept a
perpetual Christmas. What in the Bishops name is the matter? How it came about
that Christianity, which approved it self under all Persecutions to the Heathen
Emperors, and merited their favor so far, till at last it regularly succeeded
to the Monarchy, should under those of their own Profession be more distressed?
Were there some Christians then too, that feared still lest Men should be
Christians, and for whom it was necessary, not for the Gospel reason that there
should be Heresies. Let us collect a little now also in the conclusion what at
first was not particularized, how the reason of State and Measure of Government
stood under the Roman Emperors, in aspect to them. I omit Tiberius, mentioned
in the beginning of this Essay. Trajane, after having persecuted them, and
having used Pliny the second in his Province to that purpose, upon his relation
that they lived in conformity to all Law, but that which forbad their Worship,
and in all other things were blameless, and good men, straightly by his Edict
commanded that none of them should be farther enquired after. Hadrian, in his
Edict to Minutius Fundanus, Proconsul of Asia, commands him that, If any accuse
the Christians, and can prove it, that they commit any thing against the State,
that then he punish them according to the crime: but if any man accuse them,
merely for calumny and vexation, as Christians, then in faith let him suffer
for it, and take you care that he feel the smart of it. Antoninus Pius writ his
Edict very remarkable, if there were place to recite it, to the States of Asia
Assembled at Ephesus, wherein he takes notice of his Fathers command, that
unless the Christians were found to act any thing against the Roman Empire,
they should not be molested, and then commands, that if any man thereafter
shall continue to trouble them, tanquam tales, as Christians, for their
Worship, in that case, he that is the Informer, should be exposed to
punishment, but the Accused should be free and discharged. I could not but
observe that among other things in this Edict, where he is speaking. It is
desirable to them that they may appear, being accused, more willing to die for
their God than to live: He adds, It would not be amiss to admonish you
concerning the Earthquakes which have, and do now happen, that when you are
afflicted at them, you would compare our affairs with theirs. They are thereby
so much the more encouraged to a confidence and reliance upon God, but you all
the while go on in your ignorance, and neglect both other gods, and the
Religion toward the immortal, and banish and persecute them unto death. Which
words of that Emperors, fall in so naturally with what, it seems, was a common
observation about Earthquakes, that I cannot but to that purpose take further
notice, how also Gregory Nazianzen, in Or. 2. contra Gentiles, tells, besides
the breakings in of the Sea in several places, and many fires that happened, of
the Earthquakes in particular, which he reckons as Symptoms of Iulian's
Persecution. And to this I may add, Socr. l. 3. c. 10, who in the Reign of
Valens, that notorious Christian Persecutor, says, at the same time there was
an Earthquake in Bithynia, which turned the City of Nice (that same in which
the general Council was held under Constantine) and a little after there was
another. But although these so happened, the minds of Valens, and of Eudoxius,
the Bishop of the Arrians, were not all stirred up unto Piety, and a right
opinion of Religion. For nevertheless they ceased not, made no end of
persecuting those who in their Creed dissented from them. Those Earthquakes
seemed to be certain indications of tumults in the Church. All which put
together, could not but make me reflect upon the late Earthquakes, great by
how much more unusual here in England, through so many Counties two years since,
at the same time when the Clergy, some of them, were so busy in their Cabals,
to promote this (I would give it a modester name than) Persecution, which is
now on foot against the Dissenters; at so unseasonable a time, and upon no
occasion administered by them, that those who comprehend the reasons, yet cannot
but wonder at the wisdom of it. Yet I am not neither one of the most credulous
nickers or appliers of natural events to human transanctions: But neither am I
so secure as the Learned Dr. Spencer, nor can walk along the world without
having some eye to the conjunctures of God's admirable Providence. Neither was
Marcus Aurelius (that I may return to my matter) negligent as to the
particular. But he, observing, as Antonnius had the Earthquakes, that in an
expedition against the Germans and Sarmatians, his Army being in despair almost
for want of water, the Melitine (afterward from the event called the
Thundering) Legion, which consisted of Christians, kneeled down in the very heat
of their thirst and fight, praying for rain; which posture the Enemies wondering
at, immediately there brake out such a thundering and lightning, as together
with the Christian valor, routed the adverse Army, but so much rain fell
therewith, as refreshed Aurelius his Forces, that were at the last gasp for
thirst: He thence forward commanded by his Letters, That upon pain of death
none should inform against the Christians, as Tertullian in his Apology for the
Christians witnesses. But who would have believed that even Commodus, so great
a Tyrant otherwise, should have been so favorable as to make a Law, That the
Informers against Christians should be punished with death? Yet he did, and the
Informer against Apollonius was by it executed. Much less could a man have
thought that, that prodigy of cruelty Maximine, and who exercised it so
severely upon the Christians, should, as he did, being struck with God's hand,
publish when it was too late Edict after Edict, in great favor of the
Christians. But above all, nothing could have been less expected than that,
after those Heathen Emperors, the first Christian Constantine should have been
seduced by the Bishops, to be after them, the first occasion of Persecution, so
contrary to his own excellent inclination: 'Twas then that he spoke his own
mind, when he said, Eus. de vita Constable. 69. You ought to retain within the
bounds of your private thoughts of those things, which you cunningly and subtly
seek out concerning most frivolous questions. And then much plainer, c. 67.
where he says so wisely. You are not ignorant that the Philosophers all of
them do agree in the profession of the same Discipline, but do oftentimes
differ in some part of the Opinions that they dogmatize in: But yet, although
they do dissent about the Discipline that each several Sect observes, they
nevertheless reconcile themselves again for the sake of that common Profession
to which they have concurred. But again compulsion in Religious. matters so
much every where, that it is needless to insert one passage. And he being of
this disposition, and universally famous for his care and countenance of the
Christian Religion. Eusebius says these words, While the People of God did
glory and heighten it self in the doing of good things, and all fear from
without was taken away, and the Church was fortified as I may say, on all sides
by a peaceable and illustrious tranquillity, then Envy lying in wait against our
prosperity, craftily crept in, and began first to dance in the midst of the
company of Bishops; so goes on, telling the History of Alexander and Arrius. I
have been before large enough in that relation, wherein appeared that, contrary
to that great Emperors pious intention, whereas Envy began to dance among the
Bishops first, the good Constantine brought them the Fiddles. But it appeared
likewise how soon he was weary of the Ball, and toward his latter end, as
Princes often do upon too late experience, would have repressed all, and
returned to his natural temper. Of the other Christian Emperors I likewise
discoursed, omitting, that I might insert it in this place, how the great
Heathen Philosopher Themistius, in his Consolar Oration, celebrated Iovianus
for having given that toleration in Christien Religion, and thereby defeated
the flattering Bishops, which sort of men, says he wittily, do not worship
God, but the Imperial Purple.

It was the same Themistius, that only out of an upright natural apprehension
of things, made that excellent Oration afterward to Valens, which is in Print,
exhorting him to cease Persecution; wherein he chances upon, and improves the
same notion with Constantines, and tells him, That he should not wonder at the
Dissents in Cstristian Religion, which were very small if compared with the
multitude and crowd of Opinions among the Gentile Philosophers; for there were
at least three hundred differences, and a very great dissension among them
there was about their resolutions, unto which each several Sect was as it were,
necessarily bound up and obliged: And that God seemed to intend more to
illustrate his own glory by that diverse and unequal variety of Opinions, to
the end every each one might therefore so much the more reverence his Divine
Majesty, because it is not possible for any one accurately to know him. And
this had a good effect upon Valens, for the mitigating in some measure his
severities against his fellow Christians. So that after having cast about in
this Summery again, (whereby it plainly appears, that according to natural
right, and the apprehension of all sober Heathen Governors, Christianity as a
Religion, was wholly exempt from the Magistrates jurisdiction or Laws, farther
than any particular person among them immorally transgressed, as others, the
common rules of human society) I cannot but return to the Question with which I
begun. What was the matter? How came it about that Christianity, which approved
it self under all Persecutions to the Heathen Emperors, and merited their
favor so far, till at last it regularly succeeded to the Monarchy, should
under those of their own profession, be more distressed? But the Answer is now
much shorter and certainer, and I will adventure boldly to say, the true and
single cause then was the Bishops. And they were the cause against reason. For
what power had the Emperors by growing Christians, more than those had before
them? None. What obligation were Christians Subject under to the Magistrate
more than before? None. But the Magistrates Christian Authority was what the
Apostle described it while Heathen; not to be a terror to good works, but to
evil. What new Power had the Bishops acquired, whereby they turned every
Pontificate into a Caiaphat? None neither, 2 Cor. 10. 8. Had they been
Apostles. The Lord had but given them Authority for edification, not for
destruction. They, of all other, ought to have Preached to the Magistrate the
terrible denunciations in Scripture against usurping upon, and persecuting of
Christians. They, of all others, ought to have laid before them the horrible
Examples of God's ordinary Justice against those that exercised Persecution.
But, provided they could be the Swearers of the Prince, to do all due
Allegiance to the Church, and to preserve the Rights and Liberties of the
Church, however they came by them, they would give them as much scope as he
pleased, in matter of Christianity, and would be the first to solicit him to
break the Laws of Christ, and ply him with hot places of Scripture, in order to
all manner of Oppression and Persecution in Civils and Spirituals. So that the
whole business how this unchristian Tyranny came, and could entitle it self
among Christians, against the Christian privileges, was only the case in Zech.
13. 6. 7. And one shall say unto him, What are these wounds in thy hands? Then
he shall answer, those with which I was wounded in the house of my Friends.
Because they were all Christians, they thought forsooth they might make the
bolder with them, make bolder with Christ, and wound him again in the hands and
feet of his members. Because they were Friends, they might use them more
coarsly, and abuse them against all common civility, in their own house, which
is a Protection to Strangers. And all this to the end that a Bishop might sit
with the Prince in Iunto, to consult wisely how to preserve him from those
people that never meant him any harm, and to secure him from the Sedition and
Rebellion of men that seek, nor think any thing more, but to follow their own
Religious Christian Worship. It was indeed as ridiculous a thing to the Pagans
to see that work, as it was afterward in England to Strangers, where Papists
and Protestants went both to wrack at the same instant, in the same Market; and
when Erasmus said wittily, Quid agitur in Anglia? (Consulitur, he might have
added, though not so elegantly, Comburitur) de Religione. Because they knew
that Christian Worship was free by Christ's Institution, they procured the
Magistrate to make Laws in it concerning things necessary: As the Heathen
Persecutor Julian introduced some bordering Pagan Ceremonies, and arguing with
themselves in the same manner, as he did, Soz. l. 5. c. 16. That if Christians
should obey those Laws, they should be able to bring them about to something
further, which they had designed. But if they would not, then they might
proceed against them without any hope of pardon, as breakers of the Laws of the
Empire, and represent them as turbulent and dangerous to the Government.
Indeed, whatsoever the Animadverter says of the Act of Seditious Conventicles
here in England, as if it were Anvill'd after another of the Roman Senate; the
Christians of those Ages had all the finest tools of Persecution out of
Iulian's Shop, and studied him then as curiously as some do now Machiavel.
These Bishops it was, who, because the Rule of Christ was incomparable with the
Power that they assumed, and the Vices they practiced, had no way to render
themselves necessary or tolerable to Princes, but by making true Piety
difficult, by Innovating Laws to revenge themselves upon it, and by turning
Makebates between Prince and People, instilling dangers of which themselves
were the Authors. Hence it is, that having awakened this Jealousy once in the
Magistrate, against Religion, they made both the Secular and the Ecclesiastical
Government so uneasy to him, that most Princes began to look upon their
Subjects as their Enemies, and to imagine a reason of State different from the
Interest of their People; and therefore to weaken themselves by seeking
unnecessary and grievous supports to their Authority. Whereas if men could have
refrained this cunning, and from thence forcible governing of Christianity,
leaving it to its own simplicity and due liberty, but causing them in all other
things to keep the Kings and Christ's peace among themselves, and toward
others, all the ill that could have come of it, would have been, that such kind
of Bishops should have proved less implemental; but the good that must have
thence risen to the Christian Magistrate and the Church, then and ever after,
would have been inexpressible.

But this discourse having run in a manner wholly upon the Imposition of
Creeds, may seem not to concern (and I desire that it may not reflect upon) our
Clergy, nor the Controversies which have so unhappily vexed our Church ever
since the reign of Edward the Sixth unto this day. Only, if there might be
something picked out of it toward the Compromising of those differences (which
I have not from any performance of mine, the vanity to imagine) it may have use
as an Argument, a Majori ad Minus, their disputes having risen only from that
of Creeds, ours from the Imposition only of Ceremonies, which are of much
inferior consideration. Faith being necessary, but Ceremonies Dispensable.
Unless our Church should lay the same weight upon them, as one did. This is the
time of her settlement, that there is a Church at the end of every Mile, that
the Sovereign Powers spread their wings to cover and protect her, that Kings
and Queens are her Nursing Fathers and Nursing Mothers, that she has stately
Cathedrals; there be so many arguments now to make Ceremonies Necessary, which
may all be answered with one Question that they use to ask Children: Where are
you proud? But I should rather hope from the Wisdom and Christianity of the
present guides of our Church, that they will (after an age and more, after so
long a time almost as those Primitive Bishops I have spoke of, yet suffered the
Novatian Bishops in every Diocese) have mercy on the Nation that has been upon
so slender a matter as the Ceremonies and Liturgy so long, so miserably
harassed. That they will have mercy upon the King, whom they know against his
natural inclination, his Royal Intention, his many Declarations, they have
induced to more Severities then all the reigns since the Conquest will contain,
if summed up together; who may, as Constantine among his Private Devotions put
up one Collect to the Bishops, Eusebius. de vita Constable. 7. 70. Date igitur mihi
Dies tranquillos and Noctes curarum expertes. And it runs thus almost
altogether verbatim in that Historian* Grant, most merciful Bishop and Priest
that I may have calm days, and nights free from care and molestation, that I
may live a peaceable life in all Godliness and Holiness for the future by your
good agreement; which unless you vouchsafe me, I shall wast away my Reign in
perpetual sadness and vexation. For as long as the People of God stands divided
by so unjust and pernicious a Contention, how can it be that I can have any
ease in my own Spirit. Open therefore by your good agreement the way to me,
that I may continue my Expedition toward the East; and grant that I may see
both you and all the rest of my People, having laid aside your animosities,
rejoicing together, that we may all with one voice give lund and glory, for the
common and good agreement and liberty, to God Almighty for ever, Amen. But if
neither the People nor his Majesty enter into their consideration. I hope it is
no unreasonable request that they will be merciful unto themselves, and have
some reverence at least for the Naked Truth of History, which either in their
own times will meet with them, or in the next Age overtake them: That they, who
are some of them so old, that as Confessors, they were the Scars of the former
troubles, others of them so young, that they are free from all the Motives of
Revenge and hatred, should yet join in reviving the former persecutions upon
the same pretenses; yea, even themselves in a turbulent, military, and
uncanonical manner execute Laws of their own procuring, and depute their
inferior Clergy to be the Informers. I should rather hope to see not only that
Controversy so scandalous abolished, but that also upon so good an occasion as
the Author of the Naked Truth has administered them, they will inspect their
Clergy, and cause many things to be corrected, which are far more ruinous in
the Consequence than the dispensing with a Surplice. I shall mention some too
confusedly, as they occur to my Pen, at present, reserving much more for better
leisure. Methinks it might be of great edification, that those of them, who
have ample possessions, should be in a good sense, Multas inter opes inopes.
That they would inspect the Canons of the ancient Councils, where are many
excellent ones for the regulation of the Clergy. I saw one, looking but among
those of the same Council of Nice, against any Bishops removing from a less
Bishopric to a greater, nor that any of the Inferior Clergy should leave a
less living for a fatter. That is methinks the most Natural use of General, or
any Councils to make Canons, as it were Bylaws for the ordering of their own
Society; but they ought not to take out, much less forge any Patent to invade
and prejudice the Community. It were good that the greater Churchmen relied
more upon themselves, and their own direction, not building too much upon
Stripling Chaplains, that men may not suppose the Master (as one that has a
good Horse, or a fleet Hound) attributes to himself the virtues of his
Creature. That they inspect the Morals of the Clergy; the Moral Heretics do
the Church more harm than all the Non-conformists can do, or can wish it. That
before they admit men to subscribe the Thirty-nine Articles for a Benefice,
they try whether they know the meaning. That they would much recommend to them
the reading of the Bible. It Is a very good Book, and if a man read it
carefully, will make him much wiser. That they would advise them to keep the
Sabbath: If there were no Morality in the day, yet there is a great deal of
Prudence in the observing it. That they would instruct those that come for Holy
Orders and Livings, that it is a terrible Vocation they enter upon; but that
has indeed the greatest reward. That to gain a Soul is beyond all the acquists
of Traffic, and to Convert an Atheist, more glorious than all the Conquests of
the Soldier. That betaking themselves to this Spiritual Warfare, they ought to
disintangle from the World. That they do not ride for a Benefice, as if it were
for a Fortune, or a Mistress; but there is more in it. That they take the
Ministry up not as a Trade. That they make them understand as well as they can,
what is the grace of God. That they do not come into the Pulpit too full of
Fustian or Logic; a good life is a Clergy-mans best Syllogism, and the
quaintest Oratory; and till they outlive 'm, they will never get the better of
the Fanatics, nor be able to Preach with Demonstration of Spirit, or with any
effect or Authority. That they be lowly minded, and no Railers.

But these things require a greater Time, and to enumerate all that is amiss,
might perhaps be as endless as to number the People; nor are they within the
ordinary sphere of my Capacity.

But to the Judicious and Serious Reader, to whom I wish any thing I have said,
may have given no unwelcome entertainment; I shall only so far justify my
self, that I thought it no less concerned me to vindicate the Laity from the
Impositions that the Few would force upon them, than others to defend those
Impositions on behalf of the Clergy. But the Reverend Mr. Hooker in his
Ecclesiastical Polity, says, The time will come when three words, uttered with
Charity and Meekness, shall receive a far more blessed reward, than three
thousand Volumes written with disdainful sharpness of Wit. And I shall conclude.

I trust in the Almighty, that with us, Contentions are now at the highest
float, and that the day will come (for what cause is there of Despair) when the
Passions of former enmity being allaid, men shall with ten times redoubled
tokens of unfainedly reconciled Love, show themselves each to other the same
which Joseph, and the Brethren of Joseph were at the time of their Enterview in
Egypt. And upon this condition, let my Book also (yea, my self if it were
needful) be burnt by the hand of those Enemies to the Peace and Tranquillity of
the Religion of ^ngland.

FINIS.

