A TESTIMONY OF Tender ADVICE and COUNSEL, Given forth from our Half-years
Meeting in Dublin, the 9th of the 9th Month, 1688. To all that are convinced of
the blessed Truth, and make profession thereof, throughout this Nation of
Ireland.
DEAR FRIENDS,
WE having under our consideration at this time in the weighty sense of the
holy Truth, and in a true Zeal for the Prosperity thereof, to write unto you,
as we have done feveral times formerly, which is for the good of all, to advise
all that profess Truth to walk as becomes the Gospel in their Conversation,
Apparel, Deportment and Dealings, etc. which Advice has not been so fully
observed (by some) as we desired: Therefore in a sense of the weighty Care that
is upon our Spirits at this time (which did livingly seize upon all the
sensible Members of this Meeting,) we do again admonish all young People, and
Others, to beware of a false Liberty in these things, and also to keep to the
pure Language of Truth, and be careful not to degenerate into the confused
Language of the World, or the vain and changeable Fashions thereof. Moreover,
we advise, That none that profess Truth, who have Hair enough upon their Heads,
may suffer a vain unsettled mind to have place in them, so as to cut off their
own Hair, and get great ruffling Periwigs, which Truth will not allow of; but
if any have a real necessity, for want of Hair, or otherwise, then let them get
such Borders, or Periwigs, as are plain and decent, which best suits our
Principles.

These things in particular we lay before you; and our earnest desire is, that
in these, and all things else in general, you may mind the Conduct of the Word
of Grace in your own hearts, that you may be taught thereby (as the true
Christians were of old) to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live
soberly, righteously and godlily in this present world, that so you may adorn
the Gospel by your holy Lives, and godly Conversation, always coupled with the
Fear of the Lord.

And our tender Advise is to all the Elders of every Meeting, to take care that
the several Testimonies given forth heretofore be frequently read, and the
wholesome Advise, thereinput in practice. And whereas we have ground for a godly
jealousy, that there are some Parents of Children, who ought to be concerned
as Elders in the Church, that do indulge their Children in such disorders as
aforementioned, whereby the hands of the Faithful are weakened, and the
Testimonies of Truth slighted; which thing being very hurtful in the Church, we
desire, that where such Parents are, they may be Admonished by those that are
faithful, that the Testimony of Truth may be kept up in its ancient purity and
plainness, and our Youth and others reclaimed, and preserved out of such things
as are a Reproach to Truth, a Grief to honest-hearted Friends, and destructive
to their own Souls.

And further, Dear Friends, we do entreat and beseech you all to be mindful of
your Duty in Meeting together, according to the good Advice often given unto
us, and our ancient Practice, for which we were zealous in the beginning, after
the Lord had made his Truth known unto us, and in which we have so frequently
met with the Lord, and through his presence been so richly rewarded; the
neglect whereof, we fear, does bring a coldness, deadness and barrenness upon
the Souls of some, and may cause them to loss that Warmth, Freshness and Zeal
that was upon their Hearts in former times. And truly, Friends, we have a sense
upon our Spirits that too many are subject to a carelessness of performing this
duty of meeting together, especially upon the Weekdays, their minds being too
much taken up with earthly concerns, whereby they come not only to be hurt, by
giving way to the Spirit of the World, with its choking Cares; but also they
are prevented from receiving the renewing virtue of the Power of God, which by
the Faithful is enjoyed; so they, through their negligence, come to wither and
decay in their inward Man, and lose strength for want of the same: Wherefore we
desire that a godly care may be upon every mind, and that all Friends may be
stirred up to a diligent performance of this blessed incumbent Duty, that the
benefit thereof every one may reap to their comfort.

Lastly, We tenderly exhort all Friends, that the foregoing Testimony be
frequently read in your Meetings and Families, and the wholesome Advice therein
contained put in practice, which will tend to the Honor of God, and the
Well-being of your Immortal Souls; which is the earnest desire of your Friends
and Brethren.

Signed by Order of our Half-years Meeting, by Alexander Seaton.


