A Seasonable Remonstrance, by Way of Address from the Church of England, to
both Houses of Parliament.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
HIS Majesty so soon as he came to the Throne, (his undoubted Right) having
been pleased Graciously to declare in Council, that he would maintain Me, as by
Law Established; I cannot without injury to that Justness, which he has always
shown, give consent to the least doubt of his nonPerformance of it: Yet
notwithstanding, seeing You my Children are here Assembled to Consult, and
Advise about the most important matters of the Kingdom, both as to Church and
State: I hope it may be Lawful for Me to Represent to Your Wise Considerations,
my Serious Thoughts concerning the Means to establish my Tranquillity; not
doubting but Your ready Compliance, joined with His Majesty's Royal Care and
Vigilance, will sufficiently secure the quiet of the State.

You cannot be ignorant, how I for many years have been on all sides attaqu'd
by those, who Dissent from my Government; These may all of them be reduced to
two Heads, the Papist and the Phanatick. My Fate, in this Encounter, resembles
that of a City Besieged by Two different Armies, who Fight both against It, and
one another; where, if the Garrison make a Sally to Beat off the one, the other
presently takes the Advantage to make an Attaque: In like manner, whilst I set
my self Vigorously to oppose the Papist, the Puritan seeks to undermine me; And
whilst I am busied to oppose the Puritan, the Papist gains ground upon me. If I
tell the Church of Rome, I did not forsake her, but her Errors, which I
Reformed; My Rebellious Subjects tell me the same, and that they must make a
Thorough Reformation: And let me bring what Arguments I please to justify my
Dissent, the same are always produced against me. If on the other hand, I plead
against the Puritan Dissenter, that he ought to stand to Church Authority,
where he is not Infallibly certain it commands a Sin: The Papist catches at
that Advantage, and tells me, I destroy my own Grounds of Reformation, unless I
will stand to that Infalibility, which I condemn in them.

Matters standing thus betwixt Me and my Adversaries: Why would it not be a
part of Prudence in Me (as I doubt not but you would esteem it in a Governor
of that City I now mentioned) to make Peace with one of my Enemies, to the end
I may with more ease resist the On-sets of the other?

I am the casilier induced to believe this is Feazible, because my Enemies are
at Mortal Feudes with one another, and would much rather join with Me, than
against Me. And the Advantages such an Union would bring to Me and to this
Nation, are so great, I need not offer them to your view, who cannot but at the
very first see them.

Our next Consideration then must be, to find out whether of these two Parties
may be the sooner brought to sign Articles of Peace, and will give the best
Security for the exact performance of them.

In order to which, if I cast back my Eye upon the Transactions, which have
happened in this Kingdom these last 50 years, I cannot but see my Puritan
Dissenting Adversaries to be a company of People most of them without Honor,
Honesty, Conscience or Religion, though they pretend them all for a Cloak to
their wicked Villainies. I cannot but look upon them as Implacable Enemies, and
Tyranical too, where they once get the upper hand: And if I admit Them into my
bosom, I may assure my self of being Stung by them, when they are once Warm,
and have recovered Strength.

I need not mention all their Hellish practices against Me, and all my Loyal
Children from 1641, till 1648. nor by what Wiles they Undermined Me first, and
then never ceased till they had Ruined the Three Kingdoms, and Imbrew'd their
Hands in the Blood of the Best of Kings. It is apparent enough what favor I
may expect from them, if once again (which God forbid) the Power should come
into their Hands, by the Liberty they gave Me in the Usurpers wicked Reign.
Have they not endeavored to play the same Game over again, and to disturb mine
and the Kingdoms quiet, by Plots hatched in their own Brains? What was the
Popish Plot, but a blind for a Presbyterian one, as is now apparent to the
whole World? Were not all their Endeavors to Trepan us into an Ambush they had
laid for us, whilst we, with blind heat were in pursuit of that Chymerical
Fantasme? Had they not at that time all their Machines at work to involve us
all in a common ruin? Did they not under pretense of securing the King from a
Popish Gun and Silver Bullet, endeavor to let fly at him with a True
Protestant Blunderbush? What did they aim at under pretense of Securing the
True Protestant Religion, but to strike at Episcopacy; So that no person, who
was either Dutiful to Me, or Loyal to the King, but was presently branded with
the name of Papist, Popishly Affected, Papist in Masquerade, French Pensioner,
or the like. Had they not made a Catalogue of all Persons any ways Eminent in
the Kingdom, and ranked them under two Heads, of Worthy Men, and Men Worthy;
meaning by the latter, Men worthy to be made away, because True to their King
and County? And (which is still worse) when they were caught in their
Villainies, did they Repent, or did they not rather testify their Approbation
of the intended Conspiracy with their dying words? What Security can we
therefore hope for; If we strike up a Peace with those, whose Practices show
their Principles?

On the other hand, if with an Impartial Eye we look upon the Papists, we shall
find them Honest, Just, Conscientious, and Loyal in their Practices, though we
are frequently told their Principles are otherwise: But this, they say, is not
the only Calumny falsely laid upon them. And, for my own part, as I cannot think
a man's Principles Good, when I see his Practice otherwise: So am I easily
induced to believe, that a Good Practice comes from Good Principles. Did they
not in King Charles the First's time hazard their Lives and Fortunes for the
Support of Monarchy? Were not We as Loyal Subjects, so equal Sufferers in those
sad Times? Did they not stand my Friends in that my Distress, till they were
utterly dis-enabled themselves? Did not We and They live together in great
Union like common Sufferers when Banished by the Usurped Power? And since His
late Majesty's Happy Restoration, how Peaceably did we live together, till
those Wicked Emissaries of Hell had filled our minds with strange Jealousies,
and Fears of I know not what Plots and Conspiracies? With what Patience did the
Romanists then suffer all those Injuries, Contumelies, loss of Goods, yea and
of Life it self, whilst those Perjured Villains breathed out Bloody Oaths
against them? They went like Sheep to the Slaughter, and scarce bleated, unless
it were to declare their Innocence, to Pray for the King and Kingdom, and to
forwarn Us of our approaching Ruin: In which certainly they were our best
Friends, if we could have been Friends to our selves, and hark'ned to their
Advice, which we found too true, though it had like to have been too late.

Let us consider likewise how they behave themselves at present, now they enjoy
the greatest Advantages they have had this many years, and we shall find it to
be with unexpected moderation. We who were formerly almost frighted into Bedlam
for fear of a Popish Successor, find under JAMES the Just, our Liberties, our
Properties, our Rights, and our Religion secured, and may expect to see our
Kingdom become Glorious, and the old English Bravery once more flourish under
such a King.

We see ( My dearest Children) that our Fears were vain, and our Jealousies
without ground. This very stone, which was once rejected by the Architects, is
now become the chief stone in the Corner: We may truly see in It the Hand of
God, and look upon it with Admiration, and may expect (if our accustomed Fears
and Jealousies hinder not) the greatest Blessings we can wish for, an Union
betwixt those two Walls thus long separated, but now in a fair way to be linked
together by this Cornerstone, after which, how Glorious a Building may we hope
for upon such Foundations?

Shall we then (my Lords and Gentlemen) still wage a War against these our
Brethren, who would live Peaceably amongst us, and seek by all means to Endear
us? Shall we Exasperate two Enemies, when one alone gives us sufficent
employment? Shall we continue to put the rigor of the Laws equally in
Execution against these our Generous Adversaries, and those our Implacable
Enemies? Let it not be said we delight in Blood, or that our Cause is not to be
sustained but by Rigorous Penalties, as if we had neither Truth nor Justice on
our side. I cannot think those to be good Foundations, which must be cemented
with Blood. Neither can I think those who are reduced to my Embraces, or
retained in them by Rigor, will be Faithful to me in the Onset. Such are
rather Slaves than Children, Hypocrites, not Sons, who will forsake me upon any
occasion. Let Truth sustain me, not Rigor. Truth is of such a nature, it will
shine in the midst of Darkness: It cannot suffer Shipwreck in the greatest
Tempests: No Persecutions could ever hinder the growth of it: It Is like a
Diamond that casts its Luster in the dark, resists the File, the Hammer, and
the Fire, but yet may be softened with the Blood of Goats: The Gospel flourished
in the greatest Persecutions: Truth prevailed when the Professors suffered all
sorts of Torments: And their Blood which was shed, made the Church more
Fruitful: But should the Church once begin to propagate her Truth by Bloodshed,
that Blood would Tarnish all its Luster, and being bathed with it, it would
loose its Solidity, its Splendor and its Value all at once. Let Truth then be
my Solid Foundation, and let Us leave the Sanguinary and Penal Laws to those,
who are not built upon it.

If we cannot expect a perfect Peace and Union with Rome, yet we may hope for a
Truce, a Cessation of Arms, a Happy Correspondance, and Mutual Commerce.

Some Overtures of Peace have been frequently made from the Romanists, and I
may truly say, if it had not been for some Hotheaded Zealots, and other
ignorant Polemicks, our breaches had never been so wide, but on the contrary,
long since healed.

Our Zealots cry perpetually against the Idolatry of the Church of Rome, and
yet the Romanists cry as much against Idolatry as we. If they would paint a
Papist, they besmear him with the ugly color of Equivocations, Mental
Reservations, Dispensations to Lie, Forswear, and Massacre their Neighbors:
When on the contrary, the Roman Catholic recommends Simplicity and Godly
Sincerity, as truly Christian Virtues necessary to the conservation of Justice,
Truth, and Common Society: And tell us that all Pardons and Dispensations
granted, or pretended to be granted, in order to any such ends or Designs, have
no other Validity or Effect, then to add Sacrilege and Blasphemy to the
abovenamed Crimes.

And as for our common Controvertists, how often are we told by the Papists,
that they mistake their Tenants, mis-represent their Doctrines, fight against
Chymera's of their own Brains, and most commonly either spend whole Volumes in
refuting Errors, they condemn as well as we, or establishing Truths which they
affirm? How often have they told us we must separate their Articles of Faith,
from their Theological Questions, and take their Doctrines from their Councils,
not their Schools? And yet how little have our Polemicks profited by this
Admonition? How often have they urged us in former Times either to an Oral or
Pen Combat, upon condition freedom and security might be given them, and the
common Laws of Disputation observed; but still either the Interest of State, or
some other accident hindered it; Insomuch that in their public Writings they
have told us, we behave our selves like persons Diffident of our Cause, who
decline a Dispute on equal Terms, and either Mis-represent their Tenants (as
appears manifestly in their Doctrines of Justification and Merit, Satisfaction
and Indulgences) or else play the Buffoons in Joaking, Scoffing or relating
Stories, which if true, would not touch Religion. I must confess many of our
Pen-feather'd Divines are too blame in this, who after a year or two's time
spent in the University, many times step into the Pulpit, where, (for want it
may be of matter,) they confute Bellarmine with thou Lie, and rail at Rome
and Hell, the Pope and the Devil, as if linked together in one Chain; for which
being cried up by their Zealous and Ignorant Auditors, and moved with an Itch
of being in Print, they publish these their Conceptions to the World, and
flatter themselves as if from thence, the Downfall of Popery, and the
Destruction of the Whore of Babylon would ensue.

Upon these Considerations, My Lords and Gentlemen,
MY humble request to you in this Assembly, is, that You would appoint some
means for our Quiet, Concord and Agreement; and that whatever may widen our
Breaches, may be laid aside; and what may close them, embraced. The best way to
effect which, in my thoughts are these,

I. That a cessation of Arms be proclaimed: That is, that the Penal Law's, and
especially the Sanguinary, may be, if not quite taken off, at least suspended,
and those who are known to be Friends to the King and Kingdoms good, may with
Us enjoy part of those Blessings, which we may hope for, under so Great, and so
Just a King, and a Kingdom so United.

II. That for the healing our Animosities, both sides be strictly prohibittd in
their Sermons, to touch upon matters of Controversy, or to use Animating
Reflections; But that those Discourses may tend wholly to Peace and Piety,
Religion and sound Morality. And that in all public Catechisms, the Grounds
and Principles of Religion be clearly, and solely explicated, without
Reflecting Animosities.

III. That some Learned, Devout, and Sober persons, may be made choice of on
both sides, who may truly state matters of Controversy betwixt us; to the end
each one may know the others Pretentions, and the Tenants they cannot abandon
without breaking the Chain of Apostolic Faith. And if we find (notwithstanding
we are told by them, that the difference betwixt Them and Us, is not so great,
nor their Tenants so 'Pernicious, but if we saw them Naked, we should, if not
embrace them as Truths, at least not condemn them;) If (I say) notwithstanding
all this, we cannot come to an Agreement in some Nice points, let us endeavor
to agree to live together in the Bonds of Love and Charity as becomes good
Christians, and Loyal Subjects, and join together to oppugn those known Maxims
and Errors, which destroy the Essence of Religion and good Government.

This is ( My Dearest Children) the Remonstrance I thought good to make you,
and I doubt not but your Wisdoms will so order it, that, if not by this Method,
at least by some Efficacious Means, all our Differences may be soothed; and
when heats about Religion cease, we may hope for a future stable quiet in the
Nation. This is what I shall daily Pray for, and that God would by his Grace so
guide this great Assembly, that all their Acts, Votes and Councils may tend to
his Honor and Glory, the good of his Church, and the Prosperity and lasting
Peace of the Kingdom.

Amen.
God Save King JAMES the Second.

