A SEASONABLE WARNING TO THE Commons of England; Discovering to them Their
Present Danger, and the only means of Escaping it, to be by a Prudent Choice of
old English Spirits, to serve their King and Country in the Approaching
Parliament.
LET my real Zeal atone my seeming Presumption, if I, who am a part, though but
a mean part of you, do humbly offer a Word of Advice to you; If the Members
united may submissively advise their Head, I hope a single Member may Jog its
Fellows, and mind them of their Danger and Duty. If you be happy, I shall share
in your happiness; and if you sink, it will be my lot to sink with you.

I dare, without Vanity, profess, I have so much old English blood still
running in my Veins, as to scorn to outlive the wreck of my Native Country,
and had rather sink in the Public Bottom, than by a base Subterfuge, save my
self in the Boat; I have no right to sit at the Helm, I have no skill to manage
the Tackling, yet let me descry a Rock upon which our Common Interest is ready
to be dash't in pieces.

A Dumb Son once spoke, when the Sword was at his Father's Throat, and can I be
silent when a secret Dagger is ready to be sheathed in my Mother's Bowels? The
gagling of a Goose (say they) once saved Rome, from the Surprizal of the
French; Let not then wholesome Counsel be despised from a Contemptible hand,
which may possibly save England from the Designs both of Rome and France.

There are many things that are importunate with me, to be so with you; and
whilst these important Matters sound in my ears, I must Echo them faithfully
to yours.

1. I observe that your Friends and Enemies are agreed in this one point
(perhaps it is the first time that ever they were, and the last that ever they
will) That you have but one Throw more for your All: If you throw it ill; your
Enemies are resolved you shall never throw again for it; If well; your Friends
hope you shall never need. It Is a Critical Moment: Upon your well, or ill
Choosing, depends your well, or ill Being; and you had need do that well, which
you must never do but once; your Fate will not suffer you to Offend twice in
this one particular. I once stood by with trembling, to see the issue of two
Condemned Persons throwing Dice for their Lives, I hope you will therefore
excuse my concerned Fears, when the Die must be cast for my own too.

2. Such is the happy Constitution, and frame of your Government, so prudently,
so strongly have your wary Ancestors secured Property and Liberty (rescued by
Inches out of the Hands of Encroaching Violence) that you can never be Ruined,
unless you become the Authors of your own Ruin; you cannot be Enslaved, but
with Chains of your own making. As you are never undone, till you are undone by
a Law, so you can never be undone by a Law, till you choose the undoing
Legislators; And will it not be an aggravation of your misery, that your selves
have made your selves miserable? Will not your Enemies add Scorn to their
Cruelty, and pretend Justice for both, when they can plead, That they had never
trampled on your Heads, had you not laid them on the ground? And will not your
Friends and Enemies abroad, the one with pity, the other with Scorn, object it
to you, O England, thou have destroyed thy self; whom all the World could not
otherwise have destroyed?

3. And you must consider, that they whom you choose will represent your
Qualities, as well as your Persons; And if you send us up a false Glass, it
will represent you with an ugly Face; you have hitherto had the repute of an
Ancient, and Grave People; but if you choose raw Saplings, green Heads,
unexperienced Children, the World will judge of you as they once did of the
Grecians, That you were either always Children, or are grown twice Children;
you have formerly had the Character of a Sober, Temperate Nation, but if you
choose Drunkards to represent you, they will conclude that you are all Drunk;
and it has sometimes been your glory, that you were a Generous People, but if
you send up a company of sordid, saleable, mercenary Souls to represent (or
rather to betray) you, you will forfeit that Glory, and the World will judge
that you your selves were Mercenary.

4. Upon what terms our Civil and Religious Liberties now stand, your own
Fears, which I perceive are grown Universal, by this time have informed you,
what brisk Attempts have been made upon Both you know; what gallant Essays the
late House of Commons have made to Secure both, you must thankfully own; how
your Expectations have been frustrated, your Hopes blasted, you feelingly
bewail; by what Counsels you have been defeated, in the Dissolution of
Parliaments, you cannot be ignorant; and that the Remedy of all these Evils is
in, and from your selves (under God) there needs no proof; what an Excellent
Spirit was poured out upon you in your last Elections, we all admire. That you
may keep up the same Spirit, is the Hope of those that Love you, the Terror of
those that Hate you, and the only Design of this Humble Address; wherein, that
you may be directed, I shall briefly and plainly, 1. Show who are your Enemies.
2. What Designs they have upon you. 3. Lay down those Rules, which if
faithfully attended to, will disappoint your Enemies, and make, or continue you
yet a happy People.

I. Englands Enemies.
Some of your Enemies are so open and barefaced, that the Darkest Night of
Politic Reserve cannot hide them from your observance; others again, are so
secret, and close, that the brightest day cannot sufficiently discover them,
but whoever shall come under these ensuing Characters, you may warrantably set
a mark upon them, as your inveterate and sworn Adversaries.

1. They that would flatter you into a belief, that there is no such thing as a
Design upon you, as Men, and Christians, do really Design in both these
Interests to undermine you; their Policy lies in making you Secure in your
selves, that you may not be Secure from themselves; could they once sing you
asleep, their Work were easy to cut your Throats; could they once lift you up
to the Pinnacle of Presumption, they would soon throw you headlong into
desperation; and when they have once mounted you above a reasonable Fear, they
would sink you below all comfortable Hope.

2. Especially they whose steeled Impudence has imboldened them to Arraign the
Justice of the whole Nation, in denying that horrid and devilish Plot against
His Majesty's Person, the Government, and Religion of the Land: It is the glory
of an Artist to conceal his Art; and the Masterpiece of Romish Plotters to
conceal their Plots: and whilst they would deliver notorious Traitors from
deserved Punishment, would as readily expose Loyal Subjects to that which is
undeserved.

3. Since Parliaments are our Catholicon, or Universal Remedy against Universal
or Catholic Maladies; you must conclude them Enemies to the Nations Life, who
would remove the Physicians in that Critical minute, when the Patient must
either speedily recover, or immediately dye. What you are then to judge of
those Evil Counselors, who advised the Dissolution of two Parliaments in one
year, when we are sure there was never a year of more Danger, nor a Parliament
of more ability to prevent it, is easy to determine, but not so easy to
resolve, whether the loss of that Excellent Law, for a Parliament once in three
years, or the having three Parliaments in one year, was the more pernicious to
England's Safety?

4. If they who reproach your Representatives, do interpretatively reproach you
whom they represent, you know amongst what sort of men to discover your
Enemies. Such, who in their Scurrilous Pasquils, have loaded the most Loyal,
Zealous, and Wise Patriots, with Scandalous Language, traduced their Persons,
misconstrued their Counsels, fastened odious Suspicions of Disloyalty upon
them, being outrageous against them; because they were able to rescue an
Innocent People out of their Unmerciful hands.

5. In the same rank you must place those who by subtle Artifices, and finer
Sleights, obstructed Parliamentary Proceedings: who by unseasonable and
unreasonable insisting upon Un-parliamentary, Un-presidented Privileges, did
hinder those excellent Bills from passing into Acts, which had been the
Bulwarks of the Nation against Popery; who by various, and secret Methods
damm'd up the Current of Justice, that it could not teach the Capital
Offenders, who triumph in their present Immunity, and the hopes of future
Indemnity.

6. Forget not to put them into the Black-bill, who being entrusted by the
Nation, to represent them in the former Parliament, basely sold themselves,
their Votes, and You, for Annual Pensions, Gainful Offices, and can give you a
reason too, why they have sold you, because they say, they first bought you:
and it is but reasonable that they who purchased your Votes at the Election in
the Country, should sell their own Votes in the House, and that at as dear
rates as they can.

7. They whose stiffness and Pride would not yield to an accommodation amongst
differing Protestants, who have begun, continued, fomented, and increased
Divisions amongst our selves, are the most effectual Friends to the Popish, and
therefore Enemies to the English Interest,; who, whilst they do obstinately
persist in imposing unreasonable terms of Union, have advanced Disunion,
weakened the hands of Friends, strengthened the hands of Enemies, and learned
from Machiavel their Tutor, and the Devil their Father, to destroy effectually
by dividing irreconcileably; and have laid such sinful terms of Peace, as have
made Peace desperate, unless Dissenters could purchase a Peace with us at the
dear rate of a War with God, wherein Conscience must always be in Arms, and the
Soul the Seat of War.

8. Whoever have been Neutrals in this last grand Contest between the
Protestant Religion and Popery, ought to be more than suspected for your
Enemies: He that is not with us in extremity, is certainly against us; These
only wait the good hour, when they may safely show their Teeth, and bite, which
now they hide.

9. There is none more implacably your Enemy, than that Person whose Interest
it is to destroy you: They therefore that must neither eat nor drink, except
you starve, that must go in Rags, except you go naked, are taught to fleece
you, that they may keep themselves warm; I mean, as you easily know, the whole
List of Pensioners, who sold you once to get Bread, and would gladly sell you
once again that they may get Drink; they have betrayed us once, and thereby
proved themselves Knaves; if they be trusted, and betray us again, we shall
prove our selves Fools.

10. Whoever have their Dependence upon Foreign Princes or States, are under a
strong Obligation to see you ruined: for your own Reason will tell you, that no
Foreign Power will prodigally throw away his Pistols, where he expects not an
Harvest answerable to his Seed: These are those Degenerated Englishmen, who
having forsaken the Interest of their Native Country, have sold themselves to
an Outlandish Interest, that they may the better gratify their own Ambition,
and those potent Lusts which their own meaner Fortunes could not otherwise seed
and satiate.

11. Lastly, They that cry up Prerogative against the true Liberty of the
Subject, are Enemies both to Prerogative and Liberty, and would swell up the
one to the consumption of the whole; for when all the Spirits are drawn to one
part, the rest must sensibly waste, for want of their due and proper
Nourishment.

II. What Design these our Enemies have upon us.
To know our Danger, and our Enemies Designs, is a good step to prevent the
one, and disappoint the other: The Bird will perish without pity, that hastens
to the Snare laid in her sight: let me therefore warn you of the Snare, and if
you like it, put in your feet.

1. One great Design is to render Parliaments odious, and thereby useless;
which they manage by representing our Representatives, as men of Factious,
Seditious, Disloyal Spirits, and when they can say nothing more, turn us over
to Forty two, for a parallel: though some wise men have thought they were very
imprudent in making the comparison; for if Forty Two had no other design than
to secure the Protestant Religion, and our Civil Proprieties, as it is evident
this of Seventy Nine had not, the Parallel will rather justify That, than
condemn This.

2. What Design there may be of a Standing Army, I had rather any should speak
than my self; but this is sure, a more accursed Design against our Peace and
Propriety could not be formed, when every lowzy Red-coat shall pluck the Bread
out of our Children's Mouths, and the Clothes off our own Backs, when they are
once hunger-bitten for want of Pay; and these must be Lurdanes in every House,
and the Proprietor wait upon his Trencher. Whether Danby had any such Design
upon us, will be seen in his Trial, though we want not frequent Trials that
such a Design there is.

3. That there has been a Design to Corrupt all Elections, and Debauch the
Members Elected, that so a Parliament, which in its Pure and Primitive
Constitution is the best of things, may by Corruption, become the worst, is too
clear from those Voluminous Lists of Pensioners, which, formerly, and of late,
have given us our Information.

4. Though I would not have you Suspicious, yet I would have you Cautelous, and
advise with your selves, whether there be not some Endeavors to make Will and
Pleasure triumph over Right and Law? You may warrantably have a vigilant eye
upon those who cry up an Absolutely Absolute Power in the Prince; That we are
Vassals; That the Prince may Impose Taxes upon the Subjects, which they in
Conscience are bound to obey, upon pain of Eternal Damnation: you may do well
to take timely notice of this Design: Your All is at Stake, and that too great
a Concern to be ventured upon an After-Game.

5. And your Religion seems to be in Apparent Hazard; which is more worth than
all the rest; and that, for which all the rest are desirable. How difficult is
it to get a Law pass, that may effectually barrout Popery, Experience has
taught you: What Hopes Papists have of the Succession, you understand; and how
to prevent that Blow to Religion, if the Rampant Jesuits should give a Blow to
the Life of our present Sovereign, you cannot easily imagine.

6. And who knows what Danger you are in of losing your Parliaments? These
frequent Dissolutions, with some prognosticate an Annihilation; and then the
Nation, whose Eyes are scarce dry from their Lamentations for their Short-lived
Parliaments, must weep, as if it were but one great Eye, for the Funeral of our
Ancient Government.

III. The Means to prevent our Utter Ruin.
You are now ( Dear Countreyment!) upon the Brink of the Brink of Ruin, and
cannot be undone but by your own Choice: Let it not be said, when both are set
before you, You have chosen Misery before Felicity.

1. Keep a tender Eye in your present Choice upon those Worthy Persons which
answered the Trust Reposed in them the last Parliament; and where you find your
selves mistaken (and in some you were sadly mistaken) rectify your Error, and
let your Second-Thoughts compensate whatever Failing you were guilty of in your
last Choice.

2. Be resolved (against all Temptations) to choose no Minors: Can you judge
them fit to dispose of your Liberties, Lives, Estates and Religion, who cannot
legally dispose of their own Estates, or themselves? What Security can they
give you, that they will not give away yours and you, whose Bond in the Eye of
the Law will not be taken for Forty Shillings?

3. Set a black Brand upon those notorious Pensioners (now well known to all
the World) who would sell their God, their King, their Country, for morsels of
Bread: What Protection do you expect from them, who cannot show their Faces
with confidence, without a Protection, either in, or out of Parliament? Will
you secure them within the Walls of the House of Commons, who were better
secured within the Walls of the Common Gaol? Who can never pay their Debts
contracted by their Prodigality, but out of your Purses; and must run you in,
to get themselves out of their Mortgages?

4. Do not once think of opening your mouths for such as are not their own men;
who are pre-engaged to their great Masters, and must follow their Whistle:
Their Offices, Preferments, Salaries, Court-employments lie so near their
hearts, that they have no room for their Country.

5. Suspect them who by Terror and Threats would aw you, or by Bribery,
Feastings, Entertainments would allure you to prostitute your Voices for their
Elections; you may be assured they would never bid so high for your Suffrages,
but that they know where to make their Markets. Choose the worthy unwilling
person, before the complementing unworthy man, whose extraordinary forwardness
prognosticates he seeks not your Good, but his own, separate from the Public.

6. Let not Beggars be your Representatives; they will cut large Thongs out of
your Hides, to spare their own; it is a pleasure to them to become Levellers,
and to make you as poor as themselves: How can they judge what is expedient for
the Nation to spare, whose only care it is to get a piece of Money to spend?

7. Get men of Courage, who will not be Hectored out of their Duties by the
Frowns and Scowls of men: never had you more need to pitch upon the old English
Spirit, that durst be faithful and just against all Temptations. It Is God's own
Counsel, that you Elect men after his own heart, such as fear God, and not the
Faces of Great ones. Remember who they were that could never yet resist Smile
or Frown, but tamely sunk below their own Convictions, and knew the evil they
did, yet durst not but commit it.

8. Set your eyes, fix your hearts upon persons of as large principles as the
Gospel will warrant you. Narrow Souls that will own none but those that bear
their own Image and Superscription, will sooner raise Persecution at home, than
secure us from Popery, and Invasion from abroad: The great Interest of England
at this day, is, to tolerate the tolerable, to bear with the weak, to encourage
the conscientious, and to restrain none but such as would restrain all besides
themselves.

9. Make your Trust as easy a Burden as may be, to them you Elect. The Trust
it self is Burden enough, the Charges of their Attendance great enough; and
it is disingenuous to suffer them to sink in their Estates, who zealously
endeavor to preserve you from sinking.

10. Lay Obligations upon those you choose, that they labor to secure the True
Protestant Religion for the future, that they examine the present Plot, pursue
the Plotters, and impartially bring them to 'condign punishment, how high
soever they look, and with whatsoever Supports they bear up their confident
Faces: Let them be entreated also, when Grievances are redressed, Religion
secured, the Nations Peace settled and stablished, liberally to supply the
Government, to discharge Public Debts, that there may be the most happy
Closure between His Sacred Majesty and His People, that ever any Age could yet
boast of.

These things being humbly laid before you, I shall join with you all in
wishing a Happy Success to your Elections, and a Blessed Issue upon the
Unanimous Counsels of your REPRESENTATIVES.

FINIS.

