The Second Part of the Boy of BILSON: OR, A True and Particular RELATION OF
THE IMPOSTOR, Susanna Fowls, Wife of John Fowls, of Hammersmith, in the
County of Middlesex, who pretended her self to be Possessed with the DEVIL.

Giving an Exact Account of the Beginning, Progress, Conferences, Discovery,
Commitment, Confession, etc. of the said IMPOSTOR.

The Whole being Writ, and Attested by Robert Howson, Clerk; Captain John
Bonsey, and Mr. Nicholas Wade, who were frequently with her, during the Time of
her Pretended Possession, and before whom she made the Confession herein
contained; as also, by a great number of the Clergy, both Conformists, and
Nonconformists, mentioned in the following Narrative.

LONDON Printed; and are to be sold by E. Whitlock, near Stationers Hall,
MDCXCVIII.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THE following Relation sets before thee a living Instance of the Policy of
that Grand Deceiver of Mankind, the Devil; and I doubt, of those Master-workers
for his Kingdom, the Jesuits: For if all Circumstances occurring in the
subsequent Narrative, be well weighed and considered, there will, I believe, be
found some probable grounds for such a Conjecture. And therefore I was of
Opinion, that I could not do the World better Service, than by setting before
their Eyes, A True and Faithful Account of this parlous Impostor, thereby to
give a light into the Tricks and Contrivances of suchlike Damnable Designs for
the future; as also by laying open the heinousness of the Sin, to restrain the
wicked Inclinations of such as may be in danger to be misled by the Delusions
of Satan, and for the encouraging of all to a hearty Reliance upon the
Providence of Almighty God, who best knows what Condition is fittest for us.

It Is observable, That one chief End of all this kind of Impostors, is to get
Money, as it was in the Case before us, as does appear by her Confession; and
therefore I do most earnestly exhort all those whose Hearts are set too much
upon the Goods of this World, not to venture upon the least indirect Means to
procure the same, least the Devil, who, no doubt, will be apt to prompt them on
still further, do not at last bring them to that State of Insensibility, as to
dare to attempt the most unaccountable Villainies to compass their unjust Ends,
which will at last (without sincere and hearty Repentance) bring them to their
own most miserable Ends, even Eternal Damnation.

The Second Part OF THE Boy of Bilson: Or, A True and Particular Relation OF
THE IMPOSTOR, Susannah Fowls.
AMong the many strange and unaccountable Impostures that have been Acted upon
this great Stage of the World, I cannot meet with any one that will parallel
the Case before us, unless it be the Story of the Boy of Bilson, which, because
it was long since transacted, and is but come to the Knowledge of a few, I will
here set down by way of Introduction to, and Illustration of the following
Narrative. The Story was this:

In Staffordshire, at a Town called Bilson, was a Boy, whose Father, Mother,
Neighbors, and many other People, with admiration did absolutely think Possessed
with a Devil; for he had strange, sudden, violent, distorting Fits, that
appeared to all the Beholders contrary to Nature, and being not full Fifteen
Years Old, it could not be imagined that he could be guilty of any Imposture,
and therefore his Case was the more Remakable.

The Jesuits (the best Physicians in such Distempers) hearing of it, visited
the Boy, Prayed by him, and used such other Charms and Exorcisms, as make them
admired by silly People; giving his Parents good hope of Dispossessing him of
the foul Spirit, by which might palpably be discerned, how much God's Power was
expressed in their Weakness; and what Difference there was between the Truth, and
Holiness of the Catholic Religion, and the Heresy professed among
Protestants. So that they that heard them (and there were abundance that
Resorted to the Place) took them for very Holy Men.

These Caterpillars visited him often, sometimes in Private, sometimes in
Company; but this kind of Spirit would not be commanded by them, so that they
grew almost desperate of the Cure.

The Boy in his Fits would rave against an Old Woman dwelling near to his
Father, intimating, by Signs, and ghastly Behavior, that she had sent a Spirit
to torment him, and (when he was out of his Fits) positively accused her of
being a Witch, and the Author of all his Misery. This old Woman was sent to the
Chancellor of Litchfield to be Examined, and the Boy was brought thither to
confront her: And having his Back toward her, at her coming into the Room,
where the Chancellor was, before she yet entered or appeared, he fell into a
most bitter Agony, crying out, Now she comes, now my Tormentor comes! wreathing
and tearing himself in so horrid a manner, that it did not only breed
Amazement, but Pity in the Spectators, there being many with Expectation
attending the Issue: Which, with some other Probabilities, were an Inducement
to the Chancellor to send the Woman to Stafford Gaol.

At the next Assizes for the County, the Boy and his Parents appear as
Witnesses against the Witch: The Boy was placed in a conspicuous part of the
Court, with his Face to the Bench, Eying the Judge continually, in a very
peaceable and quiet Posture; and as the Woman was coming in (when the Court
thought it impossible the Boy should be sensible of her Appearance) he fell
into a more raging Fit than ever he was Possessed with before; so stupendiously
unnatural, that it was deemed by all that saw it, that nothing but a Diabolical
Spirit could work such horrid Effects. This, thus openly acted, and the
Relation of what was done at Litchfield, and other like Circumstances, so
possessed both the Court and Spectators, that the Old Woman (that had no good
Reputation among her Neighbors, being of a testy froward Temper, a Temper
incident to Old Age) found few Friends to plead her Cause; so that being
Indicted for Witchcraft, she was found Guilty by the Jury, and Condemned to Die.

Dr. Morton, Bishop of Litchfield, (happily then on the Bench upon Secular
Affairs) hearing that some Romish Priests had been tampering with the Boy with
their Exorcisms, to the Undevilling of him, and finding little Reason produced,
why the Witch should use the Boy so ill, was persuaded, this might be some
Trick of the Jesuits, for enhancing the Credit of Miracles; he therefore prayed
the Judge to Reprieve the Woman till the next Assizes, and he would take the
Boy home with him, have him carefully and strictly looked to, not doubting but
before that time he should find out the bottom of some secret and hidden
Contrivance. The Judge assented to the Bishop's Request, and so the Boy was
carried to Eccleshall Castle, the Bishop's House, whither his Fits followed him
with a great deal of Violence: for being put out of his Road, (having formerly
all sorts of People come to admire him, and now being more carefully looked to)
he grew sullen, and would not eat somerimes in two or three days, so that his
Belly was almost clung, and grown to his Back, and he had a new Swelling about
his Throat, which never appeared before; Lay in his Bed sometimes as it were
Senseless; sometimes staring with his Eyes, and foaming at the Mouth; sometimes
striking those that stood near him (his own careful Mother being one, whom he
had made all black and blue about the Arms and Breasts;) never spoke but in his
Fits, and then a strange Gibberish; at other times he only muttered, and made
signs.

The Bishop visited him often, striving sometimes to soften him with
Gentleness, at other times he handled him roughly; but his Evil Spirit was not
so easily laid.

The Bishop spoke to him one time some of the Greek Testament, to see how that
would work, and it brought him into his Fits: At another time he uttered some
Verses out of the Greek Poets, which his Devil was not so Learned as to
distinguish; for that put him into a Fit again: so that the Bishop was
confirmed that he was an Impostor of a most pernicious and pertinacious Spirit;
but how to conjure it out of him was the Difficulty. And finding Words and
Menaces made no Impression in him, he fell to Blows; for taking him out of his
Bed, and having one to hold him, the Bishop gave him six very smart Lashes with
a Rod, which moved the Boy no more than if he had been an insensible Stock.
They also thrust Needles into his Toes and Fingers, betwixt the Nails, clapped
burning Candles to his Eyelids, till they singed the Hair off, to divert him
when he was in his Fits; yet he neither winch'd nor stirred; so that the Actors
were more troubled to execute, than he to suffer.

In this Condition growing almost desperate, he would make signs for Knives, or
any other Instrument, to do himself a Mischief with, therefore strict Care was
taken, and many watchful Eyes set over him, to prevent any such Danger. Thus he
continued almost a quarter of a Year; at last his Urine grew so black, that the
Physicians thought Nature had left her usual Operation, having never found in
any Humane Body so much adust Matter, to give so deep and deadly a Tincture.

This struck the good Bishop very near; for he was certain the Priests had been
tammering with him, and now, if he should miscarry under his Hands, those
Mint-Masters of Mischief would Coin such Scandals against him, as might pass
current in the World's Opinion; Therefore he used all the means he could
possible, as well to preserve him, as to discover him: but finding the Boy
endure so many Trials with Patience, so much Hardship and Severity in tender
Years, he resolved, if his Water continued black, to shift the matter no
further. To find out which, he set a trusty Servant to watch him through a hole
that looked into the Chamber, upon the Bed, which the Boy knew not of.

The Bishop going that Morning with his Family to a Lecture, all things were
very still in the House, and the Boy finding all quiet, no Noise about him, he
lifts himself up, stares, and listens, and at length gets out of his Bed, and
in the Straw or Mat under it, takes out an Ink-horn, and makes Water in the
Chamber Pot through a piece of the Cotton, in his Hand; another little piece of
the Cotton he puts between the Glans and the Prepuce, drawing the Skin over it,
and that was for a Reserve, if he should be forced to make Water when Company
was by. Thus having cunningly put himself in order, he hides the Ink-horn
again, and returns to his Bed.

The Man that was appointed to watch him seeing all this, discovered it to the
Bishop at his coming home, who came to him presently, and asked him How he did?
he, according to his usual manner, pointed to his Water, looked ghastly on it,
and muttered out his old howling Tone.

The Bishop that now meant to deal roundly with him, said, Sirrah, you have Ink
in your Bed-straw, which you make use of to black your Water, and your Knavery
is found out; and calling in his Man, he took out the Ink-horn where the Boy
had hid it; and the Man justified, that he saw him make Water through the
Cotton. Which (with the Bishop's Threatening to send him to the House of
Correction) struck the Boy with such a sudden Terror, that he rose from his
Bed, fell upon his Knees, and humbly besought the Bishop to pardon him, and he
would discover to him the whole Truth. And as he put on his Clothes, the Bishop
laid open the Grievousness of his Sin, which wrought so upon his Spirit, that
he melted into Tears, crying to God for Mercy. A very great Alteration! that
what he did but counterfeit, the Devil so hardened him in, that all the Torments
and Pains inflicted by Man could not produce a Tear, till God that melted the
Rock had first touched the Heart.

Then he Confessed as follows; Namely, That a Pedlar met him when he was going
to School, and with many enticing Words persuaded him to go to Mr. Gifford's
House, assuring him of good Entertainment; and with his Allurements he went
thither with him. There he found four Romish Priests, who gave him Money and
many fair Words, promising him great matters if he would be conformable to
their Instructions.

They were three days in teaching him how to demean himself; and after he was
well tutored, and had practiced his Tricks there privately, then they sent him
home to his Father (who thought he had been lost, and was much troubled for
him) to exercise them in a more public way. He came home in a very distracted
manner, to the Amazement of his Parents, and in a short time drew much Company
to visit him; and his Parents being Poor got Money from many Charitable People,
which did encourage him to persist in that way. But when the Rumor of his
being Possessed with an Evil Spirit was sufficiently bruited abroad, the
Priests came to dispossess him; but he found so much Sweetness in the Ease, and
Profit of that Life, that he would not be dis-inchanted by them, though they
charmed never so cruelly; for they beat him, and pincht him, and used him very
hardly to make him desist. Thus were the Deceivers deceived!

The Bishop asked him, Why he accused the poor Old Woman of Witchcraft? He
answered, The Priests told him he must lay the Cause of his being Possessed upon
some Old Woman, and she being known to him, and of a scolding Humor, he fixed
it on her. Then the Bishop asked him, How he came to fall into his Fits a little
before the Woman appeared in the Room, both at her Examination and Arraignment?
For the first at Litchfield, he said, he heard some about him Mutter, She is
here, which made him cry out, She comes, She comes: And for the second, at
Stafford, he heard the People remove, and her Chains gingle as she came, which
gave him the sign. Lastly, he was asked how he made his Throat swell? and he
showed, it was by thrusting his Tongue (being very long) down his Throat; which
trick he found out himself, the rest were taught him by the Priests. Thus did
the Bishop preserve an innocent old Woman, condemned by the Law to die;
discover the abominable Forgeries of the Priests, and convert a wicked Boy,
whom afterward he bound Apprentice, and proved a good Man.

I shall make no Remarks upon the foregoing Story, but leave the Reader himself
to compare it with the following Imposture; which was thus.

THE HISTORY OF OUR Present Impostor.
OF all the prodigious Products, either of the Inanimate, Animate, or Rational
World, that this monstrous Age has produced, the ensuing Instance may justly
challenge the precedence: Wherein the Prince of the Air has imposed, not only
upon a great Number of Learned and Charitable Christians, both Ministers and
others, of all Persuasions, but upon himself too, pretending to be where he was
not, and to do what he did not in that sense that was pretended, that he might
rivet himself the faster in his moral Possession, and expose the heavenly
Religion of the Holy Jesus to the Ridicule and Contempt of a blasphemous and
profane Age.

But in all such Cases, I humbly conceive, it is most safe to fall forward in
being charitably mistaken, till Observation, Pains, and Prayers, with the
Blessing of Heaven upon all, shall undeceive the mistaken; as it has done
(blessed be God's Name) in the ensuing Case of Susannah Fowls, Wife of John
Fowls of Hammersmith, in the County of Middlesex, Labourer, who, about the Age
of Twenty years, was in or about August 97, married to the said John Fowls;
who finding her Fortune to be less than she did pretend to, and he did depend
upon, it caused such Discontent between them, as threw her into such
unreasonable and extravagant Passions, that she did frequently Imprecate the
Devil to fetch her from him and his Family:

Upon which the Devil soon found such Instruments, as did not only foment, but
heighten the matter to that degree, that she was persuaded she was possessed
with the Devil: Which indeed was true, though not in that, yet in a far worse
sense.

The Person she tells you in her Confession that did first persuade her to
feign her self to be possessed, was a Relation of hers that did live in
Bloomsbury, and, as she believes, a Roman Catholic.

So that now the World may expect the Second Part of the Boy of Bilson,
detected by that Learned and Pious Prelate Dr. Morton, then Lord Bishop of
Coventry and Litchfield; and not without some probable Reasons for the same:

For in some short time after, a very officious Gentleman, who is called by the
Name of Dr. Jourdan of Brentford, made her a friendly Visit, giving her a Spell
to hang about her Neck, which he told her would certainly keep out the Devil;
which was afterward examined, and found to be an Exorcism, with several
Crosses, and these words Alpha and Omega, Immanuel and Jehovah above and below,
and on each side, it being drawn in the manner of a Scheme: Who likewise
strictly charged her to cross her self upon the Forehead and Breast, not
doubting but thereby to effect the Cure: And since that, a Doctor of Divinity
of this Church, and in this City, has declared, that the Papists did report,
that the Work would never be done till their Priests came: And sometime after,
a very ingenious young Gentlewoman came to my Lodgings, and told me, That if We
of the Church of England did not, and the Popish Priests did cast the Devil out
of this Woman, she did believe that she should be a Proselyte to their Church:
To whom I answered, That before she left so good a Church, grounded upon so
good a Faith, by making our Ministers a foil to their Priests, I did hope she
would first be satisfied whether it was not an Imposture: And moreover, How far
one evil Spirit may cast out another, to carry on the common Cause of the dark
and damned World, would be very well worth her enquiry; or to that purpose: And
it was observed by a very honest Gentleman that stood by, that one day, when
she was in Rotten-Row in Old-street, a Gentlewoman gave her a Wafer in a small
piece of Cake, bidding her to eat that in the Name of Jesus, that was crucified
upon the Cross. To which, if you add the Story of the Portugueses with their
hairy Jackets and bare Feet, mentioned in her Confession, we may without breach
of Charity conclude, That if these Gentlemen were not the Contrivers, they
would (if they could) have been the Conjurers.

And now follows the Imposture it self, which was managed as follows:

First by a pretended Apparition, which she says she frequently had; and at
last was so familiar with her, that she called him her Friend Mr. Thomas;
describing him by his ghastly Face, and by all the Parts of an humane Body,
saying (to use her own Words) That his Fingers did hang like the Fingers of a
Bartholomew-Baby.

This Mr. Thomas at several times brought several Papers, to which he did
persuade her to subscribe her Name.

Monday, the 17th of January, as her Husband says, she had a Paper brought with
these words (so legibly writ that he could read them) I am thy servant: Which
she refusing to subscribe, Mr. Thomas made his Exit for that time.

Thursday following he came after the same manner, as they tell you, with a
second Paper, with these Characters, x. v. m. s and of this form and bigness, x
v m s
writ, as it is supposed, with Red Okre, though given out to be writ in Blood;
the Original of which is in my hand: to which her Hand was again required; but
she being ordered by that worthy Gentleman, Chaplain to the Lord Falconbridge,
to the contrary, would not comply with his Desires, insomuch that Mr. Thomas
went away, as you must needs imagine, very angry: but not so angry as to cease
his Suit; for that day seven-night he appears the third time, with a Candle in
one hand, and Wax in the other; bidding her only drop the Wax; but she being
very unwilling as she had reason to be) to squeeze Wax to the Devil, Mr. Thomas
was very angry, and told her, She should be damned for all her design at
London: And would by all means (since she would go) have persuaded her to go by
Water, threatening her if she did not, he would overturn the Cart; which, as the
Countryman says, is to kill the Devil; and so one Devil would kill another;
which both her Husband and his Sister, who came with her, do with great
Confidence report was very like to be done.

By the Advice of the worthy and ingenious Gentleman Captain Bonsey, my own,
and others, in order either to have her discovered or recovered, she was
brought to London about the 17th of February, and lodged in an Apartment taken
for her in Rotten-Row in Oldstreet, having for her Attendance, her Husband, and
his Sister.

Friday the 18th, I made my first Visit to her in Old-street, where I found
several, both Men and Women; some admiring, others pitying, and all seemingly
praying for her; to whom, after some short time, I addressed my self, as I and
other Ministers had often done in the Name of the Blessed Jesus: At which she
pretended to be thrown into such Convulsions and Agonies both of Body and Mind,
as did obtain upon the belief of the Beholders, that she was really possessed,
or under some strange diabolical Influence: out of which (after she had
continued in it about a quarter of an hour, without any seeming sense either of
Body or Mind) she returned with that composedness and sedateness of Mind, as if
she had been rather with God than the Devil.

Monday, the 21st of February, after having desired the Learned and Reverend
Lecturer of the Parish to accompany me, I went the second time, when I found
her in the same condition as before, with one Mr. Powel and Mr. Burnet,
Dissenting Ministers, who had bestowed some time and pains in Prayer with her,
and for her, for which she seemed to be very thankful: When to strengthen the
Imposture, she did pretend to discover what had been privately discoursed by
some in the Room in reference to her Condition; which she has since declared
she did by Conjecture only.

Wednesday the 23d, was the third time I saw her, being desired by her Husband
to meet one Dr. Tompson, Minister of St. Matthew's Friday-shreet, about Four of
the Clock in the Afternoon; when the Reverend Doctor told me, what a fatigue he
and one Mr. Pierce, Lecturer of Hammersmith, had with her at Hammersmith soon
after Christmas last, watching one whole Night with her to rescue her from Mr.
Thomas, who (as she with some extraordinary Passion told them) was to fetch her
away that Night about twelve of the Clock: During which time, the Doctor saw
the bottom of an Earthen-plate (which she held then in her hand) fall out all
at once, to his no small Admiration; but since he believes it was cracked
before: And likewise he then received a Needle from her, which he could not any
way discover, but that it was given to her by an invisible Hand.

Saturday the 26th, was the fourth and last time time I saw her in that
disguise; when after some more than ordinary sharp discourse with her, mixed
with Reproof to her Devil, and Objurgations to her self, she fell into such a
furious and raving Convulsion, that her Teeth were so fast set, that no
Endeavors could open them: During all which time, she personated the Devil
speaking in her by a shrill, hollow, counterfeit Voice; saying, She is mine,
she is mine, and has been so twelve Weeks to day about three of the Clock; and
you did not see me come in, and you shall not see me go out, for all your
design on Monday or Tuesday next: To whom it was answered, She is a Servant of
Christ Jesus, and was baptized into him, and therein that she had renounced the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil; and that she had likewise subscribed a Paper
to that purpose. To which her Devil replied, That was your doing: And I was in
her Heart: And you are Drunk with Sack. Satan, or whatever thou art, thou art a
Liar, said I, and the Father of Lies; I have not drank to day: And as the
Apostle says, This cannot be, since it is but the third Hour of the Day. To
which her Devil replied, A Man might be drunk the first Hour. She now
confesses, That all this was from her own wicked Heart, and to get Money, by
moving People's Pity. For she had arrived to that degree of Delusion, that it
may be said of her, as it was of the Boy of Bilson, That she was unwilling to
be undevil'd. But during this last Scene of her Imposture, it was Judiciously
observed by some, that when she came to pronounce her Lip-Letters, she did it
with that care and tenderness, as if she foresaw the danger of being discovered
thereby, as indeed in some measure she was; for,

On Monday following, many of the Spectators then present, by Appointment met
at Hamlyn's Coffee-House, near the Exchange, about Six in the Evening: Where
was a very ingenious Conference: And by comparing Observations, the Cheat came
to be more than suspected. In which Conference there happened to be a very
Judicious, Learned, and Sagacious Gentleman, of an excellent Temper, whom, by
Enquiry, I found to be a Dissenting Minister, Heu talis cum sit, utinam noster
erat! to whom the Discovery of this Impostor, does in no small measure owe it
self.

About this time, the Reverend and Worthy Divine, Mr. Wade, Minister of
Hammersmith, did with great Prudence, advise us to remove her Husband and
Sister from her. By doing of which, he did, and as it happened, truly conceive
that we should the better discover the Matter.

Which was accordingly done, Tuesday the 28th. of February, by removing her to
the House of Lieutenant Nathanael Barlow, near Smithfield-Bars, where the Cheat
was fully found out and discovered by Captain John Bonsey, and the above named
Lieutenant Barlow, in the following manner.

When she was in one of her pretended Fits, they so contrived the matter as to
have an Iron ready, red hot, which they put upon her Hand; at which she, in the
middle of her Fit, cried out, O Lord! and thereby discovered her self to be
both an Impostor and a Notorious Liar; for she had always said, That she durst
not name the Name of God or Christ, for fear of her Friend Mr. Thomas; as also,
that when she was in her Fits, she was altogether insensible of what was done
or said; or as she expressed it, during her Fits, she could neither hear, see,
nor feel. Hereupon Lieutenant Barlow threatened her, that if she had any more
Fits while she stayed in his House, which was 24 Hours, he would burn her again
with the hot Iron, and inflict more grievous Punishments upon her; which she
took into consideration, and has not been troubled with any since that.

And here though her Devil left her, yet her Policy was not quite exhausted;
for finding the Cheat discovered, she procured her self to be removed to Dr.
Newton's, who keeps a Mad-house in Wood's Close, who told her she was troubled
with Hysteric Fits; which she laid hold of as a good Cloak, as she thought,
for her preceding Imposture, thinking thereby to color over the Matter, and
blind the World.

But this did not avail her, for she was shortly after committed to Bridewell,
near Clerkenwell-green, by the Worshipful John Perry, Esquire one of His Majesty's
Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex, as the following Warrant
imports; where she continues in perfect Health, and has a very good hand at
the Hammer.

I must not here forget to relate, That a Gentleman having committed his Black,
a lusty Fellow, to Bridewell, for some Misdemeanour, he is appointed to knock
Hemp at the next Block to hers; which has occasioned a ridiculous Story about
Town, That though the Devil was cast out of her, yet he loved her Company so
well as to come and knock Hemp with her.

Mid. ss.
To the Governor of the House of Correction, or his Deputy.
REceive into your Custody the Body of Susanna Fowls, whom I send you
herewith, for being a notorious Impostor and Cheat, falsely and wickedly
pretending her self to be possessed with a Diabolical Spirit, and accused, upon
Oath, of Blasphemously speaking, (when the Name of our Blessed Savior was
mentioned by a Divine in Prayer with her) Curse him! Curse him! Set her to
Labor, give her due Correction, and keep her until next Sessions, to be
otherwise dealt withal, as the Court shall then direct; and this shall be your
Warrant.

Given under my Hand and Seal, the 8th. Day of March, 1697/8. John Perry.


After her Commitment, she was often attended by me, and a great Number of
other People, and frequently importuned to discover who put her upon this
wicked Undertaking; which she at first did by way of Evasion, but at last, on
the 18th. Instant, in the presence of many, made and signed this following.

March the 18th. 1697/8.
The Confession of Susanna Fowls, Wife of John Fowls, of Hammersmith, near
Chiswick.
SUsanna Fowls, the Wife of John Fowls, declares and confesses, That she the
said Susanna, to the great Dishonor of God Almighty, and the Scandal of the
Protestant Religion, about the beginning of December last past, upon some
Discontent arising between her self and Husband, and his Relations, some time
after her Marriage to him, upon pretended Fits of Melancholy, did most wickedly
personate the Devil speaking in her, and from her, by shutting her Teeth, and
speaking through them by a shrill hollow Voice, saying, She is mine, She is
mine, and blaspheming and cursing at the Name of Jesus in Prayers, and at other
times; telling the Minister, It is more than you can do, to cast me out; for
she is mine, and has been so these Twelve Weeks; and you did not see me go in,
nor shall not see me go out. And sometimes, as in the time of Prayer, when the
Name of Jesus, or our Blessed Savior was mentioned, she, the said Susanna
Fowls, immediately replied, Curse him! Curse him! And being asked how she came
to pronounce those horrid Curses; she said, the Evil thing, or he within her,
bid her do so. Being also asked for what Reason she feigned or dissembled this
Voice, to personate the Devil; she answered, she did so for no other design but
to get Money. For which, she owns her self to be an Impostor.

Susanna Fowls further acknowledges and confesses, That all she did, by
personating the Devil speaking from within her, was by ill Advice from others;
and the first that persuaded her to say or feign that she was possessed by an
Evil Spirit, she says, was a Relation, one Mary Freeman, who lived in
Bloomsbury, and whom she believed to be a Roman Catholic. And also, she says,
she was further encouraged hereunto by one Jordan, a Gardener, a pretended
Doctor, of Brentford, who gave her diverse Spells, and had her in hand about a
Month: That he also gave her a Spell or Charm in writing, which, by his order,
she wore about her Neck, which when Mr. Howson the Minister opened, he found to
be a Prayer used by the Romish Priests, in their Exorcising Service, with
diverse Crosses about it; and the aforesaid pretended Doctor bade both her and
her Husband cross themselves on the Forehead and Breast, which she says she
did, upon his saying that then the Devil would have no power of them. For all
which, she says, she is heartily sorry, and begs Pardon of God, and Forgiveness
of his Ministers, and other Christians that assisted in Prayers for her.

She also further says, That a Man came to her Husband, and told him, that
there was a Portuguese in Lincoln's Inn Fields that could cure her: And the also
adds, That on Monday, February the 21st. an Ancient Gentlewoman came to her in
Rotten Row, and told her, that if she would admit some of those People that
wear hair Jackets, and go barefoot, they would put her in the middle, and pray
round her, and restore her to her right Mind.

She also further acknowledges, That a Shooemaker, an Acquaintance of her
Husband's, in Hammersmith. advised her to go to the Priests belonging to the
Portuguese Ambassador, for they were good Men, and they would cure her. In
Acknowledgment of the Truth of all which, the said Susanna Fowls has hereto
set her Hand.

Susanna Fowls. In the Presence of Robert Howson, Cl. Capt. Jo. Bonsey.
Nicholas Wade. John Cave. Samuel Carter Rochester. John Blood. Ezekiel Fuller,
Joseph Evans. Thomas Wood. William Pearson. Lieut. Nathanael Barlow.


Observe, That on the 12th. of March she did confess much to the same purpose
before the Worshipful Mr. Justice Smith, and several Divines there present: As
likewise that on Monday, the 21st. she writ and signed with her own Hand a
Paper, wherein is repeated what she had confessed before concerning Jordan,
with this further Addition, That he gave her something in a Bottle, as also
some Pills, and told her, that they would make her Vomit Pins and Needles: And
afterward gave her more things, which he told her would kill the Live Thing
within her, for he persuaded her she had a live Puppy within her. In the same
Paper she likewise says, That a certain hopping Fellow (as she expressed it)
whose Name she does not know, a pretended Doctor likewise, living at the Golden
Ball in Fetter-lane, told her, that she was possessed with an Evil Spirit, and
Cast a Figure for her, as she says, and told her, if she would come to London,
he would cast the Devil out of her, but that it could not be done except she
came to London, and then she would be well presently. This Paper is now in the
hands of John Pero, the Bookseller hereof, where any one that desires it, may
see it.

Thus have you heard the Relation of an Imposture, carried on with that cunning
Contrivance for some Months, that it imposed upon the Sagacity of a great many
very Learned and Judicious Men; and I leave the World to Judge, whether (all
Circumstances considered) it could be managed by one Person alone, without the
Assistance and Knowledge of her Husband and Sister, who were constantly with
her.

She is now in Bridewell, near Clerkenwell-Green, beating Hemp, where she must
continue till the next Session, and take her Trial for Blasphemy and Imposture,
pursuant to the Warrant of her Commitment.

FINIS.

