THE Second Part OF THE AMORS OF Messalina Late Queen of ALBION. WHEREIN The
Secret Court Intrigues of the Four last Years Reign are further pursued;
Particularly the IMPOSTURE OF THE CHILD.

By a Woman of Quality, a late Confidant of Q. MESSALINA.

LONDON: Printed for John Lyford, 1689

THE BOOKSELLER TO THE READER.
IT cannot be denied with how much Applause the First Part of this History has
been received in the World, according to the merits of it, which is in part
demonstrable, from the Account most Booksellers give of their being daily
importuned for the Second Part, and there having been but one Party appeared
against it, viz. the Pagans of Albion, the Publisher begs to be excused for
being so Dilatory in Completing this History, not being able to bring in the
Seerets of the LEAGUE, the Amors of MESSALINA and Polydorus, and other
Intrigues of the Gothic Court into this Part, on the account the Translator
has lain under great Indisposition of Body, for near these three Weeks past,
and it was not thought advisable to interpose the style of any other; but he
being now on the mending hand, you may expect the Third Part, which Compleats
the whole History, with all the speed imaginable; and he hopes it will prove in
this as it does in Mistresses, whose put-offs and delays in matters of
possession, does but more whet on the Gallants Appetites; so that when they
have once attained to Enjoyment, it becomes so Ravishing that their Lovers
fancy themselves amply rewarded for all their forbearance and expectation.

The Second PART.
THE Pagans of Albion, had from the beginning of the Reign of Lycogenes with
great assurance expected some hapy, and speedy overtures for their eternal
settlement in that Kingdom; Nor had Lycogenes himself been wanting in his
endeavors to overruled or destroy all that pretended to oppose, or question
his proceedings against the Foundamental Rights of his Christian Subjects, he
had already removed the most of them from all Places of Trust, and contrary to
the known Laws of the Land had introduced Persons, by the said Laws incapable
to Serve; he had Raised and kept up an Army composed of Mercenary's and
Foreigners, not only to Terrify, but upon the first happy occasion to Oppress
all that should contradict his Resolutions; he had for the first three years of
his Reign, carried all things with so high a hand, that the People of Albion
from the highest to the lowest, were in a strange Confusion to think of the
dismal consequences that wonld necessarily flow from such Arbitrary
Proceedings: and though they had by the subtle Insinuations of a Court Party
of Divines, been Poisoned with that pernicious position of Passive Obedience,
yet they could not without a great deal of regret behold all the fences and
enclosures of their Laws, and Libertiy's thrown down and trampled on, and be
obliged to hold their Lives and Estates on so precarious Terms as the will and
discretion of an Antichristian packed Council: what related to the private
satisfaction of the King's humor they did with all humility, and unexpected
alaerity submit and yield to, but when it was plain that the whole Kingdom was
Designed and Refolv'd a Sacrifice, to the Interest and Ambition of a few wicked
Councillors, and a small party of Men, that had been by public Acts of the
Realm declared the Inveterate and Irreconcilable Enemies of all Christians but
chiefly of the Albionites, they then began to search into the measures of their
submission, and diligently to enquire how far they were obliged to pay
Obedience to the Commands of their Magistrates and Governors; and realy upon
the scrutiny they plainly perceived their own weakness, and the Impositions of
their Enemies, who by this subtle Doctrine had ensnared them to set their
Hands to and Sign as it were their own Destruction, several of the Great and
Wisest Men in the Kingdom, had been Debating on this Subject, and all concluded
in an acknowledgment of their weakness in so manifestly exposing themselves and
their Country to the Capricious Humors, or Tyrannical Principles that very
often are found in the greatest Princes, and therefore though from their very
Souls they wished all happiness imaginable to their King and Governor, yet they
thought their duty stretched too far on the Tenter-hooks, when by a blind
submission to irregular Commands they were obliged to forego the natural
principles of self preservation, and that by seeking officiously to add to
their Loyalty they must necessarily detract from their Judgments, Conscience,
and Honesty: But Lycogenes, who by a diligent scrutiny, and long experience of
the Natures of the people of Albion, (to his great satisfaction) knew how
effectually the Doctrine of Non-resistance (which he and his party, with great
zeal and industry had insinuated and promoted) had wrought on his Christian
Subjects, thought he had laid a very sure foundation for the introduction of
those Novelties and Abuses we have since had imposed on us, and was by the
assiduous Instigations of his Pagan Counselors prevailed upon to resolve the
total Extirpation, or at least enslaving of the Christian Heretics, as he
called them, in his Dominions, and fearing that all he could do in his own life
time, would be insufficient to assure and establish the Pagan Faction and
Interest, unless he could find such a Successor as should confirm and
strengthen what he should now begin, upon these Considerations, I say, he was
easily wrought on to consent to any thing his Counselors should propose for
the benefit and establishment of Paganism in the said Kingdom, and now what
more remained, than that the Priests consult and find the most convenient and
speedy means to secure their own Interests to indulge Messelina's Ambition, and
to sooth Lycogenes his Bigoted Zeal: Several ways were proposed, and some time
spent in Arguments and Debates before they could come to a final Resolution.

The Christians of Albion, by several Acts of their General Diets, had their
Laws, their Liberties, and their Religion secured to them, and in all, or most
of their Assemblies for one hundred years past, they had one or other express
Law against Paganism, though none did so thoroughly disable and lessen their
interest in Albion as that commonly called the Tests; and though some good
Christian Dissenters from the Church of Albion, were therein severely included,
yet they were chiefly intended for the discouragement and suppression of that
pernicious Sect of Pagans in Albion, Lycogenes his private Counsel therefore
proposed the taking away these Tests, as a necessary Preliminary for the
introduction of Paganism; the Project indeed was good, but how to bring it
about, was the difficulty, for besides that the general Diet would hardly be
induced to abrogate those very Laws which some of them so lately had stickl'd
for and promoted, and such Laws whereon their own and the Kingdoms security
seemed more immediately to depend (the Pagans having in all Reigns been proved
the irreconcilable Enemies and malicious designers against the peace and
welfare of the Christians in Albion) besides, I say, this difficulty, they were
obliged to gain the consent of Prince Anaximander and the Princess Artemisia,
the Presumptive Heiress of the Crown, for the Abrogation of the said Laws, and
this indeed was the great business that struck with Lycogenes, for as to what
concerned the election of such Members as should serve his turn in the next
General Assembly, he bid them take no care, for he was sure he could by his
influence procure such persons returned as should effectually answer his utmost
expectations: With all speed therefore persons are employed to negotiate with
the Prince and Princess for their consent aforesaid, and to lay before them the
sincerity of his Majesty's Intentions in that matter, and that his Majesty's
great and only alm was for the more general accommodation of all his Dissenting
Subjects, and that as their Highnesses could not believe that his Majesty would
resolve on any thing to their prejudice, so he did not in the least doubt of
their Highnesses ready concurrence in so pious an undertaking; but alas poor
Lycogenes and his Pensionary Counsel had far overshot themselves, when they
believed so wise a Prince as Anaximander could beso barefacedly decoyed into an
assent to a matter so necessarily and plainly prejudicial to his own and his
Princesses interest, as well as to a Kingdom and People, they had reason to
respect and take care of as their future loving Subjects, and present hearty
Friends, they were not unacquainted with the measures Lycogenes had taken from
the beginning of his Reign, so directly contrary to the Princess his Daughters
Interest, and pernicious and destructive to the Christians, and that by pure
force he had already obtruded so many illegal things on his said Christian
Subjects, that he wondered Lycogenes could pretend to make him or his Princess
instruments of their further oppression and misery; such were the Princes
resentments, and such was the result of Lycogenes his endeavors to make him
and his own Daughter Parties for the Subversion of Christianity in Albion; and
now immediately a grand Gonsult is called to consider of Anaximander's
resolutions, and of some other way to promote the grand concern: In the mean
time Messalina had been tormenting her self with the Apprehensions of her utter
disappointment; for though she had kept a constant correspondence with the
Count, she could not yet perceive her affairs go on so prosperously as she had
promised to her self, and the loss of so much time, to her Ambition, did very
much qualify the satisfaction she received in her Amor; however though she had
promised to repair to Art and Policy, to supply the present defects of Nature,
she could not resolve to abandon the Love and Service of the Count: Nay, upon
mature consideration, she concluded, that the continuation of her Amor with
him, could not be any way prejudicial to the other design they were now
undertaking, for supposing she should really conceive any considerable time
after the feigned report of her being with Child, the absurdity of the report
of this could not any way be prejudicial to the real truth of the other, the
assured Birth of a Prince being all that could be expected or desired; and
consequently, any reflections on the other would vanish as a mistake, which
Women in such cases are very often subject to. The Marchioness de Tomazo, would
daily encourage her belief of succeeding, and promised her assistance, by
imparting to her a Secret to help Conception; the Queen was wonderfully
pleased, even with the Flattery of the old Marron; but for fear of the worst,
was resolved to have the other Project speedily set on foot, she went to the
King's Apartment immediately to hear what they had resolved on, and how it was
agreed to be managed, where she found the trusty Cabal in hot and close debate:
She had ordered Aspasia, the Marchioness de Tomazo, and Father Pedro to be
there, and Lycogenes had introduced the Count and Poliorchetes the Chief
Commissioner of his Court of Conscience, having exrerienc'd his Fidelity in
matters of the greatest importance, and had raised him to that high Station
merely to be an instrument in his future undertakings.

Lycogenes upon the Arrival of the Queen arose, requiring the Company not to
separate till they had wholly concluded on the means and manner of new modeling
and settling the Kingdom of Albion, the Queen likewise as soon as she had seated
her self commanded them to give her an account of their Proceedings.
Poliorchetes the Chancellor then rising and making a profound reverence to the
Queen, delivered his Opinion thus: 'It is not unknown, mighty Sovereign, how
zealous I have been in bringing about and promoting whatsoever might be thought
advantageous to your interest; nor do I now presume to recount my Services for
any other purpose than to manifest my gratitude and willingness to engage again
and again for ever on any action and design your Majesty's, or this Honorable
Board, shall think meet to prescribe; I know the wisdom of this Noble Company,
cannot be wanting to appoint such Rules as shall for ever secure the Pagan
interest in Albion, and satisfy your Majesty's utmost Expectation;
notwithstanding since the nature of my Employments, and some years strict
enquiery into the ways and Inclinations of the people of Albion, may with
reason have rendered me capable of judging of the most secure, and convenient
ways to deal with them. I shall not be thought vain if I presume freely, to
deliver my opinion in this Matter. The Albionites where they have received
Graces or Favors from their Princes, are like the wanton Ass in the Fable,
ready to leap on their Master, and by the encouragement of two or three
benefits, they sawcily approach him with their ill natured Jeasts, and
constantly pester him with their rude Importunities, but when too much
Indulgence has rendered them Insupportable, do but show them the Rod, and like
Children they shrink, and with patience submit to the Justice of your
Correction; You remember their Insolence in Perkin's Rebellion, when with
unbounded Blasphemy they would threaten the Safety and Honor of our Royal
Master, and yet the Sword of Justice was no sooner unsheathed against them, but
with horror they fly, and call even to the Mountains to cover them, you have
heard with what patience they submitted to their Trials, and reproached even my
Sentence with their Base Servile Sufferings, my advice therefore is to follow
the example of the Great Polydorus, to get an Army of Pagans from Iberia and
Gothland, and so to Dragoon them into a civil compliance, Oh! that every year
would produce a Western Expedition, I Would soon rid the Kingdom of all our
Antagonist's, and make every Circuit more Terrible than an Inquisition, we have
too long nursed them with the Milk of our Affection, and like the profligate
Israelites they grumble at their Manna, Albion has Surfeited on Ease and
Prosperity, and the Feavour cannot abate but by leting of Blood, let us make a
full Harvest of these Hotheaded Christians (as they boast themselves) and at
once root out these obstinate Disturbers of our Peac: The Queen who was
naturally of a malicious sullen Temper, and who was not ignorant how stubborn
and averse the Albionites were to her Interest, had heard Poliorchetes speak
with a bundance of satisfaction, but being willing to hear what the rest would
propose, giving thanks to the Chancellor she expected with impatience their
Thoughts and Opinions. When Pedro rising up, said he could not but Applaud the
Zeal and Opinion of Poliorchetes, and wished that his design could be as easily
executed as proposed, that his aversion and malice to the Christians of Albion
had inspired him with such desires of Revenge, that with Nero he wished they
had all but one Neck, and that he among his Fraternity, did not doubt to find
thousands that would strive to be their Executioner, but that to his sorrow he
feared the Chancellours project, however well designed, would not be feasible,
for besides the Alarm that Foreign Auxiliaries would raise throughout the
Kingdom, the natural antipathy, that the Albionites had both to the Gauls, and
Iberians was such, that they would incontinently rise to Repel and Destroy
them, and that if those Foreigners should fail in their Attempt, the reproach
of the design would be wholly thrown on Lycogenes and his Court, and that it
would beget so implacable a malice in the Heart of the Albionites (who were
most of them Christians) that he might justly fear a general revolt, and
thereby the total ruin of the Pagan Interest in Albion for ever, his opinion
therefore was, that they should rather ensnare and delude them, and so at
advantage cut them off and destroy them, it is known said he how wonderfully our
fraternity have promoted the Mohammedan Interest by their subtle and secret
Plots and Contrivances, have not we by fomenting and raising Divisions between
the Regular and Dissenting Christians in Albion more weakened the strength of
the pretended Reformado's than ever Polydorus by his Dragoons or Contributions?
Albion (with submission to the Chancellor) is not by public Hostility to be
forced, they are valiant in their Natures, and stubborn in their Principles,
and though the hopeful Doctrine of Passive Obedience and sweet Non-resistence
has been useful unto us, and lulled them for a while, yet it may be dangerous
to raise those sleeping Lions within them, lest we too late repent our
over-fond Credulity, and to our sorrow feel the effects of their resentments;
set your Policies on work if you wish to prevail, and if you must strike, let
it be in the dark; we all of us know we are sick, and out of order, but few of
us consider the root and cause of our distemper, all disinteressed persons
would think at first view, that we were now in a hopeful way of thriving, we
have a King not only a Pagan and our Friend, but zealous and resolved to go
through with his work; but alas is resolution sufficient without means? It Is
true, by his power he can secure us for a while; but what will that signify to
a lasting satisfaction? How do our Enemies wait and gape for his death? And
with the hopes of revenge after his dissolution they patiently submit to their
present Impositions; we know the main Pillars whereon they all lean,
Anaximander and Artemisia are their delight and their hope, the Princess
Philadelphia waits too in reversion, and from these three do spring all our
fears and misfortunes, and I and my Brethren bear the Title of our great
Prophet, and suffer his Cause to be shaken by the weak intercession of three
single Lives; Oh Holy Loyola, our first Holy Patron and Foander, how would thy
mighty Spirit fret and and grieve within thee, should thou see the degenerate
baseness of thy unworthy Followers? Where are the Records of all our Glorious
Heroes that have trod on the Necks of Emperors, and pierced the Hearts of Kings,
to propagate and vindicate our Holy Religion, can we forget Borgia, Clement,
Ravilliac and others, who have freely Sacrificed themselves for their Religion,
and for reasons less considerable than ours, and can we tamely remit all our
present Advantages, and be bafled of our future hopes, by the weak puny
opposition of three petty pretenders?' No, no, continued he, let us lay hold on
the present opportunity, and at once finish our long wished for deliverance:
These three must fall a Sacrifice to our Prophet, and from the removal of that
cause will all our other Apprehensions cease.

Father Pedro had always bore such reputation with Lycogenes and Messalina that
they looked on his Counsels little inferior to Oracles, and though the
execution of them had always proved prejudicial, through their great violence,
to the Pagan Interest, yet they could not but value the sincerity of his
meaning, and always applauded his wise apprehensions, they knew his proposals
in this Zealous Oration were very consonant to reason, and agreeable to their
true interest, but knowing that the Eyes of all Europe were upon these three
Princes, and that the least baseness and imposition upon them would engage all
Christendom in their quarrel, they could not so readily conclude, or resolve
upon any violence against their persons; besides, Pedro in a small Apology
afterward insinuated to the Company, the inconvenience of letting the King
know any thing of this Project, if happily they should all agree upon it. For
(said he) though I know Lycogenes 's Zeal would make him overlook a thousand
difficulties, yet nature and conscience could not with any decency or reason be
supposed capable of being so wholly obliterated as to consent to any barbarity
upon the persons of his own children; but again, what may prove a sufficient
ground of scruple in him, may at the same time leave us free and disinteressed
from every thing and person that stands in opposition to our designs. The
Company however upon the Considerations aforesaid were very unwilling to engage
in Pedro's Resolutions or Proposals, and incontinently desired the Marchioness
de Tomazo, to give her opinion of this grand Affair. The Marchioness who had
been a Woman of Amor most of her time, and who now, though Age had
ungenerously deprived her of the power to please, was very fond and Ambitious
of being thought a Woman of Intrigue, had heard the violent Counsels, and
Proposals of the Chancellor and Father Pedro with a great deal of impatience
and displeasure; she could not digest those rough and hard terms of cutting of
Throats, Poisoning, or Assassinations, she had been always used to Amorous
Sighs, Billet deux, and Assignations; therefore rising and making her
Compliment to Messalina, and giving a hard look on Poliorchetes and Pedro, she
thus began: It Is not without the greatest regret imaginable, that I find my
self obliged to contradict persons whose known wisdom and experience in the
world may with reason claim an entire submission of judgment from me, and
though the command and service of her Majesty, may sufficiently apologize for
the freedom and liberty of my opinion, yet I doubt not from the nature of the
business in hand to prove that what both these honorable persons have
delivered as their opinions, if followed, will be inconsistent with the safety
of her Majesty, prejudicial to the Pagan interest in Albion for ever, and
extremely difficult, if not impossible to be brought about; nor do I need to
say much to dissuade this Honorable Company from the following their
proposals, since Father Pedro has already evine'd and made clear the fallacy of
the Chancellor 's project, and the rest of the Company have sufficiently showed
their dislike of Father Pedro 's; I shall now therefore proceed to give my
opinion, and if I shall have the good fortune to convince your reasons, and
draw you into a concurrence, you will then be so just to believe that the
freedom of my censure proceeds from other causes than that of mere
contradiction; we all agree in the main point, that some course must be taken
for re-establishing and securing the Pagan Interest in Albion, so as that it
should not seem entirely to depend on the uncertain life of the King, and
though the opinion of my self and the Count Davila, who doubtlessreceives all
his measures from the Conclave, and from Boanerges the High Priest, have been
by these two Gentlemen opposed, at least neglected, yet I have not been so
apprehensive as to hear any new thing proposed, as is capable of making me or
the Count recede from our former resolntions, I am sure if it take it is the
only effectual way to preserve us entire; I am as sure it is as easy, as in a
matter of that importance can be wished, it may be brought about with so little
discomposure of the public peace, that it shall rather gain the general
applause of the Kingdom; will not the attaining our desires answer all
expectations? what necessity of cutting those Throats which with abundance of
ease we can make instrumental and accessory to our designs, the supposition of
an Heir Male quashes all other pretenders in a moment; and surely Albion is not
so barren or ill natured as to deny Lycogenes a Son. No, no, (replys
Poliorchetes, interrupting the Marchioness) we have daily experience of the
fruitfulness of the Women of Albion, but yet we cannot apprehend how Lycogenes
can expect to reap where he has not had the power, or the will to sow: The will
indeed (said Aspasia sighing) I believe her Majesty can vouch for, but to the
sorrow and confusion of us all, he wants the power: Let us then (continued the
Marchioness) no longer deplore, but endeavor to supply those unfortunate
defects of the King our Master, consider on what nice points our Honor and
Interest depend, time will not stay for vain and fruitless wishes, and if we
slip so fair an opportunity, we shall seem to despise providence, ruin our
interest for ever, and fall the reproach of our Enemies, and unpitied by all
the Pagans throughout the World. Polyorchetes had heard these last words with
wonderful surprise, for his thoughts having run wholly on the extirpation of
the Christians by Fire and Sword, he had not so much as dreamed of any
possibility of milder means, and now guessing at what the Marchioness had
insinuated, he was extremely tickled with the project, and desired the
Marchioness, That since she had proposed something extraordinary, she would be
pleased to explain her self, so as that they might endeavor to solve any
difficulties that might arise upon a strict examination of the design: The
difficulty's (replied the Marchioness) are so small, in comparison of that
advantage we shall reap, that among us they will not admit of a dispute;
besides, we have had a president of what I propose, which though it miscarried
in the main, yet it was not for want of power, but will of some Partys
concerned to bring it about; That an Heir is absolutely necessary to confirm
and settle our otherwise fading hopes we all agree; and shall not we submit to
necessity, and endeavor to restore by art what envious nature, or cursed
fortune have ruined or withheld? It must be so, (replied Messalina) it must be
so, and there is no other to uphold my tottering Crown: It must be so, and yet
my boding Soul foretells it will not succeed; these saucy Albionites, will still
be prying, and every step I make will have remarks. Rejoice, Dread Sovereign,
(replied Polyorchetes) (who had already taken that hint) the Marchioness has in
one word finished what the united strength of my dull brain could never
attempt, but now the game is up, I Will keep the scent, and work it on to a
desired perfection. Why should your Majesty (replied Pedro) despair at all of
due success? Does your Majesty want power, or friends, or opportunity to act
what a Predecessor and Namesake with so much disadvantage had effected if
Philippo had proved but half so generous as is the brave Lycogenes: Can you
doubt the success of any Enterprise when you have so powerful assistance even
from your Enemies? Could she carry on a design of the same nature even to the
brink of performance, so as to amuse, nay, to convince all orders of the
Kingdom of the reality of it? And can you doubt at last of failing? She had a
sharp-sighted Parliament, near five hundred of the wisest in the Kingdom to
combat with, who were strict in their observance, suspicious of her dealing,
and resolute against any imposition; she had the Nobility on one hand, the King
her Husband of the other; and yet she baffled all but that narrow-hearted
Prince, who like the Dog in the Manger could neither eat the Hay himself, nor
would suffer the Horses; he had seen himself incapable of reestablishing the
Pagan interest by the assurance of an Heir, and was so covetous and mean as to
hinder the propagation of it by another, whereas your Majesty stands on sure
grounds, you have a strong party in the Court of wise and able men to advise
you, you have a potent Army ready to protect and defend you, but above all you
have a Husband and a King to assist, and further you; who dares even suspect
you? who would presume to prove you? By your word, you create an Heir, and your
command settles the Kingdom for ever. Thus Pedro spoke, and a general applause
run through the whole Company, there remained only Aspasia and the Queen to
give their Sentiments and Opinions, and Aspasia declaring in short, that Father
Pedro had wholly satisfied her thoughts and desires in this juncture, and that
she wholly submitted to the judgment of the Queen. Messalina raising her self,
briefly gave her resolution thus: Nothing can give us greater encouragement and
assurance of success, than the zeal and fidelity of you our beloved
Counselors, and since our business presses for a speedy conclusion, I shall
need say no more, than that I do, and shall assent to what the Majority of you,
viz. the Marchioness de Tomazo, Aspasia, and Pedro have laid down; there
remains therefore no more but that you immediately consult of the manner and
method of bringing it on, and from time to time to communicate your advice to
us; I advise and think fit that Boanerges the High Priest our most Holy
Kinsman, have timely notice of your proceedings, as also Polydorus our Royal
Friend and Ally, that they may take care to order Affairs in Foreign Parts, so
as that we may have the universal assistance of all our Friends to promote a
Project so highly advantageous to all their Interests.

This gracious Speech and Condescension was received with unspeakable joy by
the Counsel, and Father Pedro stepping to the Door, gave orders for private
Thanksgiving throughout all the Mosques in Albion, as also for Processions,
Feasts, and other expressions of joy; and having again seated himself, they
immediately fall close to the point. The first business they resolve on is,
That being five in number, viz. the Count, Pedro, Polyorchetes, the Chancellor,
the Marchioness de Tomazo, and Aspasia, they severally have several Employments
and Offices assigned them, for the more effectual and speedy accomplishment of
their business. The Count who by his Office and Interest with Boanerges, could
claim a Domination over the Pagan Priests, was to summon a Convocation, and to
give them instructions how to disperse the News of her Conception, and to
insinuate, as if by Divine Inspiration they knew it would be a Prince, as also
to quash any Objections or Doubts concerning it, and to make remarks of the
persons: Father Pedro was to be made one of the Privy Council, and as he was
one of the chief Contrivers at first, so now he was to enliven and confirm the
report of the Queens Conception at the public Board, and to represent it with
all the seeming Candor imaginable, he was to silence all Disputes and Contests
that might happily arise upon it, and to make motions to the Board, to give
such order concerning her Majesty, and the Child, as should gain a General
Approbation and belief throughout the Kingdom, and though there arose a
Controversy whether it were not fitter for some other Pagan Lords of Albion to
espouse this part, yet they soon concluded on the ability of Pedro, who was
better qualified to represent it in handsome Colors, and consequently would go
down the glibber, and pass secure with the people, seeing they had so good
Vouchers as Privy-Councellors: The Chancellor being a Man of an hardened
Constitution, was appointed to wait with diligence against the time of the
pretended Birth, and by a positive Asseveration, if any suspicion should arise
(as in all Cheats probably may happen) he was to maintain the Rem in Re, which
from so grave a person as the chief Judge of Conscience, would surely be
believed, and as readily assented to, as the words of an Oracle: Aspasia being
concerned so near Messalina as Lady of the Bedchamber, etc. She was to Caress
the Ladys with the joyful News of the Queens Conception, and from time to time
insinuate passages belonging to Childbearing, to give an account of the growth
of the Burden, and to make the thing feasible she was to carry. on a suspicion
or fear of a Miscarriage, and it being once granted that she could possibly
Miscarry, included the belief that she was really Teeming: And now there was
none but the Marchioness remaining, who being a Woman, as is before said, of a
quick Judgment in Intrigues, and who knew well how to manage an Imposture of
that nature, it was laid upon her with Secrecy and Assurance to procure two or
three young wholesome Women whose time of Delivery should critically agree with
the Queen's time allotted and set down by this Council; the Marchioness was not
dissatisfied with the Task, though she could not but be sensible it required
depth of Judgment, a great deal of discreet Enquiry, and continual Care to
manage them to a Hairs breadth, lest any unlucky accident might spoil the whole
Intregue, but upon a little consideration she remembered she had heard an
Inkling of a young Kinswoman of her own, how that through weakness she had been
forced to surrender her Virginity to the Assaults of a young Spark, who had
since forsaken her, and had withal lest her a sure pledge of his Love and
Vigor, so that being so well encouraged at first she readily submits to the
Commands of the Board, and engages upon Honor to answer their Expectation; and
now the generals being concluded on and appointed, they disperse, and forthwith
apply themselves to their several Employments, and as a Prologue to their
intended Villainy, they give out, among their own Party, at least, the necessity
of Unity in their Prayers to their Saints and the Deity, to send their
Majesty's an Heir to succeed him in his Throne and Dominions, and to settle
their Holy Religion in this Heretical Land, they cause Processions and
Pilgrimages, Offerings and Supplications, to be made, first to the great Saint
at Loretto, then to St. Winifred; and they cause Messalina to repair to several
Waters that are famous Antidotes against Barrenness, tho at the same time they
did not consider that the People looked upon it very awkard and strange, that
the Queen had never found out this way of preparing for Childbearing before;
but such are the practices of the Pagan Religion, that the greatest Villainies
and Rogueries they intend to commit are still preceded and ushered in with
great appearances of Sanctity; and now all things being in a readiness; the
Queen declares her self publicly to be with Child, and Orders were given for
public Thanksgiving throughout the Isles, and in other Foreign parts;
Rejoycings and Feastings were made by the Kings Residents and Ambassadors;
especially in Rome and Gaul; as if it were not enough to impose so great a
Villiany on the whole Kingdom, without enforcing them to prevaricate with the
Deity in their Prayers, and to make Petitions for that which really was not;
but notwithstanding all the Contrivance and Advice to carry on this Intrigue,
the People, especially the Christian Nobles and Gentry of Albion were mightily
surprised with so improbable an Accident; and though by reason of an
Indisposition, which Messalina for some while before lay under, the Kings
weakness and other circumstances, they could not readily free themselves from a
suspicion of Treachery, yet they resolved to bear themselves with all
moderation, and to have a diligent Eye upon Messalina and all about her, the
first real occasion of dislike was, that the Queen did not treat the Christian
Ladies of Albion, especially the Princess Philadelpha, with that freedom as the
joy and pride of so great a happiness, if real, would naturally have prompted
her to; for she would resent it highly if she could but observe any of the
Christians making the least observations of her Breasts, Belly, her Look, or
any other Symptom, by which Women in that Condition are easily distinguished;
another great reason was, that she seemed to slight the Pretensions of the
Princess Artemisia, so as there was not the least intimation given her to be at
the Queens Labor till within a very few days before she was Delivered;
besides, the Confidence of the Pagan Party did strangely startle the People,
when like Oracles they would affirm that of necessity it must be a Prince:
These and many other material circumstances made the Albionites talk broadly of
the business; nor were Lycogenes and Messalina ignorant of their Sentiments;
however having the Power absolutely in their hands, they were resolved to cut
that knot which they found impossible to untie, and since they had thus far
advanced in a business of that importance, they resolved to go through and
bring it about, though with a thousand absurdities and incoherences; for
besides the alteration of her Reckoning, which proceeded partly from a fear of
disappointment if the Woman that came first should have brought forth a Girl,
but chiefly to amuse the Nobility and Gentry of the Court and Kingdom, who
would doubtless have made it their business in behalf of the Princess Artemisia
and the Kingdom, to attend and watch that all things might have been carried
fairly and aboveboard; I say, besides the alteration of her reckoning she would
give out upon every turn different places of her pretended lying-in, sometimes
she would give orders for R -- d, at other times she would remove her fancy to
H -- Court, but in reality St. Jaques was the place resolved on, for Alba
Regalis the whole party disallowed, because by reason of the multitude and
concourse of People that constantly attend there, she could not possibly have
been so privately Delivered as the Intrigue did necessarily require; besides,
there was no convenience for the Child to be brought through the Galleries or
Lodgings, but in the Palace of St. Jaques, there was a Seraglio and a Mosque
adjoining with abundance of winding by dark Chambers, secret Passages,
Trap-doors and dark Corners, where not only one or two of the Women were with
great security and secrecy kept till the time of their delivery, but where the
Queen might have the Child foisted into her Bed reaking and hot from the Womb,
but in the heat of all this intrigue and design Lycogenes was unluckily put in
mind that by the Laws of Albion the presence of one or more of the Christian
Prelates was to be at the Birth of every Royal Infant indispensably required;
to resolve this difficulty a Council is immediately called, and after sundry
debates it is concluded, that some way or other must be found to bring all or
most of the dissenting part into a praemunire, and so by aggravation either to
endanger their lives, or at least to clap them up and secure them till the
Queens Delivery; accordingly a flaw was immediately found and the Prelates
forthwith confined: and now nothing but the presence of the Princess
Philadelpha was feared, but what cannot the craft of the wicked Jebusites bring
about? that Princess had unfortunately complained of some small indisposition,
when the Queen immediately takes the hint, and by the means of Pedro and some
other Malcontents, she prevails with her Physician to persuade her to take a
Journey to the Waters of Baijae, though the Operation of those Waters was
manifestly known to be contrary to the Princess's Distemper, they being
loosening, and she wanting Restringents, but her absence was absolutely
necessary, and therefore by any means to be obtained; the Princess according to
their wishes leaves the Court, and they were resolved to do their business
before her return; and now all things to appearance seemed to favor the
design, the time prescribed drew near, their greatest Adversaries were removed,
the Court Party, and Pagan Priests, with daily Stories and Shams were amusing
and taking off the attention of the Christians; all things seemed smooth, and
the Critical Minute was at hand, when news was brought to Messalina, that one
of the Women was in Labor, immediately the Queen takes her Chair, and hastes
over to St. Jaques, but before she had well ascended the Stairs, she was told,
that Woman had brought forth a Girl, with which being for the present
confounded, she descends, leaving before such Orders as were necessary; the
other Women expecting their Times Daily and Hourly; and indeed ere three Days
were over she receiving another Summons, repair forthwith to St. Jaques, she
stays there all Night with long expectation of Success, early the next Morning
she receives the glad Tidings that a Man Child was Born, which with all speed
was conveyed to the Dormitory adjoining to her Bedchamber, in the same reeking
Circumstances it was Born in, and having before taken care for the conducting
of it to the Queens Bed, the Alarm is given at Alba Regalis, that the Queen was
in Labor; Lycogenes had that Morning rose something earlier than ordinary, and
had crossed over to his own side on purpose to draw off the Men with him, and
consequently to favor the Cheat, by leaving as few as possible about the
Queens Apartment; in the mean time Madamoizell de W -- s having before given
the Infant a small Opiate to hinder its Crying for the present lays it gently
in a large Warming-Pan made on purpose, and lined with velvet for the more
commodious and easy carriage, and the Queen rising under pretense of giving
liberty for warming the Bed Madomo^elle unlades her vessel and leaves the
Infant in the place appointed; the Queen strait returning to Bed the Room
immediately fills, tho none were summoned but such as Lycogenes thought were
afraid to make a doubt or a scrutiny into the truth of it, or those whom
Lycogenes had already prepared to swallow and favor the imposition; and now
the pretended Prince being Born the Pagans of Albion begin their Jubilee,
Latroon Governor of Iberia begins to double the Persecution of the Christians
there, Polydorus by a strict Alliance and LEAGUE with Lycogenes, thinks of
nothing but an Universal Monarchy, Lycogenes doubles the Oppressions of his
Christian Subjects, Messalina boasts of the downfall of Heresy, and a
perpetual Regency, during her Life: The poor Christians, especially-the
Albimites, though something apprehenfive of the Consequences of this Intrigue,
were yet by their constant Remarques of all Transactions since the Report of
Messalina's Conception sufficiently satisfied of the fallacy and cheat, and
resolved on measures which they doubted not would in a little time unravel the
whole Mystery.

FINIS.

