Seasonable ADVICE TO THE CITY, In a Letter from a Secluded Member of
Parliament to a Gentleman in London.
SIR,
Fortune assists the bold; this you need not travel so far as Florence to
experiment, seeing our great Officers of Safety stagger at noise. Had your City
Magistrates been confident of their own Authority and Strength, the Iron Gate
had opened, and these Inohantments which affrighted them had vanished, Your
City, as Monsieur de Rohan said of England, is a Beast indomitable, when
provoked; and cannot be destroyed but by itself, having now Besides the
Magazine of Arms, (...) and Money, ( the Sinews of War) that Authority which
others want, with the Concurrence of all the Nation, except the common Enemy.
All that can be required to a happy Issue, consists under GOD in your
Resolution to Defend your selves, and trust to your own Courage: all other
Parties are only Factions and you the Umpaire. It lies now in your own Manage
to break the Yoke, and by gaining your Liberty, to set us Free. If you join
with any particular Interest, you yield the Cause, and suffer them to ride you
for their own business, changing your Masters not your Bondage. If you keep
your Swords in your Hands, and your Money in your purses, the very Tax, Excize,
and Custom which you may spare, will bear your change and tire your Opposers.
Above all, suspect Cajoles; Treaties are yet new to you, and dagerous to the
best experienced, having to do with Men that hold no Faith: Oaths Promises in
such a Juncture serve only to delude the Credulous, and gain easy secure
Victories: He that trusts not cannot be deceived. The yielding any Point in
Treaty makes way for new Demands, and does encourage hope to overcome. You will
find it most safe and Honorable to insist upon a Free Parliament, and take in
the considerable Vote of the Nation, without relying yon Soldiers of Fortune,
whose Trade is to perpetuate the War, and their Livelihood to eat up the
industrious. I wish you the Honor to oblige that Thanks which the Peoples
Deliverance may challenge. So rests,

Your Faithful Friend to serve you.

London, Printed for N.B. 1659.


