A Seasonable Caution to all LOYAL SUBJECTS, AGAINST Antimonarchical Principles.
In an Answer to a pretended Petition of the Common Hall, in London, assembled
on Midsummer-Day last, to the Honorable House of Commons; which is designed
for a Vindication of the Common Hall, as innocent of the Affront and Indignity
thereby offered, by some ill-minded Persons in their Name, to the Supreme
Authority.
WHereas the said printed Paper (which, verbatim, follows in the last part of
this sheet) was soon after Midsummer last published, under the Title of, An
Account of the Proceedings of the Common Hall, on Midsummer-day last; thereby
pretending it to be done to prevent Misrepresentation; and asserting a Petition
therein set forth, to be unanimously approved of, and agreed upon, by that
public Assembly of the Livery, representing the whole City of London,) to be
presented to the High Court of Parliament: To which, this Answer was then
immediately printed, with Allowance, and some thousands put into the Hawkers
Hands, which were so industriously bought up, or stifled, that very few Copyes
came to light: But now the same Paper having been (as we are informed) secretly
spread abroad amongst their Majesty's Subjects, as well in the City as also
into most Corporations, and other parts of the Kingdom, (for what design let
sober and thinking Men judge,) to the great reproach of this City, and
dissatisfaction of many honest and well-meaning Persons; who from thence, and
from the restless Endeavors of some Men, who by the same unusual Methods,
which they condemned as Crimes in others, do now create and set up instruments
to serve their own Turns, though to the disturbance and hazard of the Public.
We are under a necessity, by this Answer, again to countermine such dangerous
and pernicious Engineers. We cannot imagine it was so Printed and Published
with any color of Authority, but must rather conclude it was done by some ill
minded Persons, to cast an Odium on this great City, and to create
Misunderstandings between their Majesty's Subjects, under a disguise of
Opposition to Popery, though principally designed to serve their own Turn.

It Is true, and cannot be denied, than a small number of Citizens (when so duly
assembled) make a Common Hall, and the Petition in that sense, may not
improperly be so styled: But it does not from thence follow, that the Matters
contained therein were assented unto, so as to be approved of, and desired by
more Persons than were so assembled together, and personally present approving
of the same, when it was read and proposed to them.

And therefore we do judge it a duty highly incumbent on us, (as we are Members
of that great Body, and were the same Day present in Common Hall, but heard not
one Word of that Petition) to publish this Apology on behalf of our selves and
the whole City, as a Vindication (of that great Body) humbly offered to their
Sacred Majesty's, and both Houses of Parliament, as also to the whole Kingdom;
for which we have this to say, That the Authors and Managers of that Imposture,
are either afraid or ashamed to own it; and this we do also to prevent (as
much as in us lies) the evil Influence that Paper may have on the Minds of
easy and credulous Persons: To the end Truth it self (which needs no little
arts or tricks to support it) may, by its own sinews, at last prevail to
undeceive such as have been already misinformed thereby.

We pass by the Matter of the Petition, and what entertainment it met withal
from the House of Commons, as more fit for consideration of our Superiors.

And only take notice, how vehement and earnest some Men were, in that great
Assembly, to put the Commoners in Nomination before the sitting Aldermen, which
greatly surprised many of the Electors; and it was manifest, scarce one in
twenty understood the Question when it was put, in regard of the Noise and
Opposition, which was made by those that did apprehend it: And it could not but
be matter of trouble (to such as soberly desire and consult the public Peace
and Tranquillity of this City) to observe what earnest endeavors were used to
invert Order and Decency therein, (as it were, shifting Feet and Face,) by
postponing such as are already advanced to the Dignity of Senators, to their
Inferiors in Nomination.

And to behold such a zeal for particular Persons, as if they had combined and
determined before they came there (as one Man) to carry on a D^sign, rather for
a particular Interest, than the whole, and with so much Heat and Passion, as if
they would proclaim a prejudice toward all that opposed.

These things we briefly touch upon, as matters deeply to be resented by every
good Citizen, so as to endeavor they may be laid aside for the future, to
promote that peaceable Temper and public Spirit, that should govern in every
Breast, in order to prevent caballing, and private Clubs, to serve a Turn, to
the hazard of our Public Weal.

And we shall now plainly declare what followed the public Election; for Truth
whereof we appeal to those many Hundreds then present, who are all ready to
attest the same.

When the choice of the Sheriffs, Chamberlain, Bridge Masters, and Ale-Conners,
were made, we concluded the Work of that Day was over, not dreaming, in the
least, of this Petition, or any other to be set up: But the Livery (as in a
Congregation, when Sermon is ended) made all toward the door, crowding to get
out, as we our selves did when many hundreds were gone before before, and
others pressing after; but never heard one Word of this Petition, till from the
Votes of the House of Commons, which puts us upon enquiry of our Brethren
concerning it.

And at length we were informed by those that happened to be in the rear, that
when most part of the Members were gone, or going away, this Petition was
proposed to be read; and that they, with the rest remaining, (out of curiosity
to know the Contents,) held up their Hand for the reading of it; but solemnly
affirmed, That most (of those so remaining) who so held up their Hands for
reading it, did not hold up their Hands for presenting it.

We shall close with our hearty Prayer to Almighty God, to make us every one
sensible, how far we have all (even the best of us) come short of our Duty,
that we may search our Hearts, and try our Ways, and see what cause we have all
to humble our selves under the mighty hand of God, both for our Hypocrisy and
Profaneness. And that we may all of us endeavor to lay aside Pride, Passion,
and Self-love, on the one hand, and Debauchery and Immorality on the other; and
labor more sincerely to discharge our Duty to God, our Neighbor, and our
Selves, as the only Means to make us good Christians; and then we shall be sure
to be good Subjects, and good Citizens; so as no longer to envy, despise, and
rail at, or prosecute each other; but to love as Brethren, and to make Truth
the badge of our Christian Profession.

This is the only way to promote the Honor and Reputation of our National
Church, and the Religion established by Law among us; whose Foundation is not
laid in Hypocrisy, and aspiring Dominion, under a Disguise of Religion, to
delude and ensnare the Honest and Well meaning to side with us, after the
example of our Adversaries; whose Designs as they have been, so they still are,
to undermine and subvert the Government. Therefore let us countermine them, in
amendment of our lives, to cr^dit this our Holy Religion; which needs no other
Reformation, but that of Manners in its Members; according to its pure and
wholesome Doctrine and Discipline.

And as the Honorable House of Commons have, by their Impartial Votes,
declared those who invaded Charters, and c. and those who endeavored to take
off the Penal Laws, and the Test, etc. to be equal Transgressors; though we are
satisfied the Major part, on either side, might have had no such corrupt
intention, as may render them Criminals, but rather acted by awe, influence, or
misguidance of others: So let us consider each other as Christians, and learn
the Discipline of Self-Denial, (after our Redeemer's example,) to be more ready
to forget and forgive, than (Devil like) to recriminate and revenge, and rake
into each others Follies and Faults, tormenting only to be tormented, thereby
provoking one another, and God's vengeance on us all, when it is the duty of
every one (For who has so acted as not to need it?) rather to labor after,
and press for an Healing Act of Indemnity, (and Woe be to them that have
hitherto hindered it, as the only means to unite our Divisions in these our
greatest dangers; and to support our Religion, Law, and Liberties, as the
surest Bulworks against our Common Enemies.

Here follows the said printed Paper, and pretended Petition, so published in
the Name of the Common Hall.

A true Account of the Proceedings of the COMMON HALL, at the Election of
Officers for the Year Ensuing, held at the Guild Hall of the City of London,
June 24. 1689. As also the Petition of the Citizens of London to the Commons of
England assembled in Parliament.
ABout Eleven a Clock on the said Day, (the Hall being full of the Liveries of
the respective Companies) the Lord Mayor and the Court of Aldermen proceeded to
the Hustings, where, after a Proclamation for Silence, made by the Common
Crier, there was a Speech made by the Deputy-Recorder, and after him another by
the Common Sergeant, both setting forth the occasion of their being met there
that Day; and desiring their procedure in the business of the Day, might be
carried on with that Unanimity and Prudence, as might both promote their own
Honor and Advantage, and their Majesty's Interest: Which Speeches were
received with the Applause of the whole Hall.

After which (the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen being withdrawn in the
Council Chamber, and the Two Sheriffs remaining upon the Hustings) the Names of
the Candidates for Sheriffs were Read; which were, Mr. Richard Chiswel,
Stationer, Mr. Francis Child, Goldsmith, Mr. Richard Scot, Salter, Sir Thomas
Lane Alderman, Cloathworker, Christopher Lethelier Alderman, Mr. John Hubland,
Grocer, Mr. John Deagle, Draper; and some of these being Aldermen, and some
Commoners, there arose a Dispute whether the Aldermen should have the
Precedence in their Nomination, or whether they should be nominated
promiscuously, without any distinction of Aldermen or Commoners; and the
Question being put, it was carried for the latter, as the Right of the Hall.
Then each Candidate being severally proposed to the Hall for their Suffrage,
Christopher Lethelier, Esquire, Alderman, and Mr. John Hubland, Grocer, were
Unanimously Chosen; and by the Sheriffs immediately declared to be duly Elected
Sheriffs of London and Middlesex for the Year Ensuing.

In the next place, the Hall proceeded to the Election of a Chamberlain, the
Candidates being Sir Peter Rich, the late Chamberlain, Mr. John Jekyl, Mr.
Matthew Meriton, Mr. Leonard Robinson, Mr. Edward Hartwel, Mr. Edward Bushel,
Mr. Benjamin Ducame, Mr. (...) Rooksby, who being severally proposed to the
Hall, the Majority appeared to be for Mr. Leonard Robinson; which being
declared by the Sheriffs, there were some that cried out, A. Poll, a Poll; but
the Sheriffs being desirous to save the Citizens that Trouble, proposed the
putting up the Question a second time between Sir Peter Rich, and Mr. Leonard
Robinson; to which the Hall having consented, they were both proposed to the
Hall again; and the Majority then evidently appearing to be for Mr. Leonard
Robinson, he was a second time declared by the Sheriffs to be duly elected, and
the Demand of a Poll was no farther insisted on.

The Hall then proceeded to the Choice of Bridge-Masters, and Mr. Thomas
Nicholas, and Mr. Isaac Puller (the former Bridge-Masters) were continued.

They next proceeded to the Election of Auditors of the Chamber and Bridge
House Accounts, and of them, Mr. John Morice, Mr. Peter Hubland, and Ralph Box
Esquire were continued; and for the fourth, Slingsby Bethel Esquire and Mr. Justas
Odgar were Candidates, but the Choice fell upon the former.

Last of all, they proceeded to choose their Ale-Conners, and the three
surviving ones being continued, one Johnson was chosen for the fourth, in the
room of him that was deceased.

The Election of Officers being thus over, there was immediately a Petition,
(proposed to be presented to the Honorable the House of Commons) given into
the Hands of the Common Sergeant, to be read, for the Approbation of the Hall:
And the Question being put, Whether it should be Read, or not? It was
unanimously carried in the Affirmative; and after it was read, as unanimously
approved; which was sufficiently Testified both by several Vollies of loud
Shouts and Acclamations, and also by their desire to have it read again, which
was done accordingly, and thereupon their Shouts and Acclamations were again
repeated. Then the Question was put, Who should present it? And it was carried
by the whole Hall, That it should be presented by the Sheriffs and the common
Sergeant, with such other Citizens as the Sheriffs should think fit to
accompany them. The Petition it self was as follows:

To the Honorable the Commons of England, in Parliament assembled. The humble
Petition of the Citizens of London in the Common Hall assembled.
Most humbly Shows,
THat the Body Representative of the City of London, in Common Hall assembled,
for the Choice of their Sheriffs, cannot but with all humble Thankfulness
acknowledge upon this Occasion, the infinite Mercy of Almighty God, in his
Gifts of heroic Courage, and excellent Conduct to His now Majesty; and Wisdom,
and Council to your Honors, whereby the Petitioners Right to elect their chief
Magistrates freely and quietly, has been wonderfully preserved, all their
Liberties, and the very Being of Justice, Peace, and Prosperity in the City,
depending thereupon.

That by the gracious Influence of Divine Providence, this City is become very
powerful and a strong Bulwork for the defense of the Protestant Interest, and
the Security and Quiet of His now Majesty and the Kingdom; if an universal
Amity and Unity be preserved amongst the Protestant Citizens, who do equally
and perfectly renounce and detest all Communion whatsoever with the Papacy, and
the Roman Church, and adhere only to the Authority of the Holy Scriptures of
the Old and New Testament: The principal Danger impending over our English
Church and State, being from the politic Popish Designs to divide the
Protestants as they did heretofore in the beginning of the Reformation, whereby
they first subdued and destroyed the Calvinists, and then with the like
blood-thirsty-Cruelty suppressed the Lutherans, whom they had deluded to help
them in the Destruction of their Protestant Brethren.

Your Petitioners therefore most Humbly Pray, That by the Wisdom and Justice of
this Honorable House, the Ancient Right of this City freely to elect their
Sheriffs, and other Magistrates, may be fully and clearly vindicated from all
Invasions of it, and Questions concerning it: And for that purpose, That the
Bill for restoring Corporations to their Rights and Privileges may be
perfected, as Your weighty Affairs will permit.

And in regard of the present dangerous Conspiracy of the Papists, and their
Accomplices, against the Protestant Religion, our King, and Government, and the
Invasion threatened by the French King, whereby the united Force of all the
Protestants is most apparently necessary; They pray that our Gracious King may
be freed from all Restraints of using His Protestant Subjects, indifferently,
in His Military and Civil Services, according to their several Qualities and
Abilities, wherewith God Almighty, Nature, Education and Experience, have
endowed them, to that very end, that they might be useful to their King and
Country, and therein serve their God in their Generation.

Guild Hall, London, June 24. 1689. And your Petitioners shall always pray, etc.
This Petition was the next day ( viz. June 25.) presented to the Honorable
House of Commons, who at first rejected it, for want of being signed; but being
afterward signed by the Sheriffs and Common Sergeant, as the sense of the
Common Hall; it was ordered by the House to be read, which was done accordingly.

Thus much was thought necessary to be made public for general satisfaction;
as well to prevent Mis-representations, as to let the World know that the
Citizens of London can now choose their own Officers, without running the hazard
of being indicted for Rioters, and are now no more liable to have Officers
imposed upon them against their Consents: For which valuable Mercy, let us all
in the first place return our unfeigned Thanks to Almighty God, as the blessed
Author of it; and in the next place acknowledge the Goodness of their gracious
Majesty's, whom God has made the glorious Instruments thereof. And for whom
therefore we ought all heartily to pray, God bless King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1690.


