A Seasonable ANSWER To a Late PAMPHLET, Entitled, The Vindication OF Slingsby
Bethel, Esquire One of the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex.

By one who is a Citizen of London, and an Inhabitant of the Borough of
Southwark.

Nescis quo valeat nummus? quem praebeat usum?
Panis ematur, olus, vini sextarius: add
Queis humana sibi doleat nature a negatis.
Hor. Sat. 1. LONDON, Printed for C. Mearne. 1681.

A Seasonable ANSWER To a Late PAMPHLET, ENTITLED, The Vindication of Slingsby
Bethel, Esquire one of the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, etc.
THE City of London is a place of so great Consideration, and well known to
abound so much with men of True Loyalty, undoubted Integrity, plentiful
Fortunes, generous Tempers, untainted Credit, and every way fit to discharge
its principal Offices, that it cannot be under any necessity of taking up with
persons of Factious Principles, Moot Honesty, Invisible Estates, narrow and
shrivel'd Souls, or Fly-blown Reputations, to disgrace any of the Honorable
Employments in it.

And yet to the great surprise of multitudes that did, and that did not know
him, Mr. Slingsby Bethel, one of the most Notorious, and most Obscure men that
ever was made Free of the Leather-Sellers Company, was the last year, by the
feverish Zeal of a boisterous puffing Party of mistaken Citizens, blown up into
a Sheriff of London and Middlesex, though since that sudden Gust of popular
breath is laid, he has dwindled and shrunk up into a Thing not commensurate to
the Dignity of an Ale-Conner.

For now that his fond misled Friends have had time to consider and understand
him, they have with a Modesty to be encouraged, disowned the Man and his
Manners; and notwithstanding their late Midsummer Complement, upon occasion of
Discourse concerning him, have been ready to blush for him since, as much as
they sweated for him at first.

The Borough of Southwark, comparatively with any other Borough, or indeed City
in England, is much more a Neighbor to the City of London in its Trade and
Commerce, and in the number and condition of its Inhabitants, than in its
Situation; and was never so barren of Men, Honest, and Wise, and Wealthy, as
that it needed to cross the Water for Burgesses to serve in Parliament.

And yet at the last Election the same Slingsby Bethel having now gained the
Additional Title of Mr. Sheriff and Esquire to promote his pretensions, becomes
very officious in tendering us his Service in the House of Commons; and with as
little Invitation to our Pockets as ever we had to his Table, over the Bridge
come his Horse and He (the principal Burghers being not yet resolved which of
the two to make a Senator) and being encouraged by some few malcontent
Renegado's from amongst us, who like Whifflers came justling and making
Elbow-room for him, he sets up for Himself, and will be our Representative, and
put his hands into our Purses whether we will or no.

This way of Addressing the more considerable sort of our Burghers were so
unacquainted with, that presently we became curious in searching into the
qualifications of a person of such extraordinary Application; and upon enquiry
we received such a Character of him, as that the least limb of our Body, the
Men of Kentstreet it self, would disdain to send him up to Oxford as a
Representative Broomstick.

Indeed he had once the Honor to be returned by the Ward of Farrindon Without,
one of the two Commoners, of whom the Court of Aldermen were to choose the more
Worthy to be Alderman of their Ward; but it is to be noted, that he had the
Honor likewise to be rejected by that wise and impartial Court; both which put
together (especially considering the grounds of his boasted general Consent,
which, in defense of that Ward, I shall in its due place explain) I am apt to
think that the advantage of Credit from that Enterprise is not on his part so
great, as to give him any just encouragement of hoping ever to arrive at so
high a Dignity; but when Michaelmas is come, the Retinue discharged, the Horse
sold, and the Gold Chain restored, he must sit down content to be Slingsby
Bethel in cuerpo still.

Now for a Gentleman born and bred, one so well read and traveled as he has
been, and who is of too great a Spirit to stoop to the Office of Executioner,
to serve the Greatest Prince that ever was brought to the Block; for such a Man
to be so miserably defeated in his pretensions on both sides the Water, to be
so scornfully neglected, and re-buff'd in the Borough of Southwark, when he
came over, resolved to be their humble Servant; to be so unexpectedly
Dismounted and Un-Burgessed, when his Confidence of Success had already put him
to the trouble of preparing some Speeches for the House: And then in the City
to be denied Admittance into the Court of Aldermen; and while his younger
Brother, the other Sheriff, is a Member of it, for him to be forced to dance
Attendance upon it, to be made a Companion to Foot-boys, and to have no other
Diversion than what arises from being Spectator of the Olympic Exercise of
Span-Farthing: These are Indignities which no man of so equal a Mixture of Wit
and Bravery, can be expected to pass by un-revenged one way or other.

And therefore his Courage and Fancy being hereby raised, in a short time he
boldly sets up for an Author; and that he may be even with London and Southwark
together, he at once publishes a Libel upon both, under the Name of The
Vindication of Slingsby Bethel, etc.

But certainly this Man is under an ill Fate; he is not more unsuccessful in
his Adventures, than unfortunate in writing their Commentaries; he plays Booty
with his own good Name, in that which he calls his Vindication, and washes, and
lathers, and scrubs himself so long to no purpose, that he is such a Picture of
the Labor in Vain, that no Suburb Sign can match him.

He begins with a precarious Assertion of the Innocence of the former part of
his Life, thinking no doubt, that being an Old Man, and having been a
Traveller, he might have the Liberty which the Proverb allows him; and hoping
probably thereby to bury the Remembrance of his Pranks at Hamburgh (and I
question not but that, as well as he loves Money, he would be glad to be at the
Charge of Five Pound to have it done in Linen) but the mischief of it is, there
are several Merchants living, who were Witnesses of his Words and Actions
there, that can testify his first Paragraph to be false. Indeed he speaks with
a great deal of Diffidence of himself, and rather like one that desires, than
believes a thing to be true; however slily he carried himself in his Private
Station, and whatever there may be between God and his own Conscience, yet he
tells us, that he did not deserve (as he reasonably hopes) any Reproach from
Man. But to see how credulous Interest will make Men! How could he reasonably
hope, that none of his Contemporary Merchants at that Staple, should tell his
Famous History, and display him in his Colors at their Return into England? How
could he reasonably hope to survive all those who are able to justify to his
Face the Truth of what they had related, when he should have the Confidence to
deny it? How could he reasonably hope, that Factious and Turbulent Practices
should not deserve to be punished at least with Reproach and Infamy? How could
he reasonably hope -- But that I may encourage Modesty, especially in such a
one as He, for the sake of that blushing Parenthesis, I will spare him at
present; till he give me further occasion to deal more roughly with him.

From his private Station, which I cannot allow to extend any farther than to
his Continuance at Hamburgh: For after his Return into England, he himself
acknowledges, that he did embrace Civil Offices; and it is well known, that he
was always edging himself in to make one in all the late shiftings of the
Scene, and the Continuator of Bakers Chronicle attests him to have been
nominated one of the Counselors of State, who were to abjure the Family of the
Stuarts, and all Kingly Government; but these things it was his Interest to
dissemble and conceal; and therefore I say, from his Private Station, as he
calls it, he immediately passes to the time of his being chosen a Sheriff of
London and Middlesex; and because I resolve to keep up close with him, I must
even take the same Leap too.

He tells us he was called forth by his Fellow Citizens to a Public
Employment, (meaning the Shrievalty) contrary to his Inclinations and Humor,
which indeed is both true and false: It Is very true it was contrary to his
Inclination and Humor, to be at the Charge and Expense which usually attends
the Execution of that Office, as the Event has sufficiently shown; but that it
was contrary to his Inclination and Humor to have in his Hands the Power of
doing Mischief, which accompanies it, is as false: For otherwise, why should he
take the Sacrament, according to the Rites of the Church of England, the Oath
of Allegiance, etc. (about which he and his Conscience were not agreed for
Twenty Years before) merely to qualify himself for that Employment, when it is
probable the Court of Aldermen would rather have given him Money to be rid of
him, than insisted upon any high Fine to excuse him.

Well, Mr. Bethel is Sheriff of London and Middlesex, and would have been a
Burgess of Southwark: And what then? Why then he falls a complaining most
bitterly of his hard Fate, that he can no sooner leave his Private Station, and
stand in Competition for Places of great Honor and Trust, but presently men
enquire whether he be fit to be trusted? and search into the History of his
Life, and slander him with all the matter of Truth that they can collect. And
is it not a most sad and deplorable Case, that a man of his Bulk and Character,
who comes and says upon his Word, that he is as honest, and wise, and every way
as fit to be our Representative as any man we can choose, should be so
contemptuously repulsed and baulked as he was by a company of inquisitive and
unconfiding Burghers?

And now that by chance I have mentioned Mr. Bethel, and Honesty, and Wisdom in
one Paragraph, I cannot but take notice of the extraordinary Cast he gives us
of both, in his assuming the Honor of being one of our Representatives, and
making one great reason of Writing this Vindication of his to be, That those of
the Neighboring Borough may not be thought to have been mistaken and deceived
in the Person whom they preferred to a place of so great Trust, p. 2. Was it
honest in him to insinuate to the World, That he had been chosen a Burgess for
Southwark, when he was excluded by a considerable Majority, and those more
considerable for their Quality than Number? It being highly probable, that the
misled men who crowded for him, might as easily have been persuaded to give
their Votes for John Do and Richard Roe. And was it wise for him to tell us in
Print, that we had elected him, when we knew we had not? No, No, Mr. Bethel,
such Tricks will not do with us. We that opposed you, are satisfied, that we
were not (as you say well) mistaken and deceived in you; and Multitudes of
those, who through a Blind Zeal appeared for you, are now enlightened and
convinced that they were mistaken: So that I would advise you, as a Friend,
that, if when His Majesty shall be pleased to Summon another Parliament, you
find the same hankering after a Membership continue upon you, you would apply
your self to some other Borough, where you are less known than here.

Having acquainted us, to our Amazement, that he was our Burgess, he proceeds
next (with a Consistency peculiar to himself) to let the World know the
Obstacles which hindered him from being so. He says, That to disable him from
holding any Place of so great Trust, It was objected that he was a Papist and a
Jesuit; and that upon some Variance happening between him and Dr. Oats, he did
declare, that he knew him beyond the Seas to be such; that he was a Soldier in
the Parliament's Army, in the time of the late Wars, and was most cruel and
unmerciful in the Exercise of Arms; that being at Hamburgh at such time as the
Late King's Death was resolved on in England, he did there say, That rather
than he should want an Executioner, he would come thence to perform the Office;
and that he was not only one of the Late Kings Judges, but one of those two
persons in Vizzards, that assisted on the Scaffold at his Death.

To each of these Articles he says something, which he hoped, no doubt, would
look like an Answer; but the whole amounts only to this, that he stiffly denies
'em all.

But if none of these things were true, how comes it to pass, that after he had
boasted under Article 3. p. 3. That he has brought his Action at Law for the
Vindication of himself in that point, he should yet drop that Action with two
more of the same Nature; and that the Prospect of 30000l. (for so much he laid
his Damage) should not be sufficient to encourage him to be at the common
charge of the Law to go on with them? Whence should arise so much Smoke if
there were no Fire? How did it chance that the rest of the Competitors had not
the like Brands of Infamy fastened upon them? Whence did it proceed that all
the Dirt of the City and Town should be thrown into his Cart? Certainly he is
one of the most unfortunate Men that ever left Private Station, if he be
innocent.

That he is Innocent, we have only his own Word, and how far that ought to
weigh, we may judge from what follows in his next Paragraph, concerning a
Paper, Published soon after the Election, entitled, How and Rich, etc. (which
by the way I observe lies very heavy upon his Stomach) out of which Scandalous
Libel, as he calls it, he unluckily selects that Passage between him and Mr.
Mason, one of the King's Watermen, who, when Mr. Bethel threatened to pull his
Coat over his Ears, replied, Ay Sir, so perhaps you would my Master's too, if
it were in your Power. This Mr. Bethel declares to be most notoriously false,
and without any Color or Ground of Truth, p. 4.

There lying now so much Stress upon Mr. Bethel's Veracity, we will bring the
Case to a short Issue: If no such words passed at the time and place of the
Poll between those two Gentlemen, then I will take Mr. Bethel's bare Denial of
the foregoing Articles, to be a just Vindication. But to see how Time will
bring things to light! It happened, that on Wednesday, June the 29th. 1681. a
General Sessions of the Peace being then holden for the Borough of Southwark,
at the Bridge-house-hall, by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, and Mr.
Sheriff Bethel being there present, an Indictment was exhibited against him
upon the occasion of these words, together with the foul Battery that
accompanied them; and the Battery and Words were proved by the Oaths of four
substantial Witnesses, and the Bill accordingly found by the Grand Jury. Now I
leave the Reader to judge, whether he that will Print a Lie, to wipe off a
smart Repartee, is likely to boggle at saying, or un-saying any thing to bring
himself off in Matters of so heinous a Nature as the Articles contain.

Having hitherto put on as good and as bold a Face as the former matters
required, he next proceeds to some Exceptions of a less dangerous Nature, that
have been made against him; and expressing a wonderful Glee, that the Laws of
the Land do not make Covetousness a Capital Crime, he becomes now unconcerned,
and cares not much if it be admitted to be wholly true, that he is an Inmate, a
Garreteer, and all that: For he hopes this will be no good Exception in the
Case of a Burgess to serve in Parliament; telling us it is a Maxim, That those
that are most saving of their own Estates, will be most careful of the Peoples;
thereby unhandsomly insinuating, that a Parliament Man is only a kind of
Padlock, for securing the Peoples Money, whatever just occasion there may be to
part with it: But pray Mr. Bethel, come no more among us with your sordid
Maxims, it is well known, that we have better Maxims of our own; and you may see
by all the Papers we have Published since you gave us the last Trouble, that
this Maxim is like to do you but little Service with us. In How and Rich, you
will find, that one part of the Character which recommended those Gentlemen to
our Choice, was, That they were Liberal Benefactors to the Poor of our Borough.
In our Address to them at their setting forth toward Oxford, we declare it our
Opinion, That it is highly reasonable that we should help to defray the Charge,
as well as enjoy the Benefit of His Majesty's Gracious Government and
Protection; and in our Address to His Majesty, upon the Occasion of his late
Declaration, we humbly assure His Majesty, That whenever His Majesty in his
Princely Wisdom and Providence, shall see fit to call another Parliament, we
will take all possible care to choose such Representatives as shall be ready to
present His Majesty with such Supplies as the Dignity of the Crown, and the
Necessities of the Government shall require. By this Mr. Bethel, you may judge,
that your Temper and ours do not at all agree, and you may rest satisfied, that
the Borough of Southwark will never be guilty of so great a Blunder, as to send
to the Parliament such a Mis-representative as your self.

The Subject of the following part of his Pamphlet is very pleasant and
diverting; and with (or indeed without) Mr. Sheriff's Leave, that the Reader
may know what Entertainment he is to expect, I shall give him the following
Bill of Fare. 1. Here is the Grandeur of living in a Garret. 2. The Hospitality
of keeping no House; and, 3. The Charity of Starving Poor Prisoners. But you
will say, these are all empty Dishes: Why truly if they be, I cannot help it,
they are such as Mr. Sheriff's Table and Book afford.

For unless you will allow Mr. Bethel the Titles of Great, and Hospitable, and
Charitable, in spite of that Contradiction which his Actions give to them all,
there is nothing which he says for himself, that can give him any shadow or
color of Right to either.

Indeed, to vindicate his Honor from the Disparagement of living in a Garret,
he says, That to avoid the Trouble and Inconveniency, which commonly attends
the Shifting of Lodgings, he took the House he now lives in; but such a House
it is, as is rarely to be seen in the City of London: For this House has
neither Garrets nor Cellars, nor Rooms on the first Floor; so that either he
must acknowledge himself to have taken only some Rooms of an House, and
consequently to be an Inmate, or else he must be supposed to live in a
Wirdmill; for there is no other sort of House that I can think of, which
answers that Description.

He goes on to tell us what I would not for a World should be omitted by the
Writer of his Life; That at the Beginning of his Year, he kept two Feasts, of
Famous Memory, to his great Charge: Nay, that he had agreed for a fair large
Inn (much better, and more capacious than the other House) and had resolved to
keep a plentiful Ordinary, and for one Year round, to live as merry as mine
Host; but, as he says, it fell out unluckily to this purpose, that the Ancient,
Wise, Prudent, Sumptuary Laws of the City, lighting hard upon his Conscience,
and a Repulse received from the Court of Aldermen, sticking fast in his
Gizzard; these two Accidents gave such a Check to his Natural Complacency, that
he presently un-resolved all again, and has not been in an Entertaining Humor
ever since.

As for the former of these Accidents, I shall only make this Remark upon it,
That of all Laws, Mr. Sheriff Bethel has most diligently enquired into, and
most religiously observed the Sumptuary Laws, they being (as he observes) most
wholesome for the Pocket: Though I cannot imagine those Laws do forbid any
Person to exceed a Nine-penny Dinner so strictly, as not to allow him the
Liberty of an Orange with his Plate of Veal; and yet this is a Law which a
Renowned Citizen (who to avoid the ungrateful Repetition of the same word too
often, shall be nameless) has for a certain enacted to himself.

For the latter, I have obliged my self to give an acount of it, so far as the
Ward which returned him is concerned, and it is briefly thus: The Alderman of
the Ward of Farindon Without, dying, the Principal Inhabitants, upon Conference
with one another, found themselves divided in their Opinions, concerning the
Superiority of Merit between Sir Richard How and Mr. Pilkinton, and yet
resolved, if possible, to have one of them. Of this indeed they might have been
certain, if they had returned them two; but it is to be considered, that then
there had been no Trial of Skill between their two Parties; and also that being
both worthy Men, either of them which should be assigned to that Office, would
have seemed to be the Court of Aldermen's Choice, rather than theirs: Hereupon,
to leave as little scope as might be to the Court of Aldermen, for the exercise
of their Prerogative, both parties consented to return Mr. Sheriff Bethel for
one, as knowing him to be a person so un-acceptable to that Court, that they
might be sure of him of the other two, to whom it should fall by the Decision
of their own Votes. So that that Gentleman who lost it at the Poll, had more
respect shown him by the Ward, than he who carried it without a Poll; and they
unanimously agreed to choose Mr. Bethel, because they knew they were in no
Danger of being troubled with him. And now Sir, much Joy to you of the Honor of
that General Consent, and the concurrent Votes which you so highly boast of.

Now, because the Court of Aldermen had discovered a Dislike of his Company, he
therefore resolves and declaims against Housekeeping; and groundlesly
misplacing his Anger, falls foul upon the Innocent; and without any Provocation
in the Earth, does vent such undeserved Reproaches, and bitter Invectives
against all the Dishes of a Generous Sheriff's Table, even from Rost-Beef to
Custard, that certainly it is his Interest to dissuade all men from reading his
Book till they have Dined: For no Hungry Stomach can with Patience bear, to
have its good Friends and Allies so vilely abused.

He says, that nothing can be less Honorable to the Sheriffs than Feasting of
the Companies, that good Eating is a great Expense of time, and a plentiful an
Enemy to that sober Industry which is the rise and glory of a Trading City; as
if a sober industrious Trader, who intended to thrive and grow wealthy, were
obliged now and then to satisfy himself with the refreshment of sucking a
Button, and be glad to take up with the smell of a Cooks shop instead of a
Meal. Beef and Mutton defend us! say I: If this man were Manciple, he would
within the compass of a Week so effectually promote his Landlords Trade, as to
deserve to sit Rent-free; for within that time our Bellies would dwindle and
grow so lank, that happy were he who could get a Tailor to adjust the Wast-band
of his Breeches.

Being destitute of any farther Arguments to put a color upon his sordid way
of living in so public an Employment, he falls to his Prayers to God, that
among other Sins, Fullness of Bread, which was charged upon Sodom and Jerusalem,
as one Cause of Gods Judgments, may not grow to that height in this City, as to
become the Ruin and Destruction of it. I do not love to jest in Serious
Matters, and shall therefore only take notice, that there are certain Citizens
under his Custody, who, through his Neglect, are able truly to plead Not Guilty
to that Charge. Had Mr. Sheriff Bethel fed the Poor, instead of Feasting the
Rich; had he supplied the Defect of Splendid Entertainments by an extraordinary
Charity toward his Prisoners, he might have had a fairer Plea: But he himself,
without blushing, grants it to be true, that he does not contribute to the
Relief of their Necessities, and has so utterly renounced all Modesty, as
boldly to undertake to prove it his Duty to be unmerciful. For mark you me, by
putting a Stop to the usual Payments; If any Prisoners be famished this Year,
the Court of Aldermen, and a Committee of the City will take care to prevent
the like Mischief against the next: And my holding of my Hand, says he, will
prevail with others to open theirs, and encourage them to Chrritable
Benevolences and Legacies, for the Maintenance of those wretched People.
Heavens, what Arguments are these! But such a man can never be defended but by
such Logic.

I shall now trouble the Reader no further, after I have told him that I am a
Person not at all delighted in enquiring after, or exposing and publishing the
Vices or Follies of any man; and, as probably I had never known that he has
been reported to be a Jesuit, one of the late Kings Judges, etc. unless he
himself had told me; so the World had never known for me, that his carriage
toward his own Company of Leather-Sellers has been such, that they have
thought fit, contrary to their usual Method of Proceeding, to wave his Merit of
Congruity in their late Election of a Master, notwithstanding that he is
present Sheriff of London: That a Person who might have escaped a troublesome,
and (to any but himself) a Chargeable Office, by swearing that he was not worth
10000 l. should yet (to come off for a Shilling, at the time of the last
Poll-Tax) give order to a Maidservant, to acquaint the Officers, that he was a
Decayed Merchant; That when he knew the Easter Sermons were to be at S.
Sepulchers, he should yet perversely make a Ridiculous Cavalcade to the Spittle
by himself, like the Pied Piper of Halberstadt drawing all the Boys and Girls
in the Town after him. These things, I say, with all which has gone before, I
should not have concerned my self to Publish, had he not provoked me to enquire
concerning him, and by lewdly applying a Text of Scripture to himself, with a
seeming, mighty Confidence of his own Innocence, challenged all the World to
Come down and see.

FINIS.

