A SECOND NARRATIVE OF THE Signal Victory Which it pleased Almighty GOD to
bestow UPON HIS MAJESTY'S NAVY, UNDER THE COMMAND OF HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS THE
DUKE of YORK, AGAINST The States-Fleet of the United Netherlands. On the Third
of June 1665.

Licensed

June 10. by ROGER LESTRANGE.



London, Printed by W. G. and T. M. M.DC.LXV.

A SECOND NARRATIVE of the SIGNAL VICTORY, etc.
HIS Royal Highness, after his Return from the Coast of Holland, where he had
lain before the Texell, taken their Merchant Ships, and used all possible means
to provoke the Dutch to a Battle, having certain Intelligence, not only that
the Dutch Fleet had taken the Sea, but that they publicly declared their
intentions of seeking out the English Fleet; and farther, that the Good Hope
with her Convoyes from Hamburgh had unfortunately fallen into their hands,
Judging that all these Circumstances might tend to the disreputation of His
Majesty's Affairs, became very impatient of all delays; and though many of the
Provisions necessary for the Fleet were not yet on board, His Royal Highness
resolved to carry the Fleet from the Gunfleet near Harwich to Sowld Bay, and
there to take in the remainder of victuals and other stores; that being a more
open place, and therefore more proper for going out to the Dutch, in case they
should attempt to make any Bravado upon the English Coast. In prosecution
therefore of that Resolution, the Fleet weighed anchor at high water on the 30
of May (carrying with them the victualling Ships and other stores) the wind
being at South East, but it did not long continue so, but veered to the East
South-east, East, and East North-east, so that we were forced to stop Tides,
and using all our endeavors we could not arrive at Sowld Bay till June the
first, about six in the morning, where we anchored about five miles from the
shore.

Between Twelve and One of the clock this day, his Royal Highness being at
dinner, news was brought that a great Fleet was discovered, to the East,
South-east of us, about some six leagues off, which concluding to be the Dutch,
his Royal Highness ordered the Victuallers to Harwich, and the Fleet to weigh,
and to get farther off the shore, which was done accordingly till the Flood;
when we came again to an Anchor, the Dutch kept under Sail, and endeavored to
keep to the South-east, and East South-east of us; At Ten of the clock that
night, we weighed Anchor again, the wind being at East; We did our best to get
up to the Dutch Fleet, but they being to windward of us, it did not depend upon
our choice, so that the Dutch keeping upon a wind, in the morning, June 2. we
saw them about five leagues South-east from us, the wind varying from the
South-east, to South South-east, South, and South South-west. At eight in the
evening Lestoffe bore North-west about eight Leagues off, and the Dutch Fleet
was then about 3 leagues off, standing off with their Starboard Tacks on board,
and we stood after them, but they staid not for us.

There was a great desire in the Fleet to have engaged the Dutch this day,
which had twelve years since been so fortunate to the English against the same
enemy; what other reason, besides the ill fortune of that day, the Dutch could
have to decline the fighting us, then when they might have had the wind of us,
we can neither conjecture, nor learn from any of the Prisoners since taken;
This evening one of the Enemies Sternmost ships was fired, some of our men
persuaded themselves it was one of their Admirals, but we since understand by
Prisoners, it was one of their Fireships, which took fire before her time by
the drunkenness of her Commander: What ever it was, our men believed the best,
and as it was no small joy to see an Enemies ship so easily destroyed, so they
took it for a good omen of a future victory.

This night we kept sight of the Enemy all night, and the wind veering to the
South-west, between two and three of the clock in the morning, June 3. we lay
to weather of the Dutch Fleet, which they perceiving, tacked and stood with us,
but could not weather us; Being as we suppose about fourteen leagues from
Lestoffe South-east southerly. At half an hour past three in the morning the
Battle began: Prince Rupert's Squadron having the Van, and of that Squadron
Vice Admiral Mings; His Royal Highnesse's Squadron was in the body, and that of
the Earl of Sandwich in the Rear; The first salutes the Dutch received from
Prince Rupert's Squadron, (animated by the example as well as orders of that
valiant Prince) made them doubt whether the victory over the English were
either so certain, or so easy, as the Here de Wit, and their other
Countrymen who were to stay at home, had persuaded them; Both Fleets having
passed thus by one the other in a Line, there was for a considerable time a
perfect quiet without shooting one Gun; About six of the clock, we tacked, and
stood to the West, North-west, and they to the South, South-east, and passed by
one the other, there being again an intermission from shooting; Upon this Tack,
the Dutch endeavored to get the wind of us, which they hoped to have done,
which his Royal Highness foreseeing they would endeavor, kept so close to the
wind, that when the Dutch tacked, hoping to weather Prince Rupert, they found
his Royal Highness to weather them, and therefore rather then pass between two
Lines of our Fleet, they chose to bear to Leeward of Prince Rupert; We stood
not long that way, but his Royal Highness ordered the Rear of His Majesty's
Fleet to tack first, that so we might the better and sooner get up with the
headmost of their Fleet.

This was not done without some intermixture of the Ships of the several
Squadrons; but yet without any considerable prejudice. This being executed, his
Royal Highness making Sail with his Squadron, he came to be the Headmost
Squadron of the Line, and had Sir John Lauson, with some other Ships of his
Squadron a head of him, with which keeping up to the Headmost of the Enemies
Ships, we kept them to Leeward of us, and never suffered them to tack, but kept
the wind of them the whole day. The Fight continued long, and the Dutch made
very considerable resistance: but it was observed, That as we bore in upon
them, they altered their course, so that whereas they might have layn up South
South East, they bore off to the East South East. His Royal Highness who had
observed in the beginning of the Battle, the endeavor of the Dutch to get the
Wind, and by what means it was prevented, and also the great benefit we had by
it, by securing us against the Enemies Fireships, (in which they had placed a
great part of their hopes) had always a regard to the keeping that advantage
which God had so favorably given us; which with the concurrence of another
accident did somewhat prolong the Battle. The continual Smoke would not give us
leave to see very far before us what the Enemy did; and therefore the Actions
of Others, were in some measure to be the guide even of the Admiral: his Royal
Highness therefore having seen Sir John Lauson with his accustomed Valor bear
in toward the Enemies Line, but soon after to edge off again to Windward,
concluded that Sir John Lauson had seen some of the Enemies Ships endeavoring
to get the Wind of us, and therefore to prevent That, his Royal Highness kept
near the Wind, which was a guide to the whole Fleet. But this mistake was
understood a little while after, by a Message from Sir John Lauson, who
privately sent to give his Royal Highness an account that he was hurt, and for
that time incapable of service, (though, thanks be to God, without danger of
life) so that we perceived the Working his Ship which lead us into that Error,
was through the want of their Commander, the Master being also hurt. His Royal
Highness therefore ordered Captain Jordan to go on board the Royal Oak; after
which She did excellent good service. This Error being now perceived, and
about the same time Opdams Ship (which was known by a Pendant under his
Flagg) coming up to lie almost opposite in their Line to his Royal Highness
Ship in Ours; His Royal Highness was pleased to give command to bear up to
Him, saying, He would himself have a Bout with Opdam, (for so he termed it.) In
which being obeyed, and the whole Fleet taking example by the working of His
Royal Highness Ship, we began to ply our Guns at so near a distance, that the
Enemy began to shrink apace, though not absolutely to run. Whilst things were
in this condition, it pleased God (who had through the whole Conduct of this
great Business wonderfully favored us) by an extraordinary operation of his
Almighty Hand to facilitate our Work, and to shorten the danger to which his
Royal Highness had resolved to expose his own Person, by the blowing up of
Opdams Ship; which as it was a great joy to the English, so it could not but
infinitely discourage the Enemy, who did not stand long after, but (we bearing
in upon them) presently fled, we following them, and taking and burning their
Ships until night; when not being able to do any more service upon them, we
only endeavored to keep so much sight of them, as to be up with them in the
morning, when we again followed the pursuit (taking diverse of their Ships) unto
the very mouth of the Texel, where their Ships getting into Shoal water, and
being perfectly acquainted with the place, we durst not adventure so near the
shore with our Ships, which were not in condition to bear much Sail, if there
should have been need for bringing them off again. We staid in sight of the
Texel till we saw their Ships go in; which they did not neglect to do the first
Tide.

In the beginning of the Battle, two of our Ships, not being able to weather
the Enemy, fell into their Fleet; the One (which was the Charity, a Ship taken
from the Dutch in the last war) tacked, hoping thereby to help her self, but
was taken; the Other a Merchant Ship in the Kings service, called the John and
Abigail. Captain Joseph Saunders Commander finding himself amongst them,
resolved to stand the same way with our own Fleet, and to receive the Enemies
Broadsides, which he had so near, as with them to receive their Threats also,
and was honored with a Broadside from Opdams own Ship, and a Vice Admiral,
betwixt which he lay: but the Enemy was too much in haste to attend one single
Ship; so that with a considerable loss of Men, and the battering of his Ship,
Masts, Rigging and Sails, he came safe to his Majesty's Fleet. During the
Battle, there came in to us three of his Majesty's Ships returned from the
Sound, as also the Leopard from Harwich: To the Dutch came young Everson with
three Ships.

To give an account of the particular Actions of his Majesty's Commanders,
would be not only tedious, but prove injurious to many, whose merits would
seem less if not named; nor would it be less injurious to all those who have
done well, (if any Actions were to be particularized) not to name (with
reproach) those who have been wanting to their Duty. Let it therefore suffice
for an evidence of the bravery of his Majesty's Commanders in general, that the
Invincible Dutch Fleet is by them overcome; Though I will not conceal from you,
that I hear it said, his Royal Highness does not think it sufficient that they
do better then the Dutch, but will expect that they shall do as becomes
Englishmen; and therefore it is thought this occasion having made some
discovery of the tempers of some men, who could not be known before, some
alterations will be even amongst the Victorious. For the generality of the
English Seamen, it is certain, that greater or more valiant hearts are not to
be found in any Race of Men, nor more indefatigable; of which a greater
instance could not be, then this Battle, which was of such continuance, that if
separated from the labor, the danger alone would have been insupportable to
any other sort of men; and perhaps would have been so to them also, had not the
danger awakened their courages, and redoubled their spirits.

Having told you of a Ship of his Majesty's lost; if I should give over here,
you might think We had lost by the Victory; and therefore it is necessary to
give you some account of the Enemies Loss, and Our Gain; which nevertheles, in
the present uncertainty, you must give me leave to do as Accomptants use, with
a reserve of (errors excepted) endeavoring notwithstanding, so far as may be,
to tell you nothing for certain which is not so. First, Then you must know that
besides Opdam's Ship (which we saw blown up, and besides have since spoken with
some of the Men which were saved) There was taken, and afterward fired (that
so she might not clog us in the pursuit) the Orange Tree, a Ship of 76. Guns.
There were afterward four of their Ships, in the pursuit, fell foul the one of
the other, and were by one of his Majesty's Fire Ships set on fire; One of them
was the Ship Couverden, in which was Trumps Vice Admiral, Gillis Tysse Campen,
carrying 60. Guns; The Prince Maurice, Cap. de Clerk carrying 50. Guns; The
Stadt Vtrecht, Cap. Oudart, 44. Guns; And a fourth, which was, I think, called
the Stedan, carrying about 40. Guns: After these were all on fire, and our
Ships passed by, one of them burning to her Powder, blew up, and with the
blast, blew away all the Rigging, Masts, etc. of one of them of about 40. Guns,
which was on fire, and so enabled some of the Dutch, who remained there to
quench the fire, and save the Ship, at lest to preserve their own lives till
some of their Ships passed that way; but whether they towed Her into Harbor,
or not, we know not: An accident very extraordinary, and which it was not
reasonable to expect or provide against; This was observed by some of the Boats
and Ketches which were sent to save the lives of the poor men, who were left to
the two unmerciful Elements. A little after this, were likewise burned by
another Fire-Ship, three Ships, which were fallen foul one of another, the one
called the Masseeven, Jacob Rouse Commander, of 78 Guns; the Tergoes, of 34
Guns; and Cap. Cuypers Ship of 30 Guns.

Of Ships taken, I am not able to give you a perfect account, in regard some
are (as we hear) gone directly for England, and others not yet come to the
Fleet: Some of the Ships taken, Are, The Mars, 46 Guns. The Zeeland, 44 Guns.
The Carolus Quintus, 53 Guns. The Delft, 32 Guns. The Nagelboome, 52 Guns.

We hear of others taken by other Ships, of which we have not the Names, but do
conclude, we have destroyed them 23, or 24 Men of War, at the least; by the
next you shall have a more perfect account.

According to what we learn from the Prisoners, there were slain of the Dutch
Commanders of note (besides Opdam) Cortenaer, Stellingwerf, Schram; and (most
say) Trump: but for the certainty of this, the Curious must expect Letters from
Holland.

On Our Part, were slain the Earl of Marlebrough, Rear Admiral Sansum, Captain
Ableson, and Captain Kirbye, Commanders: Of Volunteers or Note, fell the Earl
of Portland, Earl of Falmouth, Lord Muskerry, and Mr. Boil, second Son to the
Earl of Burlington. (The three last by one fatal shot.) I cannot find that the
Dutch Commanders taken, can give any exact account of the number of ships in
their Fleet; that which they seem most persuaded of is, That they had about 108
Sail besides Fireships; I believe the Kings Fleet was within very few of an
100 Sail; a force worthy on either side to contend for so great a Stake.

The number of Men killed and taken from the Dutch, I conjecture may be about
8000. What the number on the side of the English are, I have not yet heard
computed; but by the conjectures which may be raised from the account of some
of the Ships which were in the hottest of the Action, it may be concluded, that
never was so great a Victory obtained against the Dutch, with so small loss on
the side of the English.

Finis.

