A (SECOND) DIALOGUE BETWIXT Jack and Will, ABOUT A Standing Army.
Jack. HOW do you, Friend Will? Tho you and I could not agree about the Lord
Mayor's carrying the Sword to Meetings, yet I hope we are agreed against a
Standing Army.


Will. I perceive, Jack, your Stars have condemned your Party to be perpetual
Blockheads; all the World knows that I was ever for a Standing Army.


Jack. Nay, then I Will be Hanged; I Am sure I have heard you exclaim against K.
James for his Standing Army.


Will. Why thou poor Fool, I never knew any he had; his was a Running Army,
witness the plaguey Race they took betwixt Salisbury and London.


Jack. A Plague on you, you will never leave your Banter; you know well enough
what I mean by a Standing Army, that is to say, A Standing Army in time of
Peace.


Will. I know that well enough, Jack, for none of your Armies durst ever stand
in time of War.


Jack. Pox take ye, why should I trouble my self to talk to such a Merry
Andrew? Answer to the purpose; I know you are against a Standing Army in time
of Peace.


Will. Why truly, Jack, your Armies never stood, neither in time of Peace nor
War; and seeing one Instance will not satisfy you, I Will give you another: Pray
tell me how bravely they stood to it at the Boyne and other places in Ireland?
And for their standing in time of Peace, I Am sure it is as false as the other;
for they run from one Henroost to another, all over the Kingdom: If they made a
Stand any where, 'twas under Ioan's Petticoat; and not so generous a Stand
neither as that which the Persians made when their Wives and Mothers took up
their Coats, and asked them when flying before their Foes, as Justin tells us,
Whether they would hide themselves there? By which they were so much ashamed,
that they turned back and routed their Enemies.


Jack. Leave off your Roguery, Will; I doubt, for the latter part on it, your
own Army is not much better.


Will. And that is one reason, Jack, why I think they ought to be Disbanded: For
considering how poor the Nation is made by the War, every Man has enough to do
to keep Children of his own getting, tho he keep none of other Men's; and to say
the truth on it, the mixture of your Army was enough to spoil ours in all
respects, both for Running oth' Reins, and Running from their Enemies; and I am
afraid that upon due Enquiry it will be found, that 'twas some of your sort
that began the Race at Steenkirk and Landen.


Jack. Hold, hold, Will, not so fast; Who was it that run at Flerus and
Gillicranky? I hope you will not say that the Dutch and the Presbyterian Scots are
Iacobites.


Will. Nay now, Jack, thou beginst to speak something like; but I Will tell you
tho for an Answer, what I have heard; that 'twas the Dutch Horse, which because
they were never well trained, could not endure the Fire at Flerus; but it must
be owned their Foot stood bravely, and came off with Honor: And for
Gillicranky, Jack, let me tell you, the Racers there were Men of your own
Kidney, a Company of Iacobites under a Williamite Mask, betrayed the King's
Army; and yet at last, Jack, the new raised Presbyterian Scots kept the Field,
and killed your Dundee, who next to your brave James, was Magna spes altera
Romae; and now, Jack, I think I owe you nothing.


Jack. Well, well then, I hope you will be serious, seeing you think you have so
much the advantage: but I am sure it is for our Interest to have the Army
Disbanded, and therein I think our Friends have for once outwitted ye in making
you to believe that they joined with you for the ease of the Country, but by my
Faith you will find it to be otherwise; we did it to ease our selves of the
double Taxes which must fall speedily now the Army must be Disbanded; and
besides, we shall be at more liberty to rise and join the French, who a
Twelvemonth hence, when the Army is entirely scattered, will have a brave
opportunity of Landing to assist us.


Will. Say so Jack? Your Party are obliged to you for keeping their Secrets
so faithfully; I thought the Cods-heads fed themselves with some such foolish
hopes, they did so sneer and laugh upon the News that no Standing Army was like
to be allowed: But stay, Jack, don't ye think that those who have from time to
time given such vast Sums to carry on the War, and have taken such care to
secure the present Government, will also take care to secure the Nation against
a future War, and prevent our being robbed of the Fruits of the so much longed
for Peace?


Jack. And don't you think but our Friends who concur with you in getting the
Army Disbanded, will find some means or other to obstruct such Methods as shall
be proposed for that which you call an Equivalent, or better Security?


Will. Nay truly, Jack, I must own you are Statesmen, and have been more
cunning in embroiling our Affairs, than at advancing your own. And is that the
reason then of your pretending to fall in with those that are against a
Standing Army, merely to rob us of the Defense we have, and obstruct our
providing another?


Jack. Yes, Faith it is, and at the same time our Party in all Companies, where
they may do it with safety, speak up for a Commonwealth, not that we are really
for one, but to render your Party suspected of carrying on such a Design, that
so we may dash you and the Court against one another, and then we hope to have
a brave time of fishing in troubled Waters.


Will. In Conscience, Jack, I believe that at last you will turn refined
Politicians.


Jack. You will say so when you know all. By this Method we shall likewise make
those who compose the present Army, Enemies to you and the Court too, to you
for pressing their being Disbanded, and to the Court for suffering it.


Will. Finer and finer, Jack; I believe these fine Threads are spun in the
Cabinet Council Beyond Sea.


Jack. Then as to the Church, we will ruin your Interest with them; for you
know they hate a Commonwealth, because that sort of Government does always clip
the Wings of the Clergy; and we will give it out (seeing we cannot have the
King we would have) that we will join with those that are for none at all.


Will. You're a parcel of rare Fellows upon my word; but pray what Methods will
you take to hinder our Friends from providing a Security Equivalent to, if not
better than that of a Standing Army?


Jack. Why that may be easily done: for you propose a Regulation of the
Militia; and we will take care by the Interest of the Church, to prevent your
having it put into the Hands of any but stanch Churchmen.


Will. What do you mean by stanch Churchmen? The Passive Obedience Crew that
would cut His Majesty's Throat, Perkins and Friend's Churchmen, or such as can
be Drunk, and Swear, and Tear, and Damn their Souls to get into Office?


Jack. Why so uncharitable, Will? Don't you think that we take as much care of
our Souls as you do of yours?


Will. I cannot tell whether you do, or not; but sure I am that those that
swear Allegiance to King William, with an Intention to betray him, and take the
Sacrament according to the Church of England, that they may get into Places,
Military or Civil, in order to support the Interest of a Popish Abdicated
Prince, seem to have no regard to the Welfare of their Souls, and to have a
very contemptuous Notion of Damnation, especially seeing they imprecate it upon
themselves every Day.


Jack. There Is a Lecture indeed, you heard that out of some Tub last Sunday.


Will. Nay, Jack, thou and thy Party seem to be more conversant with Tubs and
Barrels too than I, for I seldom meet any of 'em, but the Yeast of 'em is ready
to run over their Beards; but I would have you to know, that there are better
Churchmen than you, or any of your Crew, that will say more than I have said.
And now, Jack, seeing you have told me your Secrets with as much Vanity and
hopes of succeeding in your design, as Coleman had, when he discovered the main
of the Popish Plot to Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, out of a Vainglorious Bravado, I
will tell you that our Friends are not so short sighted as you imagine; they
know your Designs well enough, and have it in their power to prevent 'em: You
are mistaken if you think that they who have given such Sums to prevent the
Invasions of the French to join your Cutthroat Crew, will leave the Kingdom
defenseless, tho there be no Standing Army allowed; those Gentlemen are able to
satisfy the King that he may have a Force ready at Command for the Defense of
the Nation, composed of the best of the Disciplined Troops and the Militia,
besides all Honest Men, who will not grudg to be Volunteers in so good a Cause;
and the very Countenance of such will make your Party and their Supporter,
betake themselves to their Heels again, secundum usum Sarum.


Jack. That Is pleasant; How can you have any of the Disciplined Troops, when
you once Cashier them? They will be so disgusted, that they will scorn to serve
you any more.


Will. Ay, Jack, so you say; but don't you think that those of 'em that are
honest, and fought out of a Principle of Love to their Religion and Country,
will do the same again upon occasion? And such of 'em as have not wherewith to
maintain themselves, don't you think the Wisdom of the Nation able to provide
for them, either by employing them in Manufactures, or having them Listed as
Militia Men? And for your Iacobite Dammee Scum, it will be a good riddance to
the Nation to have the Army purged of them, and of such Mercenary Fellows as
you talk of, that are unwilling to be Disbanded when there is no occasion for
them; and I hope you will find there are Honest Williamite Officers in great
numbers in the Army that are Men of Estates, and glad to have the opportunity
of laying down their Arms for the Ease of their Country, and will as cheerfully
take them up again for the Defense of it when there is need; and if there be not
enough of them in this Nation, there is no reason to doubt of having enough from
the other two. You see the Scots have been prodigal enough of their blood to
assist us, and that the Protestants in Ireland wrought Wonders against your
Brethren the French and Irish, before they had the Army of your Church sent
under the Conduct of Kirk to assist them; and a sorry Assistance they had till
Duke Schomberg and His Majesty went over.


Jack. Well, well, I hope we shall have a fair Trial of Skill for it some time
or other, and then we shall see how bravely your Militia and New-modell'd Army
will perform.


Will. Why truly, Jack, I believe the Militia will do no great Feats as at
present Modelled, no more than those Regiments of the Standing Army that were
raised by K. James to withstand the Prince of Orange, can be supposed to do;
and therefore you may assure your self that our Friends will take care to have
the Militia Officers well sifted, and all the Iacobite Chaff purged out before
ever they expect any Service from the^^^^nd there is no doubt but the like
Method will be taken with the Fleet: And Friend Jack, I must needs be plain
with you, if your Friends had not been too precipitant in getting some of the
best Regiments we had Cashiered first, your Army might in all probability have
remained some time longer at least, without being questioned: But our Friends
perceiving that the Regiments raised in this King's time, were Disbanded first,
and the old Arbitrary Tools raised in the late Reigns kept up, they could not
but think that there was a Snake in the Grass, and therefore resolved to send
all a going, except what was necessary to be kept up for the Honor of the
Government. So that whatever your Party may fancy, they will certainly lose
very much by the Dissolution of the present Army; for had they continued on
foot, they or a great part of them at least, which might have been ready to
have assisted you upon a French Invasion, or have animated a certain Party (you
know who) to cut off the King, whilst they had such Tools in readiness to
overturn all that he had been doing toward the securing of our Religion and
Property since the Revolution, and to have brought the Whigs under the Lash
again; but now you are like to be disappointed.


Jack. Have you so little Honor in you, as to think that the Army which has
defended you so bravely abroad, would ever enslave you at home?


Will. Truly, Jack, I must be plain with you, the defense we have made abroad,
is as much owing to the King's Conduct in disappointing and baffling the
Designs of the French, by observing their Motions, and counteracting them, as
was visible in that Glorious March which saved Brussels and most of the Spanish
Netherlands, as to the Valor of the Army; tho to give them their due, most of
'em fought it gallantly when they had opportunity: But I must tell you further,
That it is safer to trust them abroad than at home; there they were obliged in
Honor to fight, because they were joined with other Nations that would; nor
was it safe for them to fly in a Country where they were not over-well beloved;
neither had they the Pestilent Iacks, and Passive-Obedience-Men there to
persuade them that they were fighting against the Interest of the Church, as
they have here.


Jack. I perceive the Church is a mighty Eyesore to you; you discover your self
plainly now to be no true Churchman, whatever you have pretended all along.


Will. That Is like one of thy Iacobite Slanders; the World knows I am a true
Churchman, tho I never could think fit to be in the Interests of that Church
that would needs have the Civil and Military Power entrusted only in the Hands
of such Fellows as cut the Earl of Essex's Throat, murdered the Lord Russell,
Coll. Sidney, Alderman Cornish, etc. who can never be enough lamented: And to
be yet plainer with you, I never was of that Church that was for surrendering
all the Charters of our Corporations, and exalting the Prerogative above Law;
nor of that Church which opposed King William's coming to the Crown, as being
contrary to the Divine Right of Lineal Succession. The very Turks have a better
Notion of Humane Liberty than that comes to, as is clear by their Dethroning of
one of their Sultans lately, and setting up another in his place, whom they
thought more fit to govern: Whereas the Church you talk of, would serve us as
the Danish Stories tells us they have been sometimes served, viz. have the
Offspring of Vrsus a Bear, half Man and half Beast, set up to reign over them;
and those of Norway had a Dog appointed to be their Governor: To the same
degree of Slavery would the Doctrine of Passive Obedience have brought us, as
preached up in the late Reigns, viz. That it was not lawful to take up Arms
against the King, or those Commissioned by him, upon no account whatsoever; and
if your Church had believed that Doctrine her self, she ought not to have
resisted K. James, if he had sent Dogs instead of Popish Priests to govern your
Colleges and Consciences, and to be your Justices of Peace and other
Magistrates. Thus, Jack, I think it is apparently not the Interest of this
Nation to have a Standing Army continued in it, mostly composed of such Men, as
tho they know not what Religion means, yet at the Instigation of your Church
might be influenced to overturn all that His Majesty has done since the
Commencement of His Glorious Reign, in case of His Death.


Jack. Don't trouble your self, Will; we shall have no occasion for your
Standing Army: K. James has 20000 English, Scotch and Irish in pay in France,
who will embark at a convenient opportunity, and seize yours and all other
Confederate Ships in the French Ports to assist to transport them, without
putting his Brother of France to the srouble of laying an Embargo upon them:
And tho your Managers of Sea Affairs, at least some of 'em, have generally
betrayed you, yet I Will warrant you there will be sufficient care that you shall
not have the same advantage of us; besides, we may have such a Wind as may keep
your Fleet in Port, while ours shall do your Business; and then a Fig for you:
We shall all be likewise ready to join him, and it will not be in your power to
oppose us without a Standing Army.


Will. Nay now, Jack, I perceive thou art a Warrior as well as a Statesman. But
how do you think your Fleet can escape our Squadrons, when posted so as some of
them must needs fall in with your small Craft at least?


Jack. Don't you take care of that; tho we have not a N. M. among the Ministers
of State, we have a P. N. in the Admiralty; we know all the Stations of your
Squadrons, and shall find means either to bribe your Commodores, or if that
will not do, to find some how or other that your Squadrons shall want Orders or
Provisions, or mix some poisonous Drug amongst your Beef or Water: Such things
you know have been talked of; and what has been, may be.


Will. But do you suppose, Jack, that now His Majesty has time to enquire into
the Abuses that have crept into the Administration, you can so easily play
those Tricks as formerly? What if there should be a strict Enquiry made by the
Parliament into all the Tricks put upon the Government since the Revolution,
and some of your Party should be Hanged for them? Don't you think that will put
a stop to your further Adventures?


Jack: And don't you know, Will, that whenever you began to make such an
Enquiry, we have had Interest enough, if not otherways, yet by our Money, to
put a stop to it, and to get the Enquirers sent a packing? Tho we have not so
many Wiles as the Fox in the Fable, yet we have one never-failing one with the
Cat; and that is, whenever the Curs begin to bark, we either secure our selves
in the Steeple, or Jupiter's Lap, or both perhaps at the same time.


Will. I understand your Cant, Jack, you mean that you accuse the Enquirers of
having a design against the Church and State, and so provide for the Escape of
the Guilty. But what if our Friends, who have had notice often enough of this
Intrigue of yours, should now spoil it?


Jack. Let 'em if they can, I believe it is not in their power.


Will. Nay, be not too confident, Jack, I have read of a Fox, that when close
hunted, used to catch hold of a Bush with his Teeth, and throw himself over a
Rock, so that the Dogs that pursued him, endangered the breaking of their own
Necks, and missed their aim; but this being perceived at last, the Bush was cut
up; and the Fox when he thought to have recourse to it as formerly, broke his
Neck.


Jack. Pray make the Application, Will: Do you intend then to cut up the Church
and State?


Will. Not so, Jack, but to cut up your false Pretensions of Zeal for them,
when at the same time you are sapping their very Foundations; and this our
Friends may easily do by publishing a Declaration of your Knavish Designs in
making use of that false Pretext.


Jack. Nay indeed, Will, if they should do so, it might do us a Mischief; but I
hope we have more Friends amongst you than to suffer it to come to that Issue.


Will. You may flatter your self as you will, yet the Nation has so much
respect for the King, that they will never suffer you nor your Friends beyond
Sea, to effect that in time of Peace, that you were not able to do in time of
War. King William has the Hearts, Hands and Purses of all true Englishmen at
his Command: and tho it may not perhaps be thought fit either for his nor the
Nation's Interest, which are inseparable, to have a Standing Army continued
upon the present footing; yet there is no doubt but such Methods will be taken,
as shall sufficiently make up that: For a King of England, who stands so well
in the Affections of His Subjects as His present Majesty does, can never be
supposed to want a Standing Army when the Commons of England are resolved to
stand by him with their Lives and Fortunes: It Is certain the Immortal Queen
Elizabeth reckoned her self safer in the Hearts and Affections of her good
People, than the present Fr. K. can pretend to be with hundreds of Thousands of
Mercenary Fellows, who are always ready to fight for those that give them most,
or pay them best. And you are much mistaken, Jack, if you think our Friends
have so good an Opinion of the Integrity of your Foreign Champion, as to rely
upon his Oaths or Treaties, but will take care that if he should, under the
Covert of Peace, attempt to rob our British Orchard, to be so well prepared,
that he shall find himself obliged with the Fox in the Fable, to go back by the
same way he came and say, Hang it they are but sour Crabs, when the plain
English of the matter was, that he could not come at them.


Jack. Well, well, Banter on; I am satisfied our Friends will have one touch
with you soon or late, the Passage of France being now open; we can remit Money
to our King, without any danger; and there are French Generals enough at
leisure to command the Troops he brings with him.


Will. Ay, Jack, we have Confederate Generals enough at leisure too; and I
suppose your French Generals remember the Fate of their Brethren Maimont and
St. Ruth in Ireland; the first was knocked of the Head by the brave Col. Murray,
a rough-hew'n Irish Scot, before the Walls of Derry; the other was sent to Hell
from Agrim, together with his Brethren the Irish Cutthroats, to answer for
Persecuting the French Protestants at home, and the British Protestants abroad.
And for your old Champion, we are not afraid of him; he was so accustomed to
Horse-racing at Newmarket, in his Brother's time, that he never gets on
Horseback but he fancies he is a running for a Prize: Nay, he is so used to
running of Races, that he could not forbear giving a Specimen of his Art even
at Sea, where he did so run from one Ship to another in Sol-bay, etc. that he
outrun the Dutch Ball by many Leagues, so as they could never come near him;
and you know the Proverb, Jack, Like Master like Man; Running is become so
natural to the Iacobites, that they are as easy to be known by that Character,
as King Charles the Second's Friends, who came panting to Whitehall before
Venner and his Enthusiastical handful, and told the Court (as if there had been
any danger of their being mistaken) that they were Cavaliers; upon which that
Witty Prince replied, He thought so by their running. And thus, Jack, you are
convinced now, I hope, that I am for a Standing Army or none; and that all the
hopes of your Party from our want of a Standing Army are vain; for you may
assure your self, that the Nation will never leave themselves destitute of a
sufficient Force, whether standing or not standing, to encounter your Irish
Army, that is ready when called for, and all their French and British Adherents:
and seeing no Body ever proposed the Disbanding of the Army without paying them
first, we are in no great hazard of bring surpised without a Standing Force,
especially now that we know the number of your Teagues in readiness; for upon
my Shoul, my dear Joy, I am not afraid that they can Invade us before they come
at us, tho their Countrymen have a special Faculty at overtaking People before
they come at 'em.


Jack. Ay, but our brave old Champion at the head of his 18000 Irish and other
Papists, with what he may have besides on the other as well as this side the
Water, may be able to do your Business.


Will. Why truly Jack, I believe if any can do our Business, it must be they;
for they have slain hundreds of Thousands at once, and so made short work on it:
but then it is only when they have met with defenseless People; for if they find
any resistance, (tho they have that brave Champion, whose Heels have been more
serviceable to him than his Hands, at the Head of 'em) they will be sure to fly
for it, and may be cut down the Bridge to hinder their Enemies Pursuit of 'em,
before they have got over it themselves.


Jack. You are so full of your Banter, that I Will talk no more with you, but
take my leave of you, hoping our Glorious Enterprise will end in a second Happy
Restoration; and then we'll make you know the true comfort and benefit of a
Standing Army; that the dethroning of King James was as horrid a Crime as the
taking off the Blessed Martyr's Head; and that those that put the Crown on the
Prince of Orange's Head, deserve the same Fate with the Martyr's pretended
Judges.


Will. Prithee, Jack, don't trouble your self so much; for no doubt your
ill-contriv'd Ruin of others will come home to your own Doors; all you can
expect will be this, that if we be Hanged in the Morning, you must have the
same Fate in the Afternoon. So Farewell.


The END.

