A Seasonable ADDRESS To the Right Honorable, the LORD MAYOR, Court of
Aldermen, AND COMMONERS Of the CITY of LONDON, Upon their Present Electing of
SHERIFS.
By PHILO-PATRIS, Citizen, etc.
My LORD, and Fellow-Citizens,
IT is now high time to consider of an Expedient to cure the Distempers that so
much prevails in our Corporation, since Matters are grown to such a hight, that
too many amongst Us, think it their Great Interest to Cross, yea, and Oppose
too the present Constitution of the Government: Have we not already been
deluded by the Subtilties and Contrivances of the buisy Jesuit? and the
Male-contented men amongst Us? to Act such things within the Memory of Man,
which has exposed Us to the Scorn and Contempt of all Nations round about us:
Have we been led into Rebellion by their Stratagems and Devices, and with our
Power and Purses destroyed the best Government, and the best of Kings? and
shall we still be deluded; have we not enough smarted under the Tyranny and
Cruelty of Murderers and Usurpers, who brought us so low, that if the immediate
hand of God had not interposed, and restored us to Peace and Settlement, we had
certainly been the most miserable Nation in Europe; and after all this to be
forgiven all our Murders, Rebellions, and whatever Crimes we had committed
against our lawful King and Government, still to murmr and repent, and fill
our (...) with Complaints, as if we had rather return again to our old Trade of
^ove^^nting, and Curse ye Meroz, then live in Peace and be obedient to our
Governors. Surely the hand of Heaven has been upon us by Warrant Plague, will
that give us no Warning neither? Nay do we not see a sensible Decay and
Poverty, ^ wasting of the very Spirit and Life of the City and Nation,
occasioned by the Discontents and Confusions, that are among us, whereas had we
united and lovd one another (though of different Persuasions in Religion) or
had we all joined together to oppose Popery, Profaneness, and the Outrages of
Fanaticism, and been contented under the several dispensations of Governments
since the Kings Return, been obedient to the Laws, and true lovers of our King,
and of our own Peace me might have now been the happiest City in the World. Oh
my Lord, I wish that these things may never again be told of in Gath, nor
Published in the Gates of Askalon, least the Antichristian Crew Triumph, and
Sing their Io-Paeans on our Destruction.

Do we not plainly see that the same principled men are now again working their
Designs, to put us, in the same confusion as before? See what Affronts, what
Insolences are daily offered to the Persons of Governors and the Government,
How many little Citizens become (in their own opinion) Statesmen, and instead
of minding their Shops and Business, are hearded into little Parties, to
consider what are fit Instruments to be set up to carry on their little
Policies against the established Government and Laws? So that it is high time,
My Lord and Brethren, that we (who love our King, and the true Reformed
Religion is Established among us by Law) be very diligent to put the Laws in
Execution against such public and scandalous Offenders, since all the fair
Means imaginable will not persuade them to Unity and good Order.

My Lord and Fellow Citizens, why shall we permit our Adversaries to triumph
over us thus, with their noise and nonsense? Let us stand up like Men of
Courage, and hand in hand join together against the torrent of Jesuitical Plots
and Fanatical-Rage, lest we all perish in the gainsaying of Corah.

Is it not too obvious to us all, that those very many Testimonies we have had
of a Damnable Popish Design to subvert our Government, are now become highly
esteemed of through the Follies of those that testified? Do we not see those
very Men, instead of joining with the Church of England, (the only Bulwark to
keep Popery out, secure the Monarchy, and keep us in Peace and Unity) follow
the discontented men amongst us; nay as if there were a kind of agreement made
between Rome and Geneva?

Have we not seen what misguided Zeal has formerly done? And did we not see men
lately in Authority among us, pursuing Popery so hot, that the very Effigies of
our Savior must be made Fuel, with the other Superstitious Rags of
Antichristian Trumpery Thus we cry out Popery, Jesuits, Popishly affected, etc.
and lead our selves at the same time into Confusion or Destruction. Let us but
keep quiet, submit to our Governors and our Laws, and then we need not fear
Popery, nor (which is as bad) Arbitrary Government. Have we not seen among the
Crew of our late Reforming Murderers, a notorious Jesuit, triumphing to see
the Sacred Head of the best of Kings taken off even at his own Gate (as the
Famous Du Moulin offers to prove) and shall we still be blind, and not consider
that the very same Emissaries (since they could not effect their late bloody
Designs) are now amongst us in Sheeps clothing, blowing up the Coals of
Sedition and Discontent, on purpose to accomplish their work in the midst of
our Confusions.

Wherefore, my Lord, It highly concerns us all to look home, since our King and
Government is in danger, that we admit none into any public places of Trust in
our City, but such as are of undoubted Loyalty, and great Integrity, not such
who can swallow Oaths upon Oaths, and contradictory ones too, when it serves
their Interest, not such who have laid themselves forth for the pretended good
of the Subject, in all changes of Government among us.

Then shall we bear Testimony of our Sincerity to maintain the true Interest of
our King, and the true Reformed Religion. For what trust ought there by the
King or Us, be put into Their hands, who are men of such dangerous Principles?
Or what security can there be given for them, when Zeal, and the advantages of
high Places, and love of Faction, shall bias them under the changes of any
Government.

Oh that we did all consider our own Interests and Peace, and that we would lay
it to heart before it be too late, Let not our Murmurings and Repinings, nor
our Popish and Factious Designs, provoke the King to Wrath, let us remember
what the Wise man said, The Wrath of a King is as Messengers of Death, but a
Wise man will pacify it. Let us not forfeit our Birthright for a Mess of
Pottage; throw away our Peace, our Religion, Liberty and Property, for the sake
of a few Scraps of Policy and Faction, which will be our Ruin. Let us not
under the notion of Zeal for the Protestant Interest be Protestants frighted
out of our Wits. Thanks be to God we have a good King, a King that has
expressed more affection to us by his frequent Visits, by adding large
Immunities to our City, then was ever done by many of our Kings before him, and
Thanks be to God he may live many Years to Reign over us (which God Grant) so
that what ever Fears and Jealousies we have of Popery, and^ to be sure we are
safe both in our Religion and Property as long as the King lives, and we cannot
but know that it is not so easy a matter to introduce Popery amongst us, as
'twill be a Commonwealth (the bottom of all these Designs) when once, our
Divisions drive us into Rage and Madness.

My Lord, I have my Being amongst you, and would not willingly see my Brethren
led away again into Captivity under n^^ Taskmasters; Let us all unite in
Brotherly Love, and let those who endeavor to widen our differences, by
Preachments and Coffee-House Discourses, be strictly called to an Account,
according (...) the Law Commands, that we may be once again reduced to a state
of Peace and Happiness among our selves.

My Lord, Now whatever reasons they are that do persuade the Discontented Party
amongst us, to be out of Love with Peace and Unity, and the present settlement,
I am sure they can no ways compensate the Mischiefs which do of Consequence
attend such Actions.

My Lord, I have no Design in sending this Address to Your Lordship, but to
cast in a Mite according to my duty at this juncture of time, endeavoring to
persuade my fellow Citizens that they would become good Men's, and good
Christians, and that I am sure the Consequence will be Peace and Tranquillity in
our Israel; for, My Lord what ever Interests are set up against the Established
Law of this Kingdom, either in Church or State, must lead to Sedition and
Rebellion, from which as it is your Lordships Care and Duty to prevent, so I do
assure your Lordship, that notwithstanding the noises the Popish and Fanatic
Rage may make, You will find that nothing can secure us but by observing these
Oaths, that oblige Magistrates to put in Execution such Laws as may curb the
Insolences of such Persons,

My Lord, and Fellow-Citizens, I am, Your Obedient Servant, LOVE.
London July 19th. 1680.
POSTSCRIPT.
MY LORD,
I Shall not fail to acquaint Your Lordship in a few Days, (God willing) both
with my Name, and Place of Living; that what I have written may not be taken
for a LIBEL, but the well meaning of a true Lover of the KING, and His Royal
Interest, the Church of ENGLAND, and this Honorable CITY, and all the
Honorable Members thereof.


