Sacred Geographie. OR Scriptural Mapps.

1. Of all the Earth, and Water, at the Creation. 2. Of Paradise, and the
Countries circumjacent, Inhabited by the Patriarks. 3. Isreal's forty Years
Perigrination through the Wilderness. 4. Canaan, or the Land of Promise. 5. The
Travels of S. Paul, and other the Apostles. 6. Jerusalem, as it stood in our
Saviors Time.
Collected both from Sacred and Profane Authority, by Learned Persons selected
thereunto by the National Congregation of Dutch Devines, for the more
profitable reading of the Old and New Testament. And to be bound up with Bibles.

Translated into English, By Joseph Moxon, Hydrographer to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty.

London. Printed by Joseph Moxon, and sold at his Shop on Ludgate hill, at the
sign of Atlas. 1671.

Translated into English by J. Moxon, Hydrographer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty.

London, Printed and Sold by James Moxon, at the Sign of Atlas in Warick-Lane,
1691.

To the Reverend and Right Worshipful, PETER MEW, D. D. Vice Chancellor of
OXFORD. And To the Reverend and Right Worshipful JOHN BRETON, D. D. Vice Chanc.
of CAMBRIDGE.
And to the rest of the Reverend and Learned Collegiates of these two famous
Universities.
Reverend and Learned SIRS.
I May justly expect that by your Approbation or Censure the Reputation of
these Scriptural Mapps must stand or fall: And therefore, being by my own
Examinations of them prompted to hope well from You, I offer them to your
perusals.

The Originals of these had their Original from an Assembly of Dutch Ministers,
who selected from among themselves two such Persons as they thought apt and
able to correct all the foregoing Authors that have set forth Mapps of the
like nature: viz. Ortelius, Christiaen Adrichom, Arnold and Nicholas Geilkerck,
etc. which being finished they exposed to Public view: designing thereby the
more profitable and pleasant reading of the Holy Scriptures. Among other
Speculators their Work fell under my Ey: but it was all in the Dutch Tongue,
and scarce to be understood but by those that understood it: Wherefore I
judging it as profitable and pleasant for us as them, took both the task of
Translation upon my self, and the Charge of Engraving and Printing the Plates
and Book.

If therefore by your good Readings any of you find faults in any of these
Mapps, and let me know where they be, I shall be both thank fall to you, and
careful to get the Plates corrected and amended against the next Impression.

Reverend and Learned Sirs, I wish this Piece as capable as I am willing to
serve ye. Joseph Moxon.

To the READER.
HEre is offered thee for s^al price the product of much Study, and great
Pairs. The Dutch Protestant Ministry thought it a Work very necessary for
Protestants that may read the Bible, to bind up with them, and therefore
exposed these Mapps in their Vulgar Language, together with Explanations on
each particular Mapp: And I for the same Reasons render you the same Mapps in
the English Tongue, with apt Explanations on each of them.

I have examined every word in each Mapp particularly, and altered their
spelling the names of Cities and Towns etc. to the spelling of our English
Bibles, and Geographical Tables: and in some few Cases (where I saw positive
Reason for it from the Bible) corrected the situation of Places.

In this Book of Explanations Mr Butle^ (the Author of Christologi) has in a
great measure assisted me: The rest I translated from its Original in the
Dutch, all but some alterations I thought fit to make here and there.

I have also examined all the proofs of Scripture relative to this Discourse;
which (I suppose by often re-printing of later Impressions from former) were
become exceeding falsely cited. But I have corrected them.

I confess some grave Eyes or tender sighted Persons may wish the Letters in
some of these Mapps had been bigger, which in regard of the fullness of those
Mapps could not be: But if such Persons will use a Magnifying Glass of small
price, they shall find the smalest letters appear large enough.

I chose this Volume for this little Book, that it might more conveniently ly
open on the Maps while you are perusing them, to avoid the trouble of turning
them to and fro.

Where you find any Literal faults have escaped either in Engraving the Mapps,
or Printing this Book, Pray mend them with your Pen, and consider how difficult
it is to do any thing of this nature without some fault. Farewell.

Joseph Moxon.

An Explanatory Discourse upon the Mapp of all the EARTH.
Showing the Situation of all the following Mapps in respect of the whole: And
also how it was since the Flood divided and inhabited by the Posterity of Noah.
THE Eternal and Almighty God having on the first Day created the Heavens, the
Earth, and the Light, by his Word, out of nothing; On the second Day the
Firmament, and the Waters above and beneath the same; On the third Day parted
the Dry Land from the Waters, and created Grass, Herbs, and fruitful Trees; On
the fourth the Sun, Moon, and Stars; On the fifth the Fishes great and small,
and the Fowls of the Air; On the sixth the Beasts of the Earth; At last he
created Man and Woman in his own likeness; giving him power over the Fish of
the Sea, the Fowls of the Air, and the Beasts of the Earth, and every creeping
thing, and blessed him, placing him in Paradise, and promising him upon his
obedience eternal life, (of which the Free of Life was to be a visible sign.)
giving them leave to eat of all the Trees in the Garden, except only of the
Tree of Good and Evil; Telling them that in the day they eat thereof they
should die the death.

The Devil seeing Man placed in this happy and Imperial condition, stirs up the
Serpent to tempt the Woman to taste the fruit of the Tree of Good and Evil;
telling her that they should not die, but that their eyes should be opened, and
they should be as Gods. With these sly and impudent lies of the Serpent the
Woman was persuaded to eat of the forbidden Fruit; and gave unto her Husband to
eat also. So that they both strayed from the Commands of God their Creator, and
fell by their disobedience into sin, and consequently into destruction.

From Adam in this fallen condition is produced the whole race of Mankind, who
daily as they increase fall into all manner of Pleasure, Sin, and Wickedness.
Insomuch as through their sinful lusts and abominable lives they brought upon
themselves the sad and heavy Judgment of an Universal Deludge: So that in this
Flood perished all the Generations of Adam, and all other Creatures living upon
the Face of the Earth, except Faithful Noah and his Family, and two of kind
Male and Female of all Beasts and Fowls and all Creeping things, preserved an
Ark built by the directions of Almighty God.

When the Waters retired into the compass of the Seas, Noah divided the dry
Land among his Sons Shem, Ham, and Japhet: and they again divided it among
their Sons.

The children of Japhet inhabited Europe, the Northern part of Asia and
America, as we may gather from Ezeck. 38. 6. 15. and 39. 2.

Shem spread himself over the South part of Asia and America. And Ham possessed
the Land of Canaan, Arabia, and all Africa. Yet the Posterity of Shem drove out
the Canaanites, and possessed themselves of Canaan and most parts of Arabia.

The sons of Japhet were these, Gomor, Magog, Madai, Javan, Thubal, Mesech, and
Thiras. Go^ers sons were Askenas, Riphat, and Togarma. Askenas is held by the
Scribes to be the Father of the French and Germans. Riphat, the Original of the
Finlanders, L^planders, and the inhabitants of Condora, Obdora, and Jougoria;
where Ancient Geographers have placed the Hills of Riphai, which at this day is
called by the Inhabitants thereof the G^rdle of the World. And Togarma, the
first Inhabiter of* Sweden, Denmark, and Norway. From Magog are desended all
the People of Scithya, now called Tartarie. Ezech. 38. 2. and 39. 6. And from
Madia the Medes. 2 K^^g^. 17. 6. Jos 13. 17. Jer. 25. 25. Dan. 5. 28. and 6. 1.
and 8. 20.

The Children of Javan are these Elisa, Tharsis, Kithim, and Doda^im. From
Elis^, have the Greeks (which are called Aeoles) their Original. Ezech. 37. 7.
From Tharsis the people of Cilicia, wherein is the City of Tharsis, wherein the
Apostle Paul was born. From Kithim those of Cyprus, Macedonia, and Italy have
there Original. Numb. 14. 24. Isa. 23. 1. Jer. 2. 10. 1 Match. 1. 1. Of Dodanim
are descended the Greeks called Doors, which are the People of Cariae, Rhodes,
Pelepon^esus, and Scicil^e. Thubal is accounted the Father of those of Iberia,
Albania, and Spin. And Mesech a Father of those of Cappadocia, Moscovia,
Polonia, and other People that use the Sclavonian Language, Ezech. 27. 13. and
32. 26. and 38. 3. And Thiras an Original of those of Tharsis, Misia, and
Illyria. So that the blessing Noah gave laphet came upon him when he said, God
spread forth laphet, and let him dwell in the Tents of Shem; and let Canaan be
his Servant. This blessing we here see accomplished: for God so spread forth
Iaphet that his Posterity possessed the Nothern parts of the Earth: And God
has also given him the third and fourth Monarchy of the world. At this day the
Lord has plentifully blessed him in some parts of his possessions in spiritual
blessings; in other parts in Temporal blessings: as we may see the Kingdoms and
Countries of Christendom: As also in the Moscovites, Tarters, and Turks, who at
present have the command over much of Shems and H^ms Posterity. Rome the
Empress of the fourth Monarchy had in the time of Vespatian thirteen Italian
miles, and almost one quarter. Plin. lib. 3. cap. 5. Flavius Vopiscus
witnesses that the Imperour Aurelian enlarged the compass of this City to 30
Italian miles.

The sons of Shem, were Elam, Asshur, Arphaisad, Lud, and Aram. Elam was a
father of the Elamites, that is, of the Inhabitants of the Lands of Susiana,
Elymais, and Persia, Dan. 8. 2. Where the Prophet witnesses that Susa or
Susari (situate on the River Vl^i which the Greeks call Euleum) is a City in
the lands of Elam. Here the Monarchs of Persia kept their Court, as being the
Imperial City of the second Monarchy, and had in its circuit 120. Stad. that is
15. Ital. miles for 8. Stad. makes an Ital. mile. Strab. lib. 15. From Assure
had the Assirians (who had the first Monarchy) their Original, whose Imperial
City was Ninive a City of God whose circuit was three days Journey. Jonas 3.
3. With which agree ancient writers, who witness that Ninive was in length 150.
Stad. in breadth 90 and in Circuit 480. Stad. that is 60 English miles.

Arphachsad. was a Father of the Babilonians and Chaldeans, who were called by
the Hebrews Chasdim, from one of the Posterity of Arphachsad. The Imperial City
of which lands was Babel, of whose great power glory and command the Holy
Scripture witnesses in several places. Isa. 13. 19. and 14. 12. and 47. 7. Ier.
51. 41. 58. Dan. 4. 30. With which agree Historians and Chronologers; for among
the rest Herodotus, witnesses that Babel was four square, each side having in
length 120. Stad. that is 60 English miles. Herodotus lib. 1. Yet Strab^ (an
Author of credit) makes this City less; saying that the wall of this City was
in circuit 385 Stad. that is 48 English miles and one Stad.

Among other of Arphachsads Posterity was Heber his Sons Son, who was a Father
of the Hebrews, who had two Sons, one called Peleg, because in his time the
world was divided: for Peleg signifies in English deviding. His brother was
called Iaketan who had many Sons, to wit Almodad, Saleph, Hazarmaveth, Sarah,
Haderam, Vzal, Dikela, Obal, Abimael, Seba, Ophir, Haevila and Iobab. These
spread themselves from Mesa to Sephar at the Hill toward the East. Genesis 10.
25. Many of the Learned understand by Mesa the Hill Masium, which is a part of
the Mountains of Amani. And by Sephar the City Sipphara Situate in Mesopotamia
upon the River of Euphrates. But yet there is more ground to think that their
Habitations was from the River of Tigris toward the East to the farthest parts
of the East Indies. Yet nevertheless Elams posterity inhabited also between the
borders of these vast stretched forth Lands: for the land of Hevila borders
toward the West on the spring head of the River of Pison, which is an arm of
the River of Tigris. And Ophir Hevila's brother is held to be the Father of the
Inhabitants of the Lands of Pegu, Sian, and Aurea Chersonesus, that is the
Golden Peninsula where at this day stands the Famous City of Malacca: so that
by the mountains toward the East we must understand the Hills that part the
East Indies from China.

From the Land of Ophir Solomon's Ships brought Gold Precious Stones and other
rich Commodities; Performing their Voyage in three years time. 1 Kin. 9. 26.
and 10. 12. 22. For this reason Benedictus Arias Mountanus understands by
Sephar and the Mountains toward the East the Lands and Mountains of Peru: and
says that therefore the Gold wherewith King Solomon covered the Temple is
called Gold of Peraim, that is both the Peru's, for the last silable aim
signifies in the Hebrew tongue a number of two. 2 Chronicles. 3. 6. Also the name of
the land of Jucatan (which lies between Mexico and the Island Haiti otherwise
called Spaniola) sounds very like Iaketan the name of Ophers Father.

Led the son of Shem is held to be a Father of the Inhabitants of Lydia and
other Countries in Asia the less.

From Aram Luds brother have those of Syria Mesopotamia and Armenia their
Original: for these mighty Kingdoms and their particular Provinces are called
in the Holy Scripture the Land of Aram, although they are distinguished from
one another by several names: for example, Aram Damasci, Aramzobe, Aram
Naharam, that is Aram between the two Rivers of Euphrates and Tigras, which
lands the Greeks call Mesopotamia. 2 Samuel 8. 3. 5. and 10. 6. Iud. 3. 8. The
Inhabitants of these Lands are at this day as well of themselves as of the
Neighboring Nations about them called Aramei and Asamei. The Children of Aram
are these, Uz, Hull, Gether, and Mas. From Uz are descended those of Cele
Syria, called in the Holy Scripture the Land of Uz, where Job dwelt. Job 11.
From Hull are descended the Inhabitants of Palmiaren: from Gether those of
Apamena and from Mas the People of Pieriah Comagena, and Cyrestica. See the Map
of the Travels of St Paul.

The sons of Cham are these. Cus, Misraim, Put, and Canaan. Cus (from whom the
desert and stony Arabia was called the Land of Chus) Begat Seba, Hevila,
Sabtha, Raema, Sebtecha, and Nimrod. From Seba and Hevila are descended the
dwellers of the desert and stony Arabia. Psalm. 72. 10. Isai. 43. 3. These
Countries were afterward overcome by the Posterities of Abraham, the Edomites
and the Isralites, and by them possessed. You must understand that desert
Arabia is so called not that it is wholly desert and un-inhabited, But because
it has many desert places, and few Cities, because the dwellers therein live
most in Tents, as those who for grasing of their Cattle often change Places.
Sabtha (or more properly Sabbetha) is one of the Predecessors of the
Inhabitants of Arabia the happy; wherein in former times was the City of
Sabbotha. From Raema are descended the People that inhabit that part of Arabia
the happy that borders on the Persian Sea, where Ptolomie places the City of
Rhegama. Among the Sons of Raema were Sheba and Dedan. From Dedan are descended
the dwellers of Dedace in Ethiopia, and the Troglodites, as may be gathered by
the Merchandise mentioned in Ezeck. 27. 15. and 38. 13. Seba was also the
Progenitor of the People of Ethiopia. Isai. 45. 14. From hence came the Queen
of Saba (or more properly Sheba) to King Solomon. 1 King. 10. 1. Mat. 12. 42.
And here reigned the mighty Queen Can^^es. Act. 8. 27. And at this time here
reigns that potent Prince (untruly called) Presbiter John (for he is neither
Presbiter nor Priest, but is indeed the mightiest Monarch of this world.) The
People of Arabia and other Mahumetans call him At^clabassi, and his own
Subjects Acegue, and Neguz, of the Abissines or Moors.

From Mitsraim are descended the People of Egypt. And therefore the Hebrews
from him call that land in their language Mitsraim. And also to this day the
Inhabitants and bordering People call it Misri. From Mitsraim are also
descended these following Nations: to wit, Ludim, the Inhabitants of the
Commonwealth of Mariot in Egypt. Anaemim, the Inhabitants of Marmarica and
Cyrene. Leabim, the people of Lybia Situated between Marenmaricam and Egypt,
Naphthuhim, The Moors on the borders of Egypt, whose chief City is Napatha or
Naphtha, Pathrusim, (which Ptolomy calls Phorusios, and Pliny Pharusios: those
of Getulia who border on the great Ocean Sea. Isai. 11. 11. ler. 44. 1, 15.
Plin. Book. 6. chapter 8. And Casluhim the Inhabitants of Cassiotidis lying in the
entrance of Egypt coming from India and the Caphtorims that is the Inhabitants
of Seir and other adjacent Countries: From these people are descended the
Philistims, and Caphtorims. Genesis 10. 14. Genesis 32. 3. Deuteronomy. 2. 22.

From Put are descended the People of Africa the Less, Mauritania, in which is
the River that Ptolomy calls Phehut, and Pliny Funt. And also in Numidia, and
other Countries toward the South Mauritania, and Africa the Less are now
called Barbary, Numidia, Biledulgerid, and those Lands extending farther
Southwards are called Azamaga, Gualata, Guiny, which is the land of Black Moors.

From Canaan are descended the Sidonites, Hethites, Iebusites, Emorites,
Cirgasites, Hevites, Arkites, Sinites, Arradites, Zemarites, and the
Hamathites. And their Countries extended from Sidon unto Gaza, etc. Genesis 10.
19. But almost all this Land of Canaan was for the many grievous sins of its
Inhabitants by Gods Commandment given for an Inheritance to the seed of Abraham.

Nimrod the Son of Chus began to be a mighty man upon the Earth: and the
beginning of his Kingdom was Babel, and other Cities in the land of Shinar.
Genesis 10. 10.

Now in regard that the Posterity of Noah are thus placed in Europe, Asia, and
Africa, a question may arise how America being so great a part of the world
became first populated, and from whence: and because the answer cannot be found
either in Holy writ or profane Authors, the most we can do is but to offer at
arguments, and leave them to be accepted or rejected according as they may seem
most probable or improbable to the judgment of the Reader. Yet certain it is,
that the People of America had their Original from Noah: For in the Flood God
destroyed every thing that was upon the Earth from Man to Beast; and Noah only
remained, and they that were with him in the Ark. Genesis 7. 23. But from which of
Noah's sons is the task to find out; in regard we have had so little knowledge
of that part of the world till of (comparatively) late years.

It seems nearest the truth that those People that inhabit the Northern parts
of America are descended from laphet; for toward the North is but a small Sea
both on the Western and Eastern side. On the Eastern side of America between
the Western parts of Norway and the Eastern parts of Island are not contained
above 170 Leagues: from whence by the providence of God Norway-Men Fishing at
Sea in small vessels might easily by stress of weather be forced over with a
strong Easterly wind in less than three days time. And afterward either they
or their Successors by the same Providencial cause might in less than one days
time be driven from the Western Shoars of Island upon the Shoars of Groenland;
which though it be not accounted a part of America, yet in my Judgment it
ought to be rather part of it than of any of the other three parts of the
World; and that because it borders so very near upon it, that to this day it is
unknown whether it be a part of that Continent or no. For several of our
Country men and others have attempted to find a Sea Passage between them, and
yet cannot. But if there be a passage it is a very small one, and therefore we
may probably conjecture would not longly hid; since the necessities that that
cold Climate is Subject to would compel rational Creatures (as men are) to seek
Southerly for a warmer Situation.

But here to show the possibility of such an accident I mentioned only three
days time wherein men might be forced over from the Western parts of Norway to
the Eastern parts of Groenland, though we need not from hence conclude it was
so: but we may also think, that America might as well be populated from any
other part of Europe, if we but allow that Navigations have designedly been
made thither both by our own Country men and several others: as Hacklute
relates in his English Voyages. Page 506. from the Records themselves, how
several Navigations have been made by the British Nation above 500 years ago
into America. And withal, for the probability of the truth of those Records
proves how that in Cuba and Hispaniola (two famous Islands in the Bay of
Mexico) the Natives retain several British words signifying the same thing to
this day: besides some marks of Christianity among them. Yet by the same
propability America might be populated either from France or Spain, who also
are descended from Japhet.

Thus far may be offered in favor of the sons of Japhets populating America,
and from whence. But if this be not accepted, we may consider the sons of Cham,
who Inhabited the western Shoars of Africa, which in some places are not above
480 Leagues from the Main land of Brasil.

If neither Jophet or Cham can be allowed in the Readers opinion to Populate
America, then must it of necessity be the sons of Shem who populated it: yet
here we find almost 600 leagues distance from America in the nearest place,
viz. between Yedso the most Easternly Island of Asia and California the most
Westernly Island of America: therefore as far as the likeliest probability backs
this argument, we ought to conclude that America was populated by the sons of
Japhet.

A Discourse upon the Geographical Description of PARADISE: And the several
Countries bordering thereon. Together with a short discourse of the
perigrination of the Patriarchs, from Adam to Jacob.
AFter God had created the Heavens, the Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is
out of Nothing, for the completing of his great work he set himself to make
Man; and so dignified and honored him that he made him Lord over all
Creatures, and gave him for his dwelling a most pleasant Garden in Eden, called
Paradise; excelling in Stateliness Beauty and Delightful Pleasantness all the
Countries upon the face of the Earth: and therefore is rightly called the
Garden of Pleasure. It is Situate in the Land of Shinar, a part of Asia, upon
the River now called Tigris, which is called in the Holy Scripture the River of
Pison. This River devides it self into four branches, each of a several name.
Therefore to show the true Situation of this Garden, and to describe it
perfectly, we must consider what the Prophet Moses says in Genesis 2. 8. And the
Lord God planted a Garden Eastward in Eden; As also at the 10 verse. And a
River went out of Eden to water the Garden; and from thence it was parted and
became into four heads: to wit four heads of Water. This Text clearly shows
that this Garden of Pleasure was Situate on the East side of Pison, where the
River waters it with a single stream; as you may see in the Mapp: And though we
should suppose that some part of this Garden should ly on the West side of the
River of Pison, yet it is plain by Genesis 3. 24. that the dwelling place of Adom
was on the East side: where it says, So he drove out the Man, and he placed at
the East of the Garden Cherubims etc. Because he should not enter in again
where he went out. Also from Genesis 4. 16. And Cain went out from the presence of
the Lord and dwelt in the land of Nod, in the East of Eden. And it is the more
likely to be believed, because this River as well in length and breadth as in
strength of its stream may compare with the Rhyne, or Donau; and therefore it
may consequently be conjectured that it must hinder our first parents from
flying Eastward from the presence of the Lord had they inhabited to the
Westwards of this River: for we cannot rationally conjecture they had either
Boats or Ferries to pass over it withal: nor does Gods holy word make any
mention of Building any till Noah's time. Thus therefore have many Ancient
Geographers committed an eminent error in this particular, placing this Garden
of Pleasure on the West side of the River of Pison.

This River (as aforesaid) is divided into four heads of water; to wit, two to
the Northward or above the Garden, and two to the Southward or below the
Garden; and were called Pison, Gihon, Hiddekel, and Euphrates; and are thus
described in Genesis 2. 11. The name of the first is Pison. That is it which
compasses the whole Land of Havilah, where there is Gold. v. 13. And the name
of the second River is Gihon. The same is it that compasses the whole Land of
Ethiopia. v. 14. And the name of the third River is Hiddekel: That is it which
goes toward the East of Assyria. And the fourth River is Euphrates.

This River of Euphrates has its original source from the mountains of Moschi
and Caspy in Armenia the Great: And the River of Hiddekel has its original
from a certain Lake or dead Sea Situate near the beginnings of the Mountains
of Ararat. These two streams run downwards into the aforesaid River Pison at
the North of the Garden, and so run Southwards to the Southmost part of the
Garden, where the most Easterly of these streams retains still the name of
Pison, and the Westernly takes the name of Gihon upon it, both emptying
themselves into the Persian Gulf.

Our first Parents being thus placed in this Garden of Pleasure (as aforesaid)
had all things therein given them to their use and behoof, except the Tree of
Knowledge of good and evil, Genesis 2. 17. Which was expressly Forbidden them by
God. But being deluded by the Subtleties of Satan to break Gods Command, they
were driven out of Paradise, and condemned to get their Living in the sweat of
their brows; and for their sakes the Earth was accursed and overrun with
Thistles and Thorns.

Having (as we have touched before) their dwelling in the Land of Nod, to the
Eastwards of the Garden of Eden (which Country was formerly called Susiane,
and now Susan) where they fell to Tilling the Ground. They had two Sons, the
eldest named Cain a Tiller of the Ground, and the youngest named Abel a keeper
of Sheep; who through the Spite and Malice of his brother Cain was in his fury
muthered by him. Cain being accursed of God for this fact, falls into great
despair and perplexity of mind, fearing least every one that meets him should
kill him: goes therefore forth from the face of the Lord into the Land of Nod,
and builds there a City and calls the name of it Enoch, after his Sons name.
It may be conjectured that the City now called Susan is the remains of this
City Enoch, as bordering nearest to Eden, and Situate to the Westwards of the
Mountains of Ararat upon the River Euleus, where it is probable Cain stopped his
flight from the face of the Lord, being not able to pass over this River.

The sins of Mankind growing from time to time more and more, are at last
punished by God almighty with an universal deludge; wherein was drowned all the
race of Mankind, all the Beasts of the field, all the Fowls of the Air, and all
creeping things, except Noah and his Family, and two of a sort of all Creatures
that lived on the face of the Earth, and of the fowls of the Air: preserved by
Noah upon the Waters in an Ark built by him according to the directions of God
himself, after the World had been created 1656 years. This Ark having driven to
and fro upon the Waters above the highest tops of the Mountains for the space
of about five months time, it pleased God to let it rest at last upon the
Mountains of Ararat; And after the waters were retired again into their place
the believing Noah and his Family and all the living Creatures that were
enclosed in the Ark went again out of the Ark: and Noah and his Family settled
themselves about the Eastern borders of the River of Hiddekel: from whence
afterward the Generations of Noah spread themselves both Eastwards and
Westwards; naming the several Lands and Countries wherein they lived after
their several Names: Which has moved us to insert this Geneological Table,
that the Reader may the easier learn to know the Lands in the Map, and their
several Original Possessors; as more at large you may collect them out of the
Bible, and the marginal Notes there on.

[ Let the Genelogical Table come in here.]

All the people of the Earth had then one Language and one Speech. And that
they might the better unite themselves, and perpetrate a Name, they consulted
to build a City, and a Tower therein whose top thereof should reach up unto
Heaven; which the Lord being offended with confounded their Language, scattered
them, and made them leave off building their intended City. And the name of
that place was called Babel: as you may see at Fig 1. in the Map, because the
Lord did here confound their Language, and from hence desperse them into all
parts of the Earth. Genesis 11. 9.

Not far from this City is Ur, the dwelling place of Terah; as at Fig. 2. in
the Mapp. This Terah was the Father of Abraham, and the Grandfather of Lot. And
Abraham being forewarned of God to depart from thence, according both he and
his Father Terah and Lot departed to Haran, as at Numb. 3. in the Mapp: where
Terah dyed. Genesis 11. 32. And Abraham at Gods command left his Native place, and
his Kindred, and took with him all his family, and his Nephew Lot, and all
their substance, and traveled toward the Land of Canaan, unto Sichem in the
Plain of Moreh, as at Fig. 4. in the Mapp. From whence he removed again unto a
mountain between Beth-el and Hai (as at Fig. 5. in the Mapp) and pitched his
tent there; where he built an Altar and called upon the Lord. Genesis 12. 8. From
hence they depart Southwards; and by reason of a famine in the Land are driven
to go down into Egypt; from whence after some time of stay they again depart
(richly blessed with Cattle, Silver, and Gold, etc.) into the Land of Canaan:
and again took up their dwelling place between Beth-el and Hai. at Fig. 5. Genesis
13. 3. Here Lot and Abraham parts, because the Land was too little for them.
And Lot chose the Plain of Jordan. at Fig. 6. in the Mapp; and pitched his Tent
toward Sodom. Genesis 13. 12. And Abram went and dwelt in the Plain of Mamre,
which is in Hebron, Genesis 13. 18. as at Fig. 7. in the Mapp. Here it was that
Ishmael was born, Isaac is promised, And Abrams name was changed to Abraham,
Genesis 16. and 17. From hence Abraham journeyed toward the South Country, and
dwelt between Kadesh and Shur, and sojourned as a stranger in Gerar; at Fig. 8.
in the Mapp. Genesis 20. 1. Here Abraham was commanded to offer up his Son Isaac
upon one of the Mountains of Moriah; at Fig. 9. in the Mapp. But God finding
his obedience forbids him to lay hands on the Lad, and provides a Ram for a
burnt offering in Isaacs steed, and promises him his blessings. From hence
Abraham goes and dwells in Beersheba, at Fig. 10. in the Mapp. Genesis 22. 19. And
at Kirjath-arba which is Hebron, Sarah dies, and is buried in the cave of
Machpelah over against. Mamre, at Fig. 12. in the Mapp. Genesis 23. 19.

Afterward Abraham takes an Oath of his servant, and sends him to Nahor in
Mesopotamia. at Fig. 3. in the Mapp: to take a wife for Isaac out of his
Kindred, and obtained Rebekah the Daughter of Bethuel, and brings her into
Canaan, where Isaac met her as he came from the way of the Well Lahairoi, at
Fig. 13. in the Mapp. Genesis 24. 62. Abraham at the age of 175 years dies, and is
buried by his Sons Isaac and Ishmael in the Sepulcher of his Wife Sarah, at
Fig. 12. in the Mapp. Genesis 25. 10. Isaac then dwelt in the Cit^y of Gerar, at
Fig. 14. in the Mapp. Genesis 26. 6. From whence he removed to the valley of
Gerar. Genesis 26. 17. And from the valley of Gerer to Beer-sheba. Genesis 26. 23.
But the Children of Ishmael being twelve Prince dwelt in all that space between
Havilah, at Fig. 16. and Shur, at Fig. 15. in the Mapp. Genesis 25. 18. This was a
large Country, but in probability not very fruitful or close inhabited.
Because at this time it is called the Deserts of Arabia.

Isaac had now two Sons, to wit Esau, and Jacob. And Jacob being the youngest
by his subtilety bought Esaus birthright for a mess of Pottage; and by it
obtained his father Isaac's Blessing, which belonged to Esau; for which Esau
sought Jacobs Life. But by the council of his Parents he went toward
Podan-Arain to Laban his Mothers brother. But being benighted at Luz, he took
of the stones of the Place for his Pillows, and lay down to sleep on them; and
then dreamed that he saw a Ladder whose top reached into Heaven, and the Angels
of God ascending and descending. Here he received the promise of God: and here
he took the stone he had for his Pillow, and set it up for a Pillar, and poured
oil on it, and named the City Bethel, at Fig 17 in the Mapp. Genesis 28. 11 to
20. In the morning he traveled toward the people of the East, where he met
Rachel, the daughter of his Uncle Laban, about Haran at Fig 3 in the Mapp: and
makes himself known to her, who straight runs and tells her father, who also
came out to meet him: and received him kindly. Genesis 29 13. Here Jacob served
Laban 20 years, for his two daughters Leah and Rachel, together with such
Cattle of the Flock as he barganied for: which the Lord blesses, and increases
mightily. Whereat Laban and his Sons grow displeased, and murmur against Jacob.
which caused Jacob to depart from thence with his Wives and Childeren and
Cattle to the land of Canaan over the River Euphrates, at Fig. 18 in the Mapp.
Turning toward the Hills of Gillead at Fig. 19 in the Mapp. After 7 days
persuit of his Father in law and Uncle Laban and a great power he brought with
him, he was overtaken. Yet nevertheless, Laban being warned of God not to hurt
Jacob, made a convenant with him. Gen 31. 48, 49. not to hurt each other. Here
they made a heap of stones in memorial of the covenant, and called the name of
it Gilead and Mizpah: And from thence Laban returned home in peace.

Jacob traveling a little further meets the Angels of God, and called the name
of the place Mahanaim. at Fig. 20 in the Mapp. From hence Jacob and all his
Family and followers passed over the foord Jabbok, Genesis 32. 22. Here it was
that Jacob wrestled with God, and obtained his blessing; and was called Israel;
wherefore he called the name of the place Peniel, at Fig. 21. in the Mapp. And
here he met his brother Esau coming against him, with 400 men: yet they
embraced and parted friendly from one another; Esau to his dwellings in the
mountains Seir, at Fig. 22 in the Mapp. Genesis 33. 16. and Jacob journied to
Succoth, on the River of Jordan, at Fig. 23 in the Mapp; where he built an
house. From thence he came near the City of Shechem in Canaan, at Fig. 17. in
the Mapp. From hence God commanded him to go to Bethel, and make there an Altar
unto God that appeared unto him when he fled from his brother Esau. Genesis 35. 1.
From hence Jacob traveled toward Ephrath, which is Bethelem, at Fig. 24. And
within a little way of the place Richel dyed with hard labor of her son
Benjamin, and was buried there. Genesis 35. 19. and Genesis 48. 7. Israel traveled
again from thence, and pitched his Tents beyond the Tower of Edar, at Fig. 25.
in the Mapp. From Edar he went to his Father Iscaac in Mamre, at the City of
Arbak, at Fig. 11 in the Mapp. And Isaac being 180 years old dyed; and was
buried by his sons Esau and Jacob, in the Sepulcher of his Father Abraham at
Machpelah, at Fig. 12 in the Mapp. Israel being compelled by famine, and
invited by his son Joseph, goes into Egypt; that is the land of Cham, also
called Mitsraim, where Joseph receives him with joy and duty, and entertains
him with great kindness and liberallity, giving him with the consent of Pharaoh
the Land of Goshen, at Fig. 26 in the Mapp, to live in. The souls that came
out of Egypt with him were in number 70. And Israel being very old and dim of
sight dyed there, and was carried by his son Joseph and the rest of his
children, and a great train of Egyptians very magnificently into the land of
Canaan; and buried in the Sepulcher of his Father and Grandfather, at
Machpelah, which is before Mamre, at Fig. 12 in the Mapp. Gen 50. 13.

Thus is the courteous Spectator presented with a short Narration of the several
Countries, Stations, and Dwellings, of our first Parents; from Adam downwards
to Jacob and by the corresponding figures in the Mapp, and this Narration is
directed to find the situation of every place in question which he shall read
of in the Bible, wherein they are concerned, with very great ease, speed, and
delight.

A short discourse upon the Perigrination of the Children of Israel; Together
with a Geographical description of the several places they traveled to between
Egypt and the land of Canaan.
THe land of Promise is by some old Writers called Palestine, (as is
conjectured) from the name of the Inhabitants of the land called Philistines, a
Nation descended from Cham, one of the sons of Noah. And yet may this Land be
properly called the Land of Promise; in regard of the promise God made to
Abraham, Genesis 12. 7. and Genesis 13. 15. It takes the name of Canaan from Canaan,
one of the sons of Ham:) and is divided into particular Provinces, according to
the several names of Chams sons, who were the first possessors of those
Provinces: as you may more perfectly see in the Mapp of Paradise. And lastly,
this Land is called the Holy Land, alluding to what God said unto Moses in
Deuteronomy. 3. 5. Draw not nigh hither; Put off thy shoes from thy feet; for the
Place whereon thou stand is Holy Ground. Notwithstanding this was not spoken
by God in the Land of Canaan; but in the Wilderness of Sin by mount Horeb. Yet
however we may account this a very proper name for this Land, because the
holiness of the Lord was there preserved; The Holy City of Jerusalem stood in
it; and the most Holy and true Son of God had both his birth and conversation
in it.

The extreme bounds of this Land reaches Fastwards to Arabiathe Stony.
Westwards to the Great Sea, Northwards to the Hills of Labanon, and Southwards
to the Wilderness of Paran, Edom, and Kadesh. Its length between Labanon and
Paran is about 150 English Miles: The breadth between the Great Sea and the
River of Jordan is various; for in some Places, it is about 50. in others about
60. Miles over.

This Land is watered with several small Rivolets or Brooks; some emptying
themselves into the Great Sea and others running into the River of Jordan, a
famous River taking its original from two small Lakes by the Woods of Labanon,
called Jor, and Dan; who running a little way, unite both their streams and
names: and from thence is called Jordan. This River Jordan runs from thence
into the Lake Merom, and from Merom into the Sea of Galilee; otherwise called
the Sea of Chinereth; And lastly, running from the Sea of Chinereth it looses
its self and name in the Dead Sea or Vale of Siddim. In this Valestood formerly
those wicked Cities Sodom and Gomorrah, and in the time of Lot was a most
exceeding fruitful plot of ground, compared to the Garden of the Lord, to
wit, Paradise. Gen 13. 10. This Sea or Vale is also watered with the Brooks
Zered, and Arnon, and is nevertheless (as Josephus writes) a salt and
unfruitful Lake. Tacitus, Egysippus, Pausanius, and others, write wonderful
things of this Lake; which for brevity we shall here omit. Yet this we ought to
remark, that herein is found driving upon the waters a species of Pitch called
Asphaltum: from whence this Lake has also obtained the name of Mare
Asphalticum. This Pitch being melted has a noysom stinck, and is used both in
medicines, and by the Inhabitants there-abouts for the pitching of Vessels.

But to proceed, This Land of Canaan is a very fruitful Land: producing Corn,
Wine, Oil, Sugar, Balsome, Figgs, Herbs, and Flowers; and is very truly termed
a Land flowing with milk and honey. Exodus 3. 8. and in several other places. It
is beautified with many fair Hills, Vales, Fields, Fountains, Rivers; Woods,
Cities, Vi^lages, and strong Castles: exceling many other Lands in the World:
and therefore given by God for an Inheritance to the Father of the faithful and
his Seed the children of Israel, as a type of the Heavenly Canaan, the place of
perfect and accomplished joy and happiness.

The exceeding great number of Cities in this Land is almost incredible: yet
that you may the better conceive of it, we have thought fit to add a Catalogue
of the Kingly Cities which Joshua by lot divided to the children of Israel: as
follows.

To the Tribe of Ruben Hesh^^n Madian. P^tra.
To Manasse G^^al. F^a-D^r. Ta^^a^^ M^g^^^^. Israel. Th^^z^. Ashtaroth.
Domas^^^. Ed^^^. Gesur. Maachath. Zoba. Them^^^ Madon.
To Gad Rabbah
To Benjamin. ^^thel. A^. Gibe^^: Jer^sa^^^. Jericho,
To Simeon. Debir. Gerar.
To Zebulon Jok^eam. Simron Mer^^.
To Issachat Apbek.
To Asher Achsaph. Lassor^n. Tire. Zidon.
To Naphtali. Hazor. Edrei. Heleph. Hamm^th.
To Dan. Ekron. Gath. Lac^is.
To Judah Harad. Arab. Makked^h. Lib^a. Eglon. Bes^k. Hebron. Adullam. Tappua.
To Ephraim. G^^ur. Tappuah. L^ssaron. Samaria.

in all 52 Kingly Cities.

This Description of the Land of Canaan may be thought unproper in this place,
since we pretend to show you the children of Isreal's forty years wandering
through the Wilderness: But because you may know what Land it was God had
ordained for them after their Trials and Travels; and because we intend in our
Discourse upon the Mapp of Canaan to treat mostly upon the Actions and Passages
of our Savior Jesus Christ in this Land, therefore we thought fit to insert
this Discourse here, and to omit it in the next Mapp. Wherefore,

Having thus given you an account of the Land of Promise, we come next to show
the Perigrination of the children of Israel toward it through the Wildernesses
of Paran, Zin, Kadesh, etc. where (for your information) take notice that the
double pricked line in the Map shows the passage they made; and where you find
six little round ^ thus, besides the pricked line, it shows where they pitched
their Tents: Each Station is marked with numerical figures, to which the
numerical figures in the Mapp and Book bear particular referrences. But to the
purpose.

God having purposed that the posterity of Abraham should remain as strangers
in a strange Land 430 years: And this time being expired, he took notice of
their miserable bondage, and how they were suppressed and tasked of the
Egyptians, he heard the sighs and complaints of his People; and therefore sent
his servants Moses and Aaron to lead them out of Egypt into the Promised land.

And because King Pharaoh opposed them, therefore God sent all sorts of plagues
upon Egypt, so that at last Pharaoh and his people were not only willing to let
them go, but even in a manner drove them out of the land.

The children of Israel therefore gathered themselves together from all parts
of the land to Rameses, and ate the Paschal Lamb on the 14. day of the month
Ibib. Exodus 13. 4. (which with us is part of the month of March, and by them
accounted the first month of the Year, (2583. years after the Creation of the
World) The next day (to wit the 15 day of the first month they journeyed from
thence to Succoth. (at fig. 1. in the Mapp.) and from thence to Etham (at fig.
2.) on the edge of the Wilderness, and there encamped themselves. From thence
they turned to Pi-hahiroth, (at fig. 3.) between Migdal and the Sea, where they
were overtaken by the Egytians. But God set his Angel behind the camp to guard
it: And having provided a Pillar of Cloud and a Pillar of Light, the one to
guide them in the Day, and the other to light them in the Night, placed the
Pillar of (loud behind the Israelites, and it became a Light to them, but
Darkness to the Egyptians; so as they could not come at them. Israel being thus
beset on each side with high mountains, behind with an Enemy, and before with
the Red Sea, cried unto the Lord, who by the hands of his servant Moses caused
the Waters to part, and they went over on dry Ground: But when the Egyptians
persued them, the Waters returned again, and covered them and their Chariots,
so that they were all drowned in the Sea; and not one of them escaped.

Hereat the People rejoice, and Moses and Miriam sing praises to the Lord for
their deliverance. But journeying farther, come to the bitter Waters of Marah,
(at fig. 4.) where they encamped, and murmurred against Moses, who by the Lords
direction threw a Tree into the Waters, and they became sweet. Exodus 15. 25.
From hence they journeyed to Elim. (at fig. 5.) and encamped there, where they
found twelve Fountains of Water, and seventy Palm Trees. From thence they came
to the coasts of the Red Sea. (at fig. 6.) And from thence to the Wilderness of
Sin, (at fig. 7.) and encamped there on the 15 day of the second Month after
they came out of the Land of Egypt: Here they again murmurred against Moses for
want of Flesh; calling for the Flesh pots and Bread of Egypt: Wherefore the
Lord pitying them sent them their daily bread from Heaven; which they called
Mannah, and caused a great number of Qua^^s to come out of the Sea to seed them
with. Then they journeyed from Sin, and set up their Tents in Dep^k^^, (at fig.
8.) From thence to Alush, (at fig. 9.) Thence Rep^^dim. (at fig. 10) where
there was no Water to drink: wherefore the People again murmur at Moses, and
tempred the Lord: and therefore the name of the place was called Massah, and
(...) Exodus 17. 7. Nevertheless the Lord commanded Moses to smite the Rock, and
there came forth Water for the People to drink.

Here also Amalek came forth against Israel; and Moses and Aaren and Hur went
up to the top of the Hill, where Moses lined up his hand (...) Prayer to the
Lord, and Israel prevailed: but when his hands grew heavy, so that he could not
hold them up Amalek prevailed against Israel: therefore Aaron and ^ur got a
stone for Moses to sit on and held up his hands steady, till Amlek was quite
discomfited.

Afterward came Jethro the Father in law of Moses and Priest of Midian, whom
Moses received with reverence and love: And Jethra brought with him his
daughter Zioporah Moses wife, and her two sons Gerskon and Eliezer. Jethro
seeing the great pain and trouble Moses had in judging the People, concels him
to seek out Wise, Courageous, and Jastmen, fearing God; and set them as Rulers
over thousands over hundreds and over tens: and what causes were too great for
them they should bring before Moses. This pleased Moses well, and he did so.
And his Father in law departed into his own Country.

The same day the Israelites departed out of Riphidim, and encamped in the
Wilderness of Sinai, (at fig. 11.) against the Mountains which are also in part
called Horeb: Here God came down upon Mount Sinai in the sight of all the
People, and gave them his Law; first by word of mouth, and afterward to Moses
in two Tables written on Stone by God himself, after he had been forty days in
the Mount with God, Exodus 32. 16. and Deuteronomy. 9. 9, 10, 11. But Moses coming
down, and seeing the Idolatry of the People toward the Golden Calf, waxed so
wrath with them that in holy zeal he threw the two Tables out of his hands and
brake them in pieces; and took the Golden Calf and burned it in the fire, and
ground it to powder, and showed it upon Water, and made the Children of Israel
to drink of it. Then Moses prayed unto God, and obtained mercy for them: And
God caused Moses to hew two other Tables, and with his own finger he wrote on
them the words that were in the former Tables. In the Mount Sinai Moses
receives a command from God to make the Tabernacle, with all its appertainces
according to his directions; and to require of all the People a Free will
Offering, besides a Tax of half a Shekel upon every male of 20 years old and
upwards. In this Tax were numbered 603550. men. Exodus 39. 26. and in the former
verse. it says it brought up in Silver 100. Tal and 1775 Shek. of Silver:
Besides 100. Talents of Siverto cast Sockets; which makes 200 Talents 1775.
Shekels: amounting to (in our English Coin at 2. sh. 5. d. the Shekel) the sum
of 72565. lb. 6. sh. 3. d. Besides was freely offered in Gold 29 Tallents, 730
Shekels; which if we reckon to be worth twelve times its weight in Silver (as
according to the most usual received value it is) it amounts to the sum of
127208. lb. 10. sh. o. d. To which added the Silver aforesaid 72562. 6. 3.
makes the exact sum of 199773. 16. 3. English money. This sum is for the Gold
and Silver only The Brass employed at out the Tabernacle and its appertainances
was 70. Talents and 2400 Shekels, which of our weight at 16 ounces to the pound
weighs 6526. lb. 14. ounces; which reckoned at 8. d. the pound (the usual price
of Bras; with us) comes to 217. lb. 11. sh. 3. which added to the former sum,
makes 199991. lb. 7. sh. 6. the just value of the metal employed about the
Tabernacle. Besides the Offerings of Blew Silk, Purple, Scarlet, Fine Linen,
Goats hair, Ram skins dyed Red, Badger skins, Shittim wood, Oil, Spices, Sweet
Incense, and precious Stones; which must needs amount to a very great price.
Nor is there in Scripture any mention made what the workmanship of all these
materials cost: but surely it would come to much, were into be paid for. The
Women (doubtless) spun their blew Silk and Goats hair freely: And we may
conjecture that many men that had nothing else, offered their Labor gratis to
the building of this Tabernacle to the Lord.

The Tabernacle being finished was reared up (Exodus 40. 2.) the first day of the
first month, in the second year after they departed out of Egypt. It and all
its Instruments was anointed and hallowed by Moses: And then a Cloud covered
it, and the glory of the Lord filled it. All the day time the Cloud remained
over it, and Fire was in it in the night time, and became a Light to all the
Camp.

Now follows another Offering, (Numb. 7. 2, 3.) of all the Princes and Elders
of the Tribes; And they send six covered Chariots, and twelve Oxen; two Princes
joined for a Chariot, and each Prince sent his Ox to do service in the
Tabernacle. Each Prince offered also in the first Dedication of the Altar a
Charger of 130. Shekels of Silver, and a Bowl of Silver weighing 30 Shekels,
and an Incense Cup of Gold weighing 10 Shekels, which was in all 2400. Shekels
of Silver, amounting to 590 lb. Sterling, and 120 Shekels of Gold amounting to
358 lb. Sterling: together 948 lb. Sterling. They also offered 60 young
Bullocks, 72 Rams, 72 Lambs, and 72 He Goats, for Burnt Offerings, and for Sin
Offerings, and for Peace Offerings. Thus was the Altar dedicated.

We have before found the People numbered from 20 years old and upwards; but
till now the Levites are not numbered: Therefore God commanded Moses to number
them from a month old and upwards, and they were found to be 2.000. Every
first born male is now also numbered; and they are found to amount to 22273
Souls: which with the Levites make 44273. which with the foregoing 603550 makes
647823 males. Besides Women, and Maidens, and Youths under 20 years of age.

On the 20 day of the second month of the second Year the Cloud was taken up
from the Tabernacle. Numb. 10. 11. and the Camp removed from the Wilderness of
Sinai, and rested in the Wilderness of Paran, (at fig. 12.) in such order as
you may read in Numb. 10. 14. to 29. Here the People murmur against Moses:
wherefore the fire of the Lord burnt among them, and consumed the outmost part
of the Host; and therefore the name of the Place was called Taberah. And here
the People again lusted, and wept for the Flesh, the Fish, the Onnions, and
other fare of Egypt; and loath Mannah: wherefore the Lord sent them such
numbers of Quails out of the Sea, that they even surfeited with them; and so
kindled the Lords anger against them, that he sent an exceeding great Plague
amongst them: wherefore the name of the Place was called Kibi oath. Hattaavah;
that is Graves of Lust. Numb. 11. 34.

From hence they took their journey to Hareroth (at Fig. 13) here Aaron and
Miriam for speaking against Moses were punnished; Aaron by words from the Lord,
and Miriam with Leprosy, so that she was shut out of the Host seven days. And
then the Host removed thence to Rithma, in the Wilderness of Paran. (at Fig.
14.) From hence the Lord commanded Moses to send forth 12 men to search the
Land of Canaan: who returned again in forty days; bringing with them a Cluster
of Grapes on a Bar between two of them, and Pomgranates, and Figgs; and related
it to be a Land flowing wihh Milk and Honey. But yet that the People were
strong, and the Cities walled, and that there were Giants among them: which so
discouraged the Israelites, that they again fell a murmuring, wishing they had
dyed in Egypt, or that they were dead in the Wilderness: And were conspring to
choose themselves another Captain to lead them again into Egypt. But Joshua and
Caleb (two of the twelve that were sent to search the Land) strove to appease
and encourage the People: For which the multitude were about to stone them:
which so provoked Gods anger against them, that he threatened to destroy them
all: yet by the Prayers of Moses the Lord forgave them, but swore that none of
them that had seen the miracles he did in Egypt, and had so often tempted him in
the Wilderness should ever enter into the land of Promise, only Joshua and
Caleb for their obedience should: but all the rest should die in the Wilderness,
as they had wished. Wherefore the People were sorry for what they done, and as
in despair offered to go up to the place the Lord had promised them. But Moses
would not consent to it, but councelled them to the contrary: yet they presumed
obstinately to go up, though Moses and the Ark went not with them, and were
disco^^^ted by the Amalekites, and the Cana^ni^es; and persued and consumed
even unto Hormah.

From Rithmah the Lord commanded them to go to Rimmon-Parez, (at fig. 15.) from
^immon-Pare^ to Lithnah, (at fig. 16.) from thence to Rissa, (at fig. 17.) then
to Kehelathah, (at fig. 18) then to Mount Shapher, (at fig. 19.) then to
Haradah. (fig. 20.) then to Makheloth, (fig: 21) ^hen to Tahath, (fig. 22.)
then to Tarah, (fig. 23.) then to Mithkah: (fig. 24) then to Hashmonah, (fig.
25.) then to Moseroth, (fig. 26.) then to Bene-Jaakan, (fig. 27.) then to
Hor-hagidgad, (at fig. 28.) then to Jotbathah, (fig. 29.) then to Ehronah,
(fig. 30.) then to Ezion-g^ber, (fig. 31.) on the Red Sea. from whence Solomon
sent his Ships to Ophir for Gold. 1 Kin. 9. 26. While they were in these last
recited Journeys Korah, Dathan, and Abiram conspired against Moses and Aaron,
and begat a rebellion in the People: for which the Earth opened and swallowed
them up alive, and the men that were with them, and all their families, and
Goods, and 250 of their partakers, that offered falfe Incense were consumed by
fire that came out from the Lord. Where at on the morrow all the People
murmurred against Moses and Aaron, telling them that they had killed the People
of the Lord. At which the anger of the Lord was so kindled that he sent a
Plague among them that destroyed: 14700 Souls.

Then the Lord to put an end to the grudgings of the People commanded Moses to
cause all the Princes of each Tribe to bring every one his Rod, and write
thereon his Name, and put them before the Tabernacle of the Congregation; and
to write Aarons name on his Rod, and put it there also; and the man's Rod whom
the Lord should choose to be chief Priest should bud. So on the morrow Aarons
Rod was budded, and brought forth blossoms, and bare ripe Almonds. Numh. chap.
16. and ch 17.

By this time God had led them 39 years through several Wildernesses; and in
the first month they removed from Esiongeber into the Wilderness of Zin to
Kadesh, (at fig. 32.) Here Mariam dyed, and was burieed. And here the People
again murmur against Moses and Aaron for want of Water: whereupon Moses prays
unto the Lord, who directs him to assemble the Congregation, and to take his
Rod, and speak unto the Rock before them: which he did, but smote the Rock
twice; and there came forth Water abundantly for them and their Cattle: For
which twice striking upon the Rock, the Lord reprehends Moses and Aaron of
unbeleef; (since he only commanded them to speak to the Rock); and tells them
they shall not bring the Congregation into the Land which he had promised them.
This was the Water of Meriba; so called because of the strife between the
People and the Lord. Numb. 20. 13. From hence Moses sent messengers to the King
of Edom, desiring passage through his Country; but he denying it the Camp
journeyed to Mount Hor, (fig. 33) where Aaron dyed in the tortieth year after
the children of Israel set forth out of the land of Egypt, being aged 123
years. Numb. 13. 38, 39. While they were at Mount Hor King Arad a Can^anite
warred against Israel; but Israel overcame them and destroyed their Cities,
From Mount Hor the Camp removed to Zalmonah (at fig. 34.) toward the Red Sea,
to go about by the land of Edom to Punon, (fig. 35.) where the way seemed very
grievous to them; so that they again fell to murmuring against the Lord and
Moses: Wherefore the Lord sent fiery Serpents among them, which stung many of
them to death. But upon their confession of their sins, and Moses praying to
the Lord, God commanded Moses to make a fiery Serpent, and to set it up for
those to look on that were bitten, that they might live. Numb: 21. 5, 6, 8, 1,
9. From Punon they came to Oboth, (fig. 36.) thence to Jie-abarim, (fig. 37.)
on the borders of Moab. Thence they came and pitched on the River Zared, (fig.
38.) thence to Dibon-gad, (fig. 39.) then to Almon-blath, (fig. 40.) from
thence they passed by the Well Beer, and came to Mattanah, (fig. 41.) then to
Nahaliel, (fig. 42.) then to Batmoth, (fig. 43.) in the Plain of Moab, even to
the top of Pisgah, (at this * figure in the Mapp) From hence Israel sent
messengers to Sihon, King of the Amorites, desiring his leave to pass through
his Country: but instead of giving leave he raised an Army and fought against
Israel. But Israel overcame him and took his Country from him, and possessed
it, and put all his People to the sword. In this encamping the Israelites
commit fornication with the Women of Moab, and Idolatry with Baal-Peor: which
so kindled the anger of God against them, that he sent a Plague among them
which destroyed 24000 Souls.

After which God commanded Moses again to number the People, and he found the
number of males of 20 years old and upwards to be 601630. besides the Levites,
who were numbered to be 23000. males, from a month old and upwards. Numb. 26.

But the Lord commanded Moses to revenge himself on the Midianites: so he
selected 1000 out of every Tribe, and sent them against the Kings of Midian,
and slew them, and all the males, and took their Women, and their Cattle, and
all they had, and fired their Cities and Villages.

He sent forth also and took Og King of Boshan, and his Country, and all the
Lands about Jordan, on this side.

Here Moses received command of the Lord to go up into the top of this Mount
Pisgah, and take a view of the land of Promise; for that in regard of his
disobedience to the Lord at the Waters of Meribah, he should not enter
thereinto: but Joshuab should ledd the People over. And here Moses dyed when he
was 120 years old, and was buried in a Valley in the land of Moab over against
Beth. peor: but his Sepulcher is concealed. Deuteronomy. 34. 6.

After Israel had mourned, 30 days for Moses, God commanded Joshuah to pass
over Jordan, and take possession of the Promised Land. Therefore Joshuah sent
out two men to Jericho to spy the Land, who returning brought tidings how much
discouraged the Inhabitants were because of them. Whereupon the Camp removed to
Shittim, and came to Joraan, and lodged there before they went over. Three
days after, the Officers went through the Camp, commanding the People to be in
readiness against the Ark removed to pass over Jordan; And so soon as the feet
of the Priests that bare the Ark touched the brinks of the Water the Water
parted, but the Priests with the Ark went into the middle of Jordan, and there
stood till all the children of Israel went over on dry Land. And for a
perpetual memorial of this miracle, God commanded Joshuah to cause one man out
of every Tribe to take a Stone out of the midst of the River where the Priests
feet stood, and leave it at the place where they should encamp that night,
which was at Gilgal toward Jericho. Joshuah commanded them also to pitch
twelve Stones in the middle of Jordan, where the Priests feet stood, to remain
there for a memorial for ever.

The Lord of Hosts having thus brought the children of Israel out of Egypt,
through the Red Sea, and led them 40 years together through several
Wildernesses, and now set them on the other side of Jordan, we shall leave them
there, and refer our Reader to the holy Bible for an Historical Relation of
their several exploits in the Wars with the Nations that possessed the Land;
how they overcame them all, conquered their strong Cities, possessed
themselves of the whole land, and rooted out all their enemies.

How this land was afterward divided among the twelve Tribes of Israel by
Joshuah is marked in this Mapp with single pricks; and the Capital name that is
writ within them is the name of the Tribe that possessed so much of the land as
is encompassed with those pricks. The Cities of Refuge appointed Josh. 20. 7,
8 are marked with a cross upon the Tower, as you may see in the Mapp it self,
on your left hand just over the picture of both sides the Shekel.

A Discourse upon the Geographical Description of the Land of CANAAN, Possessed
by the Israelites, and traveled through by our Savior Jesus Christ, and his
Apostles.
THe fullness of Time being come wherein God according to his eternal decree
had ordained to send his Son into the World in humane shape and nature for the
redemption of mankind; the Angel Gabriel came and saluted Mary (a Virgin at
Nazereth) (at fig. 1. it the Mapp) with a message from the Lord Luk 1. 28.
telling her that the Holy Ghost should come upon her, and the power of the most
High should overshadow her, and she should bring forth a child, and call his
name JESUS: which accordingly came to pass when Augustus Caesar was Emperor of
all the World, and Herod the Terrarch was King of Jewry, and Cyrenius Governor
of Syria, which was in the year of the World (according to Mr John Butler in
his Christologia) 4000. then came Mary with her betrothed Husband Joseph to
Bethlehem, (at fig. 2.) a City of David (for they were both of the Lineage of
David) to be Taxed according to the Decree of Caesar. And because there was no
room in the Inn, they were fain to make shift with a Stable, where she fell in
Labor, and brought forth her first born Son, wrapped him in swaddling clothes,
and laid him in a Manger. The Angels soon carried this joyful news to
Shepherds that were then keeping their Sheep, and gave them signs how they
should find the Child; who straight way left their flock, came to Bethlehem,
and found him out, and published abroad the tidings that was brought them of the
Angels. Luke 2.

This Child was circumcised at eight days old, and his name called JESUS. And
when he was 33 days old he was brought to the Temple at Jerusalem, (at fig.
3.) by his Parents, and presented to the Lord, according to the custom of the
Jews; whither also (being directed by the Spirit) came Simeon a just man, and
one that feared God; who took the child Jesus in his arms, and praised God, etc.

While they were yet in Bethlehem came wise men (having seen his Star) out of
the East to worship him. And the fame hereof coming to Herod's ears, caused him
to assemble all the chief Priests and Scribes, to learn of them the place of
his birth: who informed him it was to be in Bethlehem. Wherefore he commanded
the wise men to seek the Child with all diligence, and bring him word that he
might come and worship. When these wise men departed from the King the Star
went before them till it came and stood over the place where the Child was: who
when they had found, they worshipped, and presented with Gold, Incense, and
Myrhe. But they were warned in a dream not to return to Herod, but to return to
their own Country some other way. Also Joseph was warned in a dream that he
should take Mary and the Child, and fly into Egypt. Herod seeing himself mocked
by the wise men, gave strickt command to kill all the male children of two
years old and under in Bethlehem, and the coasts about it; that the Prophecy
might be ful^illed. Jer. 31. 15.

Herod being dead Joseph was warned of God in ^eam to return again with the
child: but hearing that Archelaus his son reigned in fudea, he was afraid; yet
turned aside into Galilee, to the City Nazareth. Mat. 2. 23.

Jesus being twelve years old came upto Jerusalem with his Parents to the Feast
of the Passover; and when the days were accomplished his Parents went home,
thinking he had been in the company: but he staid behind disputing with the
Doctors in the Temple; yet when they came back to seek him he went home with
them.

In the 15 year of the Emperor Tiberius when Pontius Pilate was President of
Judea, Jesus came from Nazareth to Jordan, not far from the Dead Sea, viz. to
Bethabane, where he was baptized of John the Baptist; at which time the Holy
Ghost descended upon him like a Dove; and a voice was heard saying, This is my
beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. Mat. 3. 17.

From hence Jesus was led aside into the Wilderness; where he fasted 40 dies
and 40 nights, and was tempted of the Devil: but the resisted, and the Devil
left him.

Then Jesus went again into Galilee; whither followed him Andrew, Peter, and
Philip, and dwelt at Nazareth. Luke 4. 16. where he taught in the Synagogue.
Coming from thence he went to Cana, where at a marriage he turned water into
wine, Joh. 2.

From thence he went to Capernaum with his ^other, his Brother, and Disciples:
yet staid not long there, but went to Jerusalem, because the Feast of Passover
was nigh.

The first year of his Ministry. Ao. 30.
Jesus coming to Jerusalem to the Passover shows his Divine authority in
whipping the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple, and overthrowing their
Tables. Joh. 2^ 15. By these and other signs many believe in him. Niced^mus a
Ruler of the Jews came by night to him, to be instructed of him. Joh. 3. 1.
From hence Jesus went into the land of Judea, and tarryed there same time. But
John was baptizing at Enon, by Salim, and was shortly after imprisoned; which
when Jesus heard he returned again into Galilee, through Samaria; and came to a
City called Sychar* near Jacobs Well; where (sitting to rest himself, there
came a woman of Samaria (while his Disciples were gone into the City to buy
meat) to fetch water; with whom Jesus discoursing, and telling her of her own
affairs, she takes him for a Prophet, and runs into the City, telling the
Citizens what she had heard and seen: whereupon they come out to him; and
hearing of his words many of them believe in him. Joh. 4. 5. etc.

Having tarryed there two days, he goes into Galilee, where the Galileans that
had seen what he did at Jerusalem received him joyfully. v. 45. Coming to Cana
in Galilee there came to him a Ruler whose Son was sick of a Fever, at
Capernaum, beseeching him to go down and heal his Son before he dyed. But Jesus
said, Go thy way: thy Son lives. And from that hour the Feaver^ (...) him. v.
52. Coming to Nazareth, and reading the Prophet Isaiah, and preaching
thereupon; the People were incensed at his doctrine, and thrust him out of the
City, and died him to the top of the hill whereon the City was built, to cast
him down headlong. But he passed through the midst of them, and went his way,
and came and dwelt at Capernaum.

Jesus walking by the Sea of Galilee called to him Peter, Andrew, James, and
John, who straight way left their Nets, and fo^lowed him. Mat. 4. 18. etc.

The second year of Christ's Ministry. Ao. 31.
Jesus traveling through all Galilee preaches in their Synagogues, and heals
all sicknesses and diseases. Mat. 4. 23. so that his fame spreads over all
Syria, and great multitudes follow him out of Galilee, Decapolis, Jerusalem,
Judea, and from beyond Jordan. v. 25. Among others he cured Peter's Wives Mother
of a Fever. Mar. 1. 30. 31, Luc. 4. 38, 39. Coming to the Lake of Genesereth
the People so pressed upon him, that he entered into Simons ship that lay by the
shoat, and required him to thrust off; and he preached to them out of the ship.
Luc. 5. 3. And when his Sermon was ended, he bad Simon lanch out into the deep,
and cast his Net. But Simon told him they had wrought all night and caught
nothing, yet because he had them they would; which when they did, they had so
great a draught that their Nets brake, and they were fain to call their
Companions to help draw them in. Luc. 5. 1. etc. And because his fame spread
more and more so many followed him that he could not enter into Capernaum, but
kept without in desert places. Mar. 1. 45. Luc. 5. 16. Some days after Jesus
came again into Capernaum, and entered into a house, whither came many
Pharisees and Doctors of the Law to hear him: and as he was teaching there was
a Man brought to him, lying in his bed, taken with a Palsy: and in regard they
could not get near him, because the press was so great, they carried him up to
the house top; and let him down through the Tileings, Bed and all; which he
immediately cured: and the Man took up his Bed and walked. Luke 5. 25. Going
from thence toward the Sea, he saw the Publican Levi, otherwise called Matthew:
And he said to him Follow me. Who left all and followed him^ v. 28. Afterward
Jesus went on a Sabbath day through the fields of Corn, and his Disciples
plucked the Ears of Corn and rubbed them between their hansd and eat them:
which the Pharisees were offended at. Luke 6. 1. Afterward he went into the
Synagogue on another Sabbath day, and healed a Man with a withered hand; which
so madded the Pharisees that they consulted with the Herodians to destroy him:
but he avoided them Mar. 3. 5, 6.

Coming near the Sea, he went upon a Mountain to pray, and staid there all
night. The next morning he called his Disciples, and from among them he chose
twelve, which he called Apostles. Luke 6. 12, 13. Going again into Capernaum he
healed the Centurious servant, marvelling at his faith, Luke 7. 1, to 11. From
thence Jesus goes to a City called Naim, (fig, 11. where a Widows son being
dead was carried out to be buried, and which Jesus (in compassion to his
Mother) raised again from the dead, and delivered her her Son alive. Luk, 7,
11, to 16.

Afterward he traveled through every City and Town in Galilee, and Samaria,
preaching the Gospel; where certain Women that he had healed of their
infirmities ministered to him. Luke 8. 1, 2.

Coming to Jerusalem to a Feast of the Jews, he found at the Pool of Bethesda a
Man who had been diseased 38 years, whom he made whole on a Sabbath day. Ioh.
5. 8. From thence he returned to Capernaum again, took ship, and stilled a
storm at Sea; then landed in the Region of the Gadarenes about Gerasa, (fig.
12.) Luke 8. 26. where he met a Man possessed with legions of Devils, whom he
dispossed, giving them leave to go into an herd of Swine, who immediately
thereupon ran headlong into the Sea: hereat the Inhabitants came and besought
him to depart out of their Coasts. v. 37. Thence he returned again to
Capernaum, where Jairus a Ruler of the Synagogue entreated him to come into his
house, because his daughter lay dying. v. 41. And as he was going with him, a
Woman touched the hem of his garment, and was immediately healed of an issue of
blood which she had had 12 years. v: 43. In the mean while the Maiden dyed, but
was raised again from the dead. v. 55. Jesus going from thence, gives sight to
two blind men. Mat. 9. 27, to 31. and speech to a dumb Man possessed with a
Devil v. 32. 33.

Jesus goes through all Cities in Galilee toward Jerusalem, Luke 13. 22. where
he preaches: is forewarned of the Pharisees that unless he depart Herod will
kill him v. 31.

Jesus calls his twelve Disciples to him, and sends them forth to preach;
giving them power to cast out unclean Spirits, and to heal all diseases. Mat.
10. 1. who at their return to him again give him an account of their Ministry.
Luke 9, 10. Then he takes them aside into a solit^ry place near Bethsoida,
where he feeds 5000 Men with sive barley loaves and two ^ishes. v. 17. Ioh. 6*
5, to 14. But perceiving that the People would make him King, he withdrew
himself to a Mountain alone. Ioh. 6. 15. and his Disciples missing him, they
about evening took shipping to go over to Capernaum, whither Jesus followed
them, walking upon the Water; whom when they saw they were afrighted: But he
spoke to them, and came into the Ship; and they presently arrived at their
Port. v, 21.

The third year of Christ's Ministry. Ao. 32.
Jesus removes from Capernaum to Jerusalem, and after the Feast of Pass.
returns again, travels through Galilee, but shuns Judea, because the Jews
sought to ki^l him. And being come home again, journeys toward Tire, (fig. 14)
and Sydon, (fig. 15.) on the coasts of the Great Sea, where he cast a Devil out
of the Canaanitish Woman's Daughter, Mat. 15. 18. And departing from thence he
went to the Sea of Galilee through the midst of the coasts of Decapolis. Mar.
7. 31. where he healed one deaf and dumb. v. 35. And in the Wilderness (fig.
16.) he fed 4000. Men besides Women and Children with 7 loaves and a few small
Fishes. Mat. 15. 38 Mar. 8. 8, 9. Then he took Ship and came into the Coasts of
Magdala, in the parts of Dalmanutha, (fig. 17.) where the Pharisees desired of
him a sign from Heaven. v. 11. which he being troubled at, left them, and
again took ship and came to Bethsaida, v. 22. where he restored a blind Man to
his sight, v. 25. Hence he and his Disciples go Casarea Philippi, (fig. 18.)
where under way Peter confessed him to be the Christ Mat 16. 16. Mar. 8. 29.
Six days after Jesus took Peter, James, and John, and went up to the Holy
Mount 2 Pet. 1 18. (fig. 19) where he was transfigured, and where appeared
Moses and Elias talking with him; and here it was that a voice came from
Heaven, declaring him to be the Son of God. Mat. 17. 5. Coming again to the
multitude he cast a Devil out of a Child. Mat. 17. 18. Hence he goes to
Capernaum, where the Toll gatherers demand Tribute of him; wherefore he sent
Peter with his Angle to the Sea, and told him that in the mouth of the first
fish that should come up he should find a twenty pence piece, which he bad him
give for them both. Mat. 17. 24. to 27. Afterward he travels through Galilee
and Samaria toward Jerusalem. Luke 9. 51.

The fourth Year of Christ's Ministry. Ao. 33.
Jesus sends forth seventy Disciples by two and two to preach the Gospel, and
heal the sick, etc. Luke 10. 1. Against the Feast of Passover he departs out
of Galilee into Judea, and dwells in Bethania, (fig. 20.) in the house of
Martha, v. 38. Thence he went to Jerusalem to the Feast, where the Jews
marvelled at his Doctrine, Ioh. 7, 15. Toward the Evenings he used to go to
Mount Olives, (fig. 21.) and stay there all night, but in the Mornings came
again into the City, and preached in the Temple.

The Scribes and Pharisees (to tempr. Jesus) brought a Woman to him taken in
adultery, who by the Law of Moses should die: And he bad them that were without
sin to cast the first Stone at her; wherefore they all departed, and left her
there without an accuser. Ioh. 8. 3. to 12.

Then he went through all Cities and Towns thereabouts, teaching the People.
And comes in the Winter time again to Jerusalem, and walked in the Temple, in
Salomons Porch, where many of the Jews encompass him, and would know positively
if he were the Christ or No. But for his answers they went about to stone him,
and would have laid hands upon him; yet he escaped them. Ioh. 10. 22, to 40.
and goes over Jordan to the place where he was baptized of John, and abode
there. v. 40. Afterward he traveled through Galilee and Samaria, teaching the
People every where. And in his way to Jerusalem he met ten leprous men, whom he
healed. Luke 12. to 20. Coming near Jericho (fig. 22.) he gave sight to a blind
Beggar man, Luke 35. etc. And when he was entered into the City of Jericho he
goes into Zacheus his house, who was the chief Reciever of the Tribute, Luke
19. 1. etc. Here he has news of Lazarus his sickness, therefore goes to
Bethania, and meets Martha, who tells him her brother is dead and buried. But
Jesus having a great affection to this Family, goes to the grave, and restores
him to Life. Yet however, the Jews seek to take him. Ioh. 11. 1. wherefore he
withdrew into the Wilderness, and remained in a City called Ephrem or Ephraim,
(fig. 23.) Six days before the Feast of Passover he came again to Bethania,
to the house of Martha, and sups with Lazarus. Ioh. 12. 1. The next day he went
to Bethphage, at (fig. 24.) whence he sent two of his Disciples to fe^ch a she
Ass, whereon he rode into Jerusalem with great acclamations of the People, who
spread their garments and strewed branches in his way, crying Hosanna in the
Highest, etc. Mat. 21. 1. etc. Coming into the Temple he again drove out the
Changers of Money, and all them that bought and sold in the Temple. v. 12, 13:
Here he healed the halt and the blind that came to him. v. 14. That night he
went to Bethania, and lodged there. v. 17. And in the Morning again to
Jerusalem, where underway he cursed the Fig Tree, which presently withered. v.
19. The day time he spent in the Temple, teaching the People, and disputing
with the Scribes, Pharisees, and Sadduces, as you may read Mat. 21. Mar. 11.
Luke 20. and a nights he went out of the City to Mount Olives. When now his
disciples showed him the beauty of the Temple, he foretold its destruction.
Mat. 24. 1. Mar. 13. 1. Luke 21. 5. Two days before the Passover, Jesus was
in Bethania, at the house of Simon the Leper, where Mary the Sister of Lazarus
anointed him. Mat. 26. 7. Ioh. 12. 3. But Judas who was a thief, and kept the
purse, murmuring at the expense of so much precious ointment, was reprehended
by Jesus: Wherefore he went to the High Priest and Scribes and Elders to betray
him. Mat. 26. Luke 22. 3, etc. Jesus having eaten the Passover, his last
Supper, with his Disciples went (according to his wont) to Gethshemane (fig,
25.) over the Book Cedron to pray: Mat. 26. 36. Joh. 18. 1. where Judas (with a
band of Soldiers, and servants of the High Priest) came, and betrayed him with
a kiss. Mat. 26. 49. The soldiers carry him into Jerusalem. The next day he is
condemned, crucified, and laid in the Grave. Job. 19.

The third day he rose again from the dead, and showed himself to Mary
Mug^^lene, Joh. 20. 14. etc. and also to two of his Disciples going to Emmaus,
(fig. 26.) who came and told it to the eleven Apostles, when they were
assembled at Jerusalem: who told them that Peter also saw him. And while they
were thus speaking together, He appeared among them, and wished them Peace.
Luke 24. Eight days after He showed himself again to his Apostles, and let
Thomas feel his wounds, Joh. 20. 27. Afterward he appeared the third time to
his Disciples at the Sea of Tiberius, that is, the Sea of Galilee. Joh. 21
Jesus having conversed now 40 days with his Disciples, after his resurrection,
went with them to Mount Olives, which is a Sabbath days journey from
Jerusalem, viz. (about a Mile,) toward Bethania And having given them his
Commands, declared his Will to them, and finally blessed them. He was taken up
in a Cloud, and so went into Heaven. Luke 24. 50.

The Disciples returned again to Jerusalem, and there kept their Whitson Feast,
together, and received the Holy Ghost.

A Discourse upon the Mapp of the Travels of S. PAUL, and other of the APOSTLES.
BEfore you peruse this Discourse and Mapp, be pleased to take notice that for
the easier finding out of Places, we have marked whole Countries with hollow
Letters a thus; and Cities with numerical Figures.

It happened that as the Jews in their exile were scattered all over Asia, like
co^strewed on the ground, some seeds also (whether by Land or Sea, or both)
fell into Cilicia, (at e in the Mapp) and particularly into the City of Tarsus,
(at 7 in the Mapp) Among others of this Nation was a certain Benjamite, a
person of good quality, who inhabited here, and from whom descended that
Heroic Father of the Gospel called Saul, or Paul, Act. 22. 3. Phil. 3. 5. for
such was the custom of those days, that most Persons of any note or eminency
had more names than one. Hence this Holy Father, was by his Father called Saul,
in evidence that he was a Hebrew of the Hebrews; and Paulus or Paul, in token
that he was born a free man of Rome. Now as this Son grew up, the good old man
was not wanting for care sufficient in his education. And first, the better to
grace his privilege of a Roman Citizen, he bred him up a Scholar in the
Academy of Tharsus, (7) and here was it, that he became so expert in the
Philosophical Sayings of the Heathen Sages, such as were Aratus, Epimenides,
Menander and others. Act. 17. 28. Tit. 1. 12. But as he grew in years to
understand himself, the Wisdom of Man not amounting to enough to make him a
Child of God, He was therefore sent away from Tharsus unto Jerusalem (1) to be
instructed in the Sacred knowledge of the Book of God. Here was famous at that
time one Gamaliel a Doctor of the Law, and Provost of the Schools in Jerusalem,
at whose feet this Tarsian Jew being set, he studied the Holy Scriptures, and
greatly profited in Divine learning, beyond all his Equals and
fellow-Studients. Act. 22. 3. Gal. 1. 14. Here was it that whilst he was eager
of his way of Learning and Religion, he drew into his head and heart the
Doctrine of the Pharisees, who were in those days though the most respected
with the Popularity, yet the most Hypocritical and Malicious of all the Jewish
Sects. Phil. 3. 5, 6.

During these Times the Messiah appeared, as was spoken of by the Prophet
Daniel, (Dan. 9. 25, 26, 27.) and one half of a week of years, or 3 years and
odd, he confirmed the Covenant with many of the Jewish Nation, until in the
midst of the Week he was crucified and slain: and Sacrifice and Oblation
ceased. All this while was Saul at Jerusalem, but so intent at Gam^liels feet,
that this news of the Messiah found no respect from his ears. Christ was
crucified at the great Paschal Feast; and at Pentecost came the Holy Ghost upon
the Apostles, and enabled them to speak all Languages, and to work miracles.
Now it happened, that by virtue of these Languages they spoke, and the miracles
they wrought, so many became their Converts, that by the Feast of Tabernacles a
necessity appeared to ordain Deacons to assist them in their Ministry. Of
these were appointed first 7 in company, whereof were Stephen and Philip, and
Nicanor and others: and after these were made still more and more Deacons and
Evangelists, such as were Ananias of Damascus, (5) Lucius, Barnabas and others.
Act. 6 chapter 9. chapter 13. But as these were zealous in preaching the Gospel, the
Jews were as envious in opposing it, and of those opposers Saul of Tarsus was
none of the meanest. The first quarrel that brake out into blood, was that of
the Synagogue of the Liberrines against Stephen, and this seems to have been at
the very next Feast after that of the Tabernacles, at what time Stephen was
ordained; and was therefore at latter end of the Feast of Dedication: at what
time Stephen being apprehended by those Libertines, was haled before the
Council, and tumultuously condemned, and stoned to death. This was (as it seems
by course of Story) much about (and as Tradition tells us, upon) the morrow
after the Anniversary Festival of our Saviors Nativity, or on the 26 of
December. Thus dyed this Proto-Martyr, and thus was this first Anniversary of the
Nativity next following his Assension turned into mourning, Act. 7. 54, 55.
etc. But devout men in honor of this noble Martyr, would not suffer his body
to ly among the bones of malefactors, to be devoured of Dogs, but exposed
themselves to the hazard of the Jews displeasure, by carrying him to buryal
with solemn lamentation, Act. 8. 2. The Persecuters thus exasperated, made
great havoke of these sacred Mourners; and some 2000 faithful Christians slew
they in this heat, together with Nicanor S. Stephens fellow Deacon, besides
great multitudes of men and women whom they carried to prison. Dor. Syn. of the
70 Disciples. Act. 8. 1. 3. chapter 22. 4. chapter 26. 10. Under the Council who
condemned this S. Stephen, was this our Saul it seems a principal Officer, who
was present at his examination, and gave his vote to have him put to death, and
was especially employed to see it done: and more than this, being in a zealous
fury in a wrong way, was the death of many a good Christian at this time,
besides what he imprisoned while he rashly imagined he did God good service by
it. 1. Tim. 1. 13. Act. 26. 9, 10. 11. At this time was Saul but a young man;
and yet not so young, but he was trusted it seems with some place of Authority,
which was not usually bestowed until a man was 30 current, and so by
consequence, at what time our Savior was 33 complete, this Saul was 30
current, and therefore some 4 years younger than Christ.

For 4 weeks lasted this persecution very hot, until most part of the poor
Christians being fled from Jerusalem (except the Apostles) were scattered
abroad here and there as they could get with safety for refuge of their lives
and liberties. But this was so far from hindrance, as it rather proved an
advantage to the Gospel, by reason of the scattered Evangelists who preaching
as they fled, scattered the news of the Gospel in all parts, as they flew away.
Philip the Deacon taught the Samaritans (2) Simon went out toward Tire (43)
and Zidon (48) preaching; Bar^abas took toward Cyprus, Lucius toward Cyrene,
(x) and Ananias made many Converts at Damascus. (5. Now when the news of these
things came to Jerusalem, (1) the Jews were madded at it: And the furious Saul
in his fiery zeal, not satisfied in that he had spoiled the growth of
Christianity in Jerusalem, unless he might chase it out of the World also, got
Letters from Caiphas the high Priest directed unto the Synagogues in Damascus
in order to bind and bring away to Jerusalem all whom he found, both men and
women who any ways feared not to own the name of Christ. Act. 9. 1, 2. But as
many times it happens where the more have is, there is the less speed, so it
was here; for on the 25, day of January, as Saul was going to Damascus, and
almost there, Lo a wonderful bright light appeared round about him, and cast
him upon the ground utterly astonished; and a voice was heard speaking unto him
as he lay, saying, Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou me? Now such was the force
of this miracle and the voice withal, together with other discourse
accompanying; that Saul's heat of persecution was quite cooled, and trembling as
he lay, his heart turned within him, and he became obedient immedia^ly to all
as was commanded him. And being led into the City (for he was struck blind with
the light) after three days fasting and prayer, Ananias the Evangelist^ came
to him by Divine appointment, and baptized him, and also constituted him to be
a Preacher of the Gospel. And Saul immediately entered into the Jewish
Synagogue, and began to preach up that Doctrine he had before cried down so
much; and justified those Christians which ere while he had so much condemned.
And though the Jews opposed his Doctrine and himself, yet he stood to it, and
confounded them by Scripture arguments; proving out of the Law and Prophets
that that very Jesus whom they had so lately crucified was the very Christ. But
all notwithstanding, the Jews would not be convinced, but rather going about to
kill him in revenge of his conversion from their way, after certain days stay
he left Damascus, and went into Arabia, (c) where he continued three years,
preaching the Gospel in the Dominions of King Aretas. Act. 9. 3, 4, 5, etc. 17.
18. chapter 26. 13, etc. Chapter 22. 6. etc. Gal. 1. 15, 16, 17.

During these years of Saul in Arabia, Philip the Deacon was very successful
in his preaching at Samaria. Hither also came Peter and John the Apostles from
Jerusalem, to confirm and settle the Church which Philip had first founded.
Here was one Simon a notable Sorcerer first converted by Philip, and then
detected by Peter in his hypocrisy, and publicly shamed, Act. 8. 5, 6. etc.
This was about the Passover Feast next after Saul's conversion, which coming
on, called Peter and John back again to Jerusalem: but Philip went on preaching
along the Country in the way toward Gaza, (3) and was in the same road, at
what time the Feast being ended, a certain Eunuch called Indion, a person of
great quality under Candace Queen of Aethiopia, but a Jewish Proselite, who was
returning from the Feast, by an happy providence fell into Philips way, and
that so as to become his convert; and being baptized, carried away with him
into his own Country the great tidings of the Gospel. But Philip went on to
Azotus, (4) and so to Caesarea, (10) preaching every where as he went. Act. 8.
26, 27, etc. By this time the Church began to enjoy peace and rest, by means of
Saul's conversion: The greatest enemy it seems was taken off, and the rest were
dampt, Act. 9. 31. And besides, the civil affairs of Judea (a) were not a
little disturbed, whereby the Spiritual enjoyed the more leisure. For Philip
the Tetrarch being dead, King Aretas with a great Army invaded Herod, in order
to be revenged for the matter of Heredias, Herod's Concubine, with whom he lived
in Incest and Adultery; and by reason of Areta the daughter of this Aretas, and
Herod's lawful Wife, whom he had put away. This came to a battle about the
Paschal time, in the 21 year of Tiherius the Emperor; and Herod the Tetrarch
was greatly foiled and routed, and had been utterly lost, but for the Authority
Imperial interposing: Jos. Ant. B. 18. chapter 17. Suet. During these things the
holy Apostles minded their business, and as it shall seem divided the
Toparchies of Judea amongst them, for the better order in their proceedings.
Until the Church increasing more and more, the Apostles also extended their
Walks farther and farther; and ten of them going forth into Galilee, and
Samaria, (see the Mapp of Canaan,) and also into Idumea and beyond Jordan. S.
James constantly abode at Jerusalem. Eus. Eccl. Hist. B. 2. chapter 1. and S. Peter
had the peculiar oversight of all quarters of Judea, Act. 9. 26, 27, etc. As
for the Deacons and Evangelists, they we^^ out far and near into all Countries
where they could find any Jews, unto whom they might preach Jesus: for hitherto
went they to none but Jews, or Jewish Proselites. Act. 11. 19. During these
times did the Apostles and their Disciples appoint and celebrate those sacred
Festivals of the Gospel, which we still observe.

S. Paul was at the Feast of Pentecost, at a private Church where S, James and
the Elders were assembled. Act. 21. 18, 19. During this time also sent Pilat to
Rome, (46) to give notice unto Tiberius and the Senate, of the mavelous works
of Christ, and how he was reported to berisen from the dead, and was esteemed
of his Disciples as a God. Eus. Eccl. Hist. B. 2. chapter 2. Also during these
years while Saul remained in Arabia, Caiphas was laid by from being High
Priest, in the 21. year of Tiberius, and in the next year Pontius Pilate was
displaced from his Prefecture. Jos. Ant. B. 18. chapter 6.

Three years were now ended since the Assension of our Savior, and the 4th*
was some months old, at what time Saul having continued almost 3 years in
Arabia, returned back to Damascus, about the 23 of Tiberius but newly entered,
and the 3^ of Christ's birth about 3 parts run out. But here again finding
himself in great danger of his life, by reason of the Jews implacable malice,
he was fain to be let down in a basket over the Town wall, and narrowly escaped
away with his life, and came to Jerusalem, about the Feast of Tabernacles, 2
Cor. 11. 32. 33. Act. 9. 25. All this while had he seen none of the Apostles,
but here (as he came on purpose to find him so accordingly) he met S. Peter.
Gal. 1. 16. 17. They at first shunned him at Jerusalem, till Barnabas wrought
his introduction among them. Here tarryed he 15 days during the Feast, and
before and after. But after a great deal of labor in vain beslowed upon the
stubborn Jews, in order to convince them that Jesus was the Christ, at length
Peter and Saul both left Jerusalem together: Saul went down to Cesarea, (6) and
from thence all along by Land through Phoenicia (f) Syria, (d) and Cylicia (c)
until he came to Tarsus, his native place Act. 9. 26, 27. etc. Gal. 1. 18. etc.

Peter in the mean time went about from Town to Town over all the quarters and
Toparchies of Judea, until he came to Lydda, (8) where he cured one Aeneas,
who had been 8 years sick of a Palsy, by a miracle: and after some stay there,
he was sent for to Joppa, (9) where by a greater miracle he raised one Dorcas
an holy and a singular good woman from the dead. These miracles were no small
furtherance to the fame of the Gospel. Act. 9. 32, etc. 36. etc. But such as
were yet stubborn would be stubborn; Wherefore now at length, after that Peter
had abode many days at this Joppa, the other half of the week of years of
confirming the Covenant with the Jews being utterly expired, and the Jewish
converts dropping in but slowly, until at length there appeared not one more;
Then pleased it Almighty God to give warning unto his Apostles hence forwards
to leave the Jews, and to turn in unto the Gentiles. This warning by the vision
of a strange sheet let down from Heaven, wherein were all manner of Beasts and
Fowls, and that as well of the unclean sorts, as of the clean, was first made
known to Peter; whereby he was given to understand, that hence forwards he
might eat of all sorts without distinction. And in the mean time messengers
being come from Cornelius a Gentile man, he was warned also to go in unto him,
without any more scruple what Country man he was, and whether he were Jew or
Proselite. And accordingly Peter being obedient unto the vision, went with
them: and finding Cornelius and many more Gentiles gathered together, he
preached unto them, and they were converted, and the Holy Ghost fell upon them
miraculously, and they were baptized, Act. 10: At the same time Barnabas of
Cyprus, and Lucius of Cyrene (x) and others, being in far Countries, and moved
by the same Spirit preached unto the Gentiles where ever they were, and they
came in, and converted to the Faith. Act. 11. 19, etc. Now when the news of
these things came first unto Jerusalem, Peter was questioned for what he had
done, until having given satisfaction of his Divine Warrant, they gave glory to
God. etc.

After this the Apostles deviding the World into 12 parts, each of them took
his Walk, together with certain Evangelists their assistants, into all parts of
the World. S. James the brother of John seems to have gone into Egypt and
Marmorica, where he spent those few years his Glass had to run. S. John went
into Asia, Dacia, and Panonia. S. Andrew Eastwards as far as Sogdia, and
Scythia. S. Philip Northward into Cappadocia, Ibonia, and so between these into
Scythia. S. Bartholmew Southeastwards into India, and S. Thomas through Persia
into China. S. Jude bestowed himself in Mesopotamia, Chaldea, and Arabia. And
Simon Zel^tus Southwestwards into Mauritania. S. Matthew tarryed at Jerus^lem,
until he had written his Gospel in the Hebrew Tongue, and then went after S.
James into Egypt, and so into Aethiopia. S. Matthias sailed over into
Macedonia, and Gracia, and from thence into Africa. Ant. Chr. par. 1 Tit. 6.
chapter 8. par. 1. Oecumen. on Acts. Eus. B. 3. chapter 1. Ab. Apost. Hist. B. 7. 9.
Dor. Syn. Pet. de Not. B. 3. chapter 149. S. James tarryed at Jerusalem, but S.
Peter steered toward Antioch. (11) and that so as Rome also was in his ey.
About this very time dyed Tiberius the Emperor at Rome, (46) and Ca^us
C^ligula ascended the throne, in Anno 37. Tac. An. B. 6. chapter 45. Dion. B. 58
Ios Ant B. 18. chapter 7. And this was a little before the Paschal time. S. Thomas
about this time, with one Jude his brother, and an Evangelist, going out
Eastwards, sent Jude unto Edessa, who miraculously cured King Ag^arus of an
infirmity which had long vexed him, and converted that King and a great many of
his subjects. Eus. Eccl. Hist. B. 1. chapter 13, 14. Barnabas went along in S.
Peter's Walk to Antioch. (11) and after Easter S. Peter followed Act. 11. 22.
Eus. Chron. And because they had here a great harvest of Converts, Barnabas
stepped aside unto Tarsus, and from thence fetched Saul also unto Antioch: and by
these three were so many Converts baptized, that by reason of the multitudes
the Disciples began to be first called Christians at this place, and so spread
the name all over the World, where ever the Gospel was dilated. Act. 11. 26.
etc.

Now by that time Peter. Barnabas, and Saul had been one whole year at
Antioch,, came Agabus the Prophet thither from Jerusalem, and foretold of a
great death, which was to follow over all the World. But with this Agabus came
certain weak brethren of the Jews, who either out of tender Conscience or
faction, were offended at the entering of the Gentiles: as if it had not been
lawful. This weakness S. Peter thought fit to comply with: but Saul was
therefore angry. 1 Cor. 9. 20, 21. Gal. 2. 12, 13, 14. Thus happened this first
quarrel amongst these great Fathers; but it was only in matters of discretion,
not of Doctrine. And however he found fault at this time, yet at another time,
Saul also himself acted S. Peter's part. 1 Cor. 9. 20, 21. After these things
was a Collection made at Antioch for the poor Saints at Jerusalem, and Barnabas
and Saul carried it. Act. 29. 30.

It was now Anno 39. at what time Barnabas and Saul continued preaching at
Jerusalem. At this time came forth S. Matthews Gospel in the Hebrew Tongue, and
was published for the use of all good Christians. But Saul and Barnabas tarryed
at Jerusalem till Anno. 40. And now was it at what time was assembled a great
concourse of People from all parts: Here was S. Peter from Antioch, and S.
James out of Egypt: and among others the plausible King Agrippa failed not to
beat the Feast too: This Agrippa being a very ambitious man, and apt to take
over much upon him, had been most shamefully mocked and abused by the Romans
and Egyptians in Alexandria, and all the Jews there fared the worse for him.
And because they could not be sufficiently revenged of the Romans and
Egyptians who did them the wrong, it seems therefore they threw the more spite
upon the Christians, who were more apt to fall into their hands; not that those
Christians had any ways offended, but merely for that inhabiting in
Alexandria, they also had not been abused as themselves were. And now having
found S. James at Jerusalem (who seems to be the Father of those Egyptian
Christians) they told Agrippa of him, who by virtue of his interest both with
Marullus the Prefect, and the Officers of the Jews, easily laid hands on him,
and without more ado sent him away to execution. But such was the magnanimity
of this braveman, that death was but a sport with him: and with so much
gallantry did he bear it, that the very Soldier that guarded him to the place
of execution, was conquered by his Prisoner, and that unto such pitch of
admiration, as the man was ambitious to die with him, in the same cause, and so
he did; and thus dyed they nobly together. S. Peter after this, was taken also,
and imprisoned, but escaped by a miracle. Act. 12. 1, etc. Eus. Eccl. Hist. B.
2. chapter 9. Clem. Hypot. B. 7. Some say that Barnabas and Saul were also clapped
up, and strangely escaped* But however, about this Time Saul being in an
ecstasie as he was praying in the Temple, was caught up into the third Heaven,
where he heard words unspeakable, and finally was commanded to be gone quickly
out of Jerusalem, for that the Jews would not receive his testimony, and to go
away upon Gods message far thence among the Gentiles. Now it does appear that
S. Paul wrote the 2d Epist* to the (...) in Anno 55, and this trance was 14
year^ before: It was certainly therefore in Anno 40. And so by consequence the
martyrdom of this James was in the same year some time before.
Act. 22. 17, etc. 2 Cor. 12. 2, etc. Now from the conversion of Saul unto his
return unto Jerusalem were 3 years, And from that time unto his coming again to
bring al^s were 11 years, or 14 in all from his conversion. Gal. 1. 17, 18. and
chapter 2. 1. Now according to this command Barnabas and Saul went back again to
Antioch, and one Titus a Greek was in their company. But there were at this
time certain other Evangelists, who in absence of these had taught at Antioch;
such as were Lucius, Simon Niger, and Manahen. And now Barnabes and Saul being
come thither too, the Holy Ghost spoke openly by vision, saying, Separate me
Barnabas and Saul for the work unto which I have called them. Act. 13. 1, 2,
etc. About this time Saul seems to be promoted to be an Evangelist. And from
hence forward is called Paul.

Anno 41. in the Spring of the year, Barnabas and Paul left Antioch* and having
one John Mark in company to be their Deacon, went forth to preach the Gospel.
And first they came into Seleucia near the Sea, upon the River ^tontes; and
from thence sailed over Sea unto Salamis (12) in the Isle of Cypras. (g) And
after some stay journeyed all over the Island, unto Paphos (13) where Sergius
Paulus the Governor held his seat, and who was by these converted to the
Faith, having first by miracle conquered one Barjesus a Sorcerer, who opposed
them; for they smote him with sudden blindness, so that he could not see at all.

Anno 42. in the Spring they crossed the Sea again to Perga (14) in Pamphilia.
But here John Mark being tired with the Voyage broke up their company, and
returned to Jerusalem. Yet Barnabas and Paul went on as far as Antioch (15) in
Psidia. (i) Here in vain first preached they unto the Jews; but after turning
unto the Gentiles, they were quickly accomodated with crowds of Converts, and
that not only of the City, but out of the Country also, who were baptized.
This took them up no small space of time, until finally by the malicious Jews
they were driven away out of the coast. Hence therefore carried they the Holy
Gospel unto I^onia (16) the principal City of Lycaonia, (k) where some few Jews
believed, but great multitudes of the Gentiles; wherefore here also tarryed
they some space of time, and most probable made up their first year in Asia,
(n) Act. 13. 4, etc. About this time S. Peter commending the care of the Church
of Antioch to one Erodius whom he left Bishop there, himself departed by land
through Cappadocia, Galatia, (m) and the rest of Asia, Pontus, and Bathina;
finally he came to Rome. 1 Pet. 1. 1, 2. This year also happened the Famine
spoken of by Agabus. Dion. B. 60. Suet. B. 5. chapter 18. Ios. Ant. B. 20: chapter 2.

Anno 43. Barnabus and Paul continued still preaching at Iconia Act. 14. 3, 4.
About this time S. Peter being at Rome, ^ounded an hopeful Church there also.
And Simon the Sorcerer came thither also with one Helena his Concubine, who was
honored, by some as much for his Arts Diabolical, as was S. Peter for his
Doctrines Divines and was so far advanced by the great ones, that his Image was
taken in also amongst their Gods Eus. Eccl. Hist. B. 2. chapter 12. 13. 14. 15.

Anno 44. S. Mark at Rome published his Gospel for the use of that Church. And
afterward was sent away into Egypt to govern the Church of Alexandria. Eus.
Eccl. Hist, Barnabas and Paul about this time were finally driven away from
Iconia, by a ryotous tumult of envyous Jews, and went on preaching to Lystra,
(17) where they got great credit by a lame man they cured miraculously. And
here also tarryed they some time; until from Antioch and Iconia the Jews
pursuing them with malice and envy raised a party in the Town, and in a tumult
stoned Paul, who was yet by miracle restored to life again, and went away with
Barnabas the next day for Derbe, (18.) Act. 14. 6, etc. v. 21. etc.

Anno 45. Barnabas and Paul having settled their Church at Derbe in peace and
quiet, left it to the Government of Elders ordained there, and so returned to
Lystra, where they spent the rest of the year. Act. 14. 21, etc.

Anno 46. Having ordained Elders at Lystra (among which was Timothy for one)
they returned to Ieonium: and doing the like there, finally they came to
Antioch, in Pisidia again. This year dyed the blessed Virgin Mary, aged about
60 years; having survived her Sons Assension 14. years, and remained a Widow
about 20. Eus. Chron.

Anno 47. Barnabas and Paul came back again to Perga, and from thence went to
Attalia, (19) where also they settled a Church, Act. 14. 24* etc.

Anno 48. they returned through Cilicia and Syria unto Antioch in Syria, every
where as they went declaring the great things God had done by their Ministry.
Act. 14. 26.

Anno 49 Barnabas and Paul still remain at Antioch: But in the mean time
certain falacious Jews from Jerusalem disturbed the Church, teaching that
without Circumcision and other Legal ceremonies the Jews could not be saved.
Whence followed great disputes; and finally, Barnabas and Paul were sent to
Jerusalem for a determination of the controversy. Here at this time were
assembled S. James, S. Peter, and S. John, besides who ever else un-named, by
whom it was ordained, as in Acts 15. With this Decree Barnabas and Paul
together with one Judas the brother of S. Thomas, and Silas, returned unto
Antioch, to the great satisfaction of the Churches. Acts 15. 30, 31.

After these things Barnabas and Paul being about to make a second Voyage into
Asia, had some quarrel about John Mark, whom Barnabas desired might be their
Companion. But Paul refused Upon this so great was the falling out, that they
parted assunder* and Barnabas with John Mark sailed away for Cyprus: (g) and
Paul with Silas departed into Asia. This was Anno 50. early in the year, at
what time Paul traveled through Syria and Cilicia, unto Derbe in Lycaonia.
Act. 15. 41. chapter 16. 1, etc. Hence went they to Lystra, where Timothy was also
taken in company, and so through Phrygia, (l) and Gallatia, (m) and Bithynia,
(p) they made but little stay in Asia, but came to Troas (20) in Mysia. Here
they shipped away for the Isle of Samothrace, (21) and thence to Neapolis (22) on
the Continent of Tharcia, and so to Philippine (23) in Macedonia, (q). Act. 16.
11. etc. Here after Lydia and others converted, and a certain Devil cast forth
of a Divining maid, they were cast into Prison; but working miracles there too,
the Jailer was converted, and on the morrow they were dismissed. Hence went
they to Amphipolis, (24) and so to Apollonia, (25) and thence onwards to
Thessa^lnica, (26) where Jason and other Jews were converted, and great
multitudes of Greeks. But being by unbeleeving Jews disturbed, they departed
after 3 weeks stay unto Berrhea, (27) where they made more Converts than at
Thessalonica. But the malicous Jews persecuting them from thence also, Paul
sailed away by Sea to Athens (28) where he had very famous disputations with
the Learned of all Sects and Religions, and converted Dyonisius the Areopagite,
and one Damaris a famous Woman, and many more. Act. 17. 1, etc. From hence Paul
wrote the first and second Epistle to the Thessalo^ians, for confirmation of
that Church. And finally from Athens he went to Corinth, (29) in the Isthmus,
where he took up his rest for one whole year and six months. Act, 18. 1, etc.

Anno 51. S. Paul had a Vision at Corinth to encourage his preaching. Sila^ and
Timothy he sent into Macedonia to confirm the Churches there. And tarrying at
Corinth wrought for his living by making of Tents, with Aqaila and Priscilla,
and yet preached constantly in the house of one Justus, which was near the
Synagogue: And Sosthenes the chief Ruler of the Synagogue being also converted
adjoined himself unto Paul. But when Gallio was made Deputy a tumult was
raised, wherein Sosthenes was hearen; yet Paul tarryed still. Act. 18. 7, etc.

Anno 52. S. Paul left unto Silas the government of the Church of Corinth; and
himself sailed away to Ephesus (32) in Asia. Here, after some reasonings with
the Jews, he converted many of the Gentiles. But after some stay, leaving
Timothy to govern the Church here, he sailed away into the Isle of Creta, (u)
where having also settled a Church, he left it to the care of Titus; and taking
ship he sailed directly to Cesarea (10) in Canaan, and so he went up to
Jerusalem; where tarrying no longer but merely to salute the brethren, went
directly to Antioch. Act. 18. 18, etc. Here also he made but a very short stay,
and began a third Voyage through Gallatia, and Phrygia, confirming the Churches
as he went; but made little stay in a place till he came to Timothy at Ephesus.
(32) Here instructed he certain Disciples of S. John Baptists, and after 3
months in vain reasoning in the Synagogues with the Jews, he preached 2 whole
years in the School of Tyrannus, unto the Gentiles.

Anno 53. Paul being at Ephesus did many miracles; and 7 sons of Scera a Jew
were foully foiled and shamed by attempting to cast out Devils in imitation of
Paul. Act. 19. 10, etc. About the same time S. Philip the Apostle having
preached the Gospel in Cappadocia, Armenia, Colchis, and Iberia; finally came
down to Phrygia, where preaching at Hierapolis the unbeleeving lews and
Heathens conspiring against him crucified him there, and stoned him with
stones. Eus. chron. and Eccl. Hist. 8. 3. chapter 28. Ant. chr. tit. 6. c. 11.

Anno 54. S. Philip being dead, it seems S. Paul was called to be an Apostle,
and was counted amongst the twelve; and ever after find we him write himself
Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ. Being still at Ephesus many were converted:
and of the new Converts many who used curious Arts burnt their Books of great
price, out of zealous love to the Gospel. But as he was about to depart, a
great tumult was raised by one Demetrius a Silver smith, upon the account of
interest, but was appeased by the Town Clark. Act. 19. 23, etc.

Anno 55. From hence Paul wrote the first Epistle to the Corinthians, and sent
it by Timothy. Act. 19. 22. 1 Cor. 16. 8. But Timothy being returned, Paul left
him at Ephesus, and went himself into Macedonia, passing by Troas. Hither came
he about Pentecost, and from hence he wrote the second Epistle to the
Corinthians 14 years and somewhat over since his carrying of alms from Anti^ch
to Jerusalem. 2 Cor. 2. 12. 1^. 1, 2. Hence also wrote he unto Titus in Crete
(u) from Nicapolis (22) in this Country. Tit. 3. 12. and here he Wintered.
This year S. Peter at Rome utterly foiled Simon the Sorcerer in the presence of
Nero; and the Sorcerer falling from on high perished. Aegesip. B. ^. chapter 2.
Epiphan. tom. 2. Haeres. 21. Abd. Apost. Hist. B. 13.

Anno 56 Paul by the first of the year came to Corinth, where and thereabouts
he tarryed 3 months. Hence wrote he an Epistle to the Romans. Romans 15. 19.
chapter 16. 25. Act. 20. 3 Hence went he to Philippi, Romans 15. 24. where leaving
Epaphroditus Govenour of that Church, and Silvanus Bishop of Thessalonica, and
one Urbanus over other small Towns. (Phil. 2. 25. Dor. Syn. (After the days of
unleavened bread he went by Sea to Troas, in Asia, where Eutieus being dead was
restored to life. Act. 2. 6. Thence went he to Assos, (33) and so to Mityleu^,
(34) to the Isle of Chios, (35) to Samos, (36) to Trogillium, (37) to Micales,
(38) to Miletus, (39) Here met him Timothy and the Elders of Ephesus. Act. 20.
16. Hence sailed he away to Choos, (40) and so to Rhodes, (41) thence to
Patara, (42) Act. 21. 1. Hence he sailed by Cyprus on the left hand unto Tire,
where Simon one of the 7 Deacons was Bishop. Dor. Syn. Act. 21. 2, 3, etc.
Hence sailed he again to Ptolomais, and thence (after one days stay) to
Cesaria, where Philip the Deacon was Bishop. Here was foretold of the ill usage
which attended him at Jerusalem; yet went he on thither by Land, where he
arrived at the Feast of Pentecost. Act. 21. 21, etc.

During his stay here he submitted to certain Jewish Ceremonies, in order to
win the Jews. But being found in the Temple, by certain Jews of Asia, was
apprehended in a tumult, and buffetted: but being rescued by Lysias the chief
Captain, and found to be a Roman, was sent safe away from Jerusalem to
Cesarea; where at an hearing before one Foelix Prefect of Judea, The High
Priest and his Orator accused him of great matters, but could prove nothing.
Act. 24. 1, etc. Here Foelix condiscended himself to hear Paul preach the
Gospel, yet was not converted. But after two years Foelix going out of place,
left S. Paul in prison. S. Peter was in Egypt, and from Babylon in Egypt
wrote his first Epistle to the dispersed strangers. 1 Pet. 1. 1, chapter 5. 15.

Anno 58 Portius Festus was made Prefect of Judea, before whom S. Paul was
accused a fresh; but he appealed to Caesar. After this, King Agrippa heard him
preach, but was only almost converted. Act. 25. chapter 26. But at end of the year
S. Paul was shipped away for Rome. Act. 27. 1, etc. And sailing by Zidon, (48)
so to Cyprus, My^a (49) in Pamphilia, (h) where he was put in a ship of
Alexandria, (50) and came to G^idas, (51) thence by Salmona, (52) and so
Westwards to the Haven in Creta, (u) called Fair havens, (53) near the City
Lasea. (54) Here he admonished the company to Winter: but heeding him not, they
sailed on, (hoping to Winter in Phoenix) (55) unto an Isle called Clauda. (56)
After this they had a very solitary Journey for 14 days together: and after
all hope of life was past, and the Ship utterly perished, all the persons
landed safe on the Isle Melita. (58) Here Publius Governor of the Isle was
converted. Anno 59 S. Paul and all his company sailed thence to Syracuse. (59)
thence to Rhegium, (60) so to Puteoli. (61) Here they landed, and traveled to
Apiiforum, (62) thence to the 3 Taverns, (63) and so to Rome.

Here S. Paul first preached to the Jews: but they being most of them hardened,
he preached two full years to the Gentiles: having liberty to dwell in an hired
house of his own, having only one Soldier for his guard. Act. 28. 1, etc.

Anno 60. He continues prisoner in Rome, and this year he wrote the Epistle to
the Galatians. Gal. 1. 1. And likewise he wrote to the Ephesians. Ephesians. 1. 1.

Anno 62. He was still prisoner, but received daily the benevolence of the
Churches. Epaphroditus brought him the good will of the Philippians; by whom he
returned his Epistle to the Philippians. Phil. 11. 1. Then came Timothy with
the alms of Ephesus. And a while after came Onesinus, run away from his Master:
by whom S. Paul returned the Epistle to Philemon. Then came Epaphras to Rome,
and not unlikely be brought with him the alms of the Colossians, to whom be
returned an Epistle, sent by Tychicus of Colophon. And finally, after 2 years
imprisonment, he came to a hearing before Nero: and though most of his friends
fell off, yet was he acquitted; 2 Timothy 4 16, 17. And now being at liberty, some
think he prosecuted his Journey into Spain, as he had promised. Romans 15. 24.

Anno 63. He was in Spain, or in his way thither, preaching the Gospel. This
year S. James at Jerusalem suffered martyrdom, in whose place S. Simon his
brother was chosen Bishop. Eus. Ecc. Hist. B. 2. chapter 11. and 23. Ios. Ant B.
20. chapter 8. S. Paul in Gallia ordained Cresceus Bishop of Calcedon. Dor. Syn.

Anno 64. S. Paul out of Gallia took shipping, and sailed into Greece.

Anno 65. S. Paul in Macedonia visited the Churches: and landed at Troas i^
Asia, where Carpus was Bishop. He left him his Cloak and certain parchment
writings, and went up into Phrygia, unto Laodecea, and from thence wrote his
first Epistle to T^mothy; at Ephesus. 1 Timothy 3. 14. 15. promising shortly to
come thither to him. But it fell out otherwise; For in the mean time the news
arriving of the persecutions ar R^me, he leaving off all farther thought hasted
to be there. And accordingly, going from Laodicea to Miletum. There he left
Trophimus one of his Companions sick. Hence he sailed away to Corinth, where
Erastus tarryed for him by appointment. 2. Tim. 4. 20. And hence he sailed away
to Rome, where S. Peter also met him. In the meantime the poor Christians in
Rome were crucified, torn with beasts, and burnt in fire. Tac. An. B. 15. chapter
44. But S. Paul at Rome greatly encouraged, and so did S. Peter. From hence S.
Paul at this time wrote his second Epistle to Timothy, desiring his company.

S. Paul was clapped up a prisoner, betrayed by Alexander the Coppersmith of
Ephesus. 2 Timothy 4. 14, 15. Demas forsook the Faith.

Anno 66. S. Peter and S. Paul were both prisoners at Rome. Timothy and
Trophimus came to Rome to S. Paul.

Anno 67. June 29. S. Peter was crucified with his head downwards; and Olympas
and Rhodion his companions suffered with him. S. Paul was beheaded; and with
him suffered his companions Aristarchus, Trophimus, and Pudens. Eus. Ecc. Hist.
B. 2. chapter 25. Tertul. in Apol. chapter 5. Dor. Syn.

Thus ended the travels of this painful Father, after he had spent some 32
years in preaching the Gospel: and had run over many thousands of miles by Land
and Water for the promulgation thereof.

The History of JERUSALEM.
BAbylon and Rome were not so much famed for their achievements Warlike but
Jerusalem was as famous as either, and beyond them both for Stories Sacred and
miraculous. She stands in account for Antiquity far beyond Rome and but a few
years on this side the confusion of Tongues; much of the same date with the
City of Babylon: for according to the reckoning of Calistenes in his Letter to
Aristotle from Babylon, at what time it was taken by Alexander, That this City
had stood 1903 years. And according to this computation was Babylon founded
some few years after the confusion. when ^^m passed over Euphrates, with the
Canaanites, Mitsraimites, and Phutites, all following toward Egypt, whereof
Canaan dropped by the way, and seated in the Holy Land. In this pleasant and most
fertile Country the numerous Offspring of these profane Canaanites
overspread themselves: and called it in parcels, each Tribe after his Fathers
name; but remembering the whole Country by the name of their Grandsire Canaan.
Here several of his Sons built Cities: among others Jebus built one, and called
it Jebus, which some time after was called Jerusalem, Some are of opinion this
City was first called Salem or Solyma, and that it had the name in the days of
Abraham. But it seems a mistake in the Ancients. For ^^st it was called Jebus
in the days of Oth^^l, after Joshua was dead. Jud. 19. 10. and this was a long
time after the days of Abraham. And therefore either it had been called Salem
for some time only by way of interruption to the name of Jebus, or else was
never so called. For Jebus the father of the Jebusites was some hundreds of
years elder than Abraham. But then how should this interruption come? or indeed
how could the Priest of the most high God by any reasonable possibility at any
time so interrupt and thrust in as to found a City of his own amidst this
profane people? For either he was descended of some of the Canaani^ish Tribes,
or from some other. If from the Canaanites, How came he to be in such a Sacred
place, as Priest of the most high God? Or was there possibly some sacred Person
amidst that most cursed People? Yet why so eminently was he called Priest of
the most high, as if none but He, or at lest so as He? And that too while Shem
the son o^ Noah was yet living; of whom Noah said Blessed be the Lord God of
Shem, and let Canaan be his servant. And God persuade Japhet that he may dwell
in the tents of Shem? Was this Melchizedeck a greater man than Shem, Gen 9. 26,
27? Or was he Sh^m himself? If so, How came be to seat there amongst the
Canaan^^^? or at least, How came to be a Priest there, where he had no People;
o^ but few to dwell within his Tents? Or how came he to pitch his Tents there
where those who would be persuaded to dwell in them could not aptly be admitted
to come at him? No, therefore (though with submission to our Elders, and under
favor of their correction we speak it) this was not that Salem where
Melchizedeck was Prince. There was another Salem in the land of Canaan. But
rather this man was Melchisalem as he was Melchizedeck King of Peace, (...) he
was King of righteousness, or a Prince Peaceable, rather than Prince of any
City called Peace; and seems indeed to have been that very Shem the son of
Noah, who at eldest of his own Tribe, was the great Priest of Priests under
God, over all those who descended from his own Loin^ as this Abraham did.
or Hierosolyma. The author of the Book of Joshua remembers it by this name;
but then was it only for that this sacred Penman called it as it had the name
in his own age wherein the writer lived, and not as it was in the days of
Iohsua. For until this City was conquered by K. David, and established his
Royal seat, we find no other name it had but Iebus only: from whence the
Conqueror called it after himself Kiriath David, or the City of David. And
under that name was it known all the days of that famous King, and after,
until K. Solomon enlarged and beautified the City, and adorned it with the
sacred and never enough to be admired Temple of God therein, which became more
famous all over the World than ever was that one of the 7 Wonders of the World
the huge Temple of Diana at Ephesus. Now by reason of these noble additions of
Solomon, and for that it was an emblem of this Princes most peaceable reign,
and more for that it was enriched with the most sacred Temple of Peace, wherein
all People were to make atonement for their sins in order to obtain their
everlasting peace with God, it was ever after called Hierosolyma in the Hebrew
tongue, which was as much as to say the Inheritance of Peace, or the vision of
Peace; And such especially was it in the days of our Savior, when the Peace
of God which passes all understanding was preached, and seen there reigning.
Phil. 4. 7.

This City was held by the Iebusites while it was called Iebus, from the year
of its first foundation until the taking thereof by K. David about 1170 years,
reckoning from about 20 or 30 years after the confusion, or about 120 or 130
after N^^hs Floode at what time Jebus under his father Canaan sat down in those
parts. After reigned here

years King David 33. King Solomon son of David 40. Rehoboam son of Solomon.
17. Abijam son of Rehoboam 3. Asa son of Abijam 41 Jehoshaphat son of Asa 25
Anion son of Manasseh 2. Josiah son of Anion 31 Athalia Wife of Ahaziah 6 Joash
son of Ahaziah 40. Jehoram together with his Father 4 and after him 4. Ahaziah
son of Jehoram 1. Amaziah son of Joash 29 Uzziah son of Amaziah 52. Jothan son
of Uzziah 16. Ahaz son of Jothan under his Father and after 16. Hezekiah son of
Ahaz 92. Manasseb son of Hezekiah 55 Jeheohaz son of Josiah 3m. 00 Jeboiakim
brother of Jeho. 11. Jehoiachim son of Jehoiachim 3 months and ten days 00.
Zedekiah brother of Jehoia. 11. And after one year more followed the Captivity
1.

The whole sum of these times was 463 years and 6 months and 10 days, whereof
390 years were from the rebellion of the ten Tribes unto the Captivity, and the
33 years of David, 40 of Solomon, and 6 months of Rehoboam before the
rebellion made out the rest. Only the 10 days were nothing else but so many
days excess of one year, wherein the Sun went backwards in the days of Ahaz.

At the end of these years came the Caldeans from Babylon, and utterly
destroyed both City and Country, and Kingdom and People. In the midst of his
11 year was K. Zedekiah taken, and his children now slain before his face, and
finally his eyes put out, and he ended his days in bondage. Ier. 52. 6. But in
the midst of the next year both City and Temple suffered by Fire: And yet not
so but that the sacred Vessels were preserved; only with the Citizens suffered
they all like fate, and were carried away into captivity. Ier. 52. 12, 13.
Ezekiel. 33. 21. After all this, yet held out Gedalia one part of a year, as
Vassal to the Caldeans; until by the end of the year he was slain by Ismael.
The remainder of the People fled away into Egypt, and carried Jeremiah the
Prophet with them. Ier. 43. Then sang the Prophet his lamentable Song, Lam.
Jeremiah chapter 1. etc.

70 years lay this city desolate, and all the country ruinate, the walls were
pulled down, and the houses became mere ashes and rubbish: the Owl lodged
there, and the grass grew in the streets for want of Passengers to tread it
down: the Trees bore all manner of fruit, and yet rotted the Apples Pears and
Plumbs for want of hands to pluck them: the Ground brought forth plenty of
Herbs and Grass, which withered to Earth again for want of mouths to eat it up:
and Weeds grew every where in steed of Corn, for want of People to till the
Ground. And thus continued it until the Land had her fill of Sabbaths, for 70
years time that it la^ thus desolate. 2 Chronicles. 36. 21. During these times while
the People were captive at Babylon reigned over these wastes Nebuchadnezzar 25
years. Evilmerodach his son 28 years. Belshazzar his sons son 17 years. 2 Chronicles. 36. 20.

At the end of the 14 year of Belshazzar, came Cyrus King of Persia, and Darius
the Median Prince, and laid siege unto Babylon, for 3 years together: At the
end of which was Belshazzar drinking Wine in the holy Vessels of Gods Temple,
and making merry with his Whores in Babylon, when the Handwriting appeared on
the Wall, made him tremble for feat. And the night after (Cyrus having drained
the River Euphrates dry,) the city was taken, and Belshazzar slain. Dan. 5. And
then reigned Darius 1 year. On that year was it Daniel the Prophet set himself
to seek the Lord by Fasting and Prayer, for that he had understood by Books,
that the 70 years were clean run out, in order that the People might be
restored again, every man to his own city and country, and that the Temple and
City might be restored. Dan. 9. Immediately was this Prayer heard: and on the
same year dyed King Darius. And Cyrus coming in place gave order for the return
out of captivity. And accordingly the Gold and Silver and Vessels of the Temple
being delivered up into the hands of Zerobabel, they lost no time, but
immediately came away, rejoicing for the good hope that God had given them.

(...) first year could they do but little more than set them up poor hutts to
lodge (...) they were carrying away the Rubbish, to lay the foundation of the
Tem^^^ (...) congratulate their return one with another. The second year they
went on (...) with the re-edification of the Temple. And so the third, until
the command (...) to forbear. Then had these (poor Strangers as yet in their
(...) lament their hard hap, that the house of God should stand only in (...)
the naked walls, without a roof. Thus it continued all the days of (...) his
absence in Egypt under the Mages, and after that all the while (...) otherwise
called Artaxerxes held Babylon against Darius Hystas^^ (...) years. During
these times the Jews built them houses in Ieru^^^ (...) ^^lling, until reproved
by the Prophets Haggai and Zachariah, (...) Darius after the Babilonion Rebel
was overthrown, they began (...); and were encouraged by the King. In 5 years
space was (...) in 2 years more the Courts were completed After (...) this
City still rising into Beauty and Honor more and more, (...) her self again:
only still she b^^oaned her naked body (...) was the goodness of God, that no
sooner were the Streets made ready, and the Houses finished in their order, but
the heart of the King of Persia favored so far as to allow them Walls too. And
to this purpose Nehemiah came with Commission to see it done.

Thus rose this Phoenix out of her Ashes, after she had slept in Rubbish many
years, and like a Virgin she began to sing again for 62 weeks of years, or 434
years, until the coming of the Messiah. During these times were chief Rulers
of Jerusalem and principal of the Sanedrim there, and High Priests.

Rulers years Jerubabel son of Shealtiel 58 Rhesa Meskullum son of Zarub. 66
Johannab^n Rhesa 54 Hir^anus son of Joham^^ 14 Joseph son of Hir^anus 7 Abner
son of Joseph 11 Mattathias son of Abner 12 Azarmahat son of Mat. 9 Artarat
Naum son of Azar 10 Haggai Eli. son of Nahum 8 Mas^t Nahum son of Haggai 7 Amos
Sirah son of Mas^^^ 14 Mattathias Silea son of Amos called in Josephus
The^^hilus 1^ Joseph Arses son of Mat. ^0 ^anna Hir^anus son of Joseph
interrupted by Antioch^^ Epip^^nes fled and slew himself 16 Judas Mac^abeus
son of Mattathia^ ^^ood up in defense of the Jews against the abomina^ion
introduced by Antioc^us Epiphanes in the days of Janna and after Janna was
dead 2 Judas slain Jonathan his brother des^ndeth 14 High Priests years Jesus
son of Josedech 56 Joak^m son of Jesus who officiated under his Father at what
time Holofernes Head was cut off by Judeth. And in whose time the building went
foreward again 48 Elia^hib son of Joakim 21 Jehojada son of Eliashim 24 Johanan
son of Jehojada whose brother Manasses married the daughter of Sa^ballat 24
Joddus son of Johanan in the days of Alexander the great, 14 Onias son of
J^ddus 21 Simon son of Onias 13 Eleazar brother of Simon 33 Manasses Brother of
Omas and Uncle unto Simon and E^^azar the High Priest 15 Omias, II 14 Simon the
just, son of Eleazar 10 Onias III son of Simon the just 39 Onias basely
murdered his Brother Jason 4 Mene^us another Brother obtained by bribery ^
Alcimus a stranger held the High Priesthood ^ Alcimus dead there was no H. Pr.
^ Rulers, and High Priests years But in the first year of Alexander Pal^ King^
of Syria. Jonath^^ was made both H* Priest and Governor ^ Simon brother of
Jenathan Governor and H Priest ^ Simon slain, John son of S^^on Governor and
H. Priest 31 John surnamed Hircan^^ dead, Aristobulus his son was king and H.
Priest ^ Aristobulus dead Jann^^s Alexander his brother King and H. P. (...)
Alex. dead Salome his wife was Queen 9. and Hircanus son of Alex H P. 9 Salome
dead, Aristobulus took away both Kingdom and H. Priesthood from his elder
brother Hircanus and held 5 Jerusalem taken by Pompey the Roman Aristob^ and
his sons were taken Prisoners, and Hircanus was made King and H Priest again 21
Antigonus son of Aristolulus by aid of the Parthians was King and H. P. ^
Rulers years Her^d son of Antipate^ the Idum^^^ was made King by the Senate of
Rome and warred upon Antigo^us all his time Antigonus slain Herod reigned 39
In time of this Herod was Jesus Christ born at Bethelem Archelaus son of great
Herod 5 He deposed. Cop^nius the Roman was made Govenour 3 M. Ambivius Governed
2 A^. Rufus Governed 2 Valerius Gratus under Tib^^^t 11 Pontius Pilat by whom
Christ was crucified 11 M^^c^llus 2 Mar^llus 4 Herod Agrippa was King of all
Palestine Cuspius Fadus Governed 3 Tiberius Ale^^nder 2 Ventidus Cumanus 3
Antonius Foelix 7 Under whom S. Paul was prisoner P^rticus Festus 3 Albinus 2
Gessius Florus under whom began the rebellion of the Jews 3 Vespatian who
overcame the Jews* Titus son of Vespatian under who^ the City and Temple
^ereburned 1 Lu^ius Bassa who reduced ^assad^* The To^^ 587 High Priests yers
Anancel made H. Priest by Herod 1 Aristobulus grandchild to Hircanus 1* He
drownded by command of Herod Anancel held again 9 Jesus son of Fab^us after him
held 3 Simon son of ^oethus Father in law of Herod 19 Mattathias son of
Theophilus 1 During this year Zacha^ias the Father of S. John Baptist
efficiated under Mattathias on the Fast day only Joaz^^ son of Simon B^ethus
held 2 Eleaxer brother of (...) 3 Jesus son of Sea 2 Annas son of Sethi^ 7
Ismael 1 Elea^^^ son of (...) 1 Sim^^ 1 Joseph surnamed Cai^ph^^ son i^ law of
Annas 17 Jonathan son of Annas 2 The oph^lus brother of Jonathan 5 Simon 1
Nattath^^ 1 Ae^^neus 1 Simon 1 Joseph ^ Ananias son of Na^^deus ^ Ismael 5
Ananias son of Annas 1 Jesus ^ Jesus son of Gama^^^ 1 Mattathias 6 Phanes a man
of lov degree during the sledge 1 No body for 2 The Total 583

Thus was the Government of Jerusalem ordered by the Rulers and Priests during
th^se times, until the day came of the utter subversion thereof. During the
Persian Monarchy she saw but few evil days. In the days of King Artaxexes
Longhand, there was one Haman son of Hamedatha the Aggagite, who was in danger
to have undon the whole Nation of the lews all the Worldover. But by the
goodhand of God, and by the means of Queen Esther and Mordica that cloud
happily blew over. (See the Book of Esther.) This was some few years before the
coming of Nehemiah to restore the Walls of Jerusalem. For that commission of
Nehemiah by favor of this Queen Esther was procured: (Nehem. 2. 6. In these
days lived Judith of Bethulia, a very famous Woman: this was she who cut off
the head of Holifernes. This Holifernes was a great Commander General under
Nabochodonozor: And that Nebochodonozor reigned at Babylon, during the time of
King Darius at Susha^ in Persia, and rebelled against the King of Persia. And
during this rebellion having vanquished one Arphaxad a Deputy Prince of Media,
under Darius, he waxed proud, and sent Holofernes out Westward against Judea,
and others; while himself made head against the Persians. But this Holofernes
perishing, being over witted by Judith, (Judith ^1. ch 2. etc.) Nabochodonozor
was vanquished by Darius, and finally being shut up in Babylon was betrayed by
Zopuras: And Darius reigned overall. Herodiat. B. 1. And in the second year
after this, was that second of Darius, at what time the building of the Temple
went forward. Ez. 6. After this lived Judith some 70 years or more into the
reign of Darius Nothus, during all which time none made the children of Israel
afraid. nor of a long time after Judith. 16. 25. In the days of Artaxerxes
Ochus there was one Bagoses who was Lieutenant to the King of Persia in these
parts who came to Jerusalem, and threatened somewhat: the reason was because of
Jonathan the H. Priest who had ^lain his brother Manasseh, for that Manasseh
had (...) a daughter of Sanballar, of Sa^aria, and contended with him for the
Priesthood Jos. Ant. Neh. 13. 28. But when Alexander gat the Empire, Sanballat
got the start of the Jews, and having opportunity by the foretop, struck in
with the Conqueror, and incensed him against them. But as Alexander lay before
Gaza, Sanballat dyed before the walls thereof, and missed of his will, to see
his ends upon the Jews accomplished. Howbeit Alexander having mastered Gaza
came against Jerusalem in great wrath. But Jaddus being H. Priest at that time,
came out of the City in his Priestly robes to meet him: whom Alexander no
sooner saw, but his wrath turned all to reverence. For having before dreamt of
just such a person, as soon as he saw him, he remembered his dream and* doing
him great honor left also noble marks of his courtesy behind him at Jerusalem.
Jos. Ant. But Alexand^r being dead Ptolomeus Lagus Lord of Egypt was not so
civil; For he coming upon the City upon the Sabbath day while they made no
defense took his advantage of their superstition, and surprised the City, and
made the Citizens his captives, and carried away many prisoners of them into
Egypt. Jos. Ant. Yet the next year Antigonus got away this City from Ptolomy
again, And now was a very bad time with the Jews, for Palestine lying (...) the
mid way between Syria and Egypt, it was an apt prey unto whom soever was
Conqueror. And thus sometimes the Egyptians were their Lords, and otherwhiles
the Syria^s; but both ways the Jews were slaves. Jos. Ant. Dan. 5. 6. etc.
Until in the end, Ptolomeus having utterly routed Antigonus, enjoyed whole
Palestine in peace. After him Ptol. Philadelphus held it, who did the Jews much
honor, and caused the famous translation of the old Testament into the Greek
tongue by the Septuagint. J^s. Ant. (...) Chr^^* After Philadelphus held Pt.
Ever^^^ all his time in whose time Jesus son of (...) wrote his Book called
(...). But (...) called the great; disturbed (...) away the whole Country from
Epiphanes his son, yet showed kindness to the jews, J^s. Ant. ^^n. 11. 13. For
(...) having oppressed them, they m^te aptly complied with (...). Dan. 1. 14.
But the son of this Antiochees called Ephiphanes, was a bloody persecuter, who
poltuted the Sanctuary of the most High, and took away the daily Sacrifice, and
set up the abominations of (...), for the space of (...) thousand and two
hundred days. Dan. 11. 31. and 8. 11, 12, 13, 14. and made havoc of the People
of Jerusalem, killing and carrying away captives, and compelling them to
sacrifice to Idols, until few of them were left. ^. Mac. 1. 2. Mat. 5. These
were bitter (...) and comparable to the days of the Bayb^ni^ns or worse, until
Judas (...) and his br^thren with a small help stood up and adventured their
lives for the law of God; and did wonders, and cleansed the alter of God, and
restored religion Dan. 8. 14. ch 11. 34. Jos. Ant. 1 Man. 4. this Judas spent
his life in fighting Gods battles and was victorious* and after him Jonathan
his brother did the like, and got ground and became famous, until he was
basely murd^^d by (...). But Simon another brother cast out the Gentiles from
the holy City, and restored Jerusalem and the worship of God, and from this
time foreward once again began the Jews to be their own masters, and to give
laws to their neighbor Princes. 1 Mat. 13. Jos. Ant. B. 13. chapter ^1. Yet this
Simon was also slain by treachery. 1 Mat. chapter last* But his (...) John revenged
(...), and grew great and prevailed against the syrians J^s. Ant. B. 11. (...)
15 and let his (...) his eldest son. This man would be called King, but dyed
after one year^ (...) and Alexander his brother succeeded him, who (...) with
the Syrians and his one rebellious subjects 27 years. Before these times the
Jews were grow^ famous for skill and knowledge, and that especially in d^^ine
things* In the return from captivity (...) famous Scribe; or a great learned
man, E^r. 7. 6. after him rose up Simon the just, a great promoter of learning
Eccl. 1. 50. After him followed Antigonus Socheus; This man was zealous of Gods
law, and had many followers. But all zealots are not so holy as they seem, for
from this corrupted zeal sprang up the Pharisees. Amongst others was one Sadoc
scholar of Ant^gonus, who yet in the end wearyed with the strict life of
religion, fell off, and became the Father of the Sadducees, John Hircanus the
H. Priest being vexed with the insolences of the Pharisees, became a professed
Sadduce, and so his sons after him. But in the days of this Alexander the
Pharisees were so popular that they gave law to the King him self, and
occasioned him many stirs and troubles. After Alex^nder, S^lome his Wife
reigned some years, but she dead, Aristobulus the younger son was very
troublesome, and put his elder brother besides the Throne* But in those days
came Pompey the great into Syria, in persuit of his conquests, and taking
advantage of the disorders among the Jews took Jerusalem, and profaned the
Temple with his presence, and left them in servitude of the Romans. After a
while came Crassus by in his Parthian expedition, and robbed the Temple. But in
the end Herod the son of Antipater an Edomite, a man of base and mean parentage
procured the Kingdom by craft and good Fortune, and reigned many years. At
latter end of his time was Jesus Christ born. In these days flourished this
City of Jerusalem in wealth, peace, and honor, as well as in all manner of
wisdom and knowledge: Only the Jews could not be contented, being under the
authority of this stranger, and swayed by the Roman power Jos. Ant. Luke ^. 5.
But alas, their pride was far a greater mischief to them than their slavery.
For that notwithstanding, they enjoyed liberty, and plenty, but by means of
this they could not receive Christ, and so lost that liberty he brought them
from Heaven. For whilst God Almighty presented them with a greater treasure
than ever the world knew before, besides, or since, so over-wise were they in
their own eyes that they despised it. Jo^. 1. 11. Now was this City the
happiest City in all the World, had she but known her own happiness, wherein it
lay, and when she was well. Happy was she in her strength of walls, and
strength of hands within those walls, happy in her wealth, and happy in her
peace, happy in her stately stree^s, but happyer in the rarest and richest
Temple that ever eyes heheld, but infinitely beyond all these, happyest in that
the ever blessed Savior of the World was come among them, and taught them in
that Temple the doctrine of peace and eternal life. Zac. 9. 9. Mat. 21. 5. etc.
9 etc. Ah, but they knew not the things that belonged unto their peace when
that day was, and therefore hence forward was it hid from their eyes: And
therefore was it foretold what the enemy should do unto them, and how the days
should come wherein one stone should not be left upon another, of all the
goodly buildings she had to be proud of. Luke 9. 41, 42, 43. chapter 21. 6. And
accordingly so it came to pass.

Forty yeary under the type of forty days, God had promised to bear the (...)
of the house of Judah. Ezekiel 4. 6. An this seemed to be fulfilled at this time:
For so many years bearing dare from the murder of Christ, unto the final
destruction of the Jews were fulfiled. In the year of Christ 32 fulfilled and
33 current was our Savior crucified, the Jews crying out to Pontius Pilat,
saying, his blood be on us, and on our children, Mat. 27. 25. And many years
after this went away these murderers, with their wiped mouths, as if they had
done no hurt. And the Apostles and other disciples of Christ were some killed,
and others imprisoned and persecuted from place to place, and yet still went
these away, no man questioning ought that they had done. But as these 40 years
began to grow on, so vengance began to draw upon this ungrateful people; and
first like a gathering cloud it hovered over head, and shed its drops round
about Jerusalem, before the City it self was washed with its bloody shower.
The first after Christ, death who felt this lowering vengance were the Jews at
Rome, who being detected in certain treacheries upon one Fulvia a noble Lady of
Rome, and complanied on to Tiberius the Emperor by S. ^arnius the Ladies
husband: All the Jews of Rome for the sake of those few faulty were banished,
slaughtered, and driven into Sardinia, to the number of many thousands, Jos.
Ant. B 18 chapter 5. Next unto these the Jews of Alexandria upon a trifling quarrel
in the days of Caius the Emp. for 3 years together were continually
persecuted, with scorns, robberies, slaughters, and exile, unto an infinite
loss both of wealth and blood. Phil. Jud. in his second B. of virtues. Jos. Ant
B. 1^. chapter 10. After this, about the beginning of Claudius the Jews at Babylon
in Caldea followed the same fate, suffering the slaughter of many thousands,
until the survivers escaped thence into Seleucia. But here too at 5 years end,
both Greeks and Syrians fell upon them at once, and (...) of them more than
50000. men, Thence fled the escaped remnant to Ctesiphon, but here (...)
Nations joined together against them, drove them away to the strong holds of
Nearda, and Nisibis. Jos. Ant. B. 18. chapter 12. After this Jerusalem began to
feel woo too, For in the days of C^manus the Govenour, by means of a quarrel
with the Sentinel at the Temple gate were 20000 men slain at the Passover
time. Next in the time of Foelix the Govenour were many quarrels and slaughters
both at Jerusalem and Cesarea, Jos. Ant B. 20. chapter 4. chapter 6. 7. 8. But as the
40 years grew nearer up, finally came Gessius Florus in the reign of Nero to be
Govenour of Jerusalem, who as if he had made it his business to pick quarrels
with them, gave himself wholly to blood and rapine. In the 21th of Nero and 6^th
of Christ, were many thousand Jews slain by this man's means at Cesarea. And a
while after the persecution following to Jerusalem, there those noble Jews who
had the honor of Roman Knighthood, yet could not escape the lash of Florus,
but by public whipping and murder many perished. But these were but beginning
of sorows* Jos. of the wars. chapter 13. 14. 15. Hence presently the wars broke
out, And as if all Nations had hated the Jews, and were glad of the
oppertunity, in all places presently they began to slaughter them: at Cesarea
the Syriaus slew 20000. Jews, and at Scythopol^^ the inhabitants slew 13000.
more of them, at As^a^on they slew 10000, at Ptol^mais 20000, at Tyrus, a great
many, and so at Gadara^ at Alexandria the old grudge revived and the Greeks and
Egyptians there slew 50000. Cestius Gallus burnt and spoiled the City Zo^^lon
(...) Gallus slew 2000 in Asamon, and C^sti^s 8000. more in Ioppa; at Damascus
were slain 10000 (...) Govenour of Askelon slew in barrle 10000 at one time,
and 8000 at another Ios. (...). B 2 chapter 16, 17, 18, etc. B. 3 ch ^. After this
came Vespotian into Gallile, and wasted the Country, took Gadara and killed
without mercy: Titus his son slew 15000 Jews at (...) took (...) and slew there
40000 men, a^. Joppa perished by shipwreck and slaughter 4200 at Tarich^a upon
the lake were slain and taken captives above 13000. men and at (...) perished
9000 more, and at Gis^ala 5000. were ^^ain and taken captives. In the 13th year
of Nero, Gadir^ was taken a second time, and 15000. Jews were slain and taken
captives there Next, at (...) perished 10000. and 1000 captives. And lastly at
(...) and thereabout followed great slaughters J^s of the war. B. 3. chapter 4. 6.
11. 12. 1^. 16. etc B. 4 chapter 1. 3, 4, 5, 6. But now a while some intermission
happening unto these slaughters by means, of (...) absence, yet great
slaughters and Opression reigned at Jerusalem by reason of seditious Tyrants
arising from among themselves, with these joined the Idumeans who slew great
numbers of the Jewish Nobility, Jos. of the ^ar B. 4. chapter 5. 6. 7. B, 5. 1. 7.
B. 6. ^. But in the first of Vespatian the Emperor and 70th o^ Christ the Jews
from all parts of the World were assembled at the feast of the Passover at
Jerusalem, at what time Titus came with his army and shut them in with a close
seidge. Now after various success, and much slaughter on both sides, on the 7th
of May, the Romans brok down the outward wall, and took the new City; on the
12th of May he took the second wall, but lost it again, but on the 15 he took
it and kept it, and with it gained all the lower City, After this followed
grievious Famine in the higher City: 600000 men were publicly burryed in the
City, besides what in private. A bushel of corn was sold for 600 crowns, and
the dung of Oxen was an excellent dish in those days. But during these
afflictions on the 5th of July the Romans took, the Fort Antonia. Then began
the women to eat their own children for hunger. And the men dropped down dead as
they walked in the streets. On the 8th of August the Temple was taken, and
fired. And then was all the lower City burnt into ashes. And lastly, on the 7th
of September was also the higher City taken and burnt. Jos. of the war. B. 6
B. 7. during this siedge were 1100000. slain, and in this War were taken 97000
captives, besides many millions that perished in silence, Thus ended this
famous City in the 38 year after Christ's death. And thus perished those cursed
Jews as they had wished, saying, his his blood be on us, and on our children.
Ten years after this some Forts still held out. But in the year 72. and 40.
ended since Christ's murder was Massada taken, and all Judea left desolate. Yet
after this, beginning to people again, they rebelled in the reign of Hadrian,
but were therefore utterly driven the Countery, and Jerusalem was rebuilt upon
Mount Ca^vary; and called Aelia, but no Jews might come there anymore.

FINIS.
In the Table of Kings fol. 76. the first Collum^e is false printed. And must
thus be corrected Jehoram and Ahoziah should begin the Collumne Athalia and
(...) should follow Ahaziah. And (...) should begin the third Column.


