THE Second and Last Collection OF THE Late London Ministers Farewell Sermons;
Preached by Dr. Seaman Dr. Bates Mr. Caryll Mr. Brooks Mr. Venning, And Mr.
Mead.


To which is added a Farewell Sermon, Preached at Dedham in Essex, by Mr.
Matthew Newcomen.

And also Mr. Lies Sermon at the conclusion of the last Morning-Exercise at
All-hallows in Lumbard-street.

Being a Summary Rehearsal of the whole Monthly-Lectures.

2 Samuel 23.1. Now these are the last words of David, the sweet singer of
Israel. LONDON, Printed in the year 1663. Price 1 s. 6 d. bound.

THE PREFACE TO THE Christian Reader:
Reader.
THe good acceptance which the former Collection of farewell Sermons (already
Published) have found among the people of God, together with the importunate
desires of many godly Persons, that were hearers of these sermons, have put us
upon recommending them unto the world, not doubting, with the blessing of God,
of the same success.

Our design in Publishing these Sermons, is not to make old fores bleed, or
foment any ones discontent concerning the laying aside of these Reverend and
Godly Ministers, nor shall we mention what great loss the Church of God has
suffered, in their being made useless, herein we must be silent and acquiess
under this sad Providence.

Much might be said, as to the excellency of these following Sermons: but we
forbear, they are of age let them speak for themselves, but thus much we are
bold to say; Here lurks no Snake under these Herbs, no poisonous Serpent, under
these fragrant Flowers, no root of error, no slip of Schism, no fruit of
disobedience, whatever some men may prejudge, concerning them; These Sermons do
breathe forth the holiness and plainness of the Preachers spirits, who were
very laborious and prosperous in the work of the Ministry, and although they be
not so Notional and Rhetorical as many may desire, yet they are substantially
profitable and fitted to the capacities of their Auditors, indeed they may well
be styled the Spiritual man's directory to the Caelestial Canaan, the names and
memories of the judicious and learned Authors of these Sermons are so precious
to us for their great worths and eminent abilities, that we cannot but rejoice
at the publication of these their labors, that are so proper and genuine, and
that these are such, we are confidently assured. If thou question the truth of
this, come and see, do but peruse them, their features will show who was their
Father, sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora ferebat. If thou seriously peruse
them, thou shall find much cause to increase thy tears in the remembrance of
those faithful Laborers that sin has deprived England of. We commend them
therefore to thy perusal and the blessing of the Lords Grace, in whom we are
thine in all Christian Service.

Farewell.
Doctor SEAMAN's Farewell SERMON.
HEB. 13.20, 21. Now the God of Peace, that brought again from the Dead our
Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the
Everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good Work to do his Will,
working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ;
to whom be glory, for ever and ever, AMEN.


THE Apostle being now upon the conclusion of this Epistle, after a very large
discovery of Jesus Christ, in all those things that belong to his Person;
concerning his Nature, as God, as Man, and concerning his Offices, especially
concercerning his Priestly; and concerning the blessings and benefits,
especially in the matter of his Sacrifice, does in this last Chapter, insist on
matters Hortatory; and, in the words, draws near to a conclusion, which
contains a Prayer, wish, or desire, which he puts up unto God, in the behalf of
them, in order to their good and benefit. Now the God of Peace that brought
again, etc.

In which words, considered by themselves, there are two things considerable.

(1) The matter of the Apostle's Prayer. (2) The grounds, which he does
insinuate for Audience.
In the things he desires, the Matter of the Prayer is laid down in the 21 v.
and is summarily and generally propounded in several expressions; yet
nevertheless so as they have their Specialities belonging to them. In the
beginning, he shows what he aims at, make you perfect, etc. In general, it
refers to their Sanctification, that they might be thoroughly sanctified, as to
their inward man, and outward Conversation, as to those things that belong to
them, in the Habits of their Minds, and external Carriage.

The grounds which the Apostle uses, by way of insinuation for Audience, are
contained in the words of the 30th verse; wherein we have a very large
Description of the Person prayed unto; The God of Peace that brought again from
the Dead our Lord Jesus, etc. He describes him under such Notes, and Marks, as
serve much for enlargement and inforcement, in the matter of his Prayer.

But here a Question may arise; Seeing Grace is the thing the Apostle
principally desires, and it is usual with holy men, both under the Old and New
Testament, (...) ^hoose out such Attributes, as suit most with their part^cular
occasions, and are most agreeable to those requests they have, Why he does not
apply himself to God, as the God of all Grace; but rather, the God of Peace?

Therein, first, the Apostle seems to make use of that same liberty, which
belongs to holy men. As there is, in the general, a liberty left to God's
People from God himself: Paul, in this place, makes use of that liberty he had,
as to the manner of Prayer; using such a description of God, as seemed good to
him at the present. But, secondly, If he be the God of Peace, it follows, he is
the God of Grace. If God has glorified himself so far among the Hebrews, as to
reconcile them to himself, by the blood of Christ, then there is no question
God will proceed further; and having provided for those things, which appertain
to their Justification, no question but he will for those things that are
necessary to their Sanctification. Therefore, the Apostle argues plainly from
Justification to Sanctification; He that justifies his People through the blood
of Christ, sanctify you by the Spirit of Christ; make you perfect to do his
Will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, etc. so desires,
we should be sanctified, on the consideration of our Justification; having
provided for Justification, by the blood of Christ, follows Sanctification by
the Spirit of Christ, 1 These. 5.23. And the very God of Peace sanctify you
wholly, etc. That God who is allayed to you the God of Peace, and has provided
for you Peace, I desire he would further provide Sanctification: for
Sanctification is nothing else, but the effect of that Grace, which is procured
for Believers, through the blood of Christ. There is no access to God, for
sanctification of our Natures, until we prevail with him for the Justification
of our Persons; and he first shows himself to be a God of Peace, by way of
Justification, before a God of Grace, by way of Sanctification. But, to proceed

First, for the description of the Person; wherein take notice of him, (1) By
one of his Attributes. (2) By one of his special Works, whereby he has
manifested that Attribute.


(1) The Attribute of God, is implied under those wo^ds that he is called the
God of Peace. The gracious God that provides for Reconciliation between himself
and sinners; that finds out ways and means to win those who are by Nature
Children of Wrath, to be the Children of God. There is no peace, but God is
Author of, Whether natural peace, or civil peace, or political peace, he is
pleased to provide for them: But there is a transcendent kind of Peace, which
does with a peculiarity belong to God's People, i. e. Spiritual Peace between
God and Sinners, and that inward peace that we enjoy, if our Conscience has
been troubled with terrors of sin, wrath, etc. Peace belongs so to God, as none
of the Creatures c^n have any glory of it, ( Psalm. 4.7.) This Peace, is God's
Peace; none can effect, or devise it, but God; and with respect to this, he is
more especially called the God of Peace; because he has found out a way to
make Reconciliation between God and his sinful perishing Creatures, 2 Cor.
5.19. Ephesians. 2.14, etc. Col. 1.13.

(2) There is a special Work of God attributed to him, that the Apostle take,
into consideration, i. e. That he [ brought again from the Dead our Lord Jesus,
that great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting
Covenant] wherein we have many words, and every word its weight; and we shall
scarce be able to weigh every one so, as to take the 'ull sense and emphasis of
them. In the words, there is, (1) Something implied. (2) Something expressed.


(1) Something implied; namely, That the Lord Jesus Christ was sometimes in the
state of Death; and that being in the state of the Dead, it was not any
ordinary power, way, or means, could ransom him: He was in the state and
condition of the Dead; he was, for a while, under the power and dominion of
Death; his Body, for the space of three days, lay in the Grave, and in that
sense, was under the dominion of Death, as all dead men are. The great Shepherd
of the sheep could not have his own life, in some sense; no interest he had in
God, by virtue of his Sonship; or any of his Offices could save him from Death,
though the Son of God, and Head of the Church; and, Christ looked upon it so
far from being below him, as he thought it necessary for him, and it was his
glory, Joh. 10.11, 12. I am the g^od Shepherd; the good Shepherd gives his
life for the sheep; but he that is an Hireling, and not the Shepherd, whose own
the sheep are not* sees the Wolf coming, and leaves the sheep, and flees,
etc. ^^elings, they have no such spirit or principle in the^ that they should
lay down their lives for the Sheep; b^^ he so much respected his Father's
glory, and good of his Flock, finding there was no way to bring them to
Salvation, As he denied himself, in all other respects, for their good; so, in
this respect, lays down his life for them. And herein the Church of God seems
to have a deadly kind of wound, to be at a deadly loss, Zach. 13.7. I will
smite the Shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered. But herein lie; the
wonderful goodness and wisdom of God, he is pleased to improve, as the life, so
the death of Christ, for the good of his Church, Luke 24.16. Ought not Christ
to have suffered these things? It was very expedient, that seeing the sheep
could not otherwise be saved, but by the Shepherd's dying, that the Shepherd
should lay down his life for the sheep; and seeing no other way, to make
Reconciliation to God, it was very expedient Christ should dye. Therefore, it is
to be taken notice of, That it does not misbecome the Head, therefore not the
Members of the Body, they must be content to lay down their lives for their
Flock, for so did the great Shepherd.

(2) Something expressed. Where, take notice, First, of the Person spoken of.
Secondly, of that which is given us to be taken notice of in particular.

(1) The Person to be taken notice of, is, Our Lord Jesus Christ. That which we
have considerable, is,

First, The Title that belongs to him in his Church; in this regard, called,
The great Shepherd of his sheep: The Shepherd of the sheep, yea, the great
Shepherd of the sheep. Whatsoever glory was (...) be communicated to any Member
of the Church, (...) was first put into the Head, before they were to be made
partaker of it. Some were to be made inferior Ranks, ( Ephesians 4.11.) But it was
not fit any should have such glory, to be called Shepherds, before he had that
honor on him. Therefore, it is the great Shepherd; he that is Shepherd not of a
particular Congregation, but of the whole Church of God, he is the Savior of
all his Body, he has the full number of all the Elect, both among the Jews and
Gentiles, committed to his charge to save.

(2) What betides this great Shepherd, through God's grace toward him, that
is, that he is brought again from the Dead, i. e. that he does attain to a
state of Resurrection. And here take notice of this by the way, for
Consolation; The great Shepherd of the sheep does dye, but the great Shepherd
of the sheep rises again. Herein argues God's love, that though he would suffer
him to dye, yet not to see Corruption, ( Psalm. 16.10.) Because he is the great
Shepherd, therefore he must dye; but because he is the Great Shepherd,
therefore he cannot continue in the state of the Dead; Death must not triumph
over the great Shepherd of the sheep, no, not by any means. As it was
necessary, that he should dye, much more, that he should rise again. We read,
Revelations the eleventh, concerning two Prophets: when they had finished their
course, they dye; and their dead bodies are cast into the Streets, etc. but we
read also of their Resurrection. There is a twofold state incident to those
(...) one estate of Dying, another estate of Rising; (...) it is not peculiar
to Christ only, but to others with him. The great Shepherd of the sheep dies;
no wonder, if the little Shepherds dye too. But the great Shepherd is raised,
so shall the little ones in their order, and in their time, (1 Peter 5.6.) When
the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a Crown of Glory that fades
not away. Resurrection is that which Christ exemplifies first in his own
Person, in order to assure all his Members, they shall attain to the same state
with him; and God is as easily able to provide, when he sees expedient, to
raise them from the Dead, as to suffer them to dye. Christ he [brought again]
by a high hand, and in a tryumphant manner; he did not with so much sorrow and
trouble to himself, and his Disciples, go to, as tryumphantly come from the
Grave: So can God, with a word, in a moment bring them to life again.

(2) By what means the great Shepherd comes to have this honor conferred upon
him, that he should be raised from the dead? There was worth enough in his
Person, but it is not altogether ascribed to this; but (through the blood of the
everlasting Covenant) i. e. by, and in, the virtue and efficacy of it: he had
dyed as a Priest, and his blood was a blood of sacrifice, and it was shed for
the remission of sins, and salvation of Souls; because Christ did dye for so
noble an end as this, and in such a manner, as that his death became a
Sacrifice, and did seal the everlasting Covenant, whereof Christ is the
Mediator: therefore with consideration of this blood of Christ, and of the
ends, uses, and benefits of it: hereupon it is Christ is raised from the dead.
In the 9th of Zach. the Resurrection of Christ was prophesied of, but by virtue
of his blood shed; so that Christ was more fit to be raised, who dyed for such
noble and honorable ends, as the glory of God, and salvation of his people, in
the virtue o^ that Covenant God had made, and in the virtue of the blood of
Christ shed for the sealing of that Covenant.

Now, what this Covenant is, is worthy to be considered, because of its
Epithets: Called here everlasting Covenant: There was a Temporal Covenant God
made with the people of Israel, and that was sealed and confirmed by the blood
of Bullocks, etc. Christ took not on him this Covenant, he did not bind men to
stand by those terms contained in that Covenant; for indeed, Christ came to
make it void. There is an Eternal Covenant, and that is nothing else but those
terms of grace and favor, which are proposed to us in the Doctrine of the
Gospel, which amounts to this, Who ever repents shall be saved: He that
repents, and forsakes his sin shall find mercy; and that he will be merciful
to all on these Conditions in all parts of the World; for these terms God will
not repent of. If men repent, they shall have the benefit of it, and whoever
believes shall be saved. It Is called [Everlasting] because God will abide by
it, both here and hereafter; the states of all shall be determined, according
to the terms of this Covenant. Now Christ shed his blood to procure those
terms contained in that Covenant; for the case of poor sinners was so
miserable, that they could never come to have all their sins pardoned, and
their Souls certainly saved, unless Christ had dyed and shed his blood, and so
to satisfy Gods Justice, that it might be free for him to be merciful, where
he would be merciful. The Covenant is founded in the blood of Jesus Christ,
that blood being the blood of the Everlasting Covenant: therefore the Apostle
so magnifies it, of all the great and Gospel-blessings that belong to the New
Testament, to the Condition of a Child of God, there is not any one like unto
this, The blood of the everlasting Covenant: they that come to this, and have
the benefit of this they shall be surely justified, and eternally saved in the
virtue of this Blood. In the business of being saved by Faith, it contributes
nothing more, but as it is an Instrument to bring us to be made partakers of the
benefit of this blood: we are saved not by the virtue of our believing, but by
the virtue of his blood; so that, it is not so much the act, as the object of
Faith, that saves. Christ rose in the virtue of his blond, and all our Comforts
and Hopes are founded in his blood. The blood of Christ was of so much value
with God, as that he will raise him from the dead, and it is of so much virtue to
us, that through it we shall have Justification, Sanctification, and Salvation.
God being so good and gracious a God to Jesus Christ and his Church; hereupon
the Apostle imboldens himsellf to desire this further manifestation of his
love, that where he has so bountifully provided for the justification of
sinners through the blood of Christ, that he would provide for their
sanctification by his Spirit. Hence observe,

(1) God is, with some singularity, the God of Peace.

(2) To the end that God might show himself to be the God of Peace, he has
provided an alsufficient Savior for his people, here called the Great Shepherd
of the flock; and God being of agracious disposition toward them, provides to
that end Christ shall take the care of them, and of all those things that
pertain to their Eternal welfare.

(3) It was expedient this Person should dye, though the Great Shepherd; Nay it
was necessary, that it might be so much more verified and manifested, that he
was the Great Shepherd of the sheep, that he should lay down his life for the
flock.

(4) It was, as necessary that Christ shoud be raised from the Dead, as that he
should dye. Therefore his Continuance was but a Temporary, nay, a Momentary
time to him. Now Christ is risen, yea, all power in Heaven and earth is
committed to him; and if he was able to do any thing for his people before,
much more now.

(5) The Resurrection of Christ does arise partly from the Tenor of the
Covenant God made with man, and partly from the virtue and benefit that was in
the blood of Christ. God put himself into a Covenant, Christ was mediator of
it, and in virtue of that Covenant, sinners must be saved; but the Savior must
first save himself, raise himself from the dead, and then has all power
committed to his hand, etc. There are two things I would have you further
observe and carry away.

(1) That Christ is indeed the only great Shepherd of the sheep. Whatsoever
others there are, they make to his own interest, whosoever there be that may
possibly indite themselves under hi^ name and notion, yet this is undeniable,
that Christ is the only Great Shepherd of the sheep: therefore in the
concernments of the Church there is none Christians should honor, as Christ;
and whose voice they ought to hear before his, or by whom they should be Ruled
and Governed but by Him. If Christ be the Great Shepherd, then the Church, must
hear his voice, for my sheep hear my voice, etc. And if He be the Great
Shepherd then the Church must be Ruled by him, for the Shepherd must have the
ordering of the flock, and the flock must be at the disposal of the Shepherd;
and then Thirdly, The flock of Christ must be careful to please him, (for fear
he set his Dog upon them) that we provok him not to exercise his Correcting
power. He has his Rod of Discpline (as well as his Staff and Crook) which is
to be performed by others as seems good to him, for he has many ways to ler
loose the Devil on his own Children. Satan had a desire to afflict Job, and
God gave way to it, etc. The Church of God, is Gods Spouse and there is a great
deal of love between the Husband and Wife, between Christ and the Church: Yet
Psalm. 4.5. this she is so solemnly charged with all. God has made Christ a
head to his Church, therefore his Church must be Ruled by Christ; and it is not
for the Church to say, The inferior shepherds would order me thus and thus, we
must in the mean while say, but What does Christ say in such cases? It is not
for the Church to go aside by the flocks of his Companions, (Cant. 1.7.) The
Companions of Christ pretend to be Shepherds of the sheep as well as he, but
have not that power Christ had: They have their Societies, and would have the
ordering of them; but the Church desires to know where she may hold Communion
with Christ, that she may not turn aside by the flocks of his compani^^ (...)
There is many Disputations amorg inferior shepherds, but this is out of all
dispute, that Christ is the Great Shepherd of the sheep. That great man at Rome
never pretended higher, than to be the Vicar of Christ, and Successor of Peter:
now we know, that the Principal is much more to be regarded than his Vicar;
therefore if Christ be the Great Shepherd, surely the sheep of Christ must hear
his voice before all other shepherds, specially since Christ has spoken so
signally in the Case, My sheep hear my voice, and they follow me; a stranger
will they not follow, for they know not the voice of strangers. And God having
so solemnly commanded ( Matthew. 17.5.) This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased, hear ye him. The Great Shepherd must be heard before all little
shepherds. The little shepherds have their division, Act. 20.29. After my
departure shall grivous Wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock, also
of your own selves shall men arise speaking perverse things, to draw away
discisples after them. True shepherds are always careful to make Disciples
for Christ, and to bring all Disciples to Christ: All John's work was to make
Disciples, to put them over to Christ, not to make disciples to himself, but to
make over all his disciples unto Christ. If any man will gather, he must gather
for Christ, not himself; others would draw men unto any matter or manner of
Doctrine, Government, etc. But our eye must be upon Christ, and our ear open to
his voice; and our Hearts awed with his will, and mind in Scripture, made known
to his Church; And they love nor Christ as they ought, that desire not to hear
his voice before any others in the world, for he is the Great Shepherd of the
sheep.

2. Though he be the Great Shepherd of the sheep, yet he dye; and though he
dye, yet because he is the Great Shepherd of the sheep he is raised again. The
great Shepherd Dies, the little Shepherds must not think much of it, if they be
called to dye: We must be contented, it be exemplified in us if occasion serve;
for, if God spared not the Great Shepherd, What have the little shepherds to
plead for themselves they should be spared? If the Case fall out, while I
labor to serve the Church as I can, I come to suffer for the Church; in the
end I do rejoice, and I will rejoice. And truly we had need to pray for such a
spirit as this: for, if this was in the Great Shepherd of the sheep, it will
very well become the little shepherds. But against the fear of death, here is
the comfort, The Great Shepherd of the sheep dies, yet is raised from the dead;
so shall the little ones; not one member of the flock, death can always
triumph over him. In this respect, Christ will have all his members to be
raised, in that he got the victory over death, for Christ arose as the First
fruits, and ascended into Heaven as a forerunner. Though we may have denial
as to the advancing of Christ's service etc. Yet the Resurrection of the dead is
that we must take into our thoughts, and, it is our solid comfort, God will one
day bring all the sheep together into one fold, and David shall be their King,
and have the Ruling and ordering of them to all Eternity. There is a
Resurrection to little shepherds: when we come to lay down our natural lives,
we can look for no other recompense for it but our Resurrection, and the
thoughts of it must be our Comfort. And oh! how does this encourage us to come
unto God, though sin be heavy upon us: Remember, there is a God of peace,
that takes to himself this name for this very end, that sinners may know, for
their incouragment, that Reconciliation is wrought out between God and them
through Jesus Christ; and if they will but come and take hold of the blood of
the everlasting Covenant, Christ has said they shall have all the blessings
and benefits promised in the Covenant of Grace, and that the blood of Christ
can procure for them; they shall have forgiveness of sins, and salvation of
Soul. Therefore, when we consider Christ has dyed to have a flock, and for
saving of the flock, and to make himself the God of peace through his blood,
this should comfort us.

It remains, we come to consider of the matter of the Prayer: this is very
full. Make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that
which is well pleasing in his sight, etc. Here we are to observe two things,
First The matter of the Apostle's desire, Secondly, The measure of it. The
matter of his desire is, that the Hebrews may be made perfect in every good
work to do the will of God, i. e. that they may be fully and thoroughly
regenerate, sanctified throughout both in soul and body, and that they may be
furnished with all graces, and enabled for every duty. Take notice of every one
of the expressions: First, Make you perfect: It Is the duty of Christians to
perfect every good work, to cleanse themselves from all the impurity of flesh
and spirit, and to perfect Holiness in the fear of the Lord, (2 Cor. 7.1.)
Secondly, In every good work, in matters of Piety, Righteousness, Charity,
Sobriety; for within these head, most of those things may be comprehended that
belong to Christians, they will go a very great way to make a perfect,
Christian, but that Christian cannot be perfect that is not sanctified in every
one of these. Thirdly, To do his will; that you may be ready, cheerfully
willing, to do his will on all occasions.

But, how is it possible flesh and blood should attain to this? that they
should be perfect to every good work? Why, says the Apostle, working in you
that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ. Working in you:
You see thereby, All our works depend on God's, and it is in vain for us to
build on any Foundation but this; for it is God that works in you, both to
will, and to do, of his good pleasure, etc. Col. 2.12. through the Faith of the
operation of God, working in you, or doing in you, or causing in you, or making
in you, that which is well-pleasing in his sight. Our work is to depend on
God's work; our outward working, depends on God's inward working.

Again, that which is acceptable in God's sight; but it is only through Jesus
Christ. Good works themselves, though never so good, agreeable to the Law and
Gospel; yet if God look not on our persons and works through Christ, they will
not serve the turn, ye cannot be accepted; working in you, that which is
well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ. Will God be pleased with
nothing, but only for Christ Jesus his sake? and if it do not please Christ,
will it not please God? It Is truly, plainly, verily, so. That which God cannot
accept of through Christ, he does not accept of at all: But now things are so
ordered, that God has put all things into Christ's hands; Christ Jesus has
the ordering of the Worship and Government of the Church, he has the making of
all the Articles of the Christian's Creed; a Christian is bound to believe
nothing, but what Christ teaches, as necessary to Salvation: so that in Christ
we are complete, if we believe, as he teaches us to believe; and if we worship
God, as he teaches us to worship God; and have such order and government
concerning his house; and walk so, as we desire in all things, to please our
Lord and Master, and have him before our eye, then are we returned unto Christ,
the Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls. But, if we present God with any kind of
Creed, Model of Worship, (...) Government, that has not Christ's Image and
Stamp upon it, God will say, as Christ, concerning the Money; Whose Image or
Superscription does it bear? If we can say, Christ's; the way of Worship, we
have learned from Christ, that Order and Government in the Church, we have
learned from Christ, then the Father and Son will own it. If it have Man's
Superscription on it, not God's, or Christ's, I cannot tell how we should
presume it can be acceptable to God, through Christ; for God has so confined
himself, he will not be pleased, but through Christ; and that all Matters of
Religion in the New Testament, should be ordered according to Christ's mind; as
the Old, according to Moses. 'This necessary, we enquire after Christ's mind,
in what we do: If we can do any thing, and in doing it, are sure it will be
acceptable to God, through Christ, well and good; otherwise, not. This is the
Apostle's Prayer, That God would make them perfect in every good work to do his
will, working in them that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus
Christ.

The Doxology; Whether we refer it to God, or Christ, it is all one; we have no
body to honor and glorify in the Church, but God, through Christ: We cannot
tell how to divide those that are so nearly united. Therefore, when we glorify
God, we glorify Christ. And this we must observe; God has ordered all man's
Concernments so, that we have nothing to plead for our Souls Salvation, but
God's Grace: the Rule is his Word, his Gospel that he has made known to us:
and therefore, Let the Word of God dwell in you richly in all wisdom. There is
a great deal of Do, in God's Church, about This and That; he that must
determine the business, is Christ, and there are but two ways; the determining
of things for the present, and for the time to come; hereafter, by questioning
the matter of fact; for the present, by making of your Rule. When the question
comes, concerning the Matter of Fact, these he receives our Rule: What has
Christ said? How has Christ provided in things of this nature? It Is plainly
so, and so; but in dubious Matter, and Customs, and the like, I know not how to
answer them, when we come to answer Christ, when he shall put the Question; Did
you not know whom you was bound to fear? Did I not speak nothing at all in the
Case, neither generally, not particularly? Could you not by any means come to
understand my mind? I doubt we shall not be able to answer this. But we must
say, we found a certain state in the Word; but having Laws and Customs among
our selves, therein were at a stand. Why (says Christ) was your Laws and
Customs above, or below, my Word? Must your Law be ruled by my Word; or my Word
by your Doctrine? Did not all Christians hold out this, that the Word of Christ
was above all Authority in the Matters of Christ? Shall the Members of the Body
become greater then the Head? Therefore, you could not be ignorant in this
Case: your own professing me to be so great, in all my Natures and Offices; but
when you come to practice, then you will deny me. Shall we be able to answer
this? We must consider of this; that if we would please God, it must be through
Christ; and then we must carry our selves, as directed by Christ Jesus in his
Word; and nothing can take us off that Principle, no pretense whatsoever; for
Christian Religion is such a thing in the nature and substance of it, as Jesus
Christ is the Author of. Therefore, if Christ be the Author all that belongs to
Christian Religion, as to its substance, we should-account nothing ^^moment in
Re^gion, but only that which we can ^^^lbe to Christ, (...) the Author of it.
The care of (...) Church is in the hand of Christ, whatsoever Providence are
let in on the Church, to exercise or try the (...), all must be bo^^ patiently;
but every Member mu^^^orship him: God has made Jesus Christ a Shepherd, etc.
In what he find^ fault, we must not justify; what he commands, we must
approve; what he calls to be done, we must practice; what is not his, we must
not own as his. Much may be drawn from this, both for Instruction and
Consolation, that Christ is the great Shepherd: Though he dye in his Members,
he shall rise in his Members: I may say; though he dye in his Ministers, he
shall rise in his Minsters, Isa. 59.21. As for me, this is my Covenant with
them, says the Lord: My Spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have
put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of
thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says the Lord, from
henceforth, and for ever. This is a part of the Covenant, that the Word and
Spirit of Christ, shall be continued among the Members, throughout all Ages:
God will provide, his Children shall not live without a Spirit, neither without
his Word; God has engaged himself for both; for the one, as well for the
other; that there shall be a super-addition, and perpetuating of them (...) and
herein we must depend upon the faithfulness of The great Shepherd of the Sheep.

Doctor BATES's Forenoon SERMON.
HEB. 13.20, 21. Now the God of Peace, that brought again from the Dead our
Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the
Everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good Work to do his Will,
working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ;
to whom be glory, for ever and ever, AMEN.


IT would give light to these words, if you confider the scope and design of
the Apostle, in this Epistle to the Hebrews: the sum of which is, He writes to
to them, that he might Antidore their Spi^ies as against A postacy from the
Doctrine of the Gospel; they were liable to this upon a double account. (1)
Partly in respect of those Persecutions to which they were exposed; for the
Jews were filled with a brutish zeal for the Ceremonies of the Levitical Law,
and expressed the greatest rancour against those, who left Moses to follow
Christ. This is the reason, why the Apostle lays down so many Preservatives
against their revolting from Religion; and he spends one part of this Epistle
in a most passionate Exhortation to perseverance, and does in the tenth Chapter
insinuate himself into them: You have already tasted the first fruits of
affliction, ver. 34. You took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing in
your selves, that you have in Heaven a better, and an enduring substance. This
is that temper that Martyrs have expressed, who have not only parted with their
goods, but with their lives, for the Gospel: When they came to the Stake, they
would not so much as shed a tear to quench those flames, wherein they should
ascend to God, as in a fiery Chatiot. You took oyfully the spotling of your
goods, knowing in your selves, that you have a better and an enduring
substance. Thus he insinuates himself, by represening what they had done, to
encourage them to perseverance; and partly he fortifies them against
Backsliding, by those terrible Judgments, which he threatened against
Revolters, as you may read, Chap. 6. and 7. (2) As they were liable to this
Apostasy, upon the account of Persecution, so upon the account of the
unsettledness, and instability of their own spirits. There were several (...)
those, who had given up their names to Christ, who di^^ compare the Ceremonies
of the Law, with the purity of the Gospel. Now the Apostle, to secure them from
this mixture, his great design is to represent the vanity and infectiveness of
all the Ceremonial Law, and to ^^press and prove the virtue and efficacy of the
Lord ^^sus his death, which was the substance of all the shadows. And this
takes up one great part of his discourse with them.

Now in these two Verses he sums up, by way of Recapitulation, all that which
he had discoursed of at large; and in them you may observe these two thing: (1)
A Description of God, to whom he addresses this Prayer. (2) The Substance of
the Prayer it self.


The Description of God, that he amplifies by these two things:

(1) From the Attributes and Qualities of God, (if I may so express it) Now
(says he) the God of Peace.

(2) From the effects of his power and love, That brought again from the Dead
our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep. And these Titles, they are
not here set down to adorn his Discourse, merely as an Ornament, but they have
all a peculiar efficacy, as to the obtaining of the request, which here he
makes for them.

I shall be^^ with the first, the Description of God, from that Attribute. (
Now the God of Peace) The Title that is used in the Old Testament frequently is
this, [ The Lord of Hosts] but in the New, he is called, The God of Peace.
There were darker Representations of the mercy and love of God then, the more
full discoveries of his grace were reserve^ ^ll the coming of Christ: Their
Discoveries under the: Old Testament were but as the Day Star, whsch ushered in
the Sun of Righteousness. Now this Title of the God of Peace imparts two things.

(1) That he is the Author of Peace, and works it. (2) That he loves and
desights in Peace.
First, That he is the Author of it: And if you consider Peace in all i^s
notions and kinds, it is a fruit of God, and that which descends from him.

First, Peace in Nature, is the Harmony that is between all the parts of the
World, the union that is between the dis-agreeing Elements, this is from God;
for without him, the whole Creation would presently disband, and return to its
first Chaos of confusion.

Secondly, Civil Peace, which is among the Societies of men; that which is so
amiable and lovely, and which needs no other foil to commend it, and set off
its luster, than the miseries of War; this Peace comes from God also: When
there is a subjection to just Laws, this is from God. Every rash hand is able
to make a wound, or cast a firebrand; but it is only the God of Peace that is
able to heal breaches, to allay those storms that are in a Nation. You know,
those showers which render the Earth fruitful, descend from Heaven, from God;
so all the counsels of Peace descend from above: The fiery Exhalations ascend
from the Earth Counsels of War and Disturbance proceed from the ^^vilish hearts
of men.

Or, thirdly, If you consider, that Rational Peace, which is in the spirits of
men, i. e. when the Understanding exercises a coercion and restraint over our
licentious Appetites, when all our inferior Faculties are under the Empire and
Conduct of Reason; this proceeds also from God: For, since the Fall, there is a
great deal of Tumult, many Ryots and Disorders in the Soul of a man. Reason
hates a bad Guide; and our Appetito^, those are evil Instruments, and do many
times hurry Reason from its regular actings.

But, fourthly, much more, if you consider Spiritu^^ Peace, that Peace does not
only import an agreemen^ of a man within himself, but the agreement of the
So^^ with God. This is the fruit of the Spirit; and it I only God that is able
to convey this peace to us. And upon a particular account this Title is given
to him, by way of eminency and propriety; as,

(1) He is alone able to allow and dispense this peace to us; for, all our sins
are injuries committed against him, against his Crown and Dignity; all the
Arrests of Conscience are made in the name of God, and therefore it is only He
that can speak peace. As in the Civil State, it is an Act of Supremacy to give
a pardon; only he that can condemn is able to speak a pardon; so, it is that
God that is our Judge, provoked and incensed by us, he that has a judicial
power to cast body and soul into hellfire, is alone able to speak peace, and
pass a Pardon for us in the Court of Heaven: and this is experienced by a
wounded spirit; it is just with such a person as it is with a Malefactor, who
stands condemned at the Bar; he cannot receive encouragement from any of his
Spectators till the Judge speak peace to him: So, if an Angel from Heaven
should come and speak to a wounded Spirit. It were impossible, unless God did
order, command and dispense it, that the Spirit should receive any peace,
because our sins are immediately committed against him.

(2) He is alone able to reveal and discover it. There is nothing harder in the
world, than to calm and quiet a disturbed conscience; it must be the same power
that makes light to spring out of darkness, that must cause a cheerful
serenity in a dark and disconsolate soul. I know, there is nothing more easy
than that false peace which is so universal in the world; for the most amongst
us cheat themselves with presumption, instead of peace with God, and security
in stead of peace with conscience: but that peace which is solid and true can
only be revealed by God himself. We have an instance of this in David ( Psalm.
51.) although Nathan had told him from God, Thy sin is pardoned; ye^
notwithstanding he faith, Mark thou me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones
which thou have broken may rejoice. He still addresses himself to God, that he
would cause him to hear the voice of pardon and reconciliation, for his soul
could not be quiet by the voice of the Prophet. There is so much infidelity in
the soul of man, that when he comes to take a view of his sins in all their
bloody aggravations, only the Spirit of God himself is able to allay the
terrots of the conscience: And this he does by an overpowering light, when he
does in an imperative and commanding manner silence all the doubts of the
soul, and establish it in peace with God. Certainly, he that shall but
consider the terrors, the faintings, the palenesse of a wounded conscience,
when you shall see a person dis-relish all the things of the world upon this
account, ^^^ring lest God is his enemy; when all discourses that ^^e addressed
to him are ineffectual, and but like wat^^ cloth to a dead carcass, cannot
inspire any heat into him. Oh! this shows, only God is able to reveal peace.
So, Job If he hide his face, who is able to be at peace? There needs no other
fury to complete the misery of a man, than his own accusing conscience.
Conscience is a verier devil than the devil himself, and able more to torment
and lash the creature. Therefore if that be once awakened, it is only God, to
whose tribunal conscience is liable, which is able to speak peace to the soul.
Now you see in what respect this Title, [The God of peace] is attributed to
him, as he is the Author and worker of it.

2. As he loves and delights in peace. This is that which is so pleasing to
him, that he adopts those into the line of Heaven, who are Peacemakers, for
they shall, be called the Children of God, Matthew. 5.6. This characterizes
persons to be his children, to be allied to him. God he only delights in
reflection of his own Image; for those things that we admire in the world, and
delight in, do not affect his heart: He delights not in the strength of the
horse; he takes not pleasure in the legs of a man. The Lord takes pleasure in
them that fear him, in those that hope in his mercy. Nothing attracts his eye
and heart, but his own similitude and resemblance; and therefore, where he sees
peaceable dispositions, this is that which indeers the soul to him, and makes
it amiable in his eyes. You may judge of his delight in peace by this it is
that grace, which in an especial manner prepares us for communion with him;
for, we can never really honor nor enjoy him, unless we bring to him those
dispositions, which (if I may so speak) are in himself. And therefore it is no
wonder, that those have little peace of conscience, who make so little
conscience of peace. You know, when God appeared to Eliah, he did not appear in
the Storm, nor in the Fire, but in the small still voice, and when Elisha was
transported with anger, he was fain to allay that passion by Music, that so he
might be prepared for the holy motions of the Spirit; he called for an
instrument, and then the Spirit moved in him. I bring it for this end, to show,
how God delights in peace, and he will only maintain communion with those that
are of calm and peaceable spirits. So much way as we give rash anger, so much
proportionably do we let in the Devil, and cast ou^ the God of peace.

Now, the reason why this Title is given to God, is upon a double account;
partly, with respect to the Blood of the everlasting Covenant, which made peace
between God and us; partly, with respect to the Covenant it self, which is
founded in that Blood.

(1) In respect of the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant. For, it was the blood
of Christ that has sprinkled Gods Throne, and made peace in heaven. You shall
read therefore, when Christ came into the world, '^is said ( Luke 2.14.) that
the heavenly Host appeared and sang, Glory to God in the highest, on earth
peace, etc. Since the Fall, God and man are enemies, there is a reciprocal
enmity between God and Man: God hates the Creature as it is unholy, and man
hates God as he is just, the avenger of sin, the author of the Law: Now, Christ
was the Umpire that composed this difference, he was God and Man in one person,
and so being allied to both, he was a fit person to reconcile both. He was (as
Job speaks) a Dayes-man between us. He has paid every farthing that was due:
for he did not compound with God, but paid the utmost that was due to him. He
it is that has reconciled us to God by the power of his Spirit, in ch^nging
and renewing our natures and creating in us those difpositions which are like
to God; so than his Blond is the foundation of this peace. And how, God appears
to us, not as a consuming fire, but as a refreshing light, full of calmness,
serenity and peace toward us. Christ he brought more honor to God by his
obedience, than we brought dishonor by our transgression; and therefore
without any injury to God; he might be at peace with us. You know, all our
sins were but the acts of finite creatures, and only infinite in regard of the
Object against whom they were c^mmited But the Blood of Christ was of infinite
value, in regard of the Subject; for, he was God, and the enriching Union of
the Deity conveyed such v^lue and worth to his Blood, that he was able to
appease God, and not only to free us from condemnation, but to make us the
favorites of God. We are not only pardoned, but preferr^d, upon the account of
his Blood.

(2) He is the God of peace, as with respect to the Blood of Christ, which is
the purchase of peace, so with respect to the Covenant which is made between
God and us (through the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant) There are three
sorts of Covenants amongst men, some are Covenants of Friendship and Amity,
some are Covenants of Trade and Commerce, and some are Covenants of Assistance
and Help. Now all these qualifications meet in this Covenant, which is made
between God and Believers. It is a Covenant of Peace and Friendship; for now we
stand upon terms of amity with God; Those who were strangers and enemies, are
now reconciled. And there is between God and us perfect peace, there is a
League (as the Scripture speaks) between God and the Creature. It is a Covenant
of Trade, there is now a way opened to Heaven; we may now ascend to God in
duties of holiness, and God descend to us by the excitations of his grace; and
influences of joy. And it is a Covenant of Assistance; for he promises not only
to give us the reward of the Covenant, but to secure unto us the Condition; he
promises to enable us to discharge the conditions of Faith and Repentance, Now
upon this account, of that Covenant which is founded in the Blood of Christ, he
is the God of peace to his people.

USE 1.
Is by way of Conviction. This may discover to us how distant their temper is
from God, who are enemies to peace: We un-man our selves, we unchristian our
selves, so far as we are opposi^e to this blessed temper of peace. Certainly,
as disturbed Water cannot make any reflection unto us of that face that looks
into it; so when our Spirits are disturbed by Animosities, Exasperations,
Heats, and Divisions, it is impossible for us to see the Image of God, as he is
the God of Peace. And certainly, there is no more doleful consideration in the
World than this, That Man whom God made a sociable Creature, who has all the
engagements and endearments laid upon him, which may cause him to live in peace
and gentleness toward those who are of the same nature with him; yet, that in
fierceness, our heats should exceed those of the most savage Creatures. Man
comes into the World naked, and altogether unarmed, as if he were designed for
the Picture of Peace: but could you look into the hearts of men, you would find
there such Tumults, Divisions, such Seeds of Enmity against their
Fellow Creatures, that Tigres and Lions are calm and peaceable, in comparison
of them. Now, how is this distant from the temper of the God of Peace? It Is
very strange to consider, that when Promises are made to bury all differences,
as Rubbish under the Foundation, that nevertheless, the great work of many
persons should be, only to revive those former Animosities, to make those
exasperations fresh and keen upon their own spirits: but is this to imitate the
God of Peace? These, to promote Divisions and Disturbances amongst us, cloth
their enemies with the Livery of shame and reproach, that so they may be baited
by their fury; that make it their Design to represent that party, which they
think is dissonant from them, with the most odious appearances, (you know this
is the old Art) and those showers of Calumnies, which are in the World, they
usually precede the Storm of Persecution. The Devil was first a Liar, and then
a Murderer; and those who are of his Seed, they follow his Art. In the
Prsmitive Times, all the Persecutions of the Heathens, arose from the
reproaches of Christians; so it is now. It is an easy thing to blast the name
of those Persons, who are designed for ruin. But if the contending Parties
would consider, [if I may call one Party contending, which is only liable to
Penalties, and is resolved to bear them patiently] how unlike this is to that
God of Peace, methinks it should allay the rancour that is in men's spirits, and
make an atonement between all the differences that is amongst them.

(2) If only Peace come from God, you may from hence take a trial of that
Peace that is within you, (for hitherto I have been only discoursing of Civil
Peace) whether it be the effect of this God of Peace. I know nothing more
common in the World, than Presumption; there is a false Peace, which does not
arise from the knowledge of a man's happiness, but from the ignorance of his
misery: Peace, which is only like a Torch to shine in the night, or like
Players, that glitter only by Torchlight; so is the false Peace men cherish in
their bosom, merely upon this account, because they do not bring their souls to
the light of the Word, they never had it from this God of Peace; Because,

(1) God never speaks Peace to a Soul, but in the way of holiness and
obedience: And therefore, you shall find it is the counsel of the Scripture,
Acquaint thy self with God and be at peace. Our Peace is found in the way of
duty: and there are none, who are more blessed with the Peace of Conscience,
than those, who with the greatest fervor, frequency, and delight, maintain
communion with God in holy Duties: For, as friendship among men is cherished
and preserved by visits and conversations; so, our Peace with God is preserved
by those visits we make to Heaven in prayer.

(2) That Peace that comes from God, always causes in us a war with sin; for
God's Covenant with us is Offensive and Defensive; and therefore it is
impossible any person should have true and solid Peace, that waking tranquillity
of Soul, which is the reward of holiness and obedience, who entertains sin; for
every sin thou do wilfully commit, it is an act of hostility against God, it is
that which makes him thy Enemy, and makes thee an Enemy to him. As Jehu said,
What Peace, so long as the Whoredoms of thy Mother Jezebel, and her Witchcrafts
are so many? So, What Peace can there be, so long as thou do indulge thy self
in sin, and make it thy business, to gratify thy outward senses, though it be
to the displeasure of God? It Is the greatest mercy in the World, to rob such
persons of their Peace, and to discover to them their danger; they are only
capable of true peace, by the knowledge of that which is false. Therefore,
bring your selves to this Trial, Whether, or no, does that peace, which now you
please your selves in, cause in you an eternal hatred of sin? Does it set you
at a distance from your most beloved Lusts? Then it is that Peace that springs
from God. The greatest part of the World are in a state of War with God, though
they do not feel the effects of that War. True indeed, God does not always draw
the Sword, either of Famine, Pestilence, or War, against a Nation; and yet they
may be acting in a most hostile way against God: So, for a person; God may not
blast thy estate, or send Diseases upon thy person, or raise a Tumult in thy
Conscience, and make a Conspiracy of thy Thoughts and Passions against thy
Peace: Thou may be quiet within, and yet have war with God; because, as in
the world, there may be a Truce, when there is no Peace, the War may still
continue, tho there be a Truces between 2 Princes. Or rather, there is not a
Truce between God and sinner; but, as a Town that is besieged for many days,
may not feel the Battery of their Enemy, because he is undermining them, to
blow them up at once; so God does not many times make his Battery against
sinners, but he is undermining them; and the Fall, at the last, will be
dreadful, if there be not a composition.

[Vse 2.]
By way of Exhortation; Let me press you all to follow Peace; it is a Duty,
which the Gospel enjoins with the greatest vehemence, with the greatest force
of words and expressions. The Apostle, when he is to seal up his affections to
them, he does it with that Prayer, (2 Thessalonians. 3.16.) Now the God of Peace
himself, give you Peace always, by all means: What strange expressions! First,
he gives you here the Title of the God of Peace; and then he says, [Himself]
The God of Peace himself. There Is a great deal of force in that word; Peace is
so excellent a blessing, and there is such an abhorrency in our corrupt nature
to it, that it is only the Lord himself that is able to effect it: As if the
Apostle had said, The Lord must bow the Heavens, he must come down himself to
create Peace among you; and, to express the greater vehemence of his desire, he
says, Give you peace always, by all means. So another Scripture, Pursue Peace,
Follow Peace with all men; a word, that imports our pursuit after it, though it
run from us. This is the strain and tenor of the Gospel, and this becomes you
as Christians. When Christ came to purchase our Peace, he came as a Lamb, an
innocent and meek Creature, Behold the Lamb of God. When the Holy Spirit
descended, to seal the privilege of Peace to us, he descended in the form of a
Dove; a gaul-less Creature, in whom there is no rancour nor bitterness. What a
strong engagement should this be upon all of us, to pursue and promote Peace?
And for your encouragement, consider,

First, That in the times of the Gospel, all the Promises, do, as it were,
empty themselves into this blessing, the blessing of Peace. Thus Isa. 11.6. you
shall find there a gracious Promise, respecting the times of the Gospel, The
Wolf also shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the
Kid, and the Calf, and the young Lion, and the Fatling together, and a little
Child shall lead them: and the Cow and the Bear shall feed; their young Ones
shall lie down together, and the Lion shall eat straw like the Ox. That which
I observe from thence is this, that God here promises to cause an universal
Peace and Unity under the Gospel, though it be as difficult as to persuade the
most disagreeing Natures to a peaceable cohabitation. For here the Scripture
instances in those Creatures, between which there is the most natural, and
therefore the most fierce Animosities. The Lord will reconcile men, though
their differences he never so great. What is too hard for the God of Peace to
effect? Is not God of infinite power, of infinite love? then it should quicken
us to pursue Peace.

(1) By Prayer to him, because he is able to effect it: Certainly, that God
that was able to bring Order into the World, when it was a mere lump and mass
of Confusion, is able to bring peace, and to unite our spirits. And it is
observable, the greater our differences and divisions are, the more will the
power of the God appear in reconciling them. It Is said in the Psalms, That
God's Throne is in darkness, i. e. His ways of Providence are very difficult
for us to trace and find out ^ and therefore when our Divisions are at the
highest, he is able, by one word, to allay the storm. This should encourage us
in Prayer. This is the course of God to glorify himself, by putting a stop to
the greatest Troubles, when nearest to us, and to work out one contrary by
another. To give you some Instances, that so we may encourage our Faith, and
quicken our Prayer to God for this blessing. Consider how still God has made
difficulties the way for enjoyment; for instance, The Promises that Sarah
should be the Mother of a Child; but he made way for that by her dead Womb: for
all that numerous Progeny, which like the Stars of the Sky descended from her.
That he first maimed Jacob, and then gave him the blessing. He brought Joseph
from the Prison, to a Princely Palace. First, David was harassed with Troubles,
and then his head was decked with the Imperial Crown. So if you look into the
Kingdom of Christ, who would have thought that a few Fishermen should have
advanced the Empire of Christ in the World: had you lived to have seen those
despicable beginnings, when a few unlearned men were the Heralds and Preachers
of Christ, how would this have caused you to fail and sink in your Spirits? and
yet the Gospel has been preached in all the parts of the World, and that by a
few Fishermen. The Providence of God, are like those plated Pictures, if you
look one way upon them, there is the appearance of a Serpent; if you look on
the other side, there is the appearance of an Angel. So here, many times God is
pleased to suffer exasperations to go very high, that so his power may appear
more eminent in the composure of them. He it is that enables the Faith of his
people, to draw Water out of the Rock, when the Fountain is dry: that makes
meat to come out of the Eater, (as in Sampson's Riddle) that is able to bring a
peaceable harmony, out of devouring differences: and therefore it should
quicken our Prayers to him.

Secondly, To make us more serious in our endeavors after peace. Consider,
what a dishonor it is to the Gospel; that those that profess themselves Sons
of the same God, Members of the same Christ, Temples of the same Spirit, should
be at deadly jars one with another. It is strange and unnatural, that Lillies
should prove Thorns to one another: that those who are Saints in pretense,
should be Devils in practice to one another: that God's Diamonds should cut one
another; this is very strange, yet thus it is. But how especially, it is most
sad, when Religion, which should restrain and bridle our Passions, is made
fuel and insentives of them: How for distant is it from the counsel of the
Apostle, Romans 14.10. where he speaks concerning their lesser differences, One
values one day above another, another esteems every day alike; what is his
counsel? He speaks as a person that was filled with bowels and compassion: Oh,
says he, let not him that does not esteem the day, judge him that does; For we
shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ; there we shall appear all
upon a Level, stand upon equal ground, and receive our final doom from him:
This therefore should calm our Spirits. Why may there not be some differences
in Judgment, without division in Affection; for it is as impossible, that all
Judgments should be of the same extent, as all our faces to be of the same
color and figure. Therefore consider, what an injury it is to our Profession,
how does it obscure the glory of God, and luster of our Religion?

Thirdly, Does not the public Enemy rejoice over us, I mean the Papists? Do
they not warm themselves at the sparks of our Divisions? for you know the old
Maxim of Divide and Reign: Therefore it should compose our spirits, and quicken
us to labor after Union. Vnmortifi'd Lusts are thence, whence all Wars and
Enmities springs in the World. The Apostle Paul, when he would compose their
differences, he does not lay down Rules to decide their Controversies, but
corrects their secret Passions, Pride, Self-seeking, Revenge, etc. this being
the Seed of all Disturbances in the Church: And although these Lusts may not be
conspicuous and visible to the eyes of men, yet they are certainly the Fuel of
our Distempers.

The sum of all is this; Those that have the Spirit of God, they cannot but
mourn, and be sensible of these Divisions. I know, a great part among us are
unconcerned: some rejoice, those that are rather buried in the Affairs of the
World, and encumbered with much business, or those that are steeped in the
pleasures of sense, are altogether unaffected with these things, and stand as
Neuters, dis-regarding all events: But the Saints of God cannot but mourn over
them, when our Divisions hinder the progress of the Gospel, and are serviceable
to nothing, but to the Kingdom of Darkness. Therefore, I beseech you, let what
has been spoken, quicken you in your Prayers to God, to pray for the peace of
Jerusalem, (that is the least effect of our love and desires after Peace) and by
all endeavors, to labor to bring back Peace to us, that we may see that
Prophecy fulfilled in our time, that the Lord shall be one, and his Name one
amongst us.

Doctor BATES His Afternoon SERMON.
Heb. 13.20, 21. Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord
Jesus, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting
Covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you
that which is wel-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ: To whom be glory
for ever and ever, Amen.


THe Apostle describes God by the effects of his power and love, [That brought
again from the dead our Lord Jesus.] The Resurrection of Christ from the dead,
is one of the most transcendent testimonies of God's love and power toward us.

(1) Of his Love; because as the Anger of God was that which crucified our
Savior, so on the contrary, it must be his Love that should raise and restore
him. Christ when he died, he looked upon God as an Enemy, as a Judge, and as
those Colors which we see conveyed to us, are unanswerable to the Medium,
through which we see them; as, if we look through a colored Gloss, we see the
object of that color: So the Lord Jesus, when he was upon the Cross, looked
upon God through the black cloud of our sins, and through the red cloud of his
Father's wrath, and so died as a sacrifice to Divine Justice. But when he was
raised from the Grave, that was the restimony of God's love to him, and of his
love to us; for he died as our Surety, he was arrested for our debt, he was
cast into the Grave as into a Prison: But by his Resurrection he was redeemed
from Prison and Judgment. And therefore you shall find, when Christ was risen,
he salutes his Disciples with this, Peace be unto you, ( Luk 24.31.) There was
the dawning of peace at the Incarnation of Christ, for then the Angels sung,
Peace upon Earth; but the complete Sunshine of peace was at his Resurrection,
when he had made full and complete satisfaction to God's Justice; for this was
a clearing of him before all the World, when God raised him from the grave. And
in this respect, it was very agreeable for the Apostle to say, The God of
Peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus.

(2) It was the effect of Infinite Power. You know, it is naturally impossible
for a dead body to quicken it self, to revive; but for the Lord Jesus, who had
the load of the sins of all the Elect upon him, who was, as it were, secured in
the grave by God's Justice and Power, for him to rise again: This must be an
effect of Infinite Power in the great God. This raising of Christ, sometimes
it is attributed to the Son, being God equal with the Father; but here it is
attributed to God: And therefore, when the Scripture would speak with the
greatest magnificence of the Power of God, it expresses it thus, That Power
which raised Jesus Christ from the dead. When Christ wrought deliverance for
the lost world, (all those who were committed to his charge.) This could be no
less than the work of an Infinite Power. And upon this account also, it is very
proportionable to the design of the Apostle; for that Prayer he makes to God is
for that, which only can be accomplished by Infinite Love, and infinite Power,
i.e. to make the Christian Hebrews perfect in every good work to do his will.

I come to a further description. He that brought again from the dead [our Lord
Jesus.] The Title of the Lord Jesus was only given to our Savior after his
Resurrection; he was called Lord before, and Jesus before; but these two Titles
were never united till after his Resurrection; They came to see the place where
the Body of the Lord Jesus lay; the reason was this, Because the Resurrection
of Christ was a solemn Proclamation to the world, that Christ was the Son of
God; it is true, this Title was iven him immediately upon the Conception, but it
was never completely declared to the world, till after his Resurrection; for
before, Christ was a Prince in disguise, the beams of his Divinity was abated
by the vail of his Humanity; but then he was declared by power to be the Son of
God.

It follows. [That great Shepherd of the Sheep.] For the opening of this, (1)
We will consider this Title of Christ. (2) The person for whom this Title
relates.


First, This Title, [The great Shepherd.] It Is a wonderful condescension in
Christ, that he will take upon him the Title of a Shepherd, that which rather
expresses Love and Care, than Power and Dominion; yet he is pleased to assume
this Title to express his affection to us. For the opening of it, wherein he
appears to be the great Shepherd, I shall lay down these particulars.

(1) He is great in the Dignity of his Person; for he that is Lord of Angels,
is become the Shepherd of the sheep; and the humiliation of his Person in this
respect, is the exaltation of his Office: It is looked upon in the World, as a
mean and low employment, to have the care and inspection of a Flock; but now
herein appears the love of Christ, he was pleased to become our Shepherd, that
so he might secure and bring us to the Fold of Heaven, and there make us to
feed upon those Pastures, and to drink of those Rivers of pleasure which flow
from the presence of God.

(2) In the derivation of his Authority; that Authority which is communicated
to him, whereby he is our Shepherd, and that is originally from God himself;
it is not by any mediate deputation, but from God himself. He is our Shepherd,
and has a Title to his Flock upon a double account: (1) They are committed to
him as his Charge and custody, ( Joh. 6.37, etc.) All the Elect of the World
were given by God the Father to Christ, not by way of Alienation, but by way of
Opigneration, as so many pledges which he was to bring to grace and glory; and
this Charge he does most fully execute, for there is none missing of those
committed to him. (2) They are given to him by way of Reward and Recompense,
for all his Blood and Sufferings, ( Isa. 53.10.) The Lord Jesus put such a
value on souls, that he purchased an Interest in them by his own Blood; and he
thinks himself exceedingly recompensed for all his Pains on the Cross, Agonies
in the Garden, Temptations in the Wilderness, etc. if Souls will submit to his
care. And here observe the course of Heaven, God would endear Souls to Christ
upon all reasons, by virtue of his command, and that charge he gives to them,
and by virtue of his own purchase.

(3) If you consider the extent of his care and affection, for all the Saints
of the world, those who are dispersed in all places, in all Ages, they are all
his Flock; and therefore it is the Royalty of his Administration, ( Joh. 10.16.)
There shall be one Fold, and one Shepherd. As Christ is the only Catholic
King, so he is the only Universal Bishop; for all other Shepherds have but
particular portions of his Flock committed to their charge; and they should be
such portions as they have regard to, and are under their inspection. And at
the last day, all his sheep shall congregate together, and stand at his right
hand. All the Saints of God that are now scattered, as so many Stars in the
Firmament, shall be united in one Constellation, when they shall appear in
glory before him.

(4) In respect of his endowments and qualifications, which fit him for the
discharge of his Office. And

(1) Take notice of his affection and love to us, and that is the wonder of
Heaven and Earth, Christ laid down his life for his sheep, ( Joh. 10, 11.) This
is strange, that Christ should be a sheep for the slaughter, that he might
become our Shepherd; that he should be a Sacrifice, before he could take this
office upon him: Other Sheep lay down their lives for the Shephe^rd, but Christ
laid down his life for the Sheep. So great was his love, that it brought him
from Heaven to seek and find those that were lost; he left a Palace to come to
a Wilderness; a Throne of Heaven, to come to a Fold here upon Earth. We read of
David, that he exchanged a Sheep-hook for a Scepter; but Christ quite contrary,
he changed a Scepter for the Rod and Staff of a Shepherd. It was said by one,
There is nothing so conspicuous in Christ, as the prodigality of his love to
us. Oh! do but consider how great love that was, that should make him to die
for us, that he might bring us home to his Fold. We were all of us like erring
Sheep, who had strayed from him, and fell to the Lord of the soil, as strange
Cattle: we were gotten into the possession of the god of this World; the Lord
Christ would buy us off from thence: though we forfeited our right in him, yet
he would not lose his right in us; but he laid down his life, that he might
reduce us to his Fold; that of Wolves, he might make us Lambs, and fit us for
the comforts of his presence.

(2) In respect of his exact dil^gence and inspection over them: When but one
sheep went astray from his Fold, we read, he left the ninety and nine, and went
and sought for that One, Luke 15. where we have that Parable, to express the
diligence and watchfulness of Christ over his sheep. There is no person, be he
never so mean, never so obscure, though lost in the number and account of the
world, if he be one of Christ's sheep, he is always under his inspection and
watchfulness. We read of the High Priest, that he carried the names of the
Tribes upon his Breast Plate, the Lord Christ carries the names of all his
sheep in his Heart; therefore, Rev. 13. speaking concerning the Saints, all
that dwell upon earth, whose names are writ in the Book of Life. His diligence
and care is so exact, that he has all their names writ in his Book: He that
tells the Stars, counts their hairs, and always exercises the most watchful
providence over them for good. You know sheep are either liable to rage, or
erring and wandering: Christ's diligence is such, that he protects them from the
rage of Satan, reduces them from all their wandering, and brings them home to
himself.

(3) In making proportionable all their services and sufferings to those
degrees of strength which he gives to them, Isa. 40.11. He shall feed his flock
like a shepherd, he shall gather the lambs with his arms, and carry them in his
bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young. Christ always makes a
proportion between the services, sufferings and strength he calls them to. He
it is that with that tenderness speaks to Peter, Peter love thou me? feed my
Lambs. He has provided for them the most ample and most satisfying
nourishment, the Ordinances of the Gospel, the Word, the Promises, which are
the Breasts of Consolation; these are all provided by him for his People. And
in this respect he is the great Shepherd, for he does not only allow them
means, but blesses the means to them: he is able to enlighten the dark mind,
and he can make pliable the stubborn will, and he can spirituallize drossie
affections, which all other shepherds in the world are not able to effect.

(4) He is the great Shepherd, if you consider his power to preserve them from
danger; not only those dangers which respect Satan, (for that fell under his
care before) but those diseases to which they are liable, which threaten ruin:
Other Shepherds possibly may cure diseases, but not defend them from danger.
Christ it is tha^ gives eternal life to his sheep, he begins the life of
holiness, which though at present is but as a spark in the Sea, yet he keeps it
alive till it shall break forth into a triumphant flame. That life that is
encompassed with so many enemies, and liable to so many weaknesses, the Lord
Jesus will bring forth judgment to victory, and will make them to be powerful
over spiritual and eternal enemies.

The sum is this: The Lord Christ is so perfect a Shepherd, so complete, as to
all the qualifications of that office, that the Prophet David breaks forth into
exaltation, ( Psalm. 23.) The Lord is my Shepherd, etc. and then afterward
expresses all those provisions which are made for him by God as a Shepherd, He
makes me to lie down in green Pastures, he leads me beside the still waters.
So that you see, Christ, whether for diligence, love, tenderness, for
preserving us from danger, for securing us to life eternal, he is only the
great Shepherd; he is the God of shepherds, as well as the God of sheep, and
all other shepherds are but inferior to him, and must be accountable to him
for the souls of his sheep, which are more valuable than all the world.

It follows, The great Shepherd [of the sheep.] I shall not spend any time in
making any resemblance between the people of God and ths sheep: only,

(1) They are sheep in respect of their Innocence. You know of all creatures,
the sheep are unarmed; other creatures, either they are armed with strength, or
skin, or swiftness, to guard themselves, and offend others; but the sheep has
neither the strength of the Lion, the craft of the Fox, swiftness of the Deer,
and of all creatures is most weak, inoffensive, and most liable to dangers and
injuries. Of all persons, Gods people are most liable to danger, and when out
of Christ's protection, the weakest persons in the world.

(2) In respect of their Meekness. A sheep is an emblem of meekness, that is
their temper, and therein they imitate Christ, who has propounded himself to
be their pattern, Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly; both these qualities
are expressed by the Prophet, ( Isa. 11.) where speaking concerning the times of
the Gospel, says, The Lamb shall lie down with the Wolf: now, where the
Prophet expresses their safety, there he expresses their innocence and
meekness. This is the reason why the Prophet says, For thy sake we are killed
all the day long, we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter: because of all
Creatures, most liable to injuries, that which does least resent them. And,
where ever the Grace of Christ comes, it sweetens the most cruel nature, and
polishes the most rough disposition, and makes them to be like Christ, meek and
lowly.

(3) In regard of their profitableness; for of all Creatures, they are most
profitable; the food, as to their flesh; the cloth, as to their fleece. And the
people of God, however they are exposed to the contempts and injuries of the
World, they are the most profitable; for, were it not for them, the whole frame
of Nature would fall into pieces, the Stars would fall like leaves in Autumn,
and all the Elements would fall into confusion: we see it by one Lot, who kept
showers of fire and brimstone from falling on Sodom, till he was got out of it.
And it is the people of God, for whom this frame of Nature is continued; and
when they are brought into the Fold of Christ, the Justice of God will have a
solemn triumph over all the World.

(4) As they are liable to wandering: Sheep are wandering Creatures, and when
strayed, not able to reduce themselves. And, in this respect, the people of God
are sheep, they have a thousand allurements to draw them from the ways of God;
and if God should not guide them by his eye, it is impossible they should go in
the way that leads to Heaven. Therefore David says, I have gone astray like a
lost sheep, seek thy servant, Psalm. 119.176. This shall suffice to make the
Parallel and Resemblance of the people of God and Sheep.

The second Argument is this, That he has designed Christ to be the Shepherd
of the Church, The great Shepherd of the sheep; this is another Argument and
Evidence, that he is reconciled to us, and that he is the God of Peace: For
when God gave Christ to be our Sacrifice, and raised him up to be our Shepherd,
these are the most clear testimonies of his love: For, although Christ now sits
in Heaven, and all the Angels of God worship him; yer he does not disdain to
exercise the same care, and to express the same love to his people, that he did
when he was upon Earth. All the Offices of Christ express God's love to us; for
he feeds us as a Prophet, dyed for us as a Priest, governs and defends us as he
is King; and all these meet together in this Title, feeding of us, dying for
us, defending of us; as he was God, he loved us; as he was Man, he dyed for us.
This does express the effects of his two Natures in this Title, and therefore
an admirable Evidence, that God is at peace with us.

It follows, [ Through the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant.] The Blood of
Christ, is that which cements God and us together: For you must remember, our
original peace with God was broken; that peace we have with him now, is called
Reconciliation: it is as a broken bone, which well set, is stronger than
before, because Nature conveys most liberal supplies to the weakest part: so
now, being reconciled to God, through the Blood of his Son, we stand upon surer
terms with him, then we did in Innocence: The Blood of Christ speaks better
things for us, than all our sins speak against us; it speaks peace to our
souls, and that in Heaven, purchased by his Death. Christ dyed as a Testator,
and bequeathed to the Church a Legacy of Peace; he lives as the Executor of
that Covenant; and now, in Heaven, conveys to us that blessing of peace, which
he bequeathed in his Death. And as our peace was founded in his Blood, so it is
conserved by his Intercession; he appears in the Court of Heaven as out
Ambassador, to make up all those differences, which fall out between God and
us: for you know, Amity and Friendship is kept between Foreign States, bp their
Residents and Agents, that are kept in their several Courts; so, we have an
Agent in the Court of Heaven, the Lord Jesus Christ, that was raised from the
Dead: And, as a Believer falls into sin, which is a breach of peace between God
and us; so that Peace is made up by the Exercise of Repentance on our part, and
by sprinkling of Christ's Blood upon us, on God's part. The renewed Exercise of
Repentance, and Application of Christ's Blood, preserves that peace that is
between God and Believers. And (to sum up the force of the Argument) when we
had fallen from God, and it did not consist with the Majesty of God, to make
peace with us without satisfaction, then was he pleased to pay out Ransom out
of his own Treasury, and redeem us by the Blood of his Son; so that all his
Attributes might shine forth in their luster, and glory in our Salvation; and
that, upon sure terms, we might be able to challenge an interest (...) his
favor and love.

It follows, Through the Blood of the [Everlasting Covenant.] It Is called an
Everlasting Covenant (...) two respects.

(1) In opposition to the Old Covenant, which was made with Adam in Innocence;
but that Covenant, which secures to us the reward of that life eternal, did not
secure to us the Condition, that was perfect obedience: And in reference to
this Old Covenant, sometimes the Gospel is called a New Covenant, sometimes a
Better Covenant, because it supplies all weakness in the first Covenant; not as
if the Law of God was weak, or faulty, in respect of it self; for the Law is
holy, just, and good, but we^k in respect of us: for it is impossible that that
Covenant, by the breach of which, Sin and Death came into us, should reconcile
us to God and appease his Ange^: and therefore, God contrived another Covenant
for us, a Covenant in the Gospel, that was made with us in Christ; and this is
called an Everlasting Covenant, because it remains for ever, the renot of it
shall not be changed; for, the first Covenant is only abrogated, and made
null, while frustra^ed, as to the intent it was first given.

(2) It Is called an Everlasting Covenant, as in brings to those that are
parties in it an everlasting glory: So the Lord Jesus his Blood is called an
Everlasting Redemption; for it ransoms the soul of men from that Eternal Death,
to which they were liable, and gives them a Title to everlasting life; for thy,
Coxenant, which now God has made with us, it not only secures the Reward, but
the Corditions to which the Reward is made; for God says, I will plant my fear
in your hearts, that you shall not depart from me.

I have now gone over the Title, and that in order to the Prayer, which
follows, [ Make you perfect to do his Will, working in you that which is
well-pleasing in his sight. The general sum of it is this, That God of peace,
who is reconciled to us in his Son, as he is the Father of mercies to us, so he
is, the Fountain of holiness to us; and, in this respect, we can only expect
from him the treasures of grace, as he is the God of peace: for God, as he is
our Judge, dispenses to sinners nothing but revenge; there is nothing to be
expected, but the curse of his Law, the execution of that Sentence of death
from him. For although the World despise holiness, as a base and contemptible
thing, (they had rather be ungracious, than inglorious, in the eyes of men) and
upon this account, they are afraid to be holy, lest they should be the public
scorn and contempt of the place wherein they live: although holiness is of
solow a price in the World; yet, in Heaven, next to God, Christ, and the
Spirit, Holiness is the most rich Jewel, that God can bestow upon us; and
therefore, we must first look upon him, as the God of Peace, before we can beg
any grace from him. And that is the reason, why the Apostle represents God by
these Titles, that he might encourage the Hebrews, to believe, God would grant
this request. When Christ dyed for us, it was not his Design only to quiet our
Consciences, but to quicken our Souls; not only to free us from Damnation, but
from the domination of sin. And therefore you shall find these two are joined
together, ( Tit. 2.14.) Wh^ gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from
all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good
works. The Death of Christ, as there was a value in it, to purchase God's
favor; so there was a virtue in it, to restore to us God's Image. And the
account of his dying for us, it is, that we must expect the highest degree of
grace and holiness from God. And this is the reason, why the Apostle prefaces
this, Now the God of Peace, etc.

I know you expect I should say something, as to my Nonconformity. I shall
only say thus much, It is neither fancy, faction, nor humor, that makes me
not to comply, but merely for fear of offending God. And, if after the best
means used for my Illumination, as prayer to God, discourse, study, I am not
able to be satisfied, concerning the lawfulness of what is required; if it be
my unhappiness, to be in an error, surely Men will have no reason to be angry
with me in this World; and I hope God will pardon me in the next.

Master BROOKS His Farewell SERMON.
ALL, that I shall do, shall be to answer two or three Quaries, and then I
shall leave a few Legacies with you, that may speak, when I am not advantaged
to speak to you.

The first Quaery is this: What should be the reason, that men make such
opposition against the Gospel, against the plain, powerful, conscientious
Preaching of it? This is not the principal thing that I intend; and therefore I
shall only touch upon the reason of it.
1 Men's hatred and opposition arises against the Gospel, because it does
discover their hidden works of darkness, Joh. 3. They hate the light, lest
their deeds should be reproved: The Gospel brings their deeds of darkness to
light; and this stirs up a spirit of hatred and opposition against the Gospel.

2 Ground is this; because sinners, under the Gospel, cannot sin at so cheap a
rate, as otherwise they might do: the Drunkard cannot be drunk at so cheap a
rate; nor can the Opposer and Persecutor, oppose and persecute at so cheap a
rate, as they might do, where the Gospel does not shine in power and glory.

3 Because the Gospel puts persons upon very hard service, upon very difficult
work, pulling out a right eye, cutting off a right hand, offering up an Isaac,
throwing overboard a Jonas, parting with Bosom Lusts, and Darling Sins. Herod
heard John Baptist gladly, till he came to touch his Herodias, and then off
goes his head. As they say, John 6. This is a hard saying, and who can abide
it? and from that time, they walked no more with him: this is a hard Gospel
indeed, and at this their blood rises.

4 Because of the differing and dissinguishing work, that the Gospel makes
among the Sons of men; it softens one, and hardens another, that ^^ts next to
him; enlightens one, (...) strikes the other blind; it wins on one, and (...)
the other. The same Sun has different effects on the Objects, on which it
shines. The Gospel puts a difference between the precious, and the vile; and
this the Vile cannot bear. It was never good days (say they) since such and
such must be Saints, and none else; we have as good hearts as any, and this
enrageth them.

Lastly, It is from Satan; Satan knows, that the very tendency of the Gospel,
is to shake his Kingdom about his ears: Satan and Antichrist know that their
Kingdom must down, by the power and light of the Gospel; and therefore Satan,
and men of an Antichristian spirit, do all they can to oppose, and show their
hatred, against the everlasting Gospel; and this makes them to be in such a
rage against the Gospel.

Quare 2. When the Gospel goes from a People, what goes? I shall give but a
touch here.
1 When the Gospel goes, Peace, Plenty, and Trading go, 2 Chronicles. 15.3.5 and 6.
compared. Now for a long season, Israel had been without the true God, and
without a teaching-Priest. Why? They had Priests; but they were Jeroboam's
Priests, as you may see Chap. 13. ver. 9. Have you not cast out the Priests of
the Lord, the Sons of Aaron, and the Levites, and have made you Priests, after
the manner of the Nations, of other Lands; so that whosoever comes to
consecrate himself with a young Bullock and 7 ^ams, the same may be a Priest of
them, that are no Gods. A little business will buy a Priesthood; and so they
are said to be without the true God, without a teaching Priest, and without
Law. Mark what follows; And in those times, there was no pence to him that went
out, nor to him that came in; but great vexations were upon all the Inhabitants
of the Country; and Nation was destroyed of Nation, and City of City for God
did vex them with all adversity.

2 Safety and security goes, when the Gospel goes; so in the Text but now
cited. The Ark was taken away; and when that was taken away, their strength and
safety was gone. When the Jews rejected the Gospel, the Romans came and took
away both their Place and Nation, John 11.48. If we let him thus alone, the
Romans will come, and take away both our place and Nation. About forty years
after, Titus and Vespatian took away their City; they cried, If we let this man
alone, the Romans will take away our Nations; And this was the ready way to
bring the Romans upon them.

3 When the Gospel goes, Civil Liberty goes: When the Jews slighted the
Gospel, and turned their backs upon it, they quickly became Bondslaves to the
Romans.

4 When the Gospel goes, the honor and glory, splendor and beauty of a Nation
goes. It is the Gospel, that is the honor and glory of a Nation; and when that
goes, all the glory goes: As old Eli said, When the Ark was taken away, the
glory is departed from Israel, 1 Samuel 4.22. Jer. 2.11, 12, 13. Has a Nation
changed their Gods, which are yet no Gods? but my People have changed their
glory, for that which does not profit; that is, the Worship of God, into the
Traditions of men. Wh^t is it, that lifts up one Nation above another, but the
Gospel? Above all Nations of the Earth, England has been lifted up to Heaven.

5 When the Gospel goes, all soul-happiness and blessedness goes: The Gospel,
you know, is the means appointed by God, to bring Souls to an acquaintance with
Christ, to an acceptance of Christ, to an interest in Christ, to an assurance
that he is theirs, and they are his. Now when this goes, all soul-happiness and
blessedness goes.

Lastly, When the Gospel goes, the special presence of God goes, for that still
goes with the Gospel. There is a general presence of God, as the Psalmist
speaks, Psalm. 139. Where shall I go from thy Spirit? Whither shall I fly from
thy presence? I his presence of God reaches from Heaven to Hell; in that
sense, God is included in no place, not excluded out of any place. But, alas!
What is this general presence? When the Gospel goes, the special presence of
God goes. This leads me by the hand to the third Quaery.

Quaerie 3. And that is this; Whether God will remove the Gospel from England,
or no?
It is the fears of many; but I humbly suppose, no: Whatsoever Darkness may be
upon it, yet that God will not remove it; and, if you please, I will offer a
few things, that signify something, as to my own satisfaction; and it may be,
so to you.

1 The rooting, that it has got in the hearts of sinners and Saints, in the
Judgment, Affections, and Consciences, both of Sinners and Saints: Certainly,
it has got so deep a root, in the hearts of many thousands of Saints and
Sinners, that it shall not be in the power of Hell to raze it out.

2 The glorious Anointings that are to be found upon many thousands of God's
Servants in this Nation, to preach the everlasting Gospel, and who would be
glad to preach upon the hardest terms, keeping God and a good Conscience, to
preach it freely, as the Apostles of old did: And certainly, God has not laid
in this Treasure, that it should be turned into a heap of Confusion, but that
it should serve to the end, for which he laid it in.

3 The ineffectualness of all former Attempts and Designs, to destroy the
Gospel. You know what endeavors of old there has been to darken this Sun, to
put out the light of Heaven, in the Marian days, and in other days since them;
and yet it has not been in Prisons, Racks, Flames, Pillories, nor any thing
else to extinguish the glory of it. And then,

4 All Designs and Attempts, to extinguish the everlasting Gospel, have turned
to the advancement, flourishing, and spreading of the Gospel.

5 God never takes away the Gospel from a People, till the Body of that People
have thrust the everlasting Gospel from them; when, indeed, they have been so
bold, as to thrust away the everlasting Gospel, God has been severe unto them:
But till the Body of a People have thrust away the everlasting Gospel, God has
not taken it away from them, 2 Chornicles, the 36. Chapter, and the fifteenth
verse, to the end God, sent his Messengers early and late; they abused, and
slighted, and scorned them, till there was no remedy. So, in the 35. of
Jeremiah, from the first, to the twelfth; it is a famous Text for this. So, in
the thirteenth Chapter of the Acts, and the 45, 46, and 47 Verses; Because you
have thought your selves unworthy of Salvation; lo, we turn to the Gentiles.
Till the Jews came to thrust away the everlasting Gospel, the Lord continued it
to them.

6 The spreading of the everlasting Gospel, is the special means appointed by
God, for the destruction of Antichrist: First, he is to be consumed by the
Spirit of his Mouth; then destroyed by the brightness of his coming, the Spirit
of Faith and Prayer in them that would be willing to lay down any thing, rather
then part with the Gospel. God will not put his blessed Church to the blush; he
will not make them ashamed of their confidence.

7 Are there not multitudes of the Children of Believers, that fall under many
Promises? and will not God make good his Engagements to them? I will circumcise
your hearts, and the hearts of your Seed; and the Seed of the Upright shall be
blessed, etc.

8 The strange and wonderful Affections and tenderness, that God has wrought
in his Children to the Gospel: What meltings and mournings, and what a spirit
of Prayer has God put upon his People?

9 There are many young tender Plants and Buds of grace; such, in whom the
Spirit of God has stirred a hungring, thirsting, and longing, after the great
Concernments of Eternity. I would, upon these grounds, with others of the like
import, hope and believe, that the Lord will not remove his everlasting Gospel,
however he may correct his People, for their trifling with, and slighting the
glorious Gospel. I have several times thought, what a day of darkness was upon
the World, in respect of Sin and Superstition: When Christ brought the
everlasting Gospel, what a day of Darkness and Superstition was on the whole
Earth? But you know, what the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 1.21. For after that, in
the wisdom of God, the World by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God, by the
foolishness of Preaching, to save them that believe.

When it is nearest day, then it is darkest. There may be an hour of Darkness,
that may be upon the Gospel, as to its liberty, purity, and glory; and yet
there may be a Sun-shining day ready to tread on the heels of it. And so much
for the Resolution of those Queries.

I shall proceed, as I said, and leave some Legacies with you; which may, by
the finger of the Spirit, be made advantageous to you, whom we are not
advantaged to speak unto you.

LEGACY 1.
The first Legacy I would leave with you, shall be this; Secure your Interest
in Christ: Make it your great business, your work, your Heaven, to secure your
interest in Christ. This is not an Age, an Hour, for a man to be between fears
and hopes between doubting and believing.

Take not up in a name to live, when you are dead Godward and Christ-ward.
Take not up in an outward form, and outward privileges. They cried out, The
Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord, that had no interest in, or love to
the Lord of the Temple. Follow God, leave no means unattempted, whereby your
blessed interest may be cleared up.

Leg. 2.
Make Christ and Scripture the only foundation for your souls and faith to
build on: as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 3.11. Other foundations can no man lay,
then that, which is laid, even Jesus Christ, Isa. 28.6. Behold I lay in Zion
for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a corner stone, a precious stone, a
sure foundation, Ephesians. 2.10. Since its a very dangerous thing, as much as your
souls and eternity is worth, for you to build on any thing besides Jesus
Christ; many will say, Come build on this authority, and that; on this saying,
and that; but take heed.

Leg. 3.
In all places and company, be sure to carry your soul-preservatives with you:
go into no place or company, except you carry your soul-preservations with you,
that is, a holy care and wisdom. You know in infectious times, men will carry
outward preservatives with them; you had need to carry your preservatives about
you; else you will be in danger of being infected with the ill customs and
vanities of the times, wherein you live, and that is a third.

Leg. 4.
I would leave with you is this: look that all within you rises higher and
higher, by oppositions, threatenings, and sufferings; that is, that your faith,
your love, your courage, your zeal, your resolutions, and magnanimity rises
higher by opposition, and a spirit of prayer: this it did, Acts 4.18, 19, 20,
21, 29, 30, and 31. compared; all their sufferings, did but raise up a more
noble spirit in them, they did but raise up their faith and courage: So Acts
5.40, 41, and 42. they looked on it as a grace to be disgraced for Christ, and
as an honor to b^ dishonored for him. They say, as David, If the be to be
vile, I will be more vile. If to be found in the way of my God, to act for my
God, to be vile, I will be more vile.

Leg. 5.
Take more pains, and make more Conscience of keeping your selves from sin than
suffering; from the pollutions and defilements of the day, then from the
sufferings of the day: this Legacy I would beg, that you would consider, take
more pains, and make more conscience of keeping your selves from the evil of
sin, than the evil of punishment, from the pollutions and corruptions of the
times, than the sufferings of the times. Acts 2.40. Save your selves from this
untoward generation. Phil. 2.15. The Children of God must be harmless, and
blameless, without rebuke in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation.
Heb. 11. speaks full to the poin in hand. Rev. 3, 4 Thou have a few names, even
in Sardis, that have not defiled their garments, and they shall walk with me in
white; for they are worthy. White was the habit of Nobles, which imports the
honor, that God will put on those, that keep their garments pure in a defiling
day. Rev. 8.4. And I heard another voice from Heaven, saying, Come out of her
my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her
plagues. If you will be tasting and sipping at Babylon's Cup, you must resolve
to receive more or less of Babylons plagues.

Leg. 6.
I would leave with you, is this, Be always doing or receiving good. Our Lord
and Master went up and down in this world doing good, he was still doing good
to body and soul; he was acted by an untired power: be still doing, or
receiving good; this will make your lives comfortable, your deaths happy, and
your account glorious, in the great day of our Lord. Oh how useless are many
men in their generation! oh! that our lips might be as so many Honey-combs,
that we might scarter knowledge!

Leg. 7.
I would leave with you, is this: Set the highest examples and patterns before
your face of grace and godliness, for your imitation: In the business of Faith,
set an Abraham before your eyes: in the business of Courage, set a Joshua: In
the business of uprightness, set a Job; of meekness, a Moses, etc. There is a
disadvantage, that redounds to Christians, by looking more backwards than
forwards. Men look on whom they excel; not on those, they fall short of. Of all
examples set them before you, that are most eminent for grace and holiness, for
communion with God, and acting for God next to Christ, set the pattern of the
choicest Saints before you.

Leg. 8.
Hold fast your Integrity, and rather let all go, than let that go: A man had
better let liberty, estate, relations, and life go, than let his integrity go;
yea let Ordinances themselves go, when they cannot be held with the hand of
integrity, Job 27. 5, 6. God forbid, that I should justify you, till I die; I
will not remove my integrity from me; my Righteousness I will hold fast, and I
will not let it go: my heart shall not reproach me, so long as I live: look a^
the drowning man holds fast that, which is cast forth for to save him; as the
Soldier holds fast his Sword and Buckler, on which his life depends: So (says
Job) I will hold fast my integrity, my heart shall not reproach me; I had
rather all the world should reproach me, and my heart justify me; then that my
heart should reproach me, and all the world justify me: that man will make but
a sad exchange, that shall exchange his integrity for any worldly concernment:
Integrity maintained in the soul, will be a feast of fat things in the worst of
days; but let a man loose his Integrity, and it is not in the power of all the
world to make a feast of fat things in that soul.

Leg. 9.
That I would leave with you is this. Let not a day pass over your head,
without calling the whole man to an exact account. Well, where have you been
acting to day? Hands, what have you done for God to day? Tongue, what have you
spoke for God to day? this will be an advantage many ways unto you; but I can
only touch on these Legacies.

Leg. 10.
Labor mightily for a healing Spirit. This Legacy, I would leave with you as
matter of great concernment. Labor mightily for a healing spirit: away with
all discriminating names what^ ever, that may hinder the applying of Balm to
hea^ your wounds: labor for a he ling spirit, discord and division become no
Christian; for Wolves t^ worry the Lambs, is no wonder; but for one La^^ to
worry another, this is unnatural and monstrous. God has made his wrath to
smoke against us for the divisions and heart-burnings, that have been amongst
us. Labor for a oneness in love and affection with every one that is one with
Christ; let their forms be what they will: that which wins most upon Christ's
heart, should winn most upon ours; and that is his own Grace and Holiness.
The question should be, What of the Father? What of the Son? What of the Spirit
shines in this or that person? and accordingly let your love and your
affections run out: That is the tenth Legacy,

Leg. 11.
Be most in the spiritual exercises of Religion: Improve this Legacy; for much
of the life, and comfort, joy and peace of your souls is wrapped up in it. I say,
be most in the Spiritual exercises of Religion: There are external exercises,
as hearing, preaching, praying, and conference; and there are the more
spiritual exercises of Religion, exercise of Grace, Meditation, Self-judging,
self-tryall, and examination. Bodily exercise will profit nothing, if
abstracted from those more spiritual. The glory that God has, and the comfort
and advantage that will redound to your souls is mostly from the spiritual
exercises of Religion. How rare is it to find men in the work of Meditation, of
Trial and examination, and of bringing home of truths to their own souls?

Leg. 12.
Take no truths upon trust, but all upon trial: 1 These. 5.21. So 1 John 4.1.
Act. 17.11. It was the glory of that Church, that they would not trust Paul
himself, Paul that had the advantage above all for external qualifications; no
not Paul himself. Take no truth upon trust; bring them to the balance of the
Sanctuary; if they will nor hold weight there, reject them.

Leg. 13.
The lesser and fewer opportunities and advantages you have in public to
better and enrich your souls, the more abundantly address your souls to God
in private. Malac. 3.16, 17. Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to
another, etc.

Leg. 14.
Walk in those ways, that are directly cross and contrary to the vain,
sinful, and superstitious ways, that men of a formal, carnal, lukewarm
spirit walk in; this is the great concernment of Christians. But more of that,
by and by.

Leg. 15.
Lock upon all the things of this world as you will look upon them, when you
come to dye. At what a poor rate do men look on the things of this world, when
they come to dye? What a low value do men set upon the pomp and glory of i^,
when there is but a step between them and eternity? Men now may put a mask
upon them but then they will appear in their own colors. Men would not
venture the loss of such great things for them, did they but look on them now,
as they will do at the last day.

Leg. 16.
Never put off your Conscience with any plea or with any argument, that you
dare not stand by in the great day of your account. It Is dreadful to consider,
how many in these days put off their consciences. We did this, and that, for
our families, they would have else perished. I have complied thus, and wronged
my conscience thus, for this and that concernment: Will a man stand by this
argument, when he comes before Jesus Christ at the last day? Because of the
souls of men, many plead this or that: Christ does not stand in need of
indirect ways to save souls, he has ways enough to bring in souls to
himself.

Leg. 17.
Eye more, mind more, and lay to heart more, the Spiritual and Internal
workings of God in your souls, than the external Providence of God in the
world. Beloved, God looks, that we should consider the operations of his hand;
and the despising the works of his hands is so provoking to him, that he
threatens them to lead them into Captivity for not considering of them. But
above all look to the work, that God is carrying on in your souls: not a soul
but he is carrying on some work or other in it, either blinding or enlightening,
bettering or worstening, and therefore look to what God is doing in thy soul.
All the motions of God within you are steps to eternity, and every soul shall
be blessed or cursed, saved o^ lost to all eternity, not according to outward
dispensations but according to the inward operations of God in your souls.
Observe, what humbling work, reforming work, sanctifying work he is about in
thy spirit; what he is doing in that little world within thee. If God should
carry on never so glorious a work in the world, as a conquest of the Nations to
Christ: What would it advantage thee, if sin, Satan, and the world should
triumph in thy soul, and carry the day there?

Leg. 18.
Look as well on the bright side as on the dark side of the cloud; on the
bright side of Providence as well as on the dark side of Providence. Beloved,
there is a great weakness amongst Christians, they do so pore on the dark
side of the Providence as that they have no heart to consider of the bright
side. If you look on the dark side of the Providence of God to Joseth, How
terrible and amazing was it? But if you look on the bright side, his forescore
years reign, How glorious was it? If you look on the dark side of the
Providence of God to David, in his five years banishment, much will arise to
startle you; but if you turn to the bright side, his forty years reign in
glory; How amiable was it? Look on the dark side of the Providence of God to
Job, Oh how terrible was it in the first of Job? but compare this with the last
of Job, where you have the bright side of the cloud, and there God doubles all
his mercies to him: Consider the patience of Job, and the end that the Lord
made with him; do not remember the beginning only, for that was the dark side;
but turn to the end of him, and there was his bright side. Many sins, many
temptations, and much affliction would be prevented by Christians looking on
the bright side of Providence, as well as on the dark.

Leg. 19.
Keep up precious thoughts of God under the sowrest, sharpest, and severest
Dispensations of God to you, Psalm. 22.1, 2, and 3. My God, my God, Why have
thou forsaken me? Why art thou so far from helping me? and from the words of my
roaring; oh my God, I cry in the day time, but thou hear not, and in the
night season, and am not silent; There was the Psalmist under smart
dispensations: but, What precious thoughts has he of God under all? But Thou
art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel: though I am thus and
thus afflicted; yet thou art holy. Psalm 65.5. By terrible things in
Righteousness will thou answer us, O God of our salvation.

Leg. 20.
Hold on, and hold cut, in the ways of well-doing in the want of all outward
encouragments, and in the face, of all outward discouragments. Its nothing to
hold out, when we meet with nothing but encouragements; but to hold out in the
face of all discouragements is a Christians duty, Psalm. 44. Though thou have
sore broken us in the place of Dragons, and covered us with the shadow of
death; yet have we not dealt fasly in thy Covenant; our heart is not turned
back, neither have we declined from thy ways; it is perseveravce that crowns
all. Be thou faithful to the death, and I will give thee a crown of life Rev.
2.10. And he that endures to the end shall be saved, Mat. 24. Its perseveran^^
(...) well-doing that crowns all our actions. If (...) began in the Spirit,
don't end in the flesh: do not go away from the Captain of your salvation;
follow the Lamb, though others follow the Beast and the false prophets.

Leg. 21.
In all your natural, civil, and Religious actions, let divine glory still
rest on your souls, Romans 14.7, 8. 1 Cor. 10.31. In all your hearings, in all
your prayings, let the glory of Christ carry it: in all your closet-dutyes, let
the glory of Christ lie nearest your hearts.

Leg. 22.
Record all Special favors mercies, providence, and experiences. It Is true, a
man should do nothing else, should he record all the favors and experiences of
God toward him; and therefore my Legacy is; Record all Special favors,
peculiar experiences. Little do you know the advantage, that will redound to
your soul upon this account, by recording all the experiences of the shinings
of his face, of the leadings of his Spirit many a Christian loses much by
neglecting this: duty.

Leg. 23.
Never enter upon the trial of your estate, but when your hearts are at the
best, and in the fitest temper. It Is a great design of Satan, when the soul is
deserted and strangely afflicted, to put the soul on trying wroke: Come see,
what thou art worth for another world, what thou have to show for a better
state, for an interest in Christ, a title for heaven: this is not a time to be
about this work: thy work is now to get off from this temptation, and therefore
to pray and believe, and wait upon God, and to be found in all those ways,
whereby you may get off the temptation.

Leg. 24.
Always make the Scripture, and not your selves, nor your carnal reason, nor
your bare opinion, the Judges of your spiritual state and condition. I cannot
see my condition to be good. I cannot perceive it. What, must your sense, and
your carnal reason, be the Judge of your spiritual state? Isa. 8.20. To the
Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this rule, it is
because there is no light, no morning in them. John 12.48. The word, that I
have spoken, the same shall judge you in the last day: The Scripture is that,
which must determine the case in the great day; whether you have grace or no,
or whether it be true or no.

Leg. 25.
Make much conscience of making good the terms on which you closed with Christ:
you know the terms, how, that you would deny your selves, take up his Cross,
and follow the Lamb wheresoever he should go: Now you are put to take up the
Cross, to deny your selves, to follow the Lamb over hedge and ditch, through
thick and thin, do not turn your backs on Christ: the worst of Christ is better
then the best of the world: make conscience of making good your terms, to deny
your self, your natural self, your sinful self, your religious self, and to
follow him; and if you do so, oh! what an honor will it be to Christ, and
advantage to your souls, and a joy to the upright?

Leg. 26.
Walk by no rule, but such as you dare die by, and stand by, in the great day of
Jesus Christ. You may have many ways prescribed to worship by; but walk by
none, but such, as you dare dye by, and stand by, before Jesus Christ: walk not
by a multitude, for who dare stand by that rule, when he comes to die?

Make not the example of great men a rule to go by; for who dare dye by, and
stand by this, in the great day of account? Do not make any authority, that
stands in opposition to the authority of Christ, a rule to walk by; for who
dare stand by this, before Jesus Christ? Ah Sirs, walk by no rule, but what you
dare dye by, and stand by at the great day.

Leg. 27.
And lastly, sit down, and rejoice with fear, Psalm. 2. Let the Righteous
rejoice, but let them rejoice with fear. Rejoice, that God has done your souls
good by the everlasting Gospel; that he did not leave you till he brought you
to an acceptance of, to a closing with, and a resignation of your souls to
Christ, and the clearing up of your interest in him. Rejoice, that you have had
the everlasting Gospel in so much light, purity, power, and glory, as you have
had for many years together. Rejoice in the riches of grace, that has carried
it in such a way toward you. And weep, that you have provoked God to take away
the Gospel, that you have no more improved it; that you have so neglected the
seasons and opportunities of enriching your souls. When you should have come to
Church Fellowship, any thing would turn you out of the way. Oh, sit down, and
tremble under your barrenness, under all your leanness: notwithstanding all the
cost and charge, that God has been at, that you have grown no more into
communion with God, and conformity to God, and into the lively hope of the
everlasting fruition of God. Here are your Legacies, and the Lord make them to
work in your souls, and then they will be of singular use to you, to preserve
you so, that you may give up your account before the great and glorious God
with joy. Labor to make conscience of putting these Legacies into practice, of
sucking at these breasts, which will be of use to us, till we shall be gathered
up into the fruition of God, where we shall need no more Ordinances, no more
preaching or praying.

Mr. MEDE, His Fare-wel SERMON.
1 Cor. 1.3. Grace be unto you, and Peace from God the Father, and from our
Lord Jesus Christ.


YOu will wonder, possibly, that I should pitch on the Apostles Salutation for
my Valediction, and make that the Conclusion of my Preaching, which he made the
Beginning of his Writing, and therefore I have made a double Plea for it. I
find that this was a form of Blessing peculiar to this Apostle, both in the
beginning and end of this Epistle: for as there is scarcely one Epistle but
begins with it; so, many end with it likewise: As in Ephesians. 6. ver. ult. The
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. So in the 2d of the
Thessalonians, the last verse of the last Chapter, The Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ be with you all: So that I finding the Apostle to use it frequently at
the beginning and end of his Writing, I thought, as I made it the matter of my
prayer for you in the beginning, so I might make it my farewell to you in the
ending; and therefore Grace be unto you, and peace from God our Father, and
from our Lord Jesus Christ.

Besides this; As Isaac said to his Jacob concerning his Venison, when his
Father asked him, How he found it so quickly? he answered, Because the Lord thy
God brought it to me: The same I may say of this Scripture: for Considering of
what subject I should speak in my last Labors here among you, this Scripture
came to my thoughts, and opening the Book, came immediately to my sight, and
therefore I may say, God brought it to me: Which I no sooner looked upon, but
methinks I saw the Apostle on Mount Ger sim, and his mouth filled with
blessing; for what greater blessing can a man wish, then that which comprehends
all blessings, and that is, Grace and Peace. Being therefore now to part, I
thought to go to the top of the Mount, and leave with you, Grace and Peace from
God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ. In which words, there are two
generals.

1. A double Blessing desired. 2. A double Spring discovered.
1. A double Blessing desired: and that is, Grat^ and Peace. Grace is of all
Blessings the richest. Peace is of all Comforts the sweetest: both these the
Apostle begs for the Cor^nthians, and so do I for you, Beloved: Grace be unto
you, and peace from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.

2. Here is a double Fountain discovered; and that is the Father and the Son,
God and Christ. The Father is called the God of Grace; the Son is called the
Prince of Peace, not that grace is from the Father without Peace, nor Peace
from the Son without grace, but both grace and peace are from God the Father,
through the Lord Christ.

The Order of the words is worth noting, Grace be to you and peace: First
grace, then peace; for there can be no peace without grace, nor grace, but
there will be peace; but there can be no true peace but from God, nor from God,
but as he is a Father; nor from God as a Father, but as our Father; and he
cannot be said to be our Father, but through our Lord Jesus Christ; and
therefore he says, Grace be unto you, and Peace from God our Father, through
our Lord Jesus Christ: both are manifested as a golden Chain linked together,
not grace without peace, nor peace without grace, but both conjoined together,
to cram the believers soul with grace and peace. Now from the Order of the
words, we might raise several Observations.

1. That Peace is the fruit of Grace.

2. That Grace and Peace are both from God.

3. That Love, which is the spring of Grace and Peace, is from God as a Father.

4. That we share not in his Love, but only as he is our Father: All is from
propriety.

First, Our Father, then Grace and Peace from God our Father.

5. That God is our Father only through Christ.

But before we draw any thing from the Text by way of Observation, we will
speak to the terms by way of Explication. Grace be to you: What is here meant
by Grace? This is a sweet word, i^ perfumes the breath, it cherishes the
Conscience (...) warms the Heart, it ravishes the Soul: As the Spouse was
ravished with the rays of Christ's glory, so Christ revives the Soul with one
of his Gracious rays discovered to the Heart; Grace is the life of the Soul,
thou art dead till grace quickens thee, thou art lost till grace finds thee,
undone till grace saves thee: Grace is the Marna of Angels^ the spiritual Bread
which those that are holy in being, (...) rished with, and subsist by; Angels
live on (...) and stand by Grace; Man that shares in the grace of God, is made
fellow-Communor with Angels; eats Angels food, and shares in Angels blessings;
Grace is the substance of the Scripture, the end of the Law, the fullness of the
Gospel. Gregory calls it, the Heart and Soul of God; I am sure, Grace is the
Heart and Soul of the Word. It Is a little word, but it comprehends all good:
here is more then Homers Iliads in a Nut-shell, it is the Epitome of all the
good in Heaven and Earth; name any word that signifies good to the Soul here,
or hereafter, and it is found in the Index, in this little word Grace; Grace
comprehends Gods love to us, and out love to God, and as Gods love to us is the
sum of all Mercy, so our love to God is the sum of all Duty; grace is the new
birth of the Soul, whereby it takes up another Nature, a new Nature, a
spiritual Godlike Nature; as Christ was born, and thereby took on him the
Nature of man, and was made flesh, so man is born by grace, and thereby takes
upon him the Nature of God, and is made Spirit; and here you have at once the
great Mystery of grace in the lowest debasement of a Savior, and the highest
advancement of a Sinner; For the Lord Christ could not be more debased then to
be born. It was nothing so great an abasement for Christ to dye, as for him to
be born; for being once made man, it is no wonder for to dye, but being the
great God, its a wonder that ever he should be made man. Lo, here is the
debasement of Christ; yet if he had been born to a Crown, to Honor, it had
been something, but he was born to shame, to sorrow and death. But man by grace
is born to a Crown, to a Kingdom, he has a title to all the glory and
blessedness of Heaven from the first moment of his new birth; So it is in the
Text, Grace be unto you and peace.

Peace in Scripture, is a very comprehensive term, it carries in it all
happiness. It was the common greeting of the Jews, Peace be unto you: Thus
David by his Proxy salutes Nabal, Peace be to thee and thy House; and the
Apostle here alludes to this form of Salutation, that he might mix new
Testament mercy, to old Testament manners: he first styles grace before peace;
as Jacob did with his Venison, he made it a savoury meat, such as Isaac loved.

Peace is the glory of Heaven, in the Bosom of God, and brought into the World
in the Arms of Angels; the first peace you read of in the Gospel, was peace by
the administration of Angels, Luke 2.13, 14. And suddenly there was with the
Angels, a multitude of Heavenly Host, praising and saying, Glory be to God in
the highest, and on Earth peace, good will toward men. And when our Lord
Christ first sent out his Disciples, this was the Doctrine that he bid them
preach, Matthew. 10.12, 13. When you come into a house, salute it; and if it be
worthy, let grace, peace, come upon it. Mark here, by the way, Our Lord Jesus
Christ is no enemy to good manners, he would not have Christians to be Clowns;
which is the use of some among us, who would have their Religion quarrel with
good manners; no, but in whatsoever City or Town you enter, salute it, and let
grace, peace, come upon it; that is, wish peace to them, saying, The peace of
God be upon this place, upon the head and hearts of all in it. So that, peace
is both a Gospel-salutation, when Ministers and People meet; and it is also a
Gospel-valediction, when the Minister and the People part. So did the Apostle,
and so do I now, Grace be with you and peace.

I observe, in Matthew. 10.13, 14. our Lord bids his Disciples, when they enter
into a house, if the house be worthy to let their peace come upon it, but if
they be not worthy let grace peace, return unto you. Instead of leaving peace
with them, to shake off the dust of their feet against them: that is, to show
that God will shake them off as dust, and tread them under feet as fuel. My
Brethren, your diligent atteddance on the Word at this place, has comfortably
prevented that part of my charge, to shake off the du^ of my feet; for, how
beautiful have the feet of a poo^ Worm been to you, being shod with the
prep^ranon of the Gospel of Christ? And therefore, seeing our Lord Jesus Christ
said, If they be worthy of th^^ peace, abide with them; On this account, I wish
to you, Grace and peace from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
But what is this Peace? It Is the beauty of Union, the harmony of the Creation,
the pleasure of Life, the feast of a good Conscience; it is that which makes
life sweet, and death easie^ Peace sweetens all our Possessions, and all our
Afflictions; without this, the fullness of the World is a burden; with this,
poverty and emptiness is a pleasant Companion; without this, our bread is
gravelled with sowrness, and our water mingled with bitterness; with this,
green herbs become a feast, and our Water is turned into Wine; Peace, it is the
most beautiful Creature in the World, and therefore it is beloved of all,
courted of all, many fee^ her, but few there be that enjoy her, they do not go
the right way to find her: for, in the ways of right^ ousness is peace. Peace
is the seminary of all blessing^ Temporal, as Grace is of all blessings
Spiritu^l: In Grace, you have employed all holiness; in Peace, all happiness: In
grace, all inward; in peace, all ou^ ward blessings: Grace and Peace, are the
Alp^ and Omcga of all Blessings, as God is of all Being^ no blessing comes
before grace, and no blessing l^^ longer: Then see, in this phrase of speech,
the (...) postle wishes upon them, as I do upon you, all (...) blessings both
of Time and Eternity; and yet (...) wished no more to them, then God promise^
give them, 1 Timothy 4.8. For godliness has the promise of this life, and that
which is to come. Grace be unto you and peace, etc. not one without the other:
though a man may have grace without peace, as in a time of desertion or
temptation; and a man may have peace without grace, as in a secure and
unregenerate Condition: grace, without peace, is often found in a troubled
Conscience; and peace, without grace, is often found in a seared Conscience: as
grace, without peace, is very uncomfortable; so peace, without grace, is very
unprofitable: like Rachel, beautiful, but barren: Therefore, the Apostle
desires ye should have both grace and peace: and we say, the Sun and Salt are
the most useful Creatures in the World; the one, for shining; the other, for
seasoning. My Brethren, grace and peace are the Christian's Sun and Salt; grace
is the light of their souls, and peace is the savor of their comforts; grace
shines through all their faculties, and peace seasons all their mercies. The
blessings of God are become as Twins, as Christ said of the Spouse, Cant. 4.2.
She is like a flock of sheep that are even, shorn, which came up from the
washing, whereof every one bears twins, and none is barren among them: Grace
and peace here are knit together by the Spirit of God, in a sacred knot not to
be untyed: As Castor and Pollux, when seen together, portend happiness to the
Mariner: so when grace and peace are found in a Soul together, they portend the
highest security and blessing to the Believer: they are said, in Scripture, to
be bound together: where God gives the one, he never denies the other: If he
gives you me Upper Spring of grace, he will give you the other Spring of peace,
for they go both together. If be gives you the Dew of Heaven, you need not
question the fatness of the Earth. If his right hand be full of merey, his left
hand shall not be empty. Therefore, Grace and peace be with us from God the
Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.

Grace has a double sense, either for the grace of God to us, that justifies
us, or the grace of God in us, that sanctifies us. Now there is a distant peace
flowing from each of these, but still its grace and peace.

First, justifying grace has a peace attending that, Romans 5.1. Being justified
by Faith, we have peace with God. So far as we have confidence, in justifying
grace, there remains no Conscience of condemning sin. As there can be no
bitterer War, then between Conscience, and the Cure; so there can be no sweeter
peace, then when mercy and peace meet together, and when Conscience and Pe^ce
kisleth each other. The former, is the taste of Heaven; the latter, is the
perambulation of Heaven; both which, the Believer shares in upon his
Justification by Faith. If Christ had peace, who was made our sin^ needs must
the Believer have peace, who is made the righteousness of God in him.

Secondly, Sanctifying grace has a peace attending it, and this peace differs
from the former, as the root from the fruit. The peace of Justification is a
radical peace, the root of peace; but the peace of Sanctification is the Bud,
the Blossom of the Tree: The former flows from the Blood of Christ, sprinkled
on the Conscience; the latte^ from the conformity that is between the Word and
Will, between the Commands and the Conscience* As many as walk according to
this Rules, grace be unto them and peace, Gal. 6.16. So that peace is the frui
of sanctifying grace. Now, as the blood of the Paschal Lamb (which was a token
of peace) was not to be struck on the Posts of the Egyptians, but upon the
Posts of the Israelites; so neither is the blood of sprinkling, which brings
perfect peace, to be struck on the posts of the carnal sinner, but on the post
of the true Believer, an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guil: no grace,
no peace, that is God's Law. How can a sinner have peace in a state of sin,
when God and Conscience, when Word and Conscience, when Law and Conscience, and
all the Attributes of God are against the sinner? No peace, says my God, to
the wicked. Pray mark that Chapter, it begins with peace, and ends in no peace.
In verse. 2. it is said, He shall enter into peace, that is, the Righteous: In
the last verse, There is no peace to the wicked. It Is the state of grace,
that is the only state of peace. And thus I pass from the double grace desired,
grace and peace, to the double Fountain discovered, God our Father, and our
Lord Jesus Christ.

But here is a Question to be answered: If Grace and Peace be from God the
Father, then how is it said to be from Christ? and if from Christ, how then
from God the Father?

Answ. It Is a known rule, thar the transient, exernal works of God, are
attributed to all the Three Persons in the Trinity, the same Works that are
attributed to the Father, are also attributed to the Son; and the same Works
attributed to the Son, the same also to the Father: so grace and peace are here
ascribed both to God the Father, and to our Lord Jesus Christ, that is, they
are both from mercy, and from merit.

From mercy, on God's part to us; from merits, on Christ's part for us: They
are from God the Father, because he wills them to us; from God the Son, because
he works them in us: They are from God to Christ, from Christ to us; they are
from God the Father originally, and from Christ derivatively, and to us
actually: God the Father is the Fountain of all grace and peace; Christ, as
Mediator, is the Conduit of all grace and peace; Man, in union to Christ, is
the Cistern, into which these streams of grace and peace run: God wills grace
and peace to us, and Christ works them in us: God gives grace and peace to be
applied to the Creature, this is from the love of the Father; but the
Application of this peace to the Soul, is from the merit of Christ the
Redeemer. Thus you see, there is a double Spring of this double Blessing. Time
will not serve me further: The only Observation is,

That all the grace and peace which Believers share in, is derived from God the
Father, through our Lord Jesus Christ: these three things opened, will clear
this.

1. That grace and peace, are the Believer's privilege. 2. That the Fountain
of this grace and peace is from God the Father. 3. That it is not given out
from God the Father, but through Christ.
First, That grace and peace are the Saints privilege; if grace is, then peace
is. But grace is the privilege of every Believer, and that whether you look
upon it, as taken from the love and favor of God to us: This is the Believers
privilege. God can as well forget Christ at his right hand, as cease his love
and favor to the Soul of a Believer: The Believers Title to all their
blessings, arises out of this never-failing love of God; or if you take grace
for the fruit of God's love to the Soul, still it falls to the Believers
privilege: Vocation, Justification, Adoption, Pardon of Sin, purging from
Sins, strength against Sin, Holiness, Love, Faith, Obedience, Perseverance; all
these are the privileges of every Believer: nay, a man cannot be a Believer,
without any one of them; they are as essential to the being of a Christian, as
reason to the being of a man.

Secondly, as grace, so peace is the Believers privilege: There is peace
Eternal, peace Supernal, peace Internal, and peace External: There is peace
External, this is peace with Men: There is peace Supernal, that is peace with
God: There is peace Internal, that is peace with Conscience: All these three
are to be had upon Earth; and then there is peace Eternal, and that is only to
be had in Heaven. The Apostle here does not exclude the former, but chiefly
intends the latter: Peace with man, is a good thing to be (...) but peace with
God and Conscience, is (...) to be desired. Peace with God, is the (...)
things, both within and without, both below and above, both in time and
Eternity: so says Job, If he gives peace, who then can make trouble? Now this
peace is the Saints privilege. It is a Legacy left to every Believer, by the
last Will and Testament of a dying Redeemer. Will you see a Copy of his Will,
then look in John 14.27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not
as the World gives, give I unto you. There is it seems a peace in the Worlds
power to give, and there is a peace of Christ's bestowing. Now Christ would have
us here, not to mistake the World's peace for his, for the difference is very
great: for first the World's peace is a false peace, it is a counterfeit Coin,
it has not the current stamp of Heaven on it; but the peace that Christ gives
to a Believer is true peace, and perfect peace, Thou will keep him in perfect
peace, whose mind is stayed on thee.

Secondly, the Worlds peace, is an outward peace: It is but skin-deep, it wets
the mouth, cannot wash the heart, Prove. 14.13. In laughter, the heart is
sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is heaviness. The Worlds peace, is but the
shell of peace; their Conscience lowres, when their countenance laughs: but the
Peace that Christ gives, is an inward and spiritual peace, Psalm. 4.7. Thou have
put gladness in my heart, more then in the time that their Corn and their Wine
increased; [Thou have put gladness in my heart,] Peace is that gladness, that
peace smooths the brow, but this fills the breast; as the Sinner has trouble
within, in the midst of all his peace without; so a Believer has Pea^^ thin, in
the midst of all his Troubles with (...) World you shall have trouble; but in
me, (...) have peace.

Thirdly, The Worlds peace has only a nether Spring arising out of the
Creature, out of World^ comforts, therefore it must needs be unclean; for an
unclean Fountain cannot bring forth clean Water: But the peace of Christians
his an upper Spring, it flows from the manifestation of the love of God in
Christ, it is from the sprinkling of Christ's Blood on the Conscience, it flows
upon the workings of Christ's Spirit upon the Soul, which is first a
Counselor, then a Comforter: Oh! how pure must this Peace be in a Believers
Soul, that flow; from so pure a Spring?

Fourthly, The Worlds peace, is a peace given to Sinners; it is a peace in sin,
and it is a peace with sin, as the Prophet Isaiah tells us, It Is a Covenant with
Hell, and an Agreement with Death, (God deliver us from that peace.) Again,
Christ's peace is given to none but Believers, it is their privilege only, a
stranger don't intermeddle with his Joy, Prove. 14.10. The heart knows his own
bitterness, but a stranger does not intermeddle with his Joy.

Fifthly, The Worlds peace, is a fading, dying, transitory thing, it withers in
the Sand, The triumphing of the Wicked is but short, and the joy of the
Hypocrite is but for a moment, Job 20.5. Solomon does elegantly liken it to the
cracking of Thorns under a Pot, which is but a blaze, and is gone, Eccles. 7.6.
So is the Sinner's peace, it is for a spurt, and is soon gone; but the peace
that Christ gives to Believers, is durable and abiding peace: Your Joy no man
shall take from you, it appears in Life, in Death, and after Death: First, it is
our peace in Life, grace brings forth present peace. It Is said of the Primitive
Christians, They walked in the fear of the Lord, and in the Comforts of the
Holy Ghost, Acts 9.31. It Is a remarkable expression, Psalm. 19.11. In keeping
thy Commands, there is great Reward; he does not fay, for keeping them, which
respects the end of the Work; but in keeping of them, which looks at the Work
it self. My Brethren, Every Duty done in sincerity, reflects a peace in
Conscience, as every flower carries its own sweetness: It Is possible, I grant,
a Believer may not always find and feel this peace, few do, some seldom find
it, few find it so always: the remains of corruption, breaking forth to
interrupt, or Temptations to hinder. And God's desertion, may darken and hide
it, and a Believer may seem to be totally lost: yet, in this condition, which
is the worst a Child of God can be in, he has a double peace.

First, a Peace in the Promises, in this very Condition: and what you have in
Bonds and Bills, you account as good as money in your Pockets.

Secondly, he has it in the Seed, Light is sown for the Righteous, and gladness
for the upright in heart, Psalm. 97.11. Grace is the Seed of Peace, which Christ
has sown in the furrows of the Soul, and therefore Peace shall spring out of
the furrows of the Soul: Indeed, this Seed springs up sooner in some, then in
others; yet every Saint shall have a reaping time sooner, or later, Psalm.
126.6. He that goes forth, and weepeth, bearing precious Seed, shall doubtless
come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him: If he stays long for
the Fruit, he shall have a greater Crop at last; if he reaps not now, he shall
be sure to reap hereafter, Psalm the 37.37. Mark the perfect man, and behold
the upright, for the and of that man is peace. Secondly, by this peace which is
the peace of a Child of God, its a peace of death; grace will minister to us
then, and that ministration shall be peace: The Sinners peace leaves him when
he comes to the grave; though in Life it fills him, yet in Death it leaves him.
A believer has a twofold spring of peace: The first is from above him, the
other is from within him: That spring that runs with peace above him, is from
the blood of Christ, sprinkled on his Conscience; the other that is from within
him, is from the sincerity of his heart, in the ways of obedience. My
Brethren, when we lie on our Deathbeds, and can reflect on our sincerity in all
Gods ways, this will be peace at last, so it was in Hezekiah, Isaiah 38.3.
Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth
and with a prefect heart, and have done that which was good in thy sight.
There Is nothing makes a Deathbed so hard, and so uneasy, as a life spent in
the service of sin and lust, and nothing makes a Deathbed so pleasant, as a
life spent in the service of Christ. Grace will bring forth Peace, if not in
this life; yet, certainly, it will be sure after Death: if Time brings not this
fruit to ripeness, yet Eternity shall; grace in Time, will be glory in
Eternity; Holiness now, will be Happiness then; what ever it is a man sows in
this world, that he reaps in the next world: Be not deceived, God is not
mocked, for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap: He that sows to
the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that sows to the
spirit, shall of the spirit reap life ^verlasting, Gal. 6.7, 8. When Sin shall
end in sorrow and misery, Grace shall end in peace, in joy, in glory; Well done
thou good and faithful servant, enter into the joy of thy Master, Mat. 25.21.
Whosoever shares in the grace of Christ in this world, shall be sure to share
with the joy of Christ in the next world, and that joy is joy unspeakable, and
full of glory. I will wind up all in a threefold Application, by way of
exhortation to three sorts of persons.

First, To such as have this grace and peace.

Secondly, To such as have this grace and no peace.

Thirdly, To such as have neither grace no^ peace.

First, To such as have both grace and peace; I Will speak to them in two or
three things. First, Admi^e thankfully the Father and Son, the Fathers Grace,
and the Sons Love, for both had a hand in this; therefore bless both the
Father for willing it to us, and the Son for working it in us. Grace and Peace
are the fruits' of Gods eternal Election: for this blessing the Father gives;
but the Aplication of it to us is the fruit of Christ's Redemtion and
Intercession; How can you think of Hell and damnation, and see your self freed
from it; And how can you think of the Dreadful Fury and Vengence of God, your
self not under it? How can you look on your state changed, your hearts renewed,
grace ratified and reconciled, and your Conscience quieted? How can you think
of these things, but must admire the love of the Father in giving this to you,
and the love of the Son in purchasing this for you? All the grace and mercy
that is given to us, is by Christ purchased for us; Grace and Peace are fruits
of the redeeming blood of Christ purchased.

Secondly, Do not envy the conditions or possessions of the men of the world;
they have Riches and Honors, Prosits, and Pleasures, but they neither have
Grace nor Peace. Therefore do not envy their happiness. There is a story of a
Roman that was condemned by the Court Martial to die for breaking his rank to
steal a bunch of Grapes; and as he was going to his Execution, his fellow
Soldiers laughed at him, and others envyed at him, that he should have Grapes
and they none: Now (says he) do not envy me for my bunch of Grapes, for you
would be loath to have them at the rate I must pay for them. (My Brethren) You
that are the Children of Grace and peace, don't envy at the men of the world,
at their Riches, their Comforts, their Pleasures; for I am sure you would be
loath to have them at the price they pay for them: for the end of these things
are Death.

Thirdly, Don't complain of the worst condition that the Providence of God
shall cast you into; in this world it may be you shall suffer hard things, but
remember, so long as thy soul is secure, never complain of hard things. (My
Brethren) As God your Father brought you into a state of Grace and Peace, and
thereby secured his love to your souls in Christ, can you complain of hard
things? So let the joy of the Lord be your strength; Rejoice in the Lord
always, and again I say, Rejoice, Phil. 4.4.

The second Use is to such as have neither Gra^s nor Peace: May I not say, I
speak to many such^ I would I might not? Are there not many that are without
Grace, and therefore must needs be without Peace?

They may have the world's peace, but they have none of this Peace; let me beg
of you to get out of this graceless condition: if you love your Souls, don't
live one day, nor one hour, nor one moment longer in a graceless state. Oh that
you would believe the words of a dying man, for so I am to you, and such words
use to be remembered. Oh remember this as a Testimony I leave with you, that the
love of Sin, and lack of Grace, will ruin and destroy every Soul at last: But
you will say, How shall I get a share in this grace and peace?

I answer, First, Break off all your f^lse peace: we can never have true peace
with God, when we content our selve; with false peace; you will never seek that
peace which Christ has purchased for you, while you content your selves with
that cursed peace which the Old man has wrought in you: Oh therefore, break off
all false peace, which is not the fruit of Grace.

Secondly, Labor to see, and be convinced of the miserable, and of the naked
condition your Souls be in for want of the righteousness of Christ for a
covering: without this, oh Soul, thou art miserable, wretched, poor and naked.
Be convinced also, what a miserable thing it is, to have God our Enemy: God is
the sinners Enemy; it is a fearful thing, to fall into the hands of the living
God: Oh be convinced of thy nakedness, without Christ's righteousness, and thy
emptiness without his fullness.

Thirdly, Labor to go out of your selves to Christ for grace and peace: surely
in the Lord shall one say, I have righteousness and strength. I, there it is to
be found. Labor for a thirsty frame of Soul, for the promises run far to
such, that he will fill the hungry with good things. Go to Christ, oh Soul,
beg, pray, never leave God, till he has given thee an interest in Christ, for
none can come to me, except the Father draw him: there is no pardon for the
least sin out of Christ, but there is pardon for the greatest sin in Christ;
one sin will damn the Soul out of Christ, but no sin can hurt the Soul in
Christ. Oh go to Christ, Soul, never give rest to thy eyes, nor slumber to thy
lids, till thou have made peace with God in the blood of Christ: one sting of
the fiery Serpent was mortal, without looking upon the brazen Serpent: So one
sin will damn a Soul out of Christ, but no sin can damn a Soul in Christ.

Thirdly, To such as have grace, but no sense of peace, this is the counsel I
would leave with all such. Be much in the exercise of grace, pray much, believe
much, use grace much, for the exercise and improving of grace will produce
peace: There are ten duties which are to be the sphere of grace in activity,
and in performing of them, we shall have peace: First make Religion your
business, the main design of your lives, be Christians to purpose; be not only
Christians by the bye, but let your Conversation be as becomes the Gospel of
Christ. Phil. 1.27.

Secondly, Put forth renewed Acts of Faith (...) Christ every day, and
remember, it is as much your duty to believe in Christ to day, as if you had
never believed before. Oh live by Faith every day, and this will bring peace to
you.

Thirdly, Maintain a constant Communion with God daily: this Communion with God
is man^ chief good; the happiness of a Child is in communion with his Father,
and the happiness of (...) Wife is in communion with her Husband, and this is
the happiness of a Believers Soul, communion with God the Father, through
Christ our Head and Husband: The seed of peace, its true, it is low^ in the
Soul in Union; but then it takes root downward, and brings forth fruit upward.
Spiritual peace will never be obtained, if communion with God be not
maintained; that gives comfort in the midst of all sorrows, and satisfies all
doubts, and reco^pences all wants. Lo, this is the fruit of communion with God.

Fourthly, Be good at all times; but of all, best in bad times; many Christians
lose their peace, by remitting of their grace, and let loose their reins of
Religion, to avoid the censures of a crooked generation. A Christians zeal
should be like the Winter fire, that burns the hottest when the Air is coolest;
or like the Lilly, that looks beautiful, though among Thorns; so should a
Child of God, though among sinners.

Fifthly, In all conditions, choose sufferings, rather then sinning; If ever you
would have peace, choose suffering rather then sinning; he that value^^ peace
with God, or peace with Conscience, he must make this his choice: thus Daniel
rather chose to be cast^o Lions, then to lose the peace of his Conscience; the
three Children chose rather to burn in the Furnace, then bow to the Image: One
said, He would rather go to Hell free from sin, then to live in Heaven with
guilt on his Conscience. (My Brethren) let me a little enlarge, because
suffering may overtake us; for Persecution is the genius of the Gospel:
therefore let me leave 4 short Rules with you concerning sufferings.

See that your Cause be good, your Call be clear, your Spirit meek, and your
End right. Sufferings cannot bring out peace without either of them; but with
them all our sufferings shall be peace.

First, Let your Cause be good, its not the blood, but the cause that makes a
Martyr; its not for every cause, a Christian should engage to suffer: every
cause will no more bear suffering, then every little stream will bear a Ship;
nor will Christ let go swee ness to every suffering, 1 Pet. 4.15. Let none of
you suffer as a Murderer, or as a Thief, or as an Evil doer, or as a busie-body
in other men's matters. To suffer thus, is neither Christian-like, nor
comfortable. Some suffer rather as Malefactors, then as Christ's Martyrs.

Secondly, Let your Call be clear; its amiss, to have a good cause without a
call: Some may suffer for the cause of God, and yet sin in suffering for want
of a call. Christ calls not all to suffer: to some it is given, to others it is
not. If thy call be clear, thy peace will be sweet, though thy sufferings be
never so great. But you will say, How shall I know when I am called to suffer?

I answer, First, when Truth suffers by our filence, then are we called to
suffer.

Secondly, when our lives will be the denial of Christ, then are we called to
deny our lives for Christ.

Thirdly, When sin and suffering surrounds us, that we cannot get out; but we
must either run through sin or sufferings, then I may safely conclude that
Christ called me to suffer, and in this cause we may expect the peace and
sweetness of his presence.

Thirdly, The third Direction for suffering, is this. Our spirit must be meek;
so was Christ, he went as a Lamb to the slaughter.

Its possible, a man may be right in his cause, and yet sinful in his carriage;
and if so, no wonder if Christ be not sweet to us. To be fierce, and raging,
and reviling in suffering, its not becoming humanity, and therefore much less
like Christianity. A Christian should be like Christ, Acts 45. And they
departed from the presence of the Council, rejoicing that they were counted
worthy to suffer shame for his Name. It becomes those that are found in the
Spirit, to give blessing for cursing; the more of Christ's spirit is in us in
our sufferings, the more comfort and joy we shall receive from our sufferings.

Fourthly, See that your end in suffering be right, if it be Self, or
singularity, or schism, then Christ cannot be sweet to thee. Some have died,
that their name^ might live. Socrates died in the defense of the truth^ and to
prove, that there is but one God; but whether he died for honor, applause, or
for Gods sake I think it is no hard thing to determine. But (...) thy cause be
good, thy call clear, thy spirit meek, and thy end right, and then you shall
have peace in all your sufferings: that is the fifth thing. Choose suffering,
rather then sinning.

Sixthly, If you would have peace, be much in studying the Scriptures: for as
God is the God of peace, and Christ the Prince of peace, so the Gospel is the
Gospel of peace, which God has given thee to lead thee in the ways of peace,
Great peace have they that love thy Laws.

Seventhly, Take heed of Apostasy, either in Doctrine or Principles. Though a
Believer is freed from Apostasy in the state of grace, yet he is not freed from
Apostasy in the degrees of grace. He may fall sinfully, though he cannot fall
finally. Demas fell by one, St. Peter by the other. Pray with David, Psalm.
17.5. Hold up my goings in thy path, that my footsteps slip not.

Eighthly, Make the Word of God your Rule in all things; be sure you have a
Scripture-warrant for all your practices. But especially, keep close to
Scripture, in matters of Gods Worship.

There are endless Discourses about the Mode of Gods Worship; I have no
disputing-time. It is good in difficult cases, always to take the surest side.
For Instance: If I follow the Traditions of man, for the worship of God, I may
sin; but if I keep close to the directions of God in the Scripture, I am sure I
cannot sin; for this is the sure word of Prophecy, to which you do well to take
heed, therefore in such a doubtful case, Gods will is, that we take the surest
side: go to the Law and to the Testament; Labor to be fruitful and grounded
Christians.

Ninthly, Keep up the power of godliness, do not let Religion down into a
life-less formality; The Righteous shall flourish like a Palm Tree: He shall
grow like a Cedar in Lebanon; those that be planted in the House of the Lord,
shall flourish in the Courts of our God, Psalm. 92.12, 13. My Brethren, it is as
much a duty in them that have grace, to improve it, as for them that have no
grace, for to get it. If you sit under the daily means, the daily waterings of
God, and do not grow; do you think this will be peace in the latter end, surely
no (my Brethren) your fruitfulness under the Gospel, is of very great
concernment. It is unfruitfulness that makes God lay his Vineyard waste. Its
fruitfulness that procures the forwarding your account in the day of grace.

Tenthly, Observe that excellent rule of the Apostle in Phil. 48. Finally,
Brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever
things are ^ust, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely
whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, and if there be
an praise, think on these things. And now, my Brethren, I commend you to God,
and to the Word of his grace, that is infinitely able to make you wise to
sa^va^ion, with this Benediction, which I shall mak^ my Valediction, Grace be
unto you, and Peace from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.

Master JOSEPH CARIL His Farewell SERMON, UPON
Revel. 3. Ver. 4. the latter part of that Verse. And they shall walk with me
in white, for they are worthy.


IN the former part of this Verse, you heard the commendation of those few
names in Sardis: It was this, They had not defiled their garments. In this
latter part, you have their encouragement in their Reward: They shall walk with
me in white. In which encouragement, I told you we might consider two things,
or take it into two parts.

First, That they should walk with Christ. Secondly, They should walk in White.
I have spoken to the former of these, They shall walk with Christ; and that
the Scripture holds forth under a twofold notion:

First, As matter of duty; It is a duty to walk with Christ.

Secondly, It is a matter of Promise: They that keep their Garments undefiled,
and live in high favor with Christ, they shall walk with Christ: we favor
those that walk with us.

Walking with Christ, notes to us three things.

1. That we have peace with him.

2. That we have intimacy with him.

3. That his being so much above us, we should have this favor from him.

And hence I noted, the great privilege of the People of God, that they shall
walk with Christ.

1. It notes, the great satisfaction of the Saints, to walk with Christ: they
shall be filled with his company.

2. How safe it is, and what safety there is to walk with Christ: he has a
Wing to spread over them.

3. What opportunities such have, as walk with Christ.

4. What liberty such have as walk with Christ.

5. Such as walk with Christ, may be sure he will communicate his secrets to
them, he will show them what they have to do.

2. We showed you the great goodness of Jesus Christ, that he would take such
Creatures to walk with him, such defiled Creatures.

3. Then let us take heed of keeping our Garments undefiled, lest Jesus Christ
cast us out of his company, and we can no longer walk with Christ any more. Oh!
take heed of walking blameless in the ways of Christ.

These things were spoken from the first Point: Now I come to the walking with
Christ in white.

In opening the Text, I told you white might be considered two ways:

1. As it respects our state, and so that by way of Justification, and thus
they shall walk with Christ; but this is not the walking in white the Text
means.

2. Here is a further walking in white, and that is matter of reward to the
people of God.

1. To walk with Christ in white, it is matter of honor, white garments are
matter of honor. Princes, great Kings walk in white garments, so the Saints of
God shall walk in white. Christ will honor them, and give them honor among
them, because they have kept their Garments undefiled. They shall walk in white
like great Princes, and honored Persons. A good name is better then precious
Ointment: They that are good indeed they shall have a good name, they shall
walk in white. To keep the Conscience clean, is to keep the Credit clean, and
they who are careful (...) blot their Conversations, Christ will take (...)
their Reputations, that they be not blotted, that they walk with me in honor.

'Twas worthily spoken in the 11. of the Hebrews, They kept their garments
undefiled, and it was by the power of Faith, and they obtained a good report by
Faith, keeping themselves from the pollutions of the World, they kept
themselves a good report. This honor and good report which we get, by keeping
our Garments undefiled, is sure: Abraham had an honorable Title, Abraham, My
Friend, and a man after my own heart, Isa. 45.4. Since thou wast precious in my
sight, thou wast honorable; and not only so, that the people of God are
honorable in his eyes, but they also sometimes walk in white, in the eyes of
the men of the World: he can give his people room in the opinions of men, he
moves their hearts to think well of them, and he opens their mouths to speak
well of them; though indeed the honor which they, who keep their Garments
undefiled, have in this World, it is most usually from good men, from godly
men: and indeed, honor of them is most honorable.

It is not much to us, what others say or think of us what the wicked World
judge of us; yet, I say, God can, and does sometimes raise a Testimony of
honor for his people, amongst carnal men of the World. Joseph would not defile
his Garments, he walked in white amongst men: true, he was cast into Prison,
what of that? he was respected by the Keeper of the Prison, and afterward he
walked in white.

In the whole Persi^^ Court, Daniel was one that walked in white, with (...)
men of the World; first with the Prince of the Eunuchs, he had tender favor
with him, he told him he would not disobey God, to please men; yet he did not
rail against him, and call him a stubborn fellow, because he would not bow to
Baal; and afterward Daniel was as great a man as any in all that Province; he
walked in white. God has created Testimonies of honor for his people, from
some men of the World; yea, they many times put white Garments upon them: so it
was with Christ, Matthew. 27.4. common-men put a good report upon Christ, a white
Garment. Truly, says the Centurion, this was the Son of God. Truly, this was a
righteous man, says he; when he saw how he carried himself at his death, he
gave him a good report: Thus it does come to pass, God does sometimes keep up
their honor in the World, who will not defile their garments, nor touch the
Sacrifice of Baal; and it falls out so with them, that the Lord shall clear up
their credit and reputation, and they shall walk in white, in honor, before
the men of the World. Rev. 6.11. where the Souls under the Altar are spoken of,
who were miserably used in this World, white Robes were given them, to every
one of them, that is, their Evidences were cleared.

This may teach us the readiest way to the white Robe, to the Robe of Honor,
it is to keep us from being defiled with sinful practices: certainly, they who
please God, he can make he World to honor them; if God approves us, he can
make the world approve us too; yet we must not think to have all men speak well
of us: yet this we may say, if we keep our Garments undefiled, we shall walk in
white in the eyes of men, if God see our Garments in the dirt, and spotted with
the filth of the World, it will spoil the honor we should have in the World:
as it was said of Arius, when his garments were defiled, they called him
Satanarius, that is to say, devilish: Thus it may be, for the Lord has a time
to take our good name from us, to cause our light of honor to be taken from us.

And as he has caused us to walk in the white of honor in the world, so he
does sometimes cause us to walk in reproach with the World: they who defile
their Garments, lose their honor with men, and they lose their joy they should
have hereafter, Mal, 2.9. You have departed from my Law, therefore will I make
you contemptible in the eyes of all men. It is a design of the spirit of
wickedness, to draw men to sin, that they may upbraid them; that, I conceive,
is the sense of the Apostle, Gal. 6.13. For neither they themselves who are
circumcised keep the Law, but desire to have you circumcised, that they might
glory in your flesh, says he: Oh there are some of this wicked Spirit, that
would draw men to such and such wickedness, not that they joy in their
returning; but that they might glory in their flesh, when as they who stand
fast, do even force a good Testimony from their Enemies: So it was the unhappy
chance of Cranmer: the Papists did persuade him to subscribe, and did he get
any honor by it? No truly, they did upbraid him, and reproach him, and so he
had dyed in a raving condition, had not the Lord been merciful to him. I
remember a speech of St. Austin, about drinking of Healths: Oh! say they, it is
upon the King's Birthday, and we cannot avoid it; If we deny it, say they, we
shall be reproached and scorned of men. He gives them many Answers to it; but
one, as I remember, was this, God will so work, that if you will not comply
with them, they, in their hearts, will honor you; and whereas if you did
comply with them, they would dishonor you, and say you are base spirited. That
is one thing of this Point, that keeping close to Jesus Christ, will get you
this Reward; you shall walk with him in the white of honor: they shall walk in
the white of honor with his People, and it may be with the World too.

2 They shall walk in white, in the white of peace, and joy, and inward comfort.

I showed you, in the opening of the Text, how the Scripture calls that walking
in white. Then the Point is this: What ever becomes of the other white of
honor in the World, they shall be sure of this, that abundance of peace, and
joy, and comfort, shall possess their souls, that keep their garments white;
they shall walk in the inward white of joy and peace with Jesus Christ, and
this is a blessed Reward.

Indeed, now this joy, this white of joy, arises in the Soul three ways.

1. From the Testimony of their own Consciences; Oh! they who have a good
Testimony from their own Consciences walk in white, 2 Cor. 1.12. We have this
for our rejoicing, the Testimony of our Consciences, that in all simplicity,
and godly sincerity, we have our conversation in Heaven; that is, walking in
white: this is our rejoicing, our Conscience speaks well of us, and kindly to
us, and who is able to express the sweetness of this thing? None can know what
this is, but they that have it, as it is said of the New Name written upon the
white Stone, Rev. 2.1^ It Is a thing beyond expression, what the joy an^ peace
of a good Conscience is! Now this I say, that our white Garments, and our
walking in white, arises from the Testimony of our Consciences.

2. As from the Testimony of our Consciences, so from that Testimony, which is
greater than out Consciences, the Spirit the shedding abroad of Divine Love:
thus it is with those, that do not defile their Garments, but endure any thing,
rather then defile their Garments, Romans 5.3, 4, 5.

And not only so, but we glory in Tribulations, knowing, Tribulation works
Patience, and Patience Experience, and Experience Hope, and Hope makes not
ashamed, (and whence was all this?) because of the Holy Ghost which was given
to us, this causes joy unspeakable, The Spirit it self bears witness with
our Spirits, that we are the Children of God. This Witness does cause wonderful
joy, much more then the witnesses of our own Consciences.

3. This joy does arise from that well-grounded hope, which that Soul has that
keeps himself clean: hope of enjoying Heaven at last, hope of future glory is
our present joy, Romans 5.2. By whom also we have access by Faith into this
Grace, wherein we stand and joyce in hope of the glory of God.

Now they who keep their Garments white, have good ground of hope of the love
of God; therefore this must needs cause them to walk comfor ably: as they who
have this hope purify themselves, so they who purify themselves, have good
ground of this hope, and therein great cause to rejoice*

Pet. 1.5, 6. Who are kept by the power of God, brough Faith, unto Salvation,
ready to be revealed in ^e last times, wherein ye greatly rejoice; though now
for (...) season (if need be) ye are in heaviness through many emptations. We
walk in white, in the hope we have of that In^eritance: Now lay these three
things together, ^f they who keep their Garments undefiled, have ^he Testimony
of their own Consciences, and the ^estimony of the Spirit, shedding the Love of
God ^n their hearts, and a well-grounded hope of fu^ure ^lory, how can it be,
but these must walk in white ^ith Jesus Christ? that is, in comfort and joy of
^e Spirit, and of their own spirits.

Thus David walked, he had abundance of joy upon the Conscience of his own
integrity, and keeping his heart and hands clean from those iniquities ^is
enemies charged him with, Ps. 3. The Lord shall judge his people. Judge me, O
Lord, according to my ^ighteousness, and according to mine integrity that is in
^^e. He appeals to the Lord, the Lord shall judge ^is people: Judge me, O Lord,
according to my ^ighteousness. Thus he appeals to God himself, he ^ad so much
confidence, and his heart gave him that, he kept himself from those iniquities.

So Job walked in white, though his Friends blackt him exceedingly, yet he
walked in white in his Conscience, Job 16.19. Behold my Witness is in Heaven
and my Record is on high: I have not only a Witness in my Conscience, but my
Witness is above. He walked in white, notwithstanding all his afflictions from
God and his Friends. Hezekiah walked in this white, when death (...) him in the
face: Lord, thou know I have we upright with thee.

I need not stay in the proof of the thing, let (...) make some Use and
Improvement of it.

Use. Is this blessed reward to those who ke^^ their garments white, to walk in
the white of peac^ and joy? then here we see the happiness of all tho^^ who are
true to Christ and his ways: Psalm. 119.^ Blessed are the undefiled in the way,
who walk in the Law of the Lord. It Is just in the Language of (...) Text; they
indeed shall walk in white: it is a great part of our blessedness to have peace
of conscience, and inward joy. Oh how much better is it that the peace and joy
of this world, and the comforts of this world? Prove. 15.13. A merry heart, or
as another Translation says, A good Conscience: and indeed a merry heart, and
a good Conscience, do but one explain the other; a merry heart, or, a good
Conscience, is a continual Feast: Here is no^ surfeiting in this feast, but a
continual Music, continual joy and comfort; oh how blessed are the^ who are
undefiled in the way!

That which Christ said of the Lilly, Solomon (...) all his glory, was not
arrayed like one of these; so may I say of the Lilly-white soul, that keeps
himself white in the world, who keeps himself white i^ matter of practice, and
worship, Solomon in all (...) glory, was not arrayed like one of these
Lilly-white ones! Oh the Rivers of Consolations that flow to them, that keep
themselves out of the pudd^^^ of this world! If you keep your selves from the
puddles of the world, from the dung of the wo^^ ye shall have Rivers of joy
flowing into your souls. I may say to all such, as Solomon says, Eccles. 11.9.
Go thy way: it is a familiar speaking to them; Go thy way, blessed soul, eat
thy bread with joy, though the world feed thee with the bread of adversity, and
though the world give thee nothing but the water of affliction, yet let thy
garments be always white; though the world cloth thee in mourning, and cause
thee to prophecy in sackcloth with the Witnesses, yet be of good comfort, O
Lilly-white soul, for God now accepts thy works; now drink thy Wine with a
merry heart, thy labor, thy ambitious labor is, that, whether present or
absent, thou may be accepted of him; thou have the fruits of thy labor, the
Lord accepts thy works, therefore rejoice in it. Here is the happiness to those
who keep themselves clean from a defiled, and a defiling world.

2. This Point gives us an account why the servants of Christ stand so strictly
upon their terms with the world, even while some call it peevishness, others
ignorance, others wilful stubbornness.

What is the reason? The reason is, because they understand in some measure,
and have had experience in some measure, what it is to walk with Christ in
white, and it has left such a relish upon their souls, that they would not
lose it for all the dainty morsels of this world; they had rather indeed walk
with Christ in white, then walk with the world in scarlet; therefore they must
stand upon their terms, Prove. 10.32. The lips of the righteous know what is
acceptable: The lips are instruments of Speech, not faculties of knowledge. Ay,
but (...) is a great deal of commerce and converse be^^^^ the Speech and the
Understanding; and a rig^^ous man will speak nothing with his lips, but w^ he
understands, therefore he is said to understa^^ The lips of the righteous know
what is accepta^^^ To whom? The lips of the righteous know what is (...)
ceptable to God; for they are acquainted with (...) Rule, and God has showed
them his Coven^^ he has showed them the pattern of his House, a^^ the way of
his Worship: now, because they a^^ pretty well skilled, and know what is
acceptab^ to God, therefore they will run any hazard, undergo any affliction,
rather then do any thing that will not please God, or be hurtful to their own
consciences; they are afraid of losing their peace, and comfort, and joy with
God, therefore they will not let go the ways of God, as Job says, Job 27.6. I
(...) hold fast my integrity, and my heart shall not reproach me, so long as I
live: as if he had said, You my friends have reproached me; but I am resolved,
my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live.

The Heart or Conscience is a busy faculty, and has many offices, it records
what we do, and come as a witness: the Conscience is judge of what (...) do,
and accordingly reproves what we do am^^ therefore says Job, I Will take care of
this: I am more afraid of the report of conscience, then of any m^ whatsoever:
therefore I will not do any thing (...) may cause my conscience to reproach me,
as (...) as I live. This is upon the heart of Gods peop^^ they are resolved,
let men reproach and rail aga^^ them as much as they will, their hearts shall
not reproach them.

3. In the third place, let it be a word of Caution and Admonition to all at
this day, to take heed of defiling their garments: If you defile your garments,
Christ will pronounce another sentence, he will pronounce a sentence against
you, he has threatenings for those who defile their garments, in the place of
rewards, for those who keep them clean. They who defile their garments, shall
walk in garments of black, in the black of dishonor: as Job says, I walk all
day mourning without the Sun: the Sun of righteousness shall not shine upon
them; Oh what bitter and sour things have many tasted for defiling their
garments, when for favor of men, or to please men, they have stained their own
garments! What sad and bitter things has been upon them? how has conscience
risen up against them? Oh take heed of the After-claps of conscience, I may
say, take heed of the Thunderclaps of conscience; for they will come upon you
one time or other, if you defile your garments: As they who to please men
defile their garments, often fall into their displeasure, whose favor they
sought: so oftentimes, such fall into displeasure with themselves, or, to be
sure, they shall at last: there is many a one lives under the dis-favour of his
own conscience, many a one, that his conscience will not give him a good word,
or good look, whence has it been? they have defiled their garments. They who
venture to do things displeasing to God, shall not long be pleasing to
themselves.

The story speaks of Francis Spira, that to plea^ men, to save an estate, he
defiled his garments^ and he presently fell into rebuk of himself and lived
under the rebuke of his Conscience a long time.

Job 8.15. speaks of the Hypocrite, ^ his hope shall be cut off: The word
signifies to loath, so some translate it, His hope shall be a loathing to him,
he shall loath his hope. There is a twofold loathing: First, a loathing to
repentance, that is, a gracious loathing, a loathing our selves for our sins
against God. And there is a loathing of despair, and that is the loathing there
meant: the Hypocrite shall loath his own hope, that is, he shall loath it
despairingly. It Is an affliction to be loathed by men, but it is a dreadful
judgment, to be loathed of our selves despairingly; this is the suburbs of
hell, for this will be the portion of the damned for ever, for their vanity,
for their madness, it is next to the Regions of Hell, for their worm dies not;
and that is the worm of Conscience: Oh therefore take heed, Conscience may be
silent, yea, it may flatter for a time; but when Conscience is provoked, it
will speak, yea thunder.

There is no such thundering-Preacher in the world as Conscience is; The
Thundering of Mount Sinai, is not like the thundering of our Conscience.

Fourthly and lastly, Let it be for Exhortation, and encouragement; for Christ
here makes it an encouragement: so let this be an encouragement to keep our
garments undefiled, the remembrance that we shall walk with him in white, in
the white of peace^ and joy in this world: Who would not walk in th^^ white?
Who would not be among those who keep their garments white, in the midst of a
defiled, and defiling, world?

Let me give you but a threefold Consider^aion, to stir you up to an exceeding
Exactness and Carfulness not to defile your garments, seeing there is such a
reward promised, such a Habit of White promised, as this White, wherein we
shall walk with Jesus Christ. I is an Angelical Happiness; so much Heaven is
come down upon you, while ye have this White. It Is Heaven before Heaven, Matthew.
28.3. the Angel that came down to the Sepulcher of Christ, his Raiment was
white as the Light. The Martyrs when they had Angelical Apparitions, they
always appeared to them in white; as one upon the Rack thought he felt an
Angel supplying him, while his enemies tormented him.

Christ calls the Pharisees whited Sepulchers; they were not white, but whited
Sepulchers: that is a wofal condition to be whited like a Sepulchers. Thus it
is with those who defile themselves, they are whited walls, and whited
Sepulchers. They that keep themselves white, shall walk in white, shall have
Angelical Glory.

Secondly, Consider, This white, or walking in white, is such as conquers all
the blackness of this world: it is not possible for the world to alter the
color of this white, how much dirt soever they put upon it, this white will
be white still; they cannot turn it to be black, they cannot take away this
peace, this joy from us; they cannot strip us of this habit: they may pull off
our fine garments, but you cannot be stripped of this white. Your (...) shall no
man take from you, 2. Cor. 6.20. As sorrowful yet always rejoicing; as poor,
yet making mam^rich; as having nothing, yet freely possessing all things. The
world may put us into a sad estate as to the world, yet we are not out of our
White garmenty, always rejoicing, Haba. 3.13. Although the Fig Tree shall not
blossom. neither shall fruit be in the Vines, the labor of the Olive shall
fail, and the fields shall yield no meat, and the flock shall be cut off from
the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls; this cannot take away the
White garments; no, says the Prophet, Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, and joy
in the God of my salvation: It Is a conquering joy, turns all sorrow into joy,
and blackness to white; therefore keep clean.

Thirdly, consider this: This White of peace and joy, as it is a joy
unconquerable, so it is that will be with us most, when we most need it: when
wordly joys are farthest from us, then this joy will be nearto us; that is a
mavelous comfort, to have comfort in its season. The Martyrs who have kept
themselves white, have had this White, and walk^ in this white; but, when they
had most need of it, and came actually to suffering, then they have had most of
it. This is a blessed thing! This the Martyrs of Jesus Christ have given
witness of, although they have had peace and joy in their consciences at other
times, yet never so much as in the hour of temptation. When they have been call
into the Cole-house, they have had white ^^^ments; when they have been cast
into priso^^ and dungeons, how have they rejoiced? It Is said, of Paul and
Silas, they were men that kept their garments undefiled, and they had a great
deal of peace and joy when they were put into the Stocks and Dungeons, then
they sung at midnight: What an enlargment of heart had they at that time!

So in the Stories of ancient and latter Time, how have they rejoiced, and gone
triumphing to Suffering? For then Christ gives most of this White: It has been
the use of Persecutors to put filthy garments upon the Martyrs, drawing
pictures of Devils upon them; and as their malice has risen to the hight (in
that time of sufferings) to make them look like Devils, then the love of Christ
has risen to the hight, and they have been full of peace and joy at that time;
therefore be encouraged to walk with Christ in this White. This white is an
Angelical Habit, it is an unconquerable Habit, and it is that will be with us
most, when we have most need of it. I should have added a third: As walking
with Christ is an honor, and it is walking in the white of peace and joy;

So thirdly, it is a truth of walking with Christ in the white of glory, as in
the Tran figuration, which was a Type of Heaven, Christ's raiment was White, so
as no Fuller on earth was able to whiten it; and that is it which I might have
spoken of to you, that they who keep their garments undefiled here, shall be
sure of that, to walk with Christ in glory hereafter. If we should miss of the
white of Honor, and have not much of the white of Joy, yet be sure we shall
walk with Christ in the white of Glory.

I would only say this to you, That as I have from this Text, and many more,
labored to bring port Souls into a white state, to a state of Justification,
to a state of Holiness. And as I have been pressing you to keep your garments
white, that you may be in the habit of White, as your Reward; so it shall be
the desire and prayer of my heart, that if I should have no more opportunities
among you, that as you have been stirred up to get into this white of Grace,
that you and I may meet in the white of Glory, where we shall never part.

Here are three whites: The white of Honor is good, the white of Peace and joy
is very good, the white of Glory is best of all: That is the answer of all our
Prayers, and that is the issue of all our Working; then we shall have as much
as we can hold for ever.

Mr. VENNING His Fare-wel SERMON.
Heb. 10. Verse 23. Let us hold fast the Profession of our Faith, without
wavering (for he is faithful that promised.)


THat Christians are greatly concerned, nor only to believe (...) to make
Prefession of their belie^^ (...) hold fast their faith, and the Profess^^ it,
is that which I have already proved unto you; the several Obligations that lie
upon Christians hereunto, have been in one or two Sermons handled among you:
the great Obligation here annexed is, ( for he is faithful that has promised.
From whence, and from other places of Scripture, I have deduced seve^^l
Arguments, and propounded them unto you; the the last of which, was this; None
can promise us better then God can; none can threaten us worse then God can,
and therefore it concerns us to hold fast: If any body can do more for you, or
against you, then God can; leave God, and cleave to that Person: But seeing
that is impossible, let it be as impossible for you to leave God: Can any body
promise you better then Heaven? and that God has promised to them that do
believe. Can any threaten you with worse then Hell? and that God has threatened
to them that do not believe. I shall now proceed, to touch the remaining
Arguments that are yet behind and give you a few helps, with which I shall
conclude this Discourse a^ this time; I pray God I may not say Preaching too:
There are several Arguments to be drawn,

First, From the Subject concerned, Us.

Secondly, From the Object, the Profession of our Faith. And,

Thirdly, From the Act, with the Qualificationt, Hold fast without wavering.

First, From the Subject concerned, Us; Let [us] hold fast, whatever others do;
if they let go Faith, and God, and (...), and Souls, and all^; yet let us hold
fast. (...) the Apostle speaks of, (...) to Believers, the^^^^ a very great.
Emph sis in the word We, or Us; as in the (...) of Tim. 6.8. says ^e Having
food and raiment, let us be content. Indeed he might have said, Let every man
be content; but the emphasis lies upon the us: If no body else will be content,
yet let us; for a Christian lies under more obligations, to all manner of
virtue, hen any other man does. If Nature will not be content with little, yet
let Grace: Let [us] be content. So here, let us hold fast our Profession: It
may be, others will let it go; I, but let us hold it fast; let us among whom,
let us upon whom, let us in whom, such mighty things have been done by God: let
us hold fast, or else it will be an intolerable upbraid, and condemnation to
us. That it will be both, see but two Texts of Scripture: The first is in the
11th of Matthew, verse. 20, 21. Then began he (that is, Christ) to upbraid the
Cities, wherein most of his mighty works were done, because they repented not.
Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida; for if the mighty works that
were done in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have repented
long ago in Sackcloth and Ashes; but, I say unto you, it shall be more
tolerable for Tire and Sidon, at the Day of Judgment then for you. And thou,
Capernaum, which art exalted unto Heaven, shall be brought down unto Hell: for
if the mighty works, which have been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it
would have remained until this day. But; I say unto you, that it shall be more
tolerable for the Land of Sodom, at the Day of Judgment, then for thee. Pray,
do but mark what an upbraid there is, and upon what ground, Because mightier
works had been done among these, then among others! Now it seems to be a little
excusible, that they, where these mighty works had not been done, did not
repent; and therefore, their punishment shall be the more tolerable: But it
will be more inexcusable for them, among whom less mighty work have been done.
If they do not comply with the design of God, their condition will be far more
intolerable: They that have been lifted up to Heaven as it were, that have as
it were seen Christ crucified before their eyes, for them to apostatize, and
turn away from Christ; of how much sorer punishment shall they be thought
worthy? Certainly, those very persons, that have great and mighty works done
among them, and upon them too, great Convictions, and strong Resolutions, and
yet they shall apostatize: oh! how will God upbraid these persons? Now see that
other Text, that speaks as dreadful as this, Heb. 6.4.5, and 6 verses. For it
is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the
Heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the
good Word of God, and the powers of the World to come, if they shall fall away,
to renew them again to repentance: Seeing they crucify to themselves the Son
of God afresh, and put him to an open shame. It is the greatest disgrace and
affront that man can put upon Christ, to apostatize from him (it is not half so
much not to own him) for by that they crucify him again, and put him to an
open shame: it is as if they told all the World, that this Christ is not worth
the believing in, and it were but to throw away their time and happiness to
believe in him. Well then, let us that pretend to such enlightnings, and say,
We have tasted of the Heavenly gift, and of the good Word of God and of the
first fruits of Heaven, let us hold fast, lest we come under this upbraid, and
this condemnation.

But more particularly, let us hold fast, as we are concerned to do, if we
consider, First, What we were before Faith. Secondly, What we are by Faith.
Thirdly, What we shall be, at the end of Faith.


First, What we were before Faith: What were we? Before Christ was Preached,
and before we believed, what were we? Why, much worse then if we had not been:
considered in our case and state, it is better not to be at all, then to be a
sinner; it were better not to be a people, then not to be the people of God.
Now what were we before Faith? Why truly, we were not a people: so the
Scripture tells you, They that were not a people, are now the people of God: so
that, if we are not the people of God, we are, as if we were not a people.

We were; What were we before Faith? Dark. We were the Darkness it self, as the
Apostle's expression is, in Ephesians. 5.8. says he, Ye were sometimes Darkness;
The very Light that was in us, was Darkness, corrupt in our Understandings and
Imaginations; the Understanding dark. We were dead, yea, under the worst of
Deaths: dead in sin; You, says he, that were dead in sins and trespasses, has
he quickened. How were they dead in sins? Did they not live in sin? Yes, says
he, wherein you walked. Why? What is their Death? To live in sin, is to be dead
in sin; all the while the Prodigal lived in his sin, the Father said of him, He
was dead: My Son, that was dead, is alive.

We were: What were we before Faith? Why we were Children: of what? of Wrath,
as well as others.

Now Beloved, consider how many abide thus to this day in Darkness: Dead in
sin, and Children of Wrath, When you are, or pretend to be, translated out of
this darkness, into his mavelous light; will not You hold fast? You that were
dead, as well as others, and now you live; is this your requital to God, that
you will now let it go? Oh! I beseech you, have a care of that.

Secondly, let us consider, what we are by Faith; and that will be another
Obligation upon us. We were not so bad before Faith; but we are better by
Faith. We were not in so miserable a case before believing, but we are in as
happy a case when we do believe. Why, what are we? We are alive, and Children
of Light, and Children of God.

We are alive: You has he quickened, says he or made alive; and, My Son that
was dead, is alive. Now, what is the work of the Living? It is to praise God,
The Living, the Living, they shall praise thee as I do this day. Now if this be
the work of the Living, then consider, if we hold not fast our Faith; if we
apostatize, we are so far from doing the work of the Living, that is, of
praising God, that we do all the dishonor we can to God; we do the work of
dead men; Yea, we are twice dead.

We are Children of the Light: Ye were darkness, but now are light in the Lord.
Now it is very observable, what the Apostle speaks concerning the children of
darkness, and the Children of the light, I These. 5.5. You Believers, says he,
are all the Children of the light, and the children of the day, we are not of
the night, nor of darkness; and what follows, therefore let not us sleep, as
do others; but let us watch, and be sober: why? for they that sleep, sleep in
the night; and they that be drunk, be drunk in the night: if any stagger, this
is the work of the night, this is not the work of the day: Now every Apostate
that wavers, he is like a man that is drunk, so that he acts clean contrary to
the Children of the day. Says he, They that are drunk, are drunk in the night;
but, says he, Let us watch and ^e sober, and let us who are of the day, put on
the Breast Plate of Faith, and for a Helmet, the hope of salvation.

We are by believing, the Children of God, Gal. 3.26. For ye are all the
Children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus: now, Beloved, are we weary of so
honorable a Title, as being the Children of God? why, we are the Children of
God by Faith in Christ Jesus. Will any body part with so great a Title as this?
why, if we are weary of being Gods Children, whose can we be? none but the
Devils? and had we rather be the Devils children then Gods: there are but these
two, either you must be the children of God, or the Devils children: now you
are the Children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus: oh therefore, let us hold
fast the profession of our Faith, seeing by Faith, we are the children of God.

Thirdly, Let us consider, what we shall be at the end of Faith: why, we shall
be saved, 1 Pet. 1.4, 5, and 9. verses compared, He has begotten us to an
Inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in
Heaven for you, who are kept by the power of God through Faith unto salvation,
ready to be revealed in the last times; and in the 9th Verse, says he,
receiving the end of your Faith, even the salvation of your souls; so that, it
seems, to be weary of believing, is to be weary of being saved; not to hold
fast Faith, is not to hold fast salvation; for, says he, You are saved through
Faith, and the end of your Faith is the salvation of your Souls. Can you be
contented to be damned? Can you have patience to think of going to Hell? Now,
put all these together, and will you not hold fast? you that before faith were
but darkness, were but dead, were but children of wrath, who by Faith are made
children of light, are made alive, and the children of God; and who at the end
of Faith, shall receive the salvation of our souls; And shall not we hold fast?
shall we leave this Faith? but then secondly,

A 2d Argument in the Text shall be drawn from the Object, and that is twofold:
there is faith; and the profession of this faith, that is to be held f^^st; and
there are Arguments from both: first, Faith; hold fast faith: why are we so
greatly concerned, and so hugely obliged to hold fast Faith? I will give you
this one Reason for it, it is the most holy Faith, there are many things may be
called Faith, that may not be called most holy Faith: there are many faiths
that are at least called holy: Turkish Faith, is by them called holy faith: the
Romish Faith, is by them called holy faith: I, but this is the most holy faith:
there is an expression that Jude has, to commend faith to us, in the 20 verse
of his Epistle; But ye beloved, building up your selves on your most holy
faith, etc. Let other pretenders be as holy as they can, they can never rise to
the holiness of this: this is the most holy faith, it is holy in so high a
degree as to be beyond compare. I, but now, what is it that may denominate this
faith to be the most holy faith? why, it has for its Author the most holy
God, it is the gift of God, and the Work of God, if we take it for the Act of
Faith; and the Doctrine of God, if we take it for the Doctrine of Faith. There
are as the Apostle says, Gods many, but we know but one most holy God: there
are that will be called your holiness in the World; but this is the most holy
God, a God that is glorious in holiness, yea, whose glory it is to be holy.
There is nothing stamps glory on any subject like holiness: what is the
difference between the Angels in Heaven, and the Angels in Hell, but holiness?
that is their glory, The holy Angels; and that is their shame, the sinful
Angels; and what was it that made Canaan a better Land than another: was it not
the holiness? it was the holy Land: what was it that made the Temple a better
place then another? was it not, because it was the holy Temple? yea, it is the
glory of all the Attributes of God, that they are holy. His Justice would look
like severity, but that it is holy: His Power would look like Tyranny, were it
not holy: His Love would look like fondness, were it not holy: His patience
would look like a toleration of sin, were it not holy: therefore it is said,
the Lord God, glorious in holiness. Now this most holy God is the Author of
this Faith, and so it is a most holy Faith; it being the Work of the most holy
God; and will you leave, and not hold fast this most holy Faith?

But then besides, It may be said to be the most holy faith in this sense too,
that it is its nature wherever it comes to make the subject in whom it is,
most holy: Says the Apostle, you has God chosen, to wit, by Faith, to be a
peculiar people, a holy Nation. Acts 15.9. it is said, He has purifyed their
hearts by faith, and he will give them an Inheritance among them that are
sanctified by faith. It may be called the most holy Faith, in these two
respects.

First, Considering the operation and effects it has upon the hearts and lives
of them in whom it is; it makes them a holy People, beyond all the people in
the World: And then upon this account too, as to the ultimate effects of it,
that it admits us into the most holy places. You know, he Holy of Holies in the
Temple, was a Type of Heaven, and Jefus Christ is said to enter into the Holy
of Holies, that is, into Heaven. Now this does admit us into the most holy
place, where that most holy God is: says the Apostle, having therefore
boldness to enter into the holiest, by the blood of Josus: Alas, in them me of
old, they could go but into the outward Court; but now, says he, We all have
this boldness, to enter into the most holy place by the blood of Jesus. Shall
we leave such a Faith as this? shall we not hold fast the most holy Faith, that
that is from the most holy God, that makes the most holy people, and that
admits us into the most holy place? Where do we find such another Faith as this
is? if you leave this Faith that is so good in it self, a Faith that does so
much good to us; and, which is better, that makes us so good; for it is much
better to be made good, than to have good done unto us; and, beloved, what will
it avail us, if God should do us good all our days, if we be not made good? If
we should have the good of health and wealth, and long life; and yet not be
made good all this while, it avails us not: now this is the nature of Faith, it
is good in it self, it does good to us, and it makes us good: therefore,
Beloved, let us not lay it aside, until we can find a better; and that we
shall never do, unless we can find any thing more holy than God.

But secondly, The second Branch of the Object, is, the Profession of our
Faith. It seems, Beloved, it is not enough to hold fast our Faith only, but
the profession of it; why so? truly there is this in it; the profession of
Faith, is as necessary, as the Faith it self: mark that. See this from the
mouth of that great Apostle, I may say from the mouth of God himself, Romans
10.9, 10. That if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall
believe in thy heart, that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be
saved; for with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth
confession is made unto salvation: An unprofessed Faith has no salvation
annexed to it: you see, the Scripture makes it as necessary to our salvation,
to profess our believing, as to believe. Now beloved, if it be necessary to
believe, and necessary to profess, its then necessary, to hold fast Faith; and
consequently, as necessary to hold fast the profession thereof: without Faith,
there is no salvation, says the Scripture; and says this Scripture, without
the profession of this Faith, there is no salvation: now to say, I will keep
faith I will only part with a little profession, it is all one in Scripture, as
to part with Faith it self; for why, the Scripture says, If thou believe with
thy heart, and confess with thy mouth, thou shall be saved: so that as long as
Faith continues, profession is to continue, or there is no salvation: Faith
without profession, will do no more for you, then profession without faith:
therefore observe whit the Apostle speaks, Heb. 3.14. Says he, We are made
partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our confidence steadfast unto
the end: not else.

Thirdly, A third Argument is drawn from the act with the qualifications, let us
hold fast without wavering: Now there are two things, to name no more, that are
hugely obliging in this very act, with its qualifications: First, it is a manly
Act, to hold fast that which is good; and it is a childish act, to let it go. I
say, it is a manly act; it argues something of a great Soul, and of a great
Understanding, and of a manly resolution, to hold fast that which is good, but
it is childish to let it go; and therefore, set how the Apostle puts these two
together, Ephesians. 4.13, 14. says he, speaking there, That God had given some
Prophets, some Apostles, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers,
for the perfecting of the Saints for the work of the Ministry, for the edfying
of the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the Faith, and of the
Knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature
of the fullness of Christ; Now he comes in the 14 (...) Verse, to add, That we
heaceforth be no more Children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every
wind of Doctrine, by the slight of men, and canning craftiness, whereas they
lie in wait to deceive: it is not for a man to be tossed to and fro with every
wind of Doctrine, for a Child to be bought out of a Pearl, with a bawble, is no
great matter; but for a man, what a shame is it, why we should be men, not
Children tossed to and fro with every wind of Doctrine: now beloved, you know
the Scripture calls upon us in such Language as this, Be courageous, and quit
your selves like men, be not like Children, that will dance after every Pipe,
tossed to and fro, and always unstable.

Secondly, It is not only a manly act, to hold fast that which is good and
childish, to let it go; but it is, a Christian act, a proper Christian act, a
right Christian act, it is that which does distinguish a true Christian from a
Hypocrite and a Counterfeit, you know it is a Character of a godly man, he is a
praying man, there went up two men into the Temple to pray, the one was a
Hypocrite, the other a Publican: now what is there then in prayer, that does
distinguish these two men: why says Job, Will the Hypotrite pray always? no
not he. I will warrant you, that is well, he held out in the profession of God,
and of his Worship and service: the Saints are always said to pray; but as for
the Hypocrite, will he pray always? no not he; for here the true Children of
God, they will hold fast; but Hypocrites, and Formalists, they will let go. Now
mark here, the Apostle makes this distinction, Heb. 10. and the last Verse; But
we are not of them who draw back to perdition but of them that believe to the
saving of their Souls: that is of them that believe to (...) end; for the end
of our Faith is the salvation of (...) Souls: now pray you, mark by the way,
what you draw back to: when you draw back, you draw back to perdition: they
that go backward, go to Hell. Now says he, We are not of them that draw back
to perdition, but of them that believe to the saving of their Souls: that is,
of those that believe to the end; and this is the difference he makes between
them that are the people of God, and them that are not, that the end holds fast
the other, let us go thus, I have given you an account of the Arguments that
are couched in these words drawn from the subject, the object and the Act, with
its qualifications. I think, I promised you a few helps, with which I shall
conclude, take them in these three or four particulars.

First, Would you hold fast (I cannot but believe it to be all your desires)
well then, if you would hold fast, let me beseech this of you, take heed of
all, and every sort of men, that make Religion a Trade to get money, by which,
perhaps you will say, are there any such in the World? oh, ^ would there were
not. See that 1 Timothy 6.3, 4, ^ where the Apostle acquaints you with such men,
says he, If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even
the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the Doctrine which (...) according
to godliness, the wholesome Doctrine, the healing Word: what then in the 4th
Verse, (...) he, He is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions, and
strifes of words, where^^ Wines enter strife-railings evil surmisings,
perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth;
supposing, that gain is godliness, or as most read it, that godliness is a gain
a mere Trade to get money by: from such withdraw thy self: If you be not
baptized, they will tell you, you are not a Christion; and baptized you shall
not be, unless you pay for it: they will tell you, eat flesh, you must not, at
such and such times; but if you will pay for it, you may: they will tell you,
you must not sin by no means; but if you will pay for it, you may, and have a
pardon for i^, when you have done, such a one as they can give. Oh I beseech
you, when ever any make use of Religion to get money by, take heed of them,
says the Apostle, from those that make godliness a Trade to get money by,
withdraw thy self, and know, that godliness with contentment, is great gain.
Doubtless, godliness is the best Trade in the world, if closely followed; but
the worst, if worldlily followed; but to take up a Profession of the Christian
Religion, merely for pomp and state, and to get gain, oh ruefull! is Christian
Religion made use of for such ends as this? Oh take heed therefore, as ever you
would stand fast in the Faith, and hold fast the Profession thereof: take heed
of all, and every sort of men, that make use of Religion to get money by.

Secondly, Take heed of the error of the wicked, lest you fall from your own
stedfastness: this advice you have from the Apostle Peter, 2 Pet. 3.17. Ye
therefore believed, seeing you know these things before, beware lest you also
being led away by the err^ of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness: the
(...) ^our of the wicked, is like to make one as wic^^ as they: pray, what was
this error of the wick^^ it was this, there were a generation of wicked men,
that said, It was in vain to serve God, for say they, where is the promise of
his coming? only Beloved, it was as much as to say, there were no reward for
godliness, nor no wages for ungodliness. Oh take heed of this error of the
wicked, it is a wicked ^^rour, and none but wicked ones hold it, to wit, The it
is in vain to serve God: therefore keep this still (...) your hearts, that,
Verily, in keeping his Commandments, there is great reward: if there were no
more but the very work, it is a great honor to us, that we may be servants to
such a God; but Beloved, Be steadfast and unmovable, knowing that your la^^^
shall not be in vain in the Lord. Mal. 3.13. there is the like instance: Your
words have been stout against me, says the Lord, yet ye say, what have we
spoken so much against thee? this God is lwayes quarrelling with us, and laying
things to our charge: what (...) we said in the 14th Verse, Ye s^id, it is in
(...) serve God, and what profit is it, that we have kept (...) Ordinances? we
have walked mournfully before (...) Lord of Hosts, and now we call the proud
happy, (...), they that work wickedness are set up, yea, they (...) tempt God,
are even delivered: well now, what (...) lowes? Then they that feared the Lord,
spoke (...) one to another; as if they had said, let not (...) things take any
thing off the edge of our affecti^^ or quench any flame of our love; did God
ta^^^ny notice of this now, that he had any such fri^^ in the World: yes says
he, God hearkened, and heard, and a Book of remembrance was written before him,
for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name, and they shall
be mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in that day when I make up my Jewels, and I
will spare them, as a man spares his own Son that serves him: there is a time a
coming, the day will declare, whether it be best serving God or the Devil: well
then Beloved, as ever you would hold fast the Profession of your Faith, take
heed of the error of the wicked, never think it vain to serve God, though you
may loose by it; for if you loose for him, ye shall never loose by him.

Thirdly, Would you hold fast the Profession of your Faith, then lay up the
word of Faith in a good and honest heart. Luke 8.15. It is said there of the
good ground; they are, they which having heard the Word, keep it, or hold it
fast: where do they lay it up now, in a good and honest heart? so that you must
pull out his heart before, that you can pull out the Word; and will any man
suffer his heart to be torn from him? you will never hold it fast, till you lay
i^ up in a good and honest heart; if it be only in the hands of a Bible, is in
your hands, or in the head, it will be gone; but if it be in your hearts, you
will never let it go: therefore observe, says he, Having heard it, they keep
it, and hold it fast in an honest and good heart, and b^ing forth fruit with
patience: they had a great deal of sufferings, to bring forth with patience;
for if they were not under suffering, what (...) were there of patience? Well
Beloved, con^^^^^ a little further, as to this, the connection between the Verse
preceding the Text, and the Text, says he, Let us draw near (...) a true heart
in full assurance of Faith, having our hearts sprinkled with an evil
Conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water: Let us hold fast the
Profession of our Faith: the purity of the heart is the best preservative of
the Faith, 1 Timothy 3.9. holding the mystery of the Faith in a pure Conscience: a
good and honest heart will never part with the mystery of Faith.

Lastly, Would you hold fast the Profession of your Faith, then look much to,
and often consider Jesus Christ, the Author and finisher of your Faith. David
had got the faculty of walking with God, and how was it, says he, I will keep
thy loving kindness before mine eyes, that I may walk with thee. Oh, if we do
but keep the loving kindness of God in Jesus Christ before our eyes, we shall
certainly keep the Faith, says the Apostle, Having a High Priest over the
House of God, let us draw near and let us hold fast a High Priest, that is,
Jesus Christ, our great High Priest. Heb. 3.1. Wherefore, holy Brethren, be
partakers of the Heavenly Calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest of our
Professi^^ Christ Jesus, Heb. 4.14. Seeing then, that ye have a great High
Priest, that is passed into the Heaven^, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast
our Profession, Heb. 12.2. Looking unto Jesus, the Author and finisher of our
Faith, who for the joy that was (...) before him, endured the Cross, despised
the sham^ and is set down at the rig^^ and of the Throne (...) God. Oh let us
be thin^ing of, and looking (...) this Jesus. You will say, what shall we think
of him? Oh think of this condescension in the world, of that vouchsafement,
which as was never the like of his: how he humbled himself, and suffered from
God and man: Think how he became poor, that was rich, that we that were poor,
might become rich: Think how he became a curse, think how he became sin for us,
think what a good Confession he made before Pontius Pilate, even to the death,
and was obedient to the death: Think how he conquered death by dying, and how
he rose again by his Almighty Power, and is ascended into Heaven, and ever
lives to make intercession for those that come to the Father through him: Think
how he lived here on Earth in a sad condition, and joyed in it, to that it
might be for our good, and shall we leave such a Christ as this? Oh can you
look upon Christ, and leave the Profession of your Faith? it cannot be, keep
Christ before your eyes, make him your pattern, and you will not, you cannot do
amiss, He that says he abides in him, ought to walk as he walked: He walked in
obedience all his days, and was obedient to the death: So must we, we must
walk in obedience all our days, though we dye for being obedient: You see now,
how many Arguments there are, for your holding fast the Profession of your
Faith: There are many now that might be added, but the time is past: therefore
I shall shut up all the words of Jude, from the 20. Verses of his Epistle, to
the end; But you, Beloved, building up your selves on your most holy Faith,
praying in the holy Ghost, keep your selves in the love of God, looking for the
mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life, and of some, have compassion,
making a difference; and others say with fear, pulling them out of the fire,
hating even the Garments spotted by the flesh. Now unto them that is able to
keep you from falling, and to present you faultless before the presence of his
glory, with exceeding joy, to the only wise God and Savior, be Glory and
Majesty, Dominion and Power, now and ever, Amen.

Mr. Matthew Newcomen His Farewell SERMON, Preached at Dedham in Essex, Aug. 20.
1662.
REV. 3. Verse. 3. Remember therefore how thou have received, and heard, and
hold fast, and repent.


I Began this Scripture the last Lord's Day in this Congregation. I told you
then, there were three Doctrines obvious in the Text: The first was,

Doct. 1. That it is the Duty of Christians, To Remember those Truths that they
have heard and received.

Doct. 2. That it is the Duty of Christians, to hold fast the Truths, that they
have heard and received.

Doct. 3. That continued Repentance, is the Duty of Christians, as well as
initial Repentance. Remember therefore how thou have received, and heard, and
hold fast, and repent.

The first of these Doctrines, I applied my self to, and applied to ^he People
the last Lord's Day, and shall not now say any thing of it; but proceed to the
next Doctrine, That it is the Duty of Christians, To hold fast the Truths, that
they have heard and received. That which the Apostle enjoins on Timothy, is, in
proportion the duty of all Christians, 2 Timothy 1.13. Hold fast the form of sound
words, which thou have heard of me in faith, and love, which is in Christ
Jesus. The whole entire Body of Divine Truth. Hold it fast, against all
opposition whatsoever. Now if they that are themselves Teachers of the Truth to
others, must hold fast the Truth, according to the Platform that has been
delivered to them; then much more is this the duty of private Christians, who
are supposed, not to have that latitude of parts and gifts that Teachers have:
And therefore you shall find, that Christ requires this, not only of the
Pastors, but of the Members of his Church, Rev. 2.24. speaking not only to the
Angel, but to the Body of the Church^ But to you I say, and to the rest in
Thyatira, as many (...) have not this Doctrine, and which have not known the
depths of Satan, as they speak, I will put upon you none other burden, but
that which you have already^^ hold fast till I come. As if he should say; This
is all I require of you my People, keep your selves, and hold fast that which
you have till I come. And so in the 3d of Rev. 11. Behold, I come quickly, hold
that fast which thou have, that no man take away thy Crown. As if he should
say, That Divine Tru^^, that thou have heard and received, it is thy Crown, thy
excellency, therefore hold it fast. This Duty of holding fast the Truth, is
urged in many other places of Scripture, under other expressions; as that of
continuing in the Word of God. Christ says, If ye continue in my Word, then are
ye my Disciples indeed. And continuing in the Faith, Act. 14.22. Paul and
Barnabas visiting the Churches, exhor ed them to continue in the Faith. And so
those terms, of being rooted in the Truth, of standing, and standing fast, and
many others, they all enforce this Duty. Now for the better handling of this
Point, I shall do these four things; First, I will show you, What Christians
are to hold fast. Secondly, How they are to hold this fast. Thirdly, Why they
are to hold fast that they have heard and received. Fourthly, I will apply it.


First, What Christians are to hold fast: The Doctrine says, They are to hold
fast the Truths they have received. Now Truths are of two sorts:

1. Some are Natural and Moral.

2. Some are Supernatural and Divine Truths: Called Truths of God; because they
come from God, and conform the Mind and Soul, that receive them, to the Image
of God.

Now, though it is true, it is good for a man to be right in Moral things, and
to know, and cleave to that which is Truth in Morality; yet the Truths that we
are here called upon to hold fast, they are Divine Truths, Supernatural Truths,
Truths in Religion, Truths in the things of God.

Secondly, Again, Religious and Divine Truths, Truths of God; they are, either
such as are so in name, and in the estimation of some men; or else they are
such Truths, as are Truths of God, in the truth and reality of the thing: Now,
when I say, that Christians are to hold fast the Truths they have received, the
meaning is not, that what ever any man, or company of men, offer as Truths,
should be received, and held fast; for then we must hold fast many Errors: But
what ever men call Truth, or offer as Truth, we must examine it by the
un-erring Rule of Truth, that is, the Word of God: In these things, it is a
clear Canon, which we have, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Prove all things, hold fast that
which is good. Prove them by the Word of God, and if they hold Truth by that,
then receive them, and hold them fast. Divine Scripture-Truths we are to hold
fast.

Thirdly, Scripture-Truths, Truths that are grounded and warranted in the Word
of God, they are either such as are immediately and expressly laid down in
Scripture, or such as are mediately contained in Scripture, and by deduction
drawn thence. Now those Truths, that are immediately and expressly laid down in
Scripture, we are with out dispute, to receive and hold fast. But those Truths,
that are drawn thence, we may make use of our Reason to examine them by the
Word; and so far as we see them to be drawn from Scripture, we are to receive
them, and hold them fast.

Fourthly, Divine Truths from Scripture, are of two sorts: Either the great and
weighty things of the Truth of God, and of Religion, which we call Fundamental
Truths; or else they are those things that are of less weight in Religion, and
yet Truths of God. Now we are not only to hold fast those Truths of God, that
are the Fundamental Truths; as, That there is a God, and but one God; and, That
there is a Trinity of Persons, in Unity of Essence, Father, Son and Holy Ghost;
and that there is but one Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus;
and that He is both God and Man in one Person, and that he has given full
satisfaction to Divine Justice, for all that by Faith close with him, and the
like.

These are the great Points in Religion; these we must be sure to hold fast.
And not only these, but even the lesser: Those Truths of Religion, that
comparatively, are, far less then these, we must hold them fast. You know what
our Savior says of the Commands: There are some that are the first and great
Commandments; and there are others, that are the lesser: But whosoever shall
break one of the least of God's Commandments, and shall teach men so, the same
shall be least in the Kingdom of God. So, whosoever shall renounce the least
Truth, God will be eaven with him for it. For those Truths of God, which are
(...) and small, comparatively, they may be of great weight and consequence in
their Sphere. L^ther said, Let Heaven run together as a Scrowl, r^ther then one
Filing of Truth should be parted with Surely, those Servants of God, the
Martyrs, were not so prodigal of their lives; but knew what they did, when they
suffered for such Truths, as men now call Trifles, and not worth standing for;
the least Truths of God must be held fast.

Thus you see, What we must hold fast; DivineTruths, Scripture-Truths, whether
greater, or lesser; we must hold fast, what we have received. I should, but
that I foresee the time will prevent me, answer an Objection. Is there nothing
to be held fast but Truth? Does not the Apostle bid the Thessalonians, in the
second of the Thessalonians, the second Chapter, and the fifteenth Verse, Hold
the Traditions which ye have been taught, whether by Word, or our Epistle? The
Papists make much of this, Place for their unwritten Traditions. In a word,
know this; Though there were some Doctrines of Faith, and Matters of Practice,
which, when Paul writ this Epistle, were not expressly to be found in Writing,
that had been Preached by the Apostles; yet this will not, in the least, infer,
that now, when the Canon of Scripture is completed, there should be such
unwritten Traditions, to which we are to give up our Faith.

I go on to the second thing; and that is to show, How we must hold fast the
Truths of God, that we have heard and received.

First, In our Judgments, being fully resolved, and settled in our Judgments
concerning them, not wavering about them, nor suffering our selves by any means
and ways, to be removed from our stedfastness in them. Says the Apostle, 2 Pet.
3.17. Seeing you know these things, beware lest you also, being led away with
the error of the Wicked, fall from your own stedfastness. Take heed you be not
removed in your Judgments; Hold fast what you have received, and suffer not
every Wind to blow you off from them.

Secondly, We must hold fast the Truths we have heard and received in our
Wills, and Affections, in our love to the Truth; we must receive the Truth in
the love of it, or else we shall never keep the Truth; Love is the strongest
hold-fast in the World, no man will part with that which he loves: What makes
^he covetous man so unwilling to part with his Money, but because he loves it?
What makes the lustful sinner so unwilling to part with his Lust, he will part
with Heaven, rather then with his Lust? Why, it is because he does so love it.
If men did love the Truth, they would hold it fast.

Thirdly, You must hold fast the Truth, in the Profession of it, Heb. 10.23.
Let us hold fast the Profession of the Truth, or of the Faith, without
wavering. We must not only believe with the Heart, but confess with the Mouth,
if we would be saved: When Teter denied his Master with his Mouth, and said, I
know him not. I am persuaded, he denied him not in his heart. It is a dangerous
thing in words, or outward Profession, to renounce the Truth, or any part of
it. Hold fast the Profession of the Truth.

Fourthly, We must hold the Truths of God fast, in our Life and Conversation;
this the Apostle calls, Walking in Christ; and holding forth the Word of Life,
in a blameless and harmless Conversation, We must hold fast the Truth of God in
our Lives.

Fifthly, We must do all this Constantly; Hold fast the Truth in our Judgment,
and Affection, and Profession, and Conversation, constantly, and at all times;
as David, I have inclined my heart to perform thy Statutes always, even unto
the end: We must not only in times of calmness and serenity, when we may have
all the peace, and applause of the World, hold fast the Truth and Profession of
it; but in stormy Times, when Truth may burn a man's fingers, if he hold it;
yet even then we must hold it fast.

Sixthly, We must hold fast the Truths we have received Resolutely, against all
opposition whatsoever, whether of Friends, or Foes. Paul would not bate an
inch; no, not to Peter his Brother, h^^ elder Brother in Christ, and in the
work of the Gospel; he resisted him to the face, and gave not place to him, no,
not for an hour.

Thus should we hold fast the Truth, that we have heard and received in our
Judgment, in our Will, and Affections, in our Profession, and in our Lives and
Conversations. And thus hold them fast constantly, and resolutely, against all
opposition, on the right hand, and on the left, both of Friends, and Foes; and
that for these Reasons, which is the first thing I have to do; which is to show
you, Why we should hold fast the Truths of God.

First, For the excellency of Divine Truth; it is more precious then Gold,
better ^hen Rubies, and all that you can desire, cannot be compared with Truth.
And it must needs be so, because it is the immediate Issue of God himself, who
is the Fountain of Truth, and the Fountain of all Perfection and Glory. Natural
men have said, Truth is the Daughter of Time. Divines say, Truth is the
Daughter of God: Divine Truth is the Child of God, the Issue and Birth of God.
And whosoever therefore, God has pleased to deliver his Truth unto, they must
be tenderly careful, that it be not deflowred and violated.

Secondly, It is our duty, to hold fast the Truth that we have received;
because we have received it under the notion of those things, that have a kind
of constancy in them. I say, we have received the Truth, under the nature of
those things, that have a kind of constancy, and perpetuity in them. The
Scripture speaks of the Truths of God, as an Heritage; Thy Testimonies have I
taken for mine Heritage, says David, in the 119. Psalm. Though a man's
Personal Estate may be alienated; yet that which is his Heritage, this is
unalienable in Law, it is a wrong done to his Posterity, if he parts with tha^:
Truth is the Inheritance of the Saints, therefore they are to hold it fast.
Again, in Scripture, the Truth of God is called a thing committed to a man's
Trust, 2 Timothy 1.14. That good thing which was committed unto thee, keep by the
Holy Ghost, which dwells in us. That good thing! What was that? Why, the form
of sound words; which, in the Verse before, he had bidden him hold fast: this
is but a Reduplication of the same thing on him. The Body of Gospel Truths,
that was committed to thee, hold it fast; that good thing, a good thing: the
Author of it is good, and it makes us good; all that is contained in it, is
good Matter, and it tend to a good End, the saving of our Souls. This, says
he, has been committed to thee, therefore keen it. A thing committed to a
man's Trust, must be so kept, that it may be re-delivered, and re-delivered
entire and whole, and re-delivered to the same Person that did commit it to us,
else we cannot be faithful to our trust. The Truth of God is committed to our
trust; we must so keep it, that we may re-deliver it, and re-deliver it entire
and whole; and re-deliver it thus entire and whole to him that committed it to
us, even to God. This (...) the Duty of all Christians, thus to keep the Wo^^
There is a committing of the Truth, to all (...) Church and Saints of God; as
Jude tells us in (...) Epistle, verse the third, That ye should conte^^
earnestly for the Faith, which was once delive^^ to the Saints; the Faith, that
is, the Doctrine Faith, the truth of the Gospel, which was delivered to the
Saints. We have but one Gospel, and it was delivered but once: God means no
more to deliver his Gospel, and the Truths of it; therefore you had need strive
hard, to keep them, and hold them.

Thirdly, We should hold fast the Truth that we have received; because if we do
not hold it fast, we do wrong God, and we wrong our selves, and we wrong the
Truth, and we wrong our Posterity.

1. It is our duty, to hold fast the Truths we have received; because, if we do
not, we wrong God; for Truths are more Gods, then ours: They are ours, as to
the use of them; but they are his, as he is the Original and Author of them.
Truths are God's Jewels; there is never a Truth of Religion, but God owns it as
his; and for us to barter away any of these Truths of God, it is Sacrilege, it
is a robbing of God, it is a wrong to God. This is that God complains of, by
his Prophet, in the second of Jeremiah, the eleventh and twelfth Verses, Has a
Nation changed their Gods, which are yet no Gods; but my People have changed
their glory, for that which does not profit. Be astonished, O ye Heavens, at
this, and be horribly afraid; b^ye very desolate, says the Lord. The Prophet,
indeed, speaks of a total forsaking of God, and all his Truths; but there is,
in the forsaking of every Truth, a proportion of wrong to God.

2. It is a wrong done to the Truths of God, when men having received the
Truth, and embraced it, hold it not fast, but cast it off, this is a wrong to
the Truths of God. We say, it is less reproach to a man when he comes to my
house, to shut the Door against him, and not receive him in at all, then when
he has been in a while with me, I turn him out, all the World will now think I
find cause to be weary of him. They who have sh^^ their hearts against the
Truth, and never gave a^ entertainment to it, they are less injurious to i^
then they that have received it, and professed it, and yet turn from it. These
tell the World, that the Truths of God are not so sweet, and worthy of their
entertainment, as they supposed them to be.

3. This is an injury and wrong to our selves; this is a wrong to our Credit
and Reputation. Now, though we may not make Credit our End in Religion; yet we
may make use of our Credit or Reproach, as an Argument to hold fast the Truth:
and this is injurious to our own Souls, John 8.31. Th^^ Jesus said to those
Jews which believed on him; If ye continue in my Word, then are ye my
Disciples. Indeed here Christ does seem to distinguish his Disciples he has
some that are so in name, that are not so is deed; and he has some that are so
in deed, and (...) truth: and of these he gives a Character here, If ^ continue
in my Word. You now profess to beli^^ my Word; but if you hold fast, and
continue^ my Word, then you are my Disciples indeed: (...) if you continue not
in my Word, you have (...) name of Disciples only, and that will not save you.
You can never be saved, unless you be indeed the Disciples of Christ; and you
can never approve your selves to be the Disciples of Christ indeed, if ye
continue not in the Truth, 1 John 2.24. Let that therefore abide in you, which
you have received and heard from the beginning, If that which ye have heard
from the beginning, shall remain in you, ye shall continue in the Son, and in
the Father, Hold fast the Truth of God, which you have received, then shall you
continue in the Son: If the Truth of God, which you have received and believed,
remain in you, and be held fast by you, ye shall continue in the love of the
Father and Son, but not else; according to what he expresses again; Whosoever
transgresses, and abides not in the Doctrine of Christ, has not God,
therefore he cannot be saved; he that abides in the Doctrine has the Father
and the Son. Therefore, as you would be saved, hold fast the Truths you have
received.

Now here (but I have not time to speak to it) is a Case of Conscience; Whether
every error does cut a man off from God? Answer, No, God forbid: But this we
cannot speak to now.

Fourthly, They that hold not fast the Truth of God, are injurious to their
Posterity. Our Forefathers holding fast the Truth of God, in the day of their
Trial, and sealing it with their Blood, was the means of transmitting the
purity of the G^spel to us their Posterity; and, if we, in our Generation, hold
no fast the Truth of God, but carry it loose in our Consciences and Judgments,
and we let it fall out of our hands and hearts, we forfeit the Truths of God,
not only from ou^ selves, but also from our Posterity. Thus you see, we shall
wrong the God of Truth, and the Truth of God; we shall wrong our selves, and
our Posterity, if we hold not fast the Truth we have received. Thus we have the
Reasons of the Doctrine.

Application.
For Application: here, first, I might bewail the general want of the care of
the performance of this Duty, which has appeared many years in this Land.

We have had little care of holding fast the Truths we have received. For
holding fast the Truth in our Judgments, How many are there, whose Judgments
have been perverted with many Errors?

This is that which the Apostle calls, A turning aside to another Gospel, in
the first of the Galathians, and the sixth Verse. And so for holding fast the
Truth in the love of it, How many are there, that have failed in that, which
Christ calls, (...) forsaking of the first Love, Revelations the seco^^, and
the fourth Verse.

And we should hold fast the Truth in the Profession of it; and how many are
there that have failed in that? This the Apostle calls in the tenth of the
Hebrews, A drawing back unto Perdition.

And for holding fast the Truth, in the Practice of it, How many have failed in
that? that have been Professors, and now are grown loose and debauched. This
the Apostle Peter calls, A turning aside from the Holy Commandment. All these
things call for our Lamentation.

Exhortation.
But the whole Work, that I will apply my self to, is, to exhort every one of
you, to the care of this Duty, To hold fast the Truths that you have heard and
received. Hold them fast in your Judgment, hold them fast in your Will and
Affections, hold them fast in your Lives and Conversations, hold the Truths you
have received constantly; and hold them against all opposition on the right
hand, and on the left, from Friends and Foes.

To press this upon you, I think I shall need use no other Motive, then what I
have laid down before you in the Doctrinal Part; only this one thing more, and
that is; Take notice, how urgent the Spirit of God is, in pressing this in
Scripture.

Now, says M^. Hildersham, If in those days, when the Apostles were ye^
living, who taught the People of GOD with more Power and Demonstration of the
Spirit, then any of us do, or can. Yet, if then they had need of such
Exhortations, to continue in the Doctrine, and to abide in it, to stand fast,
and hold fast, the Word and Truth of God; How much more needful, are these
Exhortations in our days?

If any say, No; There is not more cause; for then the Magistrate was a Mortal
Enemy to the Gospel, and the Professors of it; but we are (thanks be to God)
under a Christian Magistrate, who does not oppose, but countenance the Gospel,
and the Profeffors of it. If any makes this Objection, I will give you Mr.
Hildersham's Answer to it, which I find in a Sermon of his, Printed in the
Year, One Thousand Six Hundred Thirty and one; which is now One and Thirty
Years agone; says he, Though, through the great mercy of GOD, we in this Land,
enjoy the Gospel in great Peace, and have it countenanced by Authority; and
though, through the Religious Disposition of the KING, we may have great hopes
of the continuance of the true Religion, and seem to be freed from all fear of
the altering of it: Yet (says he) there is need of this Exhortation even in
these days; and that for these Reasons.

REAS. I.

First, Because of the great danger we are in of being overrun, or overspread
with Popery, and the Fiery Trial, before we are aware: For, says he, The great
increase of Papists, that we daily hear of, and the great declining of many,
who are ready to receive any Error that shall be offered to them: These things
give us just cause to fear the danger of Popery over-spreading us.

And Brethren, If it were so in his time, so many years ago, What is it now?

REAS. II.

Secondly, says he, If he there were no danger o^ Popery; yet, says he, there
are so many Errors newly sprung up, that do show how needful this Exhortation
is.

REAS. III.

Thirdly, says he, There is such a general decay of the love of Religion, in
all places and amongst all sorts of People, and so much irreligiousness every
where, that it is the general Disease of the Nation.

Therefore, he concludes, That in these Times of ours, though Religion has the
Magistrate to countenance it, yet there is as much need of pressing this
Exhortation, as ever there was: namely, To hold fast the Truths, that we have
heard and received.

Now, if you ask, What you shall do, that you may be able to hold fast the
Truths that you have received, I will give you some Directions.

First, If you would hold fast the Truths, that you have heard and received,
get into Christ, rooted and established in him. Brethren, It is not all the
Learning in the World, and Abilities that man can have, that will enable him to
hold out, and hold fast the Truths that he has received. If a time of Trial
come, unless Christ be his Bottom and Foundation, unless Christ be his
strength: if a man stands upon his own legs, his own Parts and Abilities, to
argue and dispute, and repel Objections, alas, these things will fall in a day
of Trial. Prison, and Death, and a Stake, are such Arguments, Brethren, that
all the Learning and Parts in the World cannot answer, but only Christ, and
his Spirit, and Grace in the Heart. Therefore, if you would hold fast the
Truths, which you have received and heard, and not be beaten off from them in
the day of Trial, get into Christ, rooted, and established in him, then shall
you stand, not else.

2. If you would hold fast the truths that you have heard, and received, then
take nothing upon trust, in matters of Religion; what ever Preachers you hear,
or what ever Books you read, take not things upon trust, but examine them, and
prove them by the Scriptures, and judge what foundation and warrant they have
from the Scriptures, and accordingly receive them, or receive them not. It is
observable in 1 These. 5. When the Apostle says, Despise not Prophesyings, in
the next words he says, Prove all things, and hold fast that which is good; as
if he should say, Though I would not have you despise Prophesying, and
Preachers, yet I would not have you to take things upon trust, in matters of
Religion, but prove all things, and hold fast that which is good.

3. If you would be able to hold fast the truths that you have heard, and
received, get a clear and distinct, and certain knowledge of what is truth,
that which you would hold fast, get a clear assured knowledge, that it is the
truth of God, 2 Timothy 3.14. Continue thou in the things which thou have learned,
and have been assured of; if a man would continue in the things that he has
learned, he must be assured of them, that they are the truths of God: But how
shall a man be assured, that such and such things are the truths of God? He may
know this; first, by the consonancy of them to the word of God; secondly, by
the power of them on his own heart, to convince, or humble, and quicken it.

4. If you would be enabled to hold fast the truths you have heard, and
received, then get a high valuation and esteem of the truths of God. Such as
David had, Psalm. 119.12. The Law of thy mouth is better unto me, then thousands
of Gold and Silver. Better in it self; all the Gold and Silver in the world,
all the riches in the world, will never do a man so much good as that; and
better in my estimation, I value it more, I had rather part with all, then with
the Word; A man that is of this mind, he will hold fast the truth: Oh that
there were such a heart in every one of you! as to say, The words of Gods
mouth, they are better then Estate, and better then liberty, and better then
Wife and Children: if there were such a heart in us, this would enable us to
hold fast the truths of God, and part with all, rather then them.

5. If you would hold fast the truth, that you have received and heard, then
make conscience to practice according to what you know; make conscience to obey
the truths of God, obedience is the sinue of constancy, Christ says, Luke
6.44. Whosoever hears these Sayings of mine, and does them, he is like a man
which built his House, and dug deep, and laid the foundation upon a Rock;
and when the flood arose, and the streams beat vehemently upon that House, it
could not shake it. Mark ye, it could not be shaken: the conscionable practical
hearer, and receiver of the truth of God, he is the man that is like to hold
out, and to hold fast the Word; he that has been a careless hearer, and never
made conscience to hear for obedience, and practice, he is blown over
presently; it is a sad passage I have met with in that Reverend man, Mr.
Hildersham, and to me it seems to have much weight in it; What hopes, says he,
can we have of many of our hearers in England, who are willing to give the
World a hearing, and outwardly profess it; but what hope can we have, but that
if a time of trial come, they will turn Papists, or profain, or any thing? for
they never loved the Word, when they heard it; and they never obeyed the Word,
but lived in known sins; they take up a form of godliness, and hate the power
of it; what hope, but that if a time of trial come, these will fall from the
truths.

6. If you would be able to hold fast the truth that you have heard, and
received; then take heed of receiving the least truth of God, take heed I say,
of knowing and willing, forsaking the least truth; and knowing and willing,
giving way to the least error, as the committing of the least sin, may render
a man abominable unto God, as you find in Levit. 11.43. You shall not make your
selves abominable with any creeping thing; that is, with the eating of any
creeping thing. Now this was one of the least Commandments that God gave out,
for the not eating of such and such things; and yet by transgressing this, the
people might make themselves abominable: the committing of the least sin may
make a man abominable to God; so the embracing of the least error, and the
forsaking of the least truth, may make a man abominable to God: the least truth
forsaken knowingly, and the least error embraced knowingly, becomes a great
sin; and a little error, makes way for a greater, if once a man gives way to
one error, a thousand will follow after. If we would hold fast the whole body
of truth, we must take heed we forsake not the least truth, if we forsake God
and his truths, whether in lesser matters or greater; and if we turn back again
to Popery, and conform to the Papists in lesser matters (says Mr. Hildersham)
know of a certainty, that Popery shall return again.

7. If you would hold fast the truths you have heard, and received, then shun
all such persons as would go about to draw you off from the truth of God; shun
all Seducers, confer not with them; have nothing to do with them, and their
ways. Prove. 19.27. Cease my Son, to hear the instruction that causes to err
from the words of knowledge; thou have been instructed in the words of
knowledge; and if any would instruct thee otherwise, and seek to draw thee off
from the words of truth, and knowledge, have nothing to do with them: Cease my
Son to hear the Instruction that causes to err from the words of knowledge.
Now my Brethren, this advice I judge to be the more seasonable, because it is
in my apprehension, that this present providence of God, in taking off at one
stroke, so many of his Servants (that have endeavored in uprightness of heart
to instruct you, and the People of God, from this work), it is on my heart to
think and fear, this will give a great advantage to Seducers, to seek to
corrupt you, and draw you off from the truth to their party; When the
Shepherds are smitten, there is a great opportunity given to the Foxes, and
Wolves, to make a prey of the flock; when God makes it dark, and night, then
all the Beasts of the Forest do creep out; as the Psalmist says, Psalm.
104.20. When there is a hight, and Cloud on the Ordinances of God, then all the
Be^sts of the Forest will go forth, many will undertake to be your
instructors, and say here is Christ, and there is Christ; but believe them not:
remember the things that you have heard and received, and hold them fast; ce^se
from the instructions of those that would turn you aside.

8. And lastly, If you would be able to hold fast the truths of God, then
commend your selves and the truths you would hold to God in Prayer, and beg of
God to hold you, that you may keep his truth: Put up those Requests to God,
that David does, Psalm. 15. Hold up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps
slip not; and in the 119. Psalm, Be Surety for thy Servant for good, hold thou
me up, and I shall be safe, and I will have respect unto thy Statutes
continually; And thus my Brethren, I have done with this Doctrine, and this
Sermon, and as far as I know, with my Preaching in this place: The day is at
hand, wherein I, and many others of my Bre^hren shall be (though not naturally
dead yet) civilly dead, dead in Law, dead as to the work of the Ministry. And,
as I told them of this particular Congregation, the last Lords day; so I tell
you; know what I would be willing to speak to you, if I lay on my Deathbed,
and had that exercise of Reason and Memory that I have now: look I say, what I
would say to you, if I now lay on my Deathbed: the same I shall speak to you
now, through Gods assistance; and first, I would, and in some measure do give
thanks to God, the God of the spirits of all flesh; that has called me a poor
unworthy Creature, not only to the knowledge, but to the preaching of the
Gospel of his Son Jesus Christ; and that in this place, and in this part of the
Land; and has pleased in mercy to continue life and liberty to me in my work
here, almost 26. years. Secondly, I would be, and I hope I am in some measure,
thankful to God, and to his people, both of this Town, and of the
Neighborhood, for a great deal of love and respect, and encouragement, that
they have given to my Person and Ministry here; and particularly, I do
acknowledge my self to be greatly obliged to my Reverend Brethren the
neighbour-Ministers, for the much love I have received from them, their
readiness to help me, in supplying my place in the time of my sickness, or
absence; and sweet society I have had with them, I believe you think it is no
easy thing for me to speak, or think of parting with such an Auditory, and
Society: the like to which, I never look to have on Earth again. But seeing,
for my sins, and your sins, God will have it so, we must submit, and lie at his
feet: that which he has made crooked who can make straight? But before we
part, give me leave to speak a few words to you, something by way of Request,
and something by way of Advice: by way of Request, I would speak this.

First, That if any of you have found any benefit by my poor Ministry, that if
any of you have been enlightened, or awakened, or strengthened, and built up in
the truth, and encouraged in the ways of holiness, by any thing that God has
put into my mouth to speak to you, let God have the praise, and let me have
some room in your hearts and prayers, however God shall deal with me.

My second Request is, That wherein soever you have seen any failings in me, or
any failings in my Ministerial duty, that you would please to pass it by, and
to help me in Prayer to God, for the forgiveness of them: These are my Requests
of you, and that which I have to say to you, by way of Advice, is much the
same, with what I said to this particular. Congregation the last Lords day.
Take it in these particulars.

1. I would advise you, and entreat you, that we may all of us lay to heart,
this present Dispensation of God toward us, and the Nation, in this respect,
that we may be sensible of it. I remember, when I was young, and my famous
Predecessor, Mr. Rogers, was taken off from his Ministry in this kind, though
but for a few weeks, these parts were wonderfully sensible of that Providence,
and laid it to heart; and were much in Humiliation, and in Prayer; and I think,
I may say, they received an answer again within some weeks. Now Brethren,
though he was worth some hundreds of us; yet now it is not the laying by of one
man, but of multititudes, fifty in one place, and threescore in another; and
fourscore in another, and this not by a single Bishop, but by an Act of
Parliament, which makes the wound the wider, and the more incapable of cure;
and shall we not be sensible of this? Shall so many precious vessels be laid
by, as vessels of no pleasure and none take it to heart? Shall so many burning
lights be quenched together, so many wells of the Water of life be stopped up
together, and this not be laid to heart? I beseech you consider and be sensible.

2. In the deepest, and saddest sense you have of this Providence of God; watch
over your own spirits, that you lay the blame of it no where so much, as upon
your selves; blame none so much for this, as your selves. Some blame the times
and charge it on their iniqui^ies; others are apt to blame us Ministers, and
charg it on our niceness and singularity. Might my Advice take place with this
people, I would desire, that every one of us might lay the blame no where so
much, as on our selves, For certainly, we have procured these things to our
selves. I find our Predecessors, the Martyrs, when by a Law Religion was
changed in the Nation, and Idollatry set up, they laid the blame not on the
Lawmakers, but on themselves, and their own hearts. One of them says, All
this is come upon us, because we did not live the Gospel; we were Gospellers
in lip, but not in life: Much more does it become us, whose sufferings are
far less, to blame our selves more, then we blame any others.

3. My third Advice is this, and I beseech you take it in love, for it is out
of love that it is given you; if you should perceive at this time, a differnce
in opinion and practice among us, that are the Ministers of the Gospel in this
Nation; standing, and sticking, at things that others can digest, and do; and
others doing things, that some of their Brethren cannot come up unto. Be not
offended, thus it has always been from the beginning, it is no new thing.
Thus it was in King Edwards days. If, there be any of God's Servants that are
Learned, and Holy, and Faithful, that do now for the enjoyment of their
Ministry, yield a conformity, to all that is enjoined. I doubt not, but many of
them are grieved, that they cannot have the exercise of their Ministry without
this: and we who cannot come up to this, are grieved, that we cannot come up to
it; the one, and the other, have grief enough; add not your censures to this
grief, that is already upon them. It has been all along, a Merciful
Providence of God, that when some of his servants could not satisfy their
consciences, and come up to the things that have been imposed upon them,
without injuring their Consciences; yet others have had a greater freedom given
them, that they could yield; and if not so, What would have become of the
people of God? Therefore, in those things, acknowledge there may be some
providence of God, for good to you in it.

5. My fourth Advice, I shall deliver to you wholly, in the words of that Holy
man and Martyr of God, Master Bradford; in his Letter to the City of London,
says he, Let us heartily bewail our sins, and repent of our evils, let us
amend the evils of our lives, let us every one be diligent in Prayer, and
attend with reverence, on the reading, and hearing of Gods Holy word, let us
reprove the works of darkness, let us stie from Idolatry, and which is the
particular, I would indeed commend unto you; Obey the Magistrate, and them that
are set over us in the Lord, in all things, that are not against the Word; and
when they command any thing contrary to the Word; Let us answer, It is meet to
obey God, rather then men. However says he. Resist not the Magistrate, nor
seek to avenge your selves; but commit your cause to God, be patient, and
submit to all that are in Authority over you; but resist not, rise not against
Authority; but wait on God, till he pleases to cause the Light to arise and
shine again upon you. This is my fourth Advice.

4. Now it pleases God, that hearing oppertun^ties, at least, some of them are
taken from some of us, from many of us, for a time. My Advice and Counsel is,
that the less now you hear, the more you would read; read the word of God much
the mote, and take all helps for the right understanding of what you read. The
Book of Annotations is a great help to inlighten you to understand the
Scriptures; and next to the reading of the Scriptures, what spare hours you
have, I would advise you to bestow your time in teading of the Book of Martyrs,
a Book that has formerly been more prized, then of late in England.
Especially, read that part of it which contains the History of Queen Mary's
days; they will inform you, of the great controversies that are between us,
and the Papists; and they will inform you, what you shall answer; the reading
how cheerfully they went to Prison, and to the stake will embolden you against
the fears of sufferings, and death; and the reading of their Letters, will be
a great means to edify, and build you up; this reading of the Scriptures, and
other good Books is my fifth Advice to you.

6. My sixth Advice to you is, That seeing God has taken away your Week-dayes
opportunities of hearing the Word, here, and in other places, you would be
careful, that the World may not devour Gods Portion, I mean that portion of
time, which some of you have bestowed on hearing these Lectures: It was a good
Speech of a gracious Woman now with God, when Mr. Rogers was silenced: Well,
says she, By the Grace of God, The World shall never have those hours, that I
was wont to spend in hearing heretofore: her meaning was, she would spend them
in her Closet in holy duties. It was an excellent Resolution, and worthy of our
imitation; and if, I might after 26 ye^^^, labor here in the Ministry, now at
my parting, obtain thus much of you, that you that have been pleased to be
constant hearers here, would lay a Law on your selves, that so much time as you
formerly spent in coming hither, sitting here, and in returning home, that you
will spend that time at home, either in praying and reading, and meditating in
your Closets, or else in praying in, and with your Families, and instructing of
them: if I might but obtain this of you at my parting, I should believe, that
the Devil and his Kingdom would be loosers, by this out parting, if you would
spend this time weekly in holy exercises, reading and praying for your selves,
and for the Nation, and for your Families, which you were wont to spend in
coming to these Lectures, and in attending here, and returning home; and that
is my sixth Advice to you, and herefore let me entreat this of you.

7. And my seventh Advice and Counsel is this, that seeing it pleases God to
take away from you, so many of your public Instructors, that you would every
one of you that are heads of Families, be so much the more in instructing, and
teaching your Families: Be so much the more in this, by how much the less is
done in public. Read the Word in your Families, and catechize your Families;
and see that they may understand them: you have many helps for this, as M.
Perkins, and M. Ball, and the Assemblies Catechism.

8. And the last Advice I have to give you, is this, That you would still
continue your Reverence of, and love to, and care for the observing of the
Lords holy Sabbath; it is that my Brethren, wherein God has been honored in
this Town, and in these Parts, I think as much as in most places of the World,
and I pray, do so still, and when you have not public Ordinances, and public
helps for the sanctifying of the Lords Day at home, in your own Congregations,
if you can have the Word and Ordinances, in any comfortable manner abroad:
travel for it, I say travel for it, and when you have them not at home, nor
abroad, be so much the more earnest, and fervent, and abundant in your Family,
and secret duties, in the sanctification of the Lords Day: I have some fears,
least if time should come to that pass, that the Magistrate should connive at
the profaning of the Lords day, giving way to sports and Recreations on it, and
Preachers should cry down the strict observation of the Lords day, and the
like; I am afraid we have many youths, that in these parts, notwithstanding all
the Instructions that have been given them, would be ready to dance after these
Pipes, and run into the profaning of the Lords Day: therefore you that are
governors of Families, remember the Charge that God has given you, more
expressly concerning this, then in any other thing that I know of; Thou, nor thy
Son, nor thy Daughter, nor thy Manservant, nor thy Maidservant, nor thy
Cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates, shall thou suffer to violate
the day of the Lord: Therefore know your Authority, and do your duty; And put
on that holy Resolution of Joshua, Whatsoever others do, I and my House will
serve the Lord, so say you: Whatever others do, I and mine will sanctify the
Lords Day, and keep it holy; So do, and the Blessing of God shall be on you,
all the week long. And now Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the Word of
his Grace; which is able to build you up, and to give you an Inheritance among
all them that are sanctified.

FINIS.
Mr Cradecots Farewell Sermon.
Phil. 4. latter part of verse. 9. -- And heard, and seen in me do, and the God
of peace shall be with you.


FRom this Verse we may observe three Doctrines.

Doct. (...). That the peoples eyes must be taught by the Ministers holiness of
life, as well as their ears by the Ministers soundness of Doctrine.

Paul did not reach one thing and practice another; he practiced as he
preached, and he both practiced and preached the forementioned Duties in the
Verse before the Text. And to this end the Lord appointed a Ministry to be
perpetuated through all ages of the World: And it is the Lords appointment that
peoples ears should be taught by the Ministers holiness of life, as well as
their ears by their soundness in Doctrine; and this is necessary for the
Minister himself, and necessary for the, people: No marvel then that a faithful
Ministry is the Butt of the Devils malice, or his craft and cruelty, and that
the Devil has in all Ages attempted and endeavored utterly to overthrow the
Ministry, or topoyson and fly-blow it shamefully; and this is the method
whereby Satan has endeavored to fly-blow the Ministry Why then see the folly
and madness of those people who affect or cry up those Ministers who do not
reach their people with sound Doctrine, or a holy life; and whether there be
not such Ministers which do not teach their peoples ears with soundness of
Doctrine, or their ey^^ with a holy life? and whether there be not such people
as do cry up such Ministers; and whether or no (...) people are not guilty of
spiritual folly and madness? judge ye.

Doct. 2. A Ministers soundness in Doctrine and holiness of life and
conversation, does lay a very great obligation on a people to a due
conscientious practice of every commanded duty. The Apostle, we see, makes his
Preaching and Practice an argument to excite the Philippians to the
forementioned commanded duties, as is in the Text, and the verse before the
Text.

As first of all, the Appellations and Titles given in Scripture to such
Ministers whose Doctrine is sound, and whose Lives and Conversations are
exemplarily holy.

They are called, 1. The salt of the Earth, as Mat. 5.13. read that, says
Christ to those great Teachers of the Gospel, and Dispensers of his Oracles,
and in them to their Successors. Salt has two things in it, namely, Sharpness
and Savouriness; and thus Ministers, first must rebuke sharply, that people may
be sown in the Faith, as Paul enjoins Titus, as in the 1. of Titus and 13.
verse. And secondly, Ministers must speak savoury things to every person, and
to every palate, that their people may be savoury both in heart and life; but
to be as unfavoury as stinking carrion in the nostrils of Almighty God, under
such a savoury and seasoning Ministry, this is woeful. It is the nature of salt
to cause barrenness where it seasoneth not, therefore we read of Abimel^^ in
Judge, 9. ver. 45. that be swed the City with salt: So that people who live
under a sharp and savoury Ministry, and are not seasoned therewith, and
preserved from purrefaction in their fin and corruption thereb^ their case is
very dangerous.

2. They are called again the Light of the World, in Mat. 5.14. read that. As
for their Doctrine, the Salt of the Earth; so for their Lives, the Light of the
World; and they must therefore lead convincing lives, as John 5.35. read that;
it is there said of John the Baptist, our blessed Lord and Savior gives him
this commendatory Character, or Testimonial, That be was a burning and a
shining light, burning in himself, and shining to others: Or as it was said of
Basil, Thundering in his Doctrine, and lightning in his Life and Conversation.
Now if good Ministers be the light of the world, then hence we may infer,

2. Inf. 1. That without a godly faithful Ministry the world lies in darkness,
ignorance, error, sin and misery. It is said of Galilee, in Mat. 4.16. That
the (...) who sat in darknese, saw great light, read that. Why, had they not
Priests and Levites? I answer, they had indeed sorr, Priests, but they had not
a faithful Ministry; and therefore the Evangelists rells them they sat in
darkness, yea, in the region and shadow of death, notwishstanding the sorry
sottish Priests they had, But, when they had a faithful Ministry, they are said
to see a great Light. Again, If good Ministers be the light of the world, then
we may draw this Corollary, That to be offended at the light of a faithful and
powerful, Ministry, argues and speaks a very sinful and wretched frame of
heart. Nothing is to excellent, but some will be displeased at and with it, as
Eccles. 11.7. Even the light it self we know is offensive to sore eyes; and
this the burning and shining light of a godly and faithful Ministry is
offensive and terrible to some; but who are they? fore diseased souls, the Lord
knows. The Ark of God, which was the monument of his presence, whom did it
smite with Emrods but the Philistinet? What then, is the Ale-bench more easy
to thee than thy Pew is to thee in this place? than a Conscience,
Soul-searching Sermon? what, art thou offended at a powerful faithful Ministry?
Oh fearful plague-tokens!

3. To do all that man can do to put out the Light, this is worse. It is the
most horrid, hellish plot, that can be assigned or named; and of this I am sure
the the Church of Rome cannot plead not guilty, which like the Scribes and
Pharisees, take away from the people the key of knowledge, and shut up the
Kingdom of Heaven against men. How terribly does our blessed Lord
thunder-strike those stupid Pharisees for this? Mat. 23.13. And as did the
Pharisees, so did the Papists: For 1. Heretofore they made it a mortal sin to
read Gods word. 2. Afterward they clogged the liberty they granted with such
cautions and restrictions, as tha^ ^^ry few escaped of those that were within
the reach^^ the Inquisition. 3. Those clogs contented not, but now it is
thought fit utterly to deny liberty, and can there be a more horrible hellish
plot assigned than this, to take from people their knowledge of salvation? And
thus the Church of Rome, whether they have Church-snuffers or not, to be sure
they have Church extinguishers, and various means to put out the light. Oh
fearful is this! as in John 3.19, 20. That is the reason men hate the Light,
because their deeds are evil.

Again, If good Ministers be the Light of the world, then hence may we draw
this conclusion, that it concerns people very nearly to believe in the light,
and-to walk in the light, and to work while the light lasts, at our blessed
Savior exhorts in John 12, 35, 36. read that. God sets up his Ministers as
Lights, as Candles on the candlesticks of his Church, to awaken men, and to
light men unto eternal life: And ought not people to pray hard, and work hard
while the light lasts? Go^ removes many times the candle and candlestick, and
makes the Sun to go down at noonday, as Amos 8.9. So darkens the earth at
clear day. Good Ministers they are called the Light of the world, and they are
called.

3. Stars, as in Revel. 3.1. And who are meant by the seven Stars? Rev. 1 ult.
they are the Angels, that is, the Ministers of the seven Churches. Now the
Stars are said to affect those inferior bodies, 1. By their influence. And
thus godly and faithful Ministers, by the influence of their lips, they feed
many with the bread of life. 2. By their regular motives of their lives they
confirm many. 3. By the light of both they confirm many: one while their
employment is to instruct poor souls, and so they are like Stars shining in a
dark winter night; another while they are to converse in their courses, Judge.
5.20. Now to enjoy and live under the Ministry of such Stars, and yet to walk
in darkness, and to have fellowship with the works of darkness, to remain
unconvinc'd, unconverted, unhumbled, unmortified, unfruitful, this is woeful,
this is a very lamentable state.

4. They are called the Lords Messengers, and Ambassadors, Mal. 2.7. And the
Ministers of the Gospel, for indeed the Ministers of the New Testament they are
no where called Priests, they are called Ambassadors for Christ, 2 Cor. 5.20.
Godly, faithful Ministers are the Lords Messengers and Ambassadors in matters
concerning the soul, the precious, immortal, never dying soul of man, not in
the matter^ of this life, but for the soul. Now this is no mean employment to
treat with God for the soul.

5. They are called the Lords Husbandmen. Gods Church is his husbandry, 1 Cor.
3.9. And Ministers are Gods Husbandmen: naturally we are. like a barren
wilderness; now the Lord sends his Husbandmen to those barren wildernesses, to
make it a fruitful Paradis^ Now for Gods Husbandmen to plow, fow, and (...)
row, and yet no fruit, no crop, Isa. 5.6 When Gods Vineyard brought forth no
fruit, I will take away all their rainy clouds, says God; you shall have
clouds, but you shall have clouds without rain; you shall have Ministers still,
but such as shall never do your souls any good.

Well, you see the titles given to them in Scripture: they are c^lled the Salt
of the Earth, and the Light of the World, and Stars, and the Lords Messengers
and Ambassadors, and Husbandmen; all which does import a very great obligation
lying on a people who live under such a Minister and who live under, and
practice every commanded duty.

1. Inference. 2. Dangerous and fearful is the estate of those who have
enjoyed, and lived under, and have not been wrought upon by such a Ministry.
And this will appear if we consider, 1. How fearful a sentence the Lord Jesus
Christ has given to those that live under, but despise, and pro^t not by the
Ministry of his faithful servants, Mat 10 14, 15. And do not think that Christ
said this touching the Ministry of the Apostles only, cert^inly the Lord Christ
would have it to be understood of the Ministry of all his faithful servants,
whom he f^ndeth to teach his people John 13.20. whomsoever he sends and 16, He
that despises whoms^ev^^ (...) send, des^iseth me. Then is the message of the
Lords faithful Messengers received aright, when people do not only ^ea^^^, but
receive it and bring forth fruit, as our blested Lo^d speaks of good hearers,
Mark 4.20. Those are they that hear, and receive the fruits ^own in good
ground: and thus our blested Lord expounds himself, Mat. 11 24. He tells us
there, that they of Caper^^um shall be in a worse case than they of Sodom and
Gomorrah; and why? because they repented not at Christ's Sermons and Miracles;
they were not to be seen in their lives, notwithstanding Christ's Ministry,
notwithstanding Christ's preaching, and his thiracles among them, they did not
amend their hearts and ways: Oh how fearful a sentence has our Lord Jesus
Christ denounced against such!

2. If a people be not wrought upon by such a Ministry what hope can such a
people have, that any thing sh^^ do their souls any good? for is not the
Ministry of Gods faithful servants the power of God to salvation, and the
ministration or the Spirit? 2 Cor. 3.8. That is that Ministry whereby the
spirit of grace and holiness is infused into the hearts of the Father's chosen
ones in Christ Jesus. The Poet speaks of excellent Musicians, who, by power of
their music, made stones to leap into a wall A godly, faithful Ministry has
done more it has taken the stone out of man's heart, and has given them new
hearts, it has made all the commandments of God easy to many a poor soul,
because it loves its Father, its Redeemer, and ^omforter. There is a kind of
obedience in a godly faithful Minister; and if this will not do, nothing will,
as in Luke 16.31.

3. Is not the cause of the non-proficiency of such a people under such a
Ministry in themselves? Oh men do hinder the fruit of the word of their own
souls, the powerful operation and working of the word on their own souls! the
Lord prophecies that sentence on the Jews, Matthew. 13.14. He lays all the blame
on themselves, and assigns their own sins, and the reason and cause of it, as
in Verse 13. And thus our blessed Savior expounds the Parable of the Sower,
showing how many that hear the word are never the better for it; and be lay^th
the blame on themselves, as in Luke 8.14. what then, have thou not profited
under the Ministry of the Lords faithful servants? Oh lay the blame on thy (...)

4. Consider, has not^ the Lord himself a hand in (...) proficiency, or
non-proficiency under such a Minist^ surely the Lord has a chief hand in
making the Min^^stry of his servants fruitful or not fruitful to them (...)
enjoy it: Now to enjoy and not enjoy, is it not a fea^ful sign that ye are not
of God? as Joh. 8.47. Is it not a sign that thou art not of Gods Elect, at
least of Regeneration? But you will say did not the Jews hear Gods word? Yes,
they did, with their bodily cars, but they heard it not with faith, submission,
and fruitfulness, and therefore our blessed Savior tells them, they were not
of God, that is, they were at least in (...) unregenerate, if not in a
reprobate condition: And so John 10.26. Ye are those Goats (says Christ) that
must stand at my left hand in that great day; And then Unbelievers shall
teflect on themselves, not on Christ Ministry by the mouths of his servants.

But if any should say, what then, will you say th^^ all of us are Reprobates
that are not wrought on by your Ministry?

I say not so; for that seed which has been sown on you, may do your souls
good hereafter, though ^t has done them little or no good as yet.

But secondly, this I may boldly say, that if any of you die in your present
state, unconverted, unregenerate, you will carry with you to your grave as
fearful marks of reprobation, as any we can find in the whole book of God. John
Baptist compares the Ministry of the Gospel to a Fan, in Mat. 3.12. When the
Lord Jesus makes use of the Ministry of his faithful servants among the
people, when he makes use of those Fans, it will appear who among them are
wheat and shall be gathered into the Lords Garner; and who among them are
chaff, and shall be cast into the (...). And now whether the present state that
you have lied under, and are not yet wrought upon by a faithful Ministry, be
not very dangerous, judge ye? And so much may suffice for the Doctrinal part.

If it be so then, That a Ministers soundness in doctrine, and holiness of life
and conversation, does lay a great obligation on a people conscientiously and
duly to practice every commanded duty; Then first of all, the first Use we
shall make of this Doctrine shall be by way of Trial and Examination, and that
in two particulars.

1 Branch of the Use of Trial.

First, Whether you in this Parish, in this place, you here before the Lord do
make conscience of the due practice of every commanded duty?

Secondly, Whether the Ministry you have enjoyed and lived under, does not lay
a great obligation on you so to do?

For the first of these, Whether you here before the Lord do make conscience of
the due practice of every commanded duty in obedience to Almighty God, you may
try your selves by these three excellent Ingredients.

First, Universality, Can thou in the witness of thy conscience say, that
through grace thou do every, as well as any part of the Lords revealed will,
so far as thou know it?

2. Uniformity; Do thou do all without prejudice or partiality?

3. Vbiquity, Art thou the same at ^^ome as abroad, in thy Closet as well as in
the Congregation? and do thou mind inward and secret, as well as open and
outward holiness? What says conscience to this?

As first, Has commanded duties a throne in your own souls and conscience.
Secondly, Have they a throne in thy Family.

First Have commanded duties a throne, in your own fouls and consciences? Is
your hearts fully possessed (...) the power of those divine and heavenly truths,
(...) you have often heard, which has been again and again inculcated upon
you, as it was upon the Thessaloni^^^, 1 These. 1.5. their carnal principles
were confuted, th^^ passion moderated, their lusts mortified, their self ends
consounded; are yours so? Have commanded duties a throne in your souls and
consciences? Oh that all your consciences could give a satisfying answer to
this Quaery.

Secondly, Have commanded duties a throne in your Families; do you make
conscience of Family duties are your houses Bethels, that is, houses of God,
houses of Prayer, are they habitations of Holiness and Righteousness? do you
make conscience of relative as well as of personal duties? Oh that all your
consciences could give a satisfying answer to this Quaery.

2. Branch of the Use of Trial.

But now the second Branch of this Use of Trial and Examination, is this;
Whether the Ministry you have enjoyed and lived under, does not lay a very
great obligation on you, to put in execution every commanded duty, as Romans
10.6, 7, 8. that is, the Word of Faith we Preach; read that place: and may not
we take up that with some variation, and say, You have heard of the disease,
the misery, and remedy. When the great God shall arraign thee at the great and
fearful Day; and shall (...) thus, Thou rebellious wretch, why did thou not
forsake thy evil ways, thy drunkenness, thy ^ipling, thy covetousness, thy
snuffing at purity, thy inve^erate heart and spirit against my holy ways and
Ministers? why did thou not forsake thy evil ways? will thou be able to say,
Lord, I lived under 1. A so I betraying, non-resident, Minister, one (...) made
it his business to fleece indeed, not to feed the flock; or 2. Under a
foul-poysoning Innovator; or 3. Under a soul-pining dry nurse; or 4. Under a
soul-misguiding guide; or 5. Under a soul unsetling temporizer: or 6. Under a
soul-destroying discountenancer.

1. Can thou say that thou live under a soul-betraying, non-resident
Minister, one that made it his business to fleece, and not to feed the flock?
one that looked after the wool and fat of the flock; the fleece, but never
minded the flock, but non-residency has been hitherto decryed, as that as
breeds a Minister idle and erroneous, or licentious? but will thou be able to
say. Lord, I lived under such a Minister, that was a soul-betraying Minister,
one that was greedy of Livings, and had perhaps two or three, or four, but so
bad a man, that the worst was too good for him? or will thou be able to plead,
or can thou say.

2. Lord, I lived under a soul-poysoning Innovator, one that was for formality
more then reality of true worship; one that preached such Doctrine as did not
season, but poison and destroy the souls of his hearers; such are Romish
Teachers, Jesuits, Priests and Seminaries, who so affect the outward pomp, as
they neglect the inward power of it? Will thou be able to say, Lord, I lived
under the Ministry of such a one, who was more realous for the formality of thy
worship, than the reality; more zealous for those things that will not (...)
the trial of the Lords day of appearance, than for the su^stance of Religion: Or

3. Can thou plead that thou livedst under a soul pining dry Nurse, one that
did not, or could not seed us with the sincere milk of thy Word, one from whom
thou never heardst a soul-solid, a soulworking Sermon all thy life? I appeal to
your Consciences, have you not heard often of your miser^^ and Gods mecy, and
Christ's merits? Have you not he^^ often of the necessity of a holy life? Oh the
conviction informations, exhortations, persuasions, directions, you have
enjoyed and lived under! Has not thy state (...) nature been ripped up, and
the Anatomy, (not of the Council of Trent) but of Gods Book, been showed to
thee? What shall I say, has not Hell and Damnation to all rebellious, and
Heaven and Salvation to all true penitent souls, been preached to you?

4. Or can thou say that thou livedst under a soulmisguiding guide, as 1. A
blind Seer, a blind Watchman, a blind Leader of the blind, one who knew not
Heavens way? Can thou say thou livedst under such a creature that is not to
be found in Christ's Catalogue, an I dolpreacher, as in Psalm 135.15, 16, 17.
verses, read that, Or 2. if not ignorant, yet one so vicious, that he pulled
down more with his foul hand, then he built up with his fair tongue? Can thou
say thou livedst under one, who by his conversation gave his Doctrine the lie?
Will thou be able to plead thus at the great day? or will thou be able to say

5. That thou have lived under a soul-unsetling Temporizer? what would he not
do rather then he would lose his Living? which made me think Religion to be but
a fancy. Will thou be able to say at the great Day, Lord, it was my sad lot and
portion to live under the Ministry of such a one, who tuned his Fiddle to the
times of every one? I, or lastly,

Will thou be able to say thou livedst under a souldestroying Discountenancer
of all purity and holiness? one (perhaps) though no dunce, or drunkard, yet a
profane scoffer, one that preached holiness out of his Pulpit, and Parish, and
House, and the like.

But first of all, we can through grace appeal in this case both to the Lord
and to your selves, that it has not been so with you.

2. Consider how unexcusable you will be, if you live and dye in your
ignorance, impenitency, and unbelief.

1. Consider, we can in this case appeal both to the Lord and (...) your
selves. 1. To the Lord: we are able with an humble boldness to appeal to him,
and say, Lord, thou know we have given this people warning, Ezekiel 3.18. Now
blessed be the Lord, we can humbly appeal to his Majesty, Oh Lord, thou know
we have warned the wicked to turn from his wicked way, and the profane from his
profaneness, and the superstitious from his superstition, and the schismatical
from his schism, and the formal from his formality, and the civil honest man
from resting in his morality. Oh blessed be thyname, we have endeavored to
take off this people from all their sandy, quagmoiry foundations. Lord, thou
know our prayers for them. And so

2. To appeal to you: And this was a very great comfort to St. Paul, that he
could appeal to the people themselves, as Acts 20.26, 27. This was a great
comfort to him; and blessed be the God of Grace, it is a great comfort to us,
that we can take you to record, that we are pure from your blood; we have not
ceased to declare all that the Father has shown to us; we have not been
affrighted by any man, or men's frowns, nor debauched to conceal any part
thereof by any man's smiles.

2. Consider how inexcusable you will be, if you live and die in your
ignorance, impenitency, and unbelief, Ezekiel. 3.10. Observe it, if you miscarry
for Eternity, the blood of your souls will not be charged on us; nay, it will
be on your own heads, And there fore the Apostle Paul, when the preached Christ
to the Jews, and they opposed and blasphemed, their blood was upon (...) own
heads, as Acts 18.5, 6. Oh consider it! if you Ministers have been faithful,
they are clear, and free and guiltless; the Lord will never charge the blood
of souls on them. Considet it therefore: how speechless will you be at the
great day, if you live and die in your sins? may not the Lord say of this
place, as he did of Capern^um, Mat. 11.23. for thou have ^^joyed the Ministry
of many of my servants; Dars any of you meet us in the day of Judgment, under
whose Ministry you have lived in an unregenerate ^state, and say that you have
lived under a soul-betraying, non-resident one; or under a soul-poysoning
Innovator; or a soul-pining dry Nurse; or a soul-misguiding guide; or a
soul-unsetled Temporizer; or a soul-destroying dis-countenancer, in (...)
unregenerate estate? The Lord will then make you to know what it was to have a
faithful Labourer among you, as Ezekiel. 33.33. Then when you-shall be convinced
in your own conscience, you shall then say, you heard all those things, and we
cannot say (...) were unwarned, either in sin or danger; we cannot say we were
untaught our duty, either to God (...) Man; we had precept on precept but we
sligh^ed all warning, and exhortation, and direction, therefore now are lost
and undone everlastingly. So much may serve for the first Use.

2. Use of Direction.

The second Use, is a Use of Direction, which will fall into many very suitable
and practical particulars, whereto I do beseech you to hearken unto, as the
words of a dying man do commonly take the deepest impression (...) the
surviving hearers. Now this may be, for all that (...) know, my last words to
you in this place; therefore (...) beseech you to hear me: An interruption, a
suspension of my weak worthless pains and labor among you there will be, for
any thing I know, from this day; but observe, it is no Refignation from me, or
my Reverend Brother; and therefore what other dissolution of the property and
relation between your Pastor and you there may be, as of that mutual
intercourse, I shall not account or call it a forfeiture of his place, whatever
others may call it, let them call it what they will. Then hearken to my words,
as the words of a dying man, yet not dead but alive, and perhaps shall nor die,
but live and declare the Word of the Lord, and hold forth the Word of the Lord
to you many a time in this place, when ever it pleases God to set open a door
for me.

If it be so, That the Ministers soundness in Doctrine, and holiness of life
and Conversation, do lay a great obligation on a people duly and
conscienciously to practice every commanded duty, Then from this Doctrine I
would suggest and leave with you several words and hints of counsel: And oh
that the Lord God of Heaven would effectually engrave and set them home on
every one of your hearts!

My first counsel is this, That when the Lord takes away such Ministers, whose
Doctrine is found, and their lives exemplarily holy, you would then be duly
apprehensive, and deeply sensible, both of the inflicting cause, and also of
the meritorious deserving cause thereof.

1. For the inflicting cause: and that is the Lord himself, Isa. 3.1, 2. Who is
it that takes away from a people the natural staff, and the civil staff, the
spiritual staff, says the Prophet? The Lord, the Lord of Hosts. Whoever it be
that is the instrument, it is certain it is (...) Lord himself that is the
principal efficient cause of this judgment on a people; and this will appear,
if we consider.

1. The Lord has threatened his judgment on a rebellious peoply, Amos 8.11,
12. I (says the L) will bring this judgment on them. A most dreadful siritual
judgment! Gods Word is the spiritual food (...) our spiritual lives; and
therefore as the granting of (...) is a blessing indeed, so the withholding of
it is a judgment indeed. This ireful, dreadful judgment the Lord we see,
threatens, yea, that is not all, the Lord has not only threatened it, but

2. Inflicted it. As the Lord has taken away his faithful Messengers and
Ambassadors.

1. Sometimes by death, out of the world, out of the land of the living. And
thus the Lord took away the Prophet Enoch, Genesis 5.24 And

2. Sometimes by removal. Thus the Lord took away the Prophet Jonas from
Israel, and sent him to Ninivie, as Jonah 1.2. And thus Paul and Barnabas went
away from the Jews, and turned to the Gentiles, as Acts 13.4.

3. Sometimes by deprivation. A time there was when the good Priests and
Levites were forced to flee their own places and possessions, 2 Chronicles. 11.13,
14.

4. Sometimes by Suspension. Thus a time there was, When it was said to the
Seers, see not, and to the Pr^phets, prophecy not, Isai. 30.9, 10. Thus a time
there was, when People would have Pastors, but would not endure faithful
Jeremiah; and a time there was, that there was a Law made, Look ye speak no
more in the name of Jesus, Acts 4.18. And a time there was, when Paul and
Timotheus, and Silvanus, were forbid to preach to the Gentiles, as 1 These.
2.15, 16. Thus we see the Lord has inflicted this dreadful Judgment on a
people; and the Lord has diverse ways, and methods, and means to in^^^^ it.

3. Consider, The Church and people of the Lord has been very sensible of the
Lords hand in this Judgment, as we may see in Psalm. 74.1. and (...) verses
compared. Why, what is the matter? as if they have said, God was wont
heretofore to give us signs and tokens he would even work miracles for us; the
Lord would send us some Prophets to converse with, and instruct us; we had
those that could tell us how long our troubles should last; but now we see no
sign, the Lord leaves us, as it were to the wide world and how sensible was
the Lords Church in this judgment? as ver. 1. of that Psalm. This is the first
endeavor, We are to he duly sensible, and deeply apprehensive of the
inflicting cause of such a Judgment; and that is the Lord himself.

2. Of the meritorious Cause, and that is Sin. Say not we, it is long of such
or such, but it is long of our selves, we may thank our selves for this, and we
appeal to your selves, whether this judgment may not be charged.

1. From the general unflexiblenesse, and untractablenesse of people under the
Ministry of the Word: For this very cause the Lord plagued, and poured his
vengeance upon the Ten Tribes, as in 2 Kings 17 from ver. 13 to 19. The Lord
testified against Is^ael by all the prophets, and by all the Seers, saying,
Turn you from your evil ways; notwithstanding they would not hear. And for
this very cause did the Lord afterward plague all Judah, as Jer. 29.17, 18,
19. And for this very reason did the Lord Jesus Christ remove Paul from
Jerusalem, because the people ware a st^ff necked people, and they would not
receive Paul's estimony concerning Jesus; as Acts 22.18. Paul had a great
desire to stay at Jerusalem, as appeared by his reasoning with the Lord, ver.
19, 20. But what says the Lord Christ? ver. 21. N^w can England, can London
plead not guilty of this heinous provocation, a generval unflexiblenesse,
untractablenesse, under a Conscience-ransacking, a Conscience-searching
Ministry? (...) shall the Lord do with such a people, under (...) Ministry? Is
it not just with God to let them al^^ that are profane and superstitious? let
there be^^ people, like Priests? let the blind lead the blind, (...) let the
wicked, rebellious Minister, lead a wicked, lo^^^ people, that both may perish
together everlastingly.

2. The unfruitfulnesse, formality, luke-warmnesse, declining of Gods own
people; and for this the Lord threatens the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2.4.5. I
have (says Christ) somewhat against thee, thou have left thy first love;
though not absolutely for nature, yet eminently for measure: And can England,
can London plead not guilty of this sad provocation? Now indeed we cannot but
observe, and approve of your flocking to the Lords Ordinances, as Doves to the
holes of a window; but did you do so some months agon? Oh your voluntary, and
fearful distractions, avocations, diversions from the worship and service of
God! And is it not just with the Lord to take away that bundance, and choice of
spiritual helps a people had, when they approved not of them, yea, when th^^
undervalued, and despised, and abused them? (...) Lord God help us all to
affect our souls, and to ^ay our selves low before his all-seeing Majesty for
our provoking him to do this! and endeavor to be duly apprehensive, and deeply
sensible of the inflicting cause, and meritorious cause thereof.

2. Take heed of a profane delight in loose, lewd, wicked, dissolute
Ministers. And here we will premise two or three things.

1. Too many people are too ready to cavil at many M^^sters without a cause.
The life of our blessed Lord and Savior, was it not traduced? did not some say
that he was a friend to Publicans and sinners? We (...) Christ was cavil that,
and (...): And thus the holy Apostles, their (...), they went through evil
report, as well as good report, 2 Cor. 10.2. And thus Ath^nasius, who was
traduced for an Adulterer by the Ariant; and so Auther and Calvin are
represented and reported by the Papists, as if they had been the vildest
creatures in the world: The wicked man cavils at, and finds spots, a^ least do
what he can to find spots in the Sun; and some, who are not so wicked, do look
for an Evangelical perfection in Ministers, and all their^, their wives, and
their children, and their Servants, and their company: how ready are people
grossly and uncharitably to censure a Minister for any, yea, the least they
discern in him, or his; and is this their virtue? nay, is it not their vice and
corruption?

2. It is no breach of the Churches peace, no argument of a contentious and
unquiet spirit in a Minister, to speak vilely of vile Ministers and enemies of
the Churches peace. Why, who are they? John-Baptist tells us, he calls them
vipers, a generation of vipers: why, were they not Preachers? Mat 3.7. and will
you say that John Baptist was a man of a contentious spirit, of an unquiet
spirit? And who were they whom our blessed Savior calls a generation of
vipers? as Mat. 12.34.38.39. and who were they that our Savior calls a
generation of vipers, and an evil and adulterous generation? were they not
Preachers? and it is very observable, both John Baptist, and our Savior did
call those Preachers th^^, even in the hearing of them who were their ordinary
hearers; and do but observe what strange terms of disgrace S. Peter gives
them, 2 Pet. 2.12. to certain Preachers in his time, ver. 14. what strange
terms does the Apostle give those Teachers whose pernicious ways many would
follow, as in ver. 2. of that chap. but did not the Scribes and Pharisets sit
in Moses Chair? and did they not preach some good Doctrine, (...) much that
Jesus Christ bids the people hear them, and observe what they said, though not
what they did, as Mat. 23.1, 2, 3. Therefore may some say, It seems strange,
that Christ should thus disgrace the Scribes and Pharisees, was not this the
way to make their Ministry contemptible?

First, It is very clear and undeniable that there were a generation of pitiful
sorry Teachers, as in Mat. 9.36. Why, did not the people enjoy the teaching of
the Scribes and Pharisees; yes, they did, but the Scribes and Pharisees were
Idol Shepherds, they knew not how to feed their flock, and therefore Christ
looked on the people as sheep scattered abroad for all the Scribes and
Pharisees. They did not understand that there was heart-murder, or
heart-adultery, until our blessed Savior instructed them. The Scribes and
Pharisees they did but strike at the bough only, but our Savior preached with
authority, and not at the Scribes did. And withal I answer.

Secondly, That beyond all peradventure our blessed Savior saw that although
the Scribes and Pharisees did teach some truths, yet by their life and doctrine
they did more mischief then good, and therefore the more credit they had among
the people, the more mischief they were like to do; and therefore from hence
our blessed Lord and Savior calls them a generation of vipers, But I hope you
will not count it an argument of the breach of the Churches peace to speak
vilely of a vile Ministry, It was no more than John Baptist did, and then our
Savior did.

Thirdly, No man's sin deserves so sharply to be reproved as the sins of
Ministers, because their sins of all others are the chief sins committed in a
land; at the Sanctuary profaneness too too often begins. Therefore when Gods
people met in their public fa^^^ made (...) confession of those (...) of the
first magnitude, by which they had most provoked the Lord, they do (...)
confession chiefly of the sins of these Magistrates, and their Ministers. Neh.
9.33, 34. The Jews there bewailed the sins of their Magistrates and Ministers,
as the particular cause of their plagues, On the sins of the Teachers, are the
Teachers of sin, and therefore no man's sin deserves to be so sharply reproved,
as the scandalous sins of Ministers. Now if you love your souls, take heed and
beware of a profane delight in lewd, loose, dissolute Ministers. We find the
Lord complaining of the wickedness of the Prophets, and of the Priest and
People, Jer. 5. ult. the People did take a profane delight in false Prophets,
and in polluted Priests; and so likewise in the Prophet Micah, chap, 2. ver.
11. the people, although they did oppose the Prophet Micah, and other true
Prophets, yet they did approve of, and delight in false Prophets, such ^s were
of their own leven, their own way and mould, such as would flatter them, and
promise them wine and strong drink: and are there not many such people in the
world, that had rather hear such a Minister, than such as preach close-walking
with God, and of getting to Heaven under pain of damnation? Will you cry up,
and will you profanely delight in a Ministry that shall preach, Peace, Peace,
to all profane rebellious people; in short, such a one as will poison you in
his Doctrine, or in his example?

Thirdly, take heed and beware of sinful idolizing of godly, faithful,
Ministers; the Apostle decries this with much zeal, ardency and fervency of
spirit, what is Paul's planting, and what is Apollo's watering, 1 Cor. 3.5, 6.
as excellent gifts, parts, and graces as these men had, ye^ they look higher:
so it is your duty to look ab^^^ (...) parts, and above (...) and graces: Paul
and Apollo cannot give (...); Paul indeed may plant, but there is no rooting
(...) of these plants, but by Christ. And read ver. 7. it is God, and he only
that can give increase: as Elisha's Servant could carry his Masters staff and
lay it on the dead child, but the Child could not be raised to life until
Elisha came himself; thus g^dly faithful Ministers can but lay Gods Message
before you, but unless the Lord set it to the heart, never a dead soul can be
raised from the death of sin, to the life of grace and holiness. Remember,
godly and faithful Ministers, although they have the Lords Sword, yet they have
not the Lord Christ's Arm; and alas what can the Lord Christ's Sword do without
his Arm?

Fourthly, take heed of being leavened with prejudice against the Ministry of
the word, because of the misdemeanour or miscarriage of the Minister. Surely
the efficacy of the Word and Sacraments, does not depend on the quality of the
Minister. It is the word of the Lord that converts, not the person of the
Dispencer or Speaker. A seed that is sown in a good soil, may, yea will grow
and thrive, although perhaps the Sower had a very dirty hand; as 2 Cor. 2.3.
the Apostle tells the Corinthians, that they are, says he, the Epistle of
Christ's Ministry by us; the Hand is Christ's, Ministers are but the Pen. Hence
it was, that the Ministry of the Scribes and Pharisee^ was not to be rejected,
but to be esteemed, so long as they failed not in the substance thereof; and
hence the Apostle rejoices that Christ was preached of the false Apostles,
Phil. 1.15, 16, 17, 18. though out of envy; take heed therefore and beware of a
total separation from, disserting of, and forsaking Church assemblies; and yet
I conceive it is a very rare thing for unconverted Ministers to convert some.
For what says the Lord by the Prophet Zephania, Zeph. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. Oh says
the Lord, to Jerusalem, that bath such Prophets and such Priests, woe to such a
City, to such a Country, to such a Parish: and what says Christ himself in
Matthew. 15.14. Let them alone; often times it falls out so, that it made
Archbishop Abbot speak in a Lecture of his, and profess, that his heart did
even bleed within him, to think of the precious souls of many people who had
such Ministers, that if they had not been in the Ministry, they would not have
been fit Hogherds f^r Swine. And yet we must remember not to tie the efficacy
of the word and Sacraments to the goodness or badnesse of a Ministers person.

Fifthly, take heed and beware of being leavened with prejudice against all
Ministers, because of the vileness and monster-like unbeseeming carriage of
some Ministers. It has been granted over and over, that some Ministers evil,
licentious carriage and conversations are notorious; the Lord knows, too many
Ministers have Esau's hands with Jacobs voice: what then, must this redound to
the general disgrace of all Ministers: Because some professors of the Law live
lawless, must therefore all be censured and condemned for lawless livers?
Because Judas was a Devil, and a Son of perdition, will you therefore say that
all the Disciples of Christ were naught? Perhaps you do know some Sir John's,
some blind Seers, some blind Watchmen, who know not Heavens way, some blind
Droans; Or secondly, some that carry themselves insolently, as Jer. 20.1, 2. as
Pasher did. Or thirdly, some that are too too like that evil servant in the
Gospel, as Luke 12.45. Or perhaps you know fourthly, some apostatizing
Demusses, who embrace this present world, and revolt from their principles and
profession, as 2 Timothy 4.10. Or perhaps yo^ know fifthly, some aspiring and
climbing Deatrephes, (...) 3 John 9. Perhaps you know some such as these as I
have instanced, what then? is there any profession, as it were, but it has a
certain skum? why then in the face of some, who through grace are free from
these miscarriages, take heed and beware of being leavened with prejudice
against all Ministers, because of the vileness and miscarriage of some.

Sixthly, Be earnest with the Lord for a godly, faithful Ministry, whose labor
and pains among the people the Lord uses to bless. The Lord Jesus Christ is
the great Patron of all Livings, as a Reverend man, now in Heaven, once said;
He can present whom he will to a Parish, and he can restore whom he will to
their people, as Acts 12.5.6 7. As he did Peter out of prison by the peoples
prayers. And thus when Paul was in prison at Rome, observe how he writes to
Philemon, in Ver. 22. of his Epistle. And thus when the Author of the Hebrews
was restrained from preaching, observe what an Exhortation he uses, Heb.
13.18.19. Oh pray therefore, pray for godly faithful Ministers, their pains,
their labors, the Lord uses to bless among a people; as Malachy 2.6 we read
that the Lord blessed the labors of Levi, so that he was an Instrument in the
Lords hand to turn wicked men from their iniquity: and Verse 5. Lo it was said
of Barnabas, that by his Ministry much people were added to the Lord. Acts
11.24. And if we would have godly faithful Ministers, as we must pray for them,
so we must first repent us of our sins. Jer 3.14.15. Repent we must of our
sins, and particularly our contempt of the Ordinances and Worship of God,
Secondly, We must prize the Gospel more then we have done; the Gospel loves to
come, and to stay where it is welcome. Of all the seven Churches of Asia, ^he
Church of Philadelphia was the best; that Church used the Word best, and that
Church enjoyed the Word longest. Be earnest with the Lord for godly faithful
Ministers, whose pains and labors among the people the Lord uses to bless and
prosper.

7. Be earnest with the Lord, that the refining work of a National-Reformation,
a City, a Country, a Family Reformation, a Personal-Reformation may begin at
the refining and purging of Ministers. None will deny, but that there is great
need of Reformation; there is none of you but will confess, that the seed of
leaven had need sometimes to be winnowed out from among us, as 2 Chronicles. 29.48.
Hezektab began at the Priests and Levites, Hezekiah began his Reformation at
them; and thus at our first Reformation, the Protestants did then affirm, that
there could never be any good Reformation, unless they began at the Court of
Rome: And it is very observable, that when the Prophet speaks of the Lord
Christ's coming, as a refining fire, and as Fullers soap, this also is
prophesied of refining the Sons of Levi, Malachy 2.2. When he shall purify the
Sons of Levi, when he shall purge them as gold and silver As it was in Judah,
in that good Reign of that good King Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 29 34. The Priests were
too few there; And as it was in Judah then, whether it be not so in England
now, I affirm not, but leave you to judge. But a Minister soundness in
Doctrine, and holiness of life and conversation, should lay a great obligation
on a people, duly and conscientiously to practice every command to duty. And
this may suffice for the second Doctrine. Come we now to the third Doctrine
deducible to be handled from this Text; and that is this, That in the due
practice of commanded duties, Gods people may warrantably and confidently
expect much of the gracious presence of the God of peace, even in the worst of
times. These things think on, says the Apostle, Ver. 8. These things do,
says the Apostle in the Text; and what then? the God of peace shall be with
you. In the due practice of commanded duties, Gods people may confidently
expect much of the gracious presence of the God of peace in the worst of times:
Then take counsel fron this Doctrine, that you may have the gracious presence
of the God of peace with you, and if this pulpit were my deathbed, I should
give such counsel as these following to you.

First, Crown the Prince of peace, the Lord Jesus Christ in your hearts and
lives: I say, Crown the Prince of peace, the Lord Jesus Christ in your hearts
and lives, receive him as your Lord and King, set a Crown on his head here in
your hearts and lives, and he will Crown you with peace in this life, and set a
Crown of glory, a Crown of immortality on your heads in the life to come. If
you have Christ, you have all things, all heavenly graces, all spiritual
comforts, all temporal blessings; if you have Christ, God will, God can then
give you all things that are good for you, without Christ, you are not, and you
can do nothing that is acceptable with God.

Therefore this is my first counsel to you, Crown the Prince of peace, the Lord
Jesus Christ, in your hearts and lives.

Secondly, Then maintain a constant and conscientious intimate communion with
the God of peace. It was good counsel which Eliphas gave to Job, Job 22.21.
Would you have much of the presence of the God of peace? Oh then frequently
fall down, and lie at the footstool of the Lords Throne, for grace, and for
peace and when you do so, be not unmindful of us, who have often been your
mouths to God, and Gods mouth to you. And to engage and encourage you herein,
consider.

First, The Lord Jesus Christ has promised to be with his poor Ministers
always, even to the end of the world, Mat. 28. ult. If always, not in the
Pulpit, only; no, the Lord has promised to be with his faithful servants out
of the Pulpit as well as in the Pulpit; in the Prison sealing the truth, as
well as in the Pulpit preaching the truth: Oh then, will you put this in suit
by prayer, that the Lord Christ will be with his poor Ministers to the end of
the world. 2. We shall not sail to pray for you, 1 Samuel 12.23. Our sequestring
from our preaching work from you, will give us advantage to lay out more time
to fetch sighs from our hearts in prayingwork for you; and I trust the Lord
will give us hearts, so to improve our time for you, as Samuel said, so God
forbid we should sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray for you. As Peter did
to the people with a promise, as 1 Pet. 5.10. And not only for you, but

Secondly, Even for such as have treated us somewhat uncivilly and unkindly, to
say no more of them, although the number of them are very inconsiderable; but
for such, I trust we shall not forget in our prayers: As Moses fell down on his
face for the Children of Israel, when they treated him very unkindly, and spit
in his face, I trust we shall not forget Moses's prayer for the people: And so,
when they danced before their Idol, Jeremiah wept for those in his time, as
Jerem. 13.17. And that we shall not forget Jeremiah, weeping for you: And I
trust likewise, that we shall remember Stephen, being on his knees for his
Persecutours, pouring out his life and prayer together, Acts 7.60. I doubt not
but my Reverend Brother, and my self, shall remember Paul's willingness, to
spend, and to be (...) both in prayer and preaching for you all. Though the
more abundantly he loved, the less he was beloved, 2 Cor. 12.15.

3. Maintain and nourish all tenderness in your Conscience all your days: Oh
go not without, much less against the dictates of conscience! rebel not
against the light of it; beware of stifling and suppressing a warning
conscience, lest a warning conscience, prove a gnawing conscience, and prove a
tormenting conscience: And consider, first, Remorse of Conscience has an eye
against all sin past. Secondly, Tenderness of Conscience, which has an eye to
all sin to come. Take heed then of all calmness of heart.

Fourthly, Take heed of Apostatizing. Chrysostom has a notable saying,
namely, That Ministers have a greater trouble, because they never find their
work as they leave it, as other workmen do: Oh in how short a time does a poor
Minister find all his work put out of frame and order! Did not Moses find it
so? Exodus 32.8. Moses had no sooner turned his back as it were, but the people
were turned out of Gods way of worship. And did not Paul find it so? Gal. 1.6.
The Galathians were quickly removed; Paul was but lately gone from them, and
they were quickly apostatized. Now this comes to pass.

First, It is by reason of a crafty, subtle, deceitful Devil, as in the Gospel
we read. While men slept, the Enemy came and sowed tares, Mat. 13.25. And who
this Enemy is, we may see in Christ's expounding the Parabl^^ ver. 39.

And Secondly, Partly by reason of men's own deceitful hearts, as Heb. 3.12.
observe it. There is an evil heart of unbelief in the best: it dwells in the
best, but it reign^ in the wicked. And what is that? one of these evil hearts
of unbelief, in apostatizing, in departing from the living God.

Thirdly, It is partly by Reason of deceitful workers, as the Apostle calls
false Apostles. It is partly by reason of such. Then take heed of apostatizing,
either from truth of Doctrine, purity of worship, or practice of Conversation.

1. From truth of Doctrine. Be not weary of old truths; take beed and beware of
itching after novel Doctrines; take heed and beware of admiring this or that
opinion, which, as new lights, drop down from heaven, but indeed is but as the
smoke of the bottomless pit.

2. From purity of Worship also. Let not your zeal be cold, but kindled against
every bracelet of the Scatlet Whore. How often does the Apostle call the people
adulterers and adulteresses, because they apostatize from the Word and Worship
of God.

3. In practice and Conversation. Prize the Gospel, love it, and live
accordingly to it: With constancy look on every motion of thy soul, and every
action of thy life, as a step to life or a step to death, as a step toward
Heaven, or a step to Hell, Heb. 10.38. To close this Counsel, the Author of the
Hebrews brings in the Lord, protesting against apostatizing. If any man draw
back from Gospel-principle, and Gospel Worship, or froth a Gospel-conversation,
says the Lord, If any man draw back thus, my Soul shall have no pleasure in
him. Tremble then at this, thou Apostatizer, whoever thou art, wherever thou
sit or stand, My Son shall have (...) pleasure in thee. I loath and
abominate that person, faith the Lord.

5. All of you then study peace, and particularly you who do unfeignedly set
your hearts and faces toward Heaven, study peace, and follow after it; thou^^^
run from you, pursue after it. You profess you^ selves to be them that are
truly fearing God, an^ truly honoring the King, and truly loving one another,
Oh then seek peace.

You who do unfeignedly set your hearts and fac^^ toward Heaven, study peace
always, and decline all dividing principles and practices among you; and that
you may not either breed or feed circumstantial differences, or substantial
divisions; consider, God (...) the God of Peace; our Savior is the Prince of
Peace; our Comforter is the Comforter of Peace; our Calling is the Calling of
Peace; our Way is the Way of Peace. Oh that we may so live in Peace, that the
God of Love and Peace may dwell with us; and that the God of Peace may live
with us here, that we may live with the God of Peace hereafter.

Mr. Bull of Newington-Green, His Farewell Sermon in the Forenoon.
John 14.16. And I will send the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever.
THe Observation that I commended to you (...) of these words, was this,

It is the great work for which the Spirit (...) Christ is given by Ged, to
comfort the hearts of (...) people.

You may remember that I have (...) ope^^^ the truth to you, and have showed
you what this spititual comfort is that the Spirit of Christ works in the
hearts of his Disciples. I gave it you in this Description.

It is that inward, spiritual satisfaction, that the heart of a gracious person
finds in, and through Jesus Christ, in all the various dispensations of God
toward him, whereby he is enabled to go on in chear^inesse in the way that God
would have him, whether it be by a way of doing, or of suffering. And herein I
showed,

1. The nature of the spiritual satisfaction.

2. The Author of it, It is God by his Spirit.

3. The Object of it, God through Jesus Christ.

4. The proper Subject of this inward spiritual comfort, the people of God.

5. And lastly, The effects of the spiritual comfort; it is to strengthen the
heart, both to do and suffer.

I came the last time, to show you how the Spirit of God does this.

1. He does it as an enlightening Spirit, by showing where comfort is to be had,
by opening the eyes of the understanding, as he did Hagars bodily eyes, to see
the Well of water.

2. He does it as a quickening Spirit, bringing the soul into that capacity to
take in the comfort; for what comfort can a dead man receive? a Cordial and a
Puddle is all one to a dead man.

3. He works this inward spiritual satisfaction, by discovering the truth of
this vital Principle in the soul: for a man may have a principle of Grace and
spiritual life in him, and not know it, that though he has the spiritual
comfort, yet it is all one as if he had it not.

Now this is the great Question that is debated in the heart of a Child of God,
Whether he be regener a (...) born again? whether he has grace in his soul,
(...) grace that will qualify him for glory? and if he was ^^risfied as to
this, he would not be a moment without comfort: But he is afraid that he is
dead in sin, that he is a stranger to the life of Grace; hence arises all his
spiritual troubles, now the Spirit of God comes in and resolves the case, comes
into the soul by his bright Reflections, and fills our souls with comfort: Now
(...) have received not the spirit of the world, but the Sp^^ which is of God.

4. The Spirit of God is a comforting Spirit, as he opens the vein of godly
sorrow in the soul: Truly this is the next way to spiritual comfort, when a man
can once spiritually mourn for sin, Matthew. 5.4. Blessed are they that mourn,
for they shall be comforted, Godly forrow opens the vein, and lets out the
matter that hinders comfort, and causes inward trouble in the soul? A gracious
man takes a great delight in godly forrow: Oh! its a matter of mavelous
comfort, to a Child of God, when he can kindly mourn for his sins.

5. The Spirit of God comforts the soul as he is (...) mortifying Spirit. Thus
he takes away that that is the ground and matter of Believers trouble,
mortifying that sin that is the cause of his sorrow; pride, unbelief,
inordinate love to the world.

6. The Spirit of God works comfort in the hearts of his people, by setting
their own spirit to seek for comfort in Gods own ways.

The last thing I did for the Explication of the Doctrine, was to add some
Propositions, and they were (...) as these.

1. Many a gracious heart, that has fellowship with the Spirit of God in his
sanctifying work, may feel (...) find none in his comforting work. The Sun
(...) operate where it does not shine. A man (...) of salvation, when he does
not feel the joy^^ of (...) Isa. 51.3. You shall find those that fear the Lord,
and had the comforts of the Holy Ghost, yet walked in darkness.

2. Even those gracious souls, that have the fellowship of the ^nnforting
Spirit to day, may want it to morrow. This is not daily bread, while the Saints
are on this side Heaven. The Solstice of a Christians comfort does not last all
the day long; they are not feasted with this every day, they have the night as
well as the day? there is a night as well as a day in the heart of a gracious
soul; as it is in natural, in the common course of nature, the Sun may shine to
day, but it may be clouded to morrow. Thus it was with that holy man, Psalm.
30.7. Lord, by thy favor thou have made my mount ain* (...) stand strong, thou
did hide thy face and I was troubled. And God does this in infinite wisdom,
to put a difference between Earth and Heaven, this valley of tears, and that
state of glory, that so the hearts of Gods people may be kept in a frame of
longing after the state of Heaven; God^wil have his people be groaning here,
that his people may groan after that condition when all sorrowing and sighing
shall flee away. God reserves perfect comfort to be the reward of perfect
holiness; while our graces are imperfect, we most make account that our comfort
will be so too; Tears will be never wiped from our eyes, til sin be quite taken
out of our hearts.

3. Those that have had this spiritual comfort in their souls, they may lose
not only the impression of the Spirits com^nt; but they may feel impressions of
Gods anger. Heman compla^^, that the wrath of God did hang upon him, and that
the (...) of God had cut him off. A gracious heart has real grou^^^^ of
consolation, though he has not present sensible comfort.

A child of God has always that, that if he did see, he could not be without
comfort; the Promises are his support, he has the first fruits of the Spirit,
and right to ea^^nal life:

A child of God shall always have so much to keep up^ hopes and affiance upon
God; a child of God, in the da^est condition, though he does not see enough to
make (...) rejoice in God, yet he sees enough to make him trust i^ God; though
he walk in darkness, and see no light, yet he trusts in God. Job says Though
the Lord slay him, yet be would trust in him. David was in great trouble, while
^e was in that disquiet expostulation, Why art thou cast down O my soul! and
why art thou disquieted within me? trust in God.

5 Those that have inward comforts from the spirit, may at the same time have
little comfort from Gods outward dispensations. It may be dark without, when
it is light within; while Stephen sees nothing but blood here below, he saw
Heaven above: And Christ tells his Disciples, In the world they should have
tribulation, but in him they should have peace.

6 And lastly, Though this be one great work of the spirit of God to comfort
the hearts of Christ's Disciples; yet there are some special seasons where in
the Spirit of God gives out this comfort. There are seasons of sadness, there
is a season of heaviness, and there is need of it: There is a time to weep,
and a time to laugh: and a time to mourn, and a time to dance. I showed you
some of the Seasons.

1 One special Season of the Spirits comforting the renewed soul, is presently
upon the souls first salvation. After the Spirit is become a Spirit of
Adoption, presently it becomes a Spirit of Consolation; after the Spirit has
come into the Soul, in the Law, it then nextly appears a Spirit in the Gospel.

2 Another season when the Spirit gives out this comfort is just before the
Lord lays upon his people any great afflict^^ on When was it that Christ was
transfigured, and his face did shinc as the Sun? it was immediately before his
blood passion. Christ was first taken into the Mount, before (...) was up
lifted upon the Cross. When was the (...) heard, This is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well (...) but just before he was led into the wildecess^ to be
tempted. When was Paul lifted up into Heaven? it was immediately before Satan
was sent to buffer him. Thus God gives his people something beforehand to
support their spirits, that they may not faint; the Disciples were full of
comfort, Acts 5.41. and when was this? immediately just before they were
carried before the Council, and whipped up and down like Vagabonds and Rogues,
for Preaching the Gospel.

3. Another Season when the Spirit gives out this Comfort, is in the time of
suffering. God comes in the nick of time, especially if a man suffer for
righteousness sake; if his suffering be upon the account of Christ, he seldom
fails to send the Comforter for the relieving of his spirit, 1 Pet. 4.13. But
rejoice, in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his
glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy.

Bodily confinement, and inward streights are the time of the Souls greatest
enlargement. John had his Vision i^ the Isle of Patmos. When a child of God is
brought to a piece of bread, then is the season for God to feed him with
heavenly Manna; Jacob had glorious Visions, while he was flying from the wrath
of his Brother, when he had nothing but a heap of stones for his Pillow. It was
in the wilderness that God speaks to his Church. Thus I told you of Mr.
Glover, a Prisoner, who found no comfort in the time of his imprisonment; but
when he was going to the stake, he cried out, He is come, he is come, meaning
the Spirit, the Comforter.

4. Another Season of Comfort is, after some special exercise of Grace, godly
sorrow for sin, fresh actings in the pardon of sin, and new engagements, and
Resolutions, and Promises of more close walking with God, after declining from
him.

5. Another Season of Comfort is, After some great Trials and afflictions.
Light is then most pleasant, when we new are come out of a dark place; after
Thunder, comes Light^ing; after a storm, comes a calm: God led his people
first into the Wilderness, and then into the Land of Canu^^ (...) is often so
in God^ Dispensations toward his people, th^^ greatest afflictions go before
their greatest deliverance and therefore let not the Saints of God despair when
they are at the lowest; when they walk in darkness, and see no light, yet set
them trust in the Lord.

6 Another Season of Comfort is, When men are conscientiously diligent in their
particular Callings, then they walk with God. To this I gave you an instance in
the Shepherds; they were faithful and diligent in their callings, they were
watching over their flocks by night, and then the Angel comes and tells them Lo
you is born this day in the City of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord,
Luke 2.11. A company of poor Shepherds keeping of their Sheep, God appears unto
them, and manifests his comforting presence, when the Scribes and Pharisees,
notwithstanding all their long prayers, and their strict Rites and Ceremonies,
hear not a word of him.

7 Another Season of Comfort is, When we are either preparing for, or in the
spiritual act of some duty. When grace is exercised to prepare the heart to
pray, and in attendance upon such an Ordinance, then often times the Spirit of
God is with them, to let poor souls in their endeayours find acceptance with
God. Hannah had been praying to God, but what melody did she find in her heart?
When Mary sat at Christ's feet, how does Christ fill her heart with comfort,
sealing up her salvation to her? I now come to close with some application.

Use of Information.
Use. If it be the work of the Spirit of God to comfort the bea^ of Christ's
Disciples, then by way of Information I gather this, That a poor soul is very
hardly settled and satisfied in (...) of comfort. Sure it is a hard matter to
comfort a poor (...), when one of the persons of the blessed Trinity must be
^^ployed on purpose to do it. This is an Office belong^^^ the Holy Ghost, when
he is to be the Paraclete, the com^^^ of the Holy Ghost. This sure is a hard
matter, to com^^^ the wounded spirit, when the soul is fully (...) spir^^ (...)
bondage. Oh! the hesitancies, the jealousies, the do^^^ and fears, the
objections that a poor soul makes against (...) spiritual peace and comfort,
now it begins to take comfort, then it doubts again; now he believes, and
takes courage, but anon he is afraid; there is a great deal ado to fasten
comfort upon a poor soul, 2 Cor. 1.21, 22. What a heap of words are there
together, and it is all little enough to comfort a poor soul! Now he that
establishes us with you on Christ and has anointed us, is God, and has also
sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts. It is not without
much tugging and drawing that the soul is first brought to believe; and then
when it does believe, it is a hard thing to persuade it that it does believe:
There is a strange kind of squemishness upon the heart; he thinks that there is
no comfort to be taken that does belong to him. Luther says, It is a harder
thing to comfort a troubled Conscience, than to raise the dead. Surely it must
be as hard, when nothing but the sau^^ power must do it.

The soul is hardly convinced, but all the glad ridings, of the Gospel, are
golden streams, and all the Promises are (...) pleasant Fancies, without any
Reality; but that these things should belong to him, this he cannot believe,
for want of Faith: So that the Spirit of God is fain to come in, and end the
controversy, before the soul will be satisfied.

2. If it be the work of the Spirit of God, to comfort the hearts of his
people: then all the comfort of Christless and graceless souls is nothing
worth; there is no true peace, for they are not the Disciples of Christ, which
are the prop^^ subjects of this comfort; they will not hearken to (...) nor
learn of Christ, but they cast his words behind their back, and break his bands
a sunder.

Those that do not learn Christ's precepts, and follow Christ's Canons and obey
Christ's Commands, they are none of Christ's Disciples; and to be sure, they have
not the (...) of Christ, which is the Efficient ^n this (...), and (...) the
root there cannot be the fruit; for this inward peace (...) the fruit of the
spirit. And therefore what comfort they have, it is either a sinful comfort,
which to be sure will end in sorrow, or else at best it is but a carnal
comfort, which will soon vanish like the crackling of thorns under a Pot; There
is no peace, says God, to the wicked; there is no peace with God as long as
you are at peace with sin.

3. Here they are stumbled with the riddle, that the people of God should be
sorrowing, yet always rejoicing; as sorrowing, yet always rejoicing; the carnal
world think this to be a contradiction; though they be troubled without, yet
they have peace within; though they have matter of sorrow in respect of outward
affliction, yet they have fellowship with the holy Ghost the Comforter, which
gives peace in affliction, joy in sorrow, light in darkness, which fills them
with joy unspeakable, and full of glory.

Secondly, If the holy Ghost be the only Comforter of the hearts of Gods
people, then let me exhort every one of you to labor for an interest in this
Comforter. Friends, I beseech you be restless till you have got some evidence
of the Comforter in your souls by the inhabitation of the Spirit in your
hearts; without you have an interest in Christ, there is no comfort, no true
comfort to be expected; no comfort in prosperity, no comfort in adversity, no
comfort in life, nor in death, no peace with your consciences: Men may make a
shift to keep themselves at quiet for the present, by lulling conscience, they
may have a kind of peace from a false principle; Ah, but what will you do when
storms arise? wh^^ will you do when death and affliction comes! Jonas lay
quietly asleep till the storm came: O my Friends, we must shortly lie a dying,
the Lord knows how soon; O what will you do for comfort in a dying hour? all
other comforts may forsake you and before that time you may meet with sorrow
and heavy afflictions, so that all your friends in the world will not do you
good; your friends may fail, your hearts may fail, and then no comfort but the
comfort of the Holy Ghost will do you good; the time may come, that all your
friends may pr^^^^ miserable comforters when God comes to (...) with the so^^
to set sin home upon the conscience, to lay sin before us, then what will you
do? We are all guilty of sins of omission and sins of commission; when these
come to be changed upon the soul, what will you then do? Then no plaster of
comfort will stick, but those of the Spirits laying on; unless the Spirit seal
up the pardon of sin, the love of God to the soul, nothing will be quiet and
comfort the soul; however men may be merry for a time, yet there is a time of
sorrow that will come, when they shall reflect upon their ways, when they shall
see nothing but sin behind them, and terrors before them: Oh! what amazement
will seize upon their souls! they have no interest in God, in Christ, they have
no interest in the Promises: there is nothing that will comfort you, unless you
have an interest in the Spirit.

But then, what shall I do, that I may get this comforting Spirit into my Soul?

First, Thirst earnestly after it. The promise is made to those that thirst
after it, Isa. 44.3. Thirst after him in his convincings, in his humblings, in
his sanctifying mercy: Oh let the desire and longing of thy soul run out this
way; no matter for an Estate, no matter for friends and outward comforts if
thou have the Spirit of God, thou have that is paramount to all outward
comforts,

Secondly, Pray earnestly for the Spirit. You are not so willing to give your
children what they want, as God is to give his Spirit to them that ask it. Cry
mightily, Lord give me thy Spirit: and cry to the Spirit, and say as Laban to
Jacob, Come in, so pray the Spirit so come into thy Soul.

Thirdly, If you would have this Comforter to come and abide with you, You must
resolve to become Christ's Disciples. It is only for such that Christ prays that
God would send the Comforter: you must hearken and obey him, and follow him
wheresoever he goes. You know the terms upon which you must be Christ's
Disciple, Matthew. 16 24. He must deny himself, and take up his Cross, and daily
follow Christ. He (...) deny him-self. There is two selfs in a man, nay, three
selfs and they must be denied* but, however (...) two must be denied if you
intend to be Christ's Disciple*

1 A man's righteous self. If any thing that we are, that we have, or can do,
from our works or duties, any thing of our own, all must be denied in point of
Justification.

2 Sinful self. A man's corruptions must be denied; pride, passion, and love to
the world.

3 Natural self. Friends, Estates, Relations, Credit, and Honor, and outward
comforts, these may be denied, you may be called to part with them; but if they
come in competition with Christ, they must be denied.

2 You must take up the Cross of Christ, rather then forsake his honor, or
disobey his commands. You must resolve to follow Christ wheresoever he shall
lead you, either in a way of active or passive obedience; you must take up
Christ's load, you must undergo his burden.

Now Christians, are you resolved upon this? now sit down and consider what it
will cost you to be Christians; and if you would have the best, you must be
contented with the worst; and if you are resolved upon this, then you are the
true Disciples of Christ, and you are under the promise of his comfort, and
Christ is praying the Father to send you another Comforter, who shall abide
with you for ever.

The second use of Exhortation.
2 Use, Is of Exhortation, wherein I shall apply my self to the true Disciples
of Christ, those that have had communion with Christ in his sanctifying
presence; labor after communion with him in his comforting presence; To all
others that are without the Spirit of God, I may say, as Jehu to Jehoram, What
have thou to do with these things?

Labor to be convinced of the need and want of Christ; but such as have been
partakers of the Spirit of Christ as a sanctifying spirit, labor after
communion with him as a comforting spirit; and to this end I shall stir you up
to this, 1 By way of Motive. 2 By way of Comfort.


First, By way of Motive. Though you have some comsort, it is but little in
comparison of what you may have, and in comparison of what you may stand in
need of, though a Saint would not change the saddest hour of his life for the
sweetest hour in his former condition. If the Saints of God did enjoy the
comforts that they might, oh what blessed lives might they live! but they are
so full of trouble, as if there were no holy Ghost the Comforter. The people of
God are oftentimes troubled without a cause; as that holy man, Why art thou
cast down oh my soul? He could not render a true account of his trouble; he was
sad, but he could not tell why or wherefore.

2 When there is cause, they are apt to be troubled without measure. In those
cases, where it is a sin not to be troubled at all, the people of God are apt
to be troubled overmuch, as the Israelites in their bondage in Egypt. It were a
sin for them not to be troubled; but they were so full of troubles that they
could not hearken to Moses and Aaron, and so the Disciples in the Text, it were
a sin for them not to be troubled for the absence of Christ's body; but so to be
troubled, as if God could not comfort them without him, this was their
weakness. And to come to our case, it were a sin to slight this Dispensation of
God that is coming upon us, if we should not be troubled for the loss of the
Ministers of Jesus Christ; but to mourn before God under the sense of this
Dispensation, to mourn so much as to think that when these are gone; all is
gone, to be so much troubled as not to hearken to the words of the Text, That
we have a Comforter. I remember an admirable expression of a child to his
mother when his father was dead to show. That out of the mouths of Babes and
Sucklings God can manifest his praise. Why Mother (says the child) though my
Father be dead, yet God is alive. May I not say so to you? Though your
Ministers be as it were naturally dead, yet is not God alive? is not the Spirit
of God alive? Though you have some comfort, yet you have little in comparison
of what you may have, if you seek for it.

2 Study the excellent nature of the comfort, how little soever a man has of
this spiritual comfort; it will swee^ his condition, be it what it will be.
When a man has communion with the Spirit of God, he has comfort in all
conditions; then, though a man's condition be never so bad, yet it is very good,
Hab. 2.17. Though the Fig Tree shall not blossom, though the fruit be not in
the Vines, the labor of the Olive shall cease, and the fields shall yield no
meat; the flock shall be cut off from the Fold, and there shall be no Herd in
the stalls, yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
salvation. He can fetch hope, and ground his faith upon the Promises, though
the Providence and Dispensations of God be never so mysterious; the comfort of
the Spirit does make up the want of all other comforts: the comforts of
Ordinances are sweet comforts, Sermons-comforts are sweet comforts,
Sacraments-comforts are sweet comforts; Ah, but the comfort of the Spirit can
supply the want of all these* all outward crosses do not hinder these inward
comforts; a man that has these comforts, may have a feast with bread and
water; a little of this comfort is able to sweeten a whole Ocean of sorrow: In
the multitude of the thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul, Psalm.
94.10. So that when the hearts of Gods people are filled with sad thoughts,
what will become of themselves, What will become of their Families, what will
become of the Church of God, what will become of the Ministry of the Gospel,
and of the Ordinances of Christ? they are full of sad fears, and distracting
thoughts; when they have a multitude of thoughts, in the midst of all, these
spiritual comforts can comfort and refresh the soul: Oh labor after a greater
share of this comfort.

God has cast us upon sad times, wherein we shall have need of more than
ordinary comfort: we are like to have troubles without; if we have not peace
within, it will be very sad; we are like to lose much of Christ bodily
presence, I mean in his Ordinances; many of those Messengers that represent the
person of Christ, and stand in his stead; if we should not enjoy the other
Comforter, our estates would be doleful; If we have darkness without, and
darkness within, how sad will that darkness be!

3. Labor to get more communion from the Spirit of God. This will raise and
sublimate your natural comforts, and turn them into spiritual comforts. A man
never relisheth these outward comforts, till he come to taste the ravishment
and sweetness of the holy Ghost; till he taste the love of God; these give them
a higher luster than the men of the world; though they enjoy much comfort, yet
they do not enjoy half that a Child of God does; the litttle that the righteous
has, is better than the great revenues of the wicked; to a Child of God a
Dinner of green herbs is more savory and pleasant to him, than the stalled
Ox, because a Child of God has better sauce with it.

Worldly men they smell to their flowers; it is only the godly man that sucks
out the honey; that all things are given to him in love, out of this he sucks
comfort: A gracious heart sees all these outward comforts, that they are
purchased with the blood of Christ, and therefore these should do him good, and
he may take comfort that he hopes for what he has not, as well as for what he
may have; and he may take comfort in his condition, be it what it will he sees
all is for his good; such a one believes what he feeth not: So he believes
Gods ways are ways of truth though some more sweet, and some more bitter.

Labor after communion with the Spirit in his comforting work is another. This
is the best preservative against all intanglements of sin whatsoever: It is a
great hour of temptation, and if our comforts do not lie above the world, we
shall be greatly ensnared by the world. If a man (...) sweet meats, he cannot
relish ordinary food; so while these sweet comforts lie upon the soul, he
cannot relish these ordinary things in the world: What do ye tempt me with
these things? says a Child of God; what are these to the comforts of the Holy
Ghost? The heart of man will seek comfort one way or another; and if he has it
not from the Spirit of God, he will seek it some other way; it he has not
comfort from the Spirit of God, he will seek some sparks of his own kindling;
rather then they will sit in darkness without comfort, they will light their
candle at the Devils sire. And as he delivers from temptation on the right,
so he delivers from temptation on the left hand; he that is filled with the
comforts of the holy Ghost, what are sufferings to such a man? He has that
within him that will carry him through all danger; here is that comfort, and
that life by Christ, which may ease us in our greatest crosses; this will make
a child of God speak of the sufferings of this World as a light matter. Our
light affliction which is but for a moment, shall work out for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory: they took joyfully the spoiling of their
goods, because in heaven they had a better, and more enduring substance, Heb.
11.35. Some were tortured, receiving no deliverance, because in heaven they had
a better substance. Oh, if you would be kept from the snares of the world, let
your comforts be above the power and danger of temptation from any thing here
below.

3 By way of Direction. How shall we have communion, and act Faith upon the
holy Ghost as our Comforter? The holy Ghost is designed and appointed by God
the Father to this Office. Now you know none love to be slighted in their
office; and if we do not act Faith upon the holy Ghost, we slight his Office;
therefore we should have recourse to him in a way of believing: As we should
act Faith upon Christ for the pardon of sin, so we should act Faith upon the
holy Ghost for a sense of that pardon.

2 Go often to Jesus Christ, and beg him, and beseech him to entreat the Father
for you. Go to God the Father in the name of Christ, and beg it upon the
account of Christ's prayer and intercession, that he would send the Comforter,
and you have good argument to enforce the Petition; the very same as the
Disciples, That Christ would, when he w^^^ away, pray the Father, and he should
send you another Comforter. Christ tells them, that some there were that would
kill the^ and in so doing, think they did God good service; therefore Christ in
compassion to them, in the state that he left them in, prays the Father that
he would send the Comforter. So now we must go to God; those Ministers that
were wont to comfort us, are now to be taken from us; our Barnaba^'s, Sons of
consolation, their mouths are to be stopped, though Ordinances are now to be
dammed up, the houses of God made places of defilement; our Teachers are
removed into corners, our troubles increase, and we have none to tell us how
long; the light of our eyes, the comfort of our hearts, in respect of the
outward means, are going from us; whither shall we go? we want bread for our
souls, we want cordials for our hearts, blessed Savior pity us; and since thou will not come to us in thy own presence, as thy Ambassadors do, come to us by
thy Spirit, do now in heaven as thou did on earth, pray the Father for us; do
not leave us as so many Orphans, without father or mother, but send thy Spirit
to refresh our souls: see how we are hated and reviled, and we must suffer
these things now, Let us have thy spirit.

3 If you would have communion with the Spirit of Christ in his comforting
work, Take heed that you do not lay up your comforts in the creature. This is
for to seek for the living among the dead; those that rejoice in the creature,
rejoice in a thing of naught; and you that have an interest in God. God will
not take it well at your hands, to seek it any where else, no, not in
Ordinances; though God would have you to seek comfort in Ordinances, yet he
would not have you to seek comfort from Ordinances.

4 Sit down, and be much in duty, Psalm. 63.5, 6. My soul shall be satisfied as
with marrow and fatness, my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips, when I
remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night watches. If you
look at the beginning of the Psalm, you shall find this Psalm was penned when
David was deprived of the Ordinances of God. Many a man complains that he lives
uncomfortably; no wonder when he little thinks on Christ.

5 Be much in the exercise of grace; Then they walked in the fear of the Lord,
when they walked in the comfort of the Holy Ghost.

6. Take heed of quenching and grieving the Spirit your Comforter, by
neglecting his motions, or by acting any thing against the mind of the Spirit:
Do not sin against him as your enlightening Spirit; that will hinder him as your
Comforter.

I close with a word of Comfort to the people of God. If it be one of the great
works of the Spirit of God, here is matter of great comfort to those that stick
close to Jesus Christ.

1. Sure your comforts will be satisfying Comforts; sufficient, because they
are comforts of the Spirits working. The Lord Jesus has promised to make up
the want of his, bodily presence, by sending his Spirit: He was now going from
them, and tells them, That he could not stay; and this was sad news to the
Disciples, who where ready to break their hearts; and the best comfort that he
could afford them, was to tell them. That he would send the Comforter. If
Christ can comfort his people in the absence of himself, surely he can comfort
them in the want of all other comforts, that relate either to soul or body; and
so in the want of mercies, in the want of outward Ordinances, he can comfort
the soul. It is the Spirit of God that can comfort in the use of these; and, if
he will, he can do it in the want of them; he can comfort us in the wilderness
where no water is; when he does deny the means, he can cumfort us without;
where he denies the stream, he can make us drink out at the Fountain.

7. And Lastly, The people of God find hereby, that their comforts are abiding.
Your liberty, your friends, ah! Ordinances and Ministers may be taken from you;
your Ministers may be banished, your Ministers may be imprisoned; but here is a
Comforter that abides for ever. And though they may keep your Ministers out of
the Pulpit, yet they shall not take the Comforter out of your hearts: So that
when I shall not Preach any more to you, I shall Pray the Father that he would
send you another Comforter that he may abide with you for ever.

Mr. Bull of Newington-Green, His Farewell Sermon in the afternoon.
Acts 20.32. And now Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his
Grace, who is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among them
that are sanctified.


THe words are part of S. Paul's Farewel-Sermon, or discourse to the Elders of
the Church of Ephesus, one of those famous seven Churches of Asia, that we read
of in the book of the Revelations. It is not to be doubted, as Calvin does
Comment upon the place, that though the Apostle speaks immediately to the
Elders, yet he does comprehen^ the whole Church in the Speech.

Our holy Apostle had been a long time with the Church, preaching among them,
taking pains with them, both in public and private, as you may see in the 20
verse, and declares to them the whole Counsel of God, verse 27. and now being
called away, taken off by divine Providence, by the will of his Master, the
last and best office that he thought he could do for them, was to commit them
to the care of God, and to leave them in his arms, and to recommend them to his
Grace.

It would be more then the time would permit, to look over the whole Apostles
Sermon, which is partly Narrative, and partly Consolatory. Narrative, to put
them in mind in what manner he had preached to them, from verse 17. to verse
27. And its partly Consolatory, from the 27. to the Text, wherein the Apostle
could hold no longer, but his love constrains him, and makes him to break forth
into this pathetical wish, or rather prayer, And now Brethren, I commend you to
his grace. As if he had said, I am just now going (...) you, not knowing that I
shall see your face any more; now I am a dying man, as to my conversing with
you an^ more; now I am departing, this is the best Legacy I can bequeath unto,
To commend you to God, and to his grace. And he speaks to persons as standing
in the same relation with God and Christ, and having the same Father, and the
same elder Brother: As if he should have said, you are as dear to me as my own
flesh, as if you were my brethren by consanguinity, and it is my sorrow that I
must leave you; but as it is my greatest grief to part with you, yet I must
leave you; and this is the comfort, that I shall leave you in safe hands; I do
not leave you to the wide world, I do not leave you as Orphans without a
Father, as Sheep without a Shepherd, but I commend you to God, and to his grace.

O happy word! Though I must leave you, yet I trust God, who is able, will keep
you; as God is present everywhere by his Essence, so by his gracious presence
more especially God is present with his people: I commit you, I commend you to
God, I commit you to his care, to his keeping; so the word signifies, so
Ravanelus interprets the words, I trust you with God, I leave you as a
depositum in Gods hands, as a dying man leaves his children in a friends hands
to look after them, as Christ did his Mother in John's hands; so the Apostle
leaves the Ephesians in the hands of God; and to the word of his grace; that
is, the Gospel that he had declared to them. The Word of God in Scripture is
often called his grace, 2 Cor. 6. Ephesians. 3.5. because it is a declaration of the
free grace of God to poor souls, and because it is the Spirits instrument to
work grace in the hearts of sinners.

This is remarkable, that after the Apostle had recommended them to God, he
adds one word, of his grace: He does not think it enough to mention
recommending them to God, but to the word of his grace. The expression is not
for Euphoniae gratia, it is no Tautologie, it is no^ for more then needs, but
to show how needful, and how necessary the word of Gods grace is, as well to
the building up, as for the converting of poor sinners; and though God can
build up a Saint immediately, yet ordinarily he does it not but through the
word of his grace, which is able to build you. Beza and Calvin refer this
Clause to God, answering to that of the Apostle. 2 Cor. 9.18. God is able to
cause all grace to abound in you. But Erasmus refers this word to the words of
Gods grace, which is able to build you up. And this construction is favored by
those two places of Scripture, and may very well be meant both in 2 Timothy 3 15.
and Jam. 1 21. both which places attribute to the Word of God, as this does;
and in the second place, Receive with meekness the ingrafted word, which is
able to save your souls. So that both these words may be referred to this
Clause, The Word of God, and The Word of his grace; to God as the Principle,
and to the word of his grace as the instrumental cause to build them up; as
much as if he had said, I commend you to the grace of God, which is able to
build you up. The Apostle tells them, that he left them to such a God, as
through the Gospe^ was sufficient to build them up, till he brought them to the
full fruition of the Saints in light. The Apostle commends this to his Church,
that were ready to weep, and say at his departure, O Paul! God has made thee a
happy instrument of laying a good foundation among us, of doing a great deal of
good to our souls, and we may bless God that we ever saw thy face; but now,
alas! thou art going from us, we are afraid all thy pains will come to nothing;
we should hope that if God had pleased to continue thee amongst us, then we
should have been built up; and surely, if God had intended good to us, and
brought us to Heaven at last, he would not have taken thee from us. No, says
the Apostle, be not discouraged, though I leave you, yet I commit you to God,
and to the word of his grace. If I be here, it is God alone that must build you
up; I am but a poor weak instrument in the hand of God, and when I am gone, God
can build you up by some means or other; and carry you over, or through all
oppositions, temptations and discouragements, till he has fitted you for
himself, and given you an inheritance amongst them that are sanctified.

Thus you have the words explained in that familiar P^raphrase; and being thus
opened, you may take notice that

The words hold forth the special care of this blessed Apostle of Jesus Christ,
though he must leave them, yet he takes care to leave them in safe hands, that
was able to give a good account of them: You have the Apostle making a deed of
trust for the securement of the Saints at Ephesus after his departure; or if
you will, you have the Apostles last Will and Testament.

1 You have the Person making over this trust, St. Paul.

2 You have the Trust it self, and those were the Saints of Ephesus.

3 You have the Trustees, those to whom this trust is committed; and they are
two fold. 1 To God. 2 To the Word of his grace. 3 Here is the time of making
this Test, now I am ledving of you. 4 Here is the commendation of the Trustee,
from the power and ability of him to manage this trust, and this is expressed
in two particulars:

1 He is able to build you up; and then

2 To give you an inheritance: as if he should have said, I will leave you with
such who are able to build you up. I might raise a multitude of observations
from the words: as first of all,

Doct. 1. Thas it should be the care of a faithful Minister, when he is by the
providence of God taken from a people, to recommend them to God, and to the
word of his grace.

2 As it is the duty of a faithful Minister to do it, so it is his comfort that
he may do it, that he may leave his people in the hand of God, who is able to
build them up in grace.

3 It may be the comfort of any Church of Christ, that when they are deprived
of faithful Ministers, that yet they are left in the hands of God.

4 Though God can by his infinite power perfect grace, and bring men to heaven
without the use of means, yet we have no ground or warrant to expect one or
other, but through the Word of Gods grace.

5. And lastly, Though their be a glorious inheritance purchased and prepared
by Jesus Christ, yet it is to be expected by none but those that are built up
and sanctified; Or thus,

None must look for an inheritance hereafter, but such as are born of the
Spirit and built up in grace.

I might speak to many more, but I shall gather all that I have said into this
one general Proposition, which is this:

Doct. That the best Farewell that a Gospel-Minister can give to his people that
he loves and labors amongst, when he by the providence of God is taken from
them, is, to commend them to the Gospel, and to the word of his grace.

Thus does our holy Apostle when he was taken from his people, and left to
preach to them no more, he recommends them to the hands of God. And thus does a
greater then St. Paul, even Jesus Christ himself, the great shepherd of the
Sheep, as St. Peter calls him, when he was leaving of the world, and could no
longer preach to them, he commends them to God, Joh. 17.11. And now says Christ
to his Father, I am no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I
come to thee. Holy Father, keep through thy own name those whom thou have given
me, that they may he one as we are. And in the 14 I have given them thy Word;
he commends them to God, and to the Word of his grace.

In the prosecution of this truth, I shall explain these particulars.

1 Show you what it is in a Minister to recommend his people to God.

2 What it is that he should recommend them to God for

3 Why he should be so careful to recomend them to God.

4 How he should recommend them to God.

Lastly, Apply.

First, It is to leave them in the hand of God, to give them ^g unto Gods care
and keeping, as I showed you in the opening of the words, to commend them unto
God, is to do that for them effectually, which he would fain do Ministerially,
if he had been suffered to continue among them As when a dying Father, or
Husband commends (...) wife and children to some surviving intimate friend; it
is a leaving, a committing them to that friend, to deal, and to do that for
them, which he would have done if he had lived.

Now let us consider what it is that a faithful Ministers designs and endeavors
are to do for that Congregation that is committed to his charge: these 4 things
especially every faithful Minister endeavors to do while he is among his
people.

1 Their conversion unto Sanctification. 2 Their building up, their
Edification. 3 Their Protection and Preservation. 4 Their Comfort and
Consolation.
First, Their Conversion and turning to God. This is that that a faithful
Ministers heart is set upon, that he may convert poor souls that are in a
sinful state, that he may turn poor souls to God; that by often preaching, and
praying, and counsel, he may bring them into a state of salvation. Romans 10.1.
The Apostle there speaks of the Romans, that they were the people of God in
profession; ah, but this was not enough, fain he would that they should be the
people of God in truth; this is the hearty desire of every faithful Minister,
not only to bring his people to the outward profession of godliness, but to the
work and power of it in their hearts; not only to have the name of a Christian,
but Christianity it self; and this i^ the end of all his studying, to get them
to God by little and little, I till Christ be formed in them, Gal. 4.11. My
little children, says the Apostle, etc. St. Paul travels in birth with the
Galatians from a state of nature to a state of grace; he would get grace
wrought in their hearts, he would get them ingrafted into Christ; and this is
the end of his commending them to God, which he would fain have done, if he
might have been suffered to preach to them. This is the language of a Ministers
heart; Lord, thou know that it was the desire of my soul, that every one of
this people should be made holy by the Word; I would fain have begotten them by
the Ministry to Jesus Christ^, but now by the providence of God I am taken off
before my work is done; and thou see yet there is a great many in the gall of
bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, in a state of death, and I am now
likely not to do any thing more: now it is my care, that those that belong to
the election of grace, may be gathered home to thee.

2 To build them up in knowledge and faith. He endeavors that those that are
already sanctified, may be further built up in their most holy faith; where
there are the most eminent Saints, yet there is a great deal lacking. The
Apostle gives great commendation of the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 3.10. They were
a famous Church, and there were a great many eminent Christians, yet there was
something lacking in their says, and in their knowledge. Christ speaks to one
of his most eminent Apostles, Oh thou of little faith! Though the
foundation-stone be laid, yet there is a superstructure behind, and this is the
work of Christ, the building them up, Ephesians. 4.12. This is the end of every
faithful Minister, to make his people meet for Heaven; be would be feeding of
them, that they may grow to the sull measure of the stature of Christ: and
therefore every godly Minister desires that he may be the Finisher as well as
the Author (under God) of their faith, that they may be built up to Christ's
heavenly Kingdom.

3 A Ministers aims are, that his people may be kept from danger. The people of
God, after they are effectually called, they are continually in danger; they
are as a Lilly amongst Therns, as Sheep amongst Wolves, as a besieged City in
the midst of her Enemies.

They have enemies without, and enemies within; enemies without, the Devil is
their adversary.

1 They are in danger in respect of the Devil, who is a very potent enemy, a
roaring Lion, and a malicious enemy, malicious against God; an industrious
enemy, he goes thout seeking whom he may devour; he compasses the earth to do
what he can to keep souls from Christ; he it a subtle enemy, that has his
Stratagems to catch and ensnare poor souls. Now it is the endeavor of every
true Minister of Jesus Christ, to secure his people by his counsel, and his
prayers; for we are not ignorant of his devices, 2 Cor. 2.11. as it he should
say, I have most experience of the Devils subtilty, Satan sets to oppose them
most; and this is one thing, to rob Ministers of their Mediation; of their
Prayer; and therefore it is the design of Ministers to strengthen their people,
in regard of Satan's temptations.

2. They are in danger in respect of Seducers, that lie in wait to deceive.

3 They are in danger by the world, lest they should be frighted by its
opposition.

4 They are in danger by their corrupt lusts, that war against their souls:
Therefore every faithful Minister warns his people of those, that their souls
may be secured; this being that that a faithful Minister would do among his
people while he is with them; when he is taken from them he commits them to God
to be secured from all danger, as Christ in that place before, Father keep them
in thy own hands.

Lastly, Every faithful Minister seeks the comfort and consolation of his
people. It is their desire to comfort the feeble hand (...) they are not
Masters of your grace, but Helpers of your joy, 2 Cor. 4.21. Where the Gospel
appears in power, man will stand in need of comfort, under doubts, fears, and
afflictions; and this is the desire of every faithful Minister of Jesus Christ,
in their departure from their people, to support the weak, to resolve the
doubted, to succor the tempted; and when he is taken from them, and can
contribute little to this work, he recommends them to God. A departing Minister
may say to his people, If God has made me an instrument of speaking comfort to
your souls, you have cause to bless God for it. Now I can do no more, I must
recommend you to God, whom (I hope) will be the God of your comfort when I am
gone.

2. This is the best office that a Minister can do for his people when he is
taken from them: and that whether we look upon Minister or people, certainly it
is the best office that a Minister can do for his people, To commend them to
God 1 God is omnipotently, infinitely able. 2 God is gracious and faithful,
therefore willing to do it.


First, God is infinitely able to manage this trust, he is God all-sufficient,
Gen 17.1. sufficient to make himself happy, much more to make his people happy.

1 God is all in all in the enjoyment of mercy. 2 God is all in all in the want
of mercy.
First, He is all in all in the enjoyment of mercy. When a people have a
faithful Minister placed over them by the providence of God, he can do nothing
of himself, 2 Cor. 3.6. Our preaching is from the assistance of God; and when
we have done all, we cannot make this effectual, we cannot give the success;
Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, but it is God that must give the
increase, 1 Cor. 3.6. Why do you keep such a stir? one would have this
Minister, another that; one would have Paul, another would have Apollo, another
Cephas; are they not the Ministers of God, by whom ye have believed? Our profit
depends not upon the parts and gifts of a creature, but upon out blessing of
God; it is God that must put this heavenly treafore into the heart, and it is
God that must disperse it at last for the good and benefit of his people. The
most eloquent Apollo's cannot persuade obstinate sinners to lay hold upon the
Gospel; they may speak to the ear, but it is God that must carry the word to
the heart, either for conviction or conversion.

Secondly, God is all in all in the want of means. Let the instrument be never
so weak, if it be in the hand of God it shall prove effectual: God can make a
poor Fisherman instrumental to catch three thousand souls at one time; and God
chooses to do his work by weak instruments that the praise may be of God: It is
not the Ministers parts or gifts, but only the power of God that strengthens
the soul, and sanctifies, and builds them up, and comforts them. God is able to
convert all unconverted sinners in a Congregation; God can say, Ephata, be
opened.

2 God is able to build up those that are converted, God is able to make all
grace abound, 2 Cor. 9.8. Those that have little grace: God is able to make it
increase God is the God of all grace. God can make every Saint perfect, entire,
lacking nothing; he can fill all the void places of the heart.

3 God can keep us in all trials and troubles, God can keep up his people in
the midst of Apostasy, Mat. 16.13. The gates of hell shall not prevail against
them. God can keep them, that all the power of Hell shall not hurt them.

4 God is able to comfort the most disconsolate soul. Ministers may speak
comfortable words, but they cannot speak them farther then to the ear, but God
can speak them to the heart; I will allure her into the wilderness, and speak
to the heart. God can comfort the poor soul, let the case be never so sad, 2
Cor. 1.4.

2 As God is infinitely able, so he is infinitely gracious and faithful. See
his Name in Exodus 34. Full of power and tender mercy. Is not God willing for
the conversion of poor sinners, willing as Ministers? yea, a thousand, and ten
thousand times more. Hear how pathetically God speaks, Turn ye, why will ye
dye? hear, and live. He calls upon all men everywhere to repent.

Secondly, God does not only desire it, but purpose it, and resolves. God that
has begun a good work, he will finish it, and so for their preservation, he
has said, That the gates of hell shall never prevail against them. Of all thou
have given me I have lost none, Joh. 17.11. Though God may suffer his people to
be led away for a time, yet they shall be brought back again, and shall be kept
through the power of God unto salvation. Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but
not one jot or title which God has spoken.

How willing is God to comfort all his comfortless ones? what Mother can be
more pitiful to her sick child, then God is to them that are under affliction?
Though a Mother forget her sucking child, yet God caunot forget his people. And
then he is the Fa^^ (...) all comfort, and there are many gracious promis^^
(...) has made to this purpose, that they may be as so many Aqua vitae pledges
of consolation to his people: So that this will appear, That it is the best
office of a Minister, both to Minister and people, To commend them to God.

1 To Ministers, it is the highest expression of their love; What greater
testimony of their love can they show to their people, to do all that for them,
that he would willingly have done, and ten thousand times more? Is it not an
expression of love from a dying father to his children, Dear children, I am now
dying, I can provide for you no more, I shall leave you such a friend that
shall provide for you in a more abundant measure then if I had been with you?
It is the best demonstration of their faith;

1 That he will not leave them to the wide world; and then,

2 He will not take any one; he will trust his people with none but God, who is
able and willing to give account of them.

3 It is the greatest satisfaction to his heart. A Ministers leaving his people
can never be satisfied in his own breast, that he should leave them, and commit
them; and not to know to whom: but when he knows with whom he has committed
them, when he has delivered them over to God, that first committed them to
him, this is a great quietment and satisfaction to a Ministers spirit: Every
Minister takes a care of souls; God lays the people as a depositum, and will
require an account of them at the last day. Now when a Minister is taken from
his people, he cannot be satisfied, till he has delivered back his trust to
God; Lord, here they are, and while I was with them I did what I could; but now
I am taken from them, here I surrender them back into thy hand; when I was in
the world, I kept them in thy Name: And so it is best for the people to be
left; such a one who will keep them in all their dangers, and comfort them in
all afflictions.

3 How should a people be comm^^^^ to God?

1 By Exhortation. 2 By Prayer.
First, By Exhortation. Thus the Apostle before and after my Text, And then by
Prayer, for so does St. Paul. Calvin looks upon these words as a Prayer brought
in, always making mention of you in my prayers, Romans 1.19. Phil. 1.4. Col. 1.3.

And I trust that I shall not only now, at this solemn parture, but as long as
I live, still recommend you into the hands of God; though I shall not preach to
you, yet I still shall make mention of you in my prayers, that God would
stablish and comfort, and preserve you to his heavenly kingdom.

4 Why does the Apostle commend them to the Word of his grace? For these two
Reasons:

First, because all the good that any people can look for, is from God; it is
declared and laid up in the Promises, and in the Gospel; there is the Treasure
of God, it is in the Gospel: The grace of God, which has appeared to all men,
brings salvation, Tit 2.11. We could never have known the glorious mysteries
of salvation, had it not been for the grace of God; we could never have
expected good, but from the Gospel, that is the great Magna Charta wherein God
has made over whatsoever concerns the eternal good of his people. We have
nothing to show for grace, and comfort, and heaven, and glory, but his Gospel,
that is the great deed of gift that God has given to his people; poor sinners
might look a Savior, if the word of God had not revealed it; those people
would have no ground to expect salvation, if God had not declared it in his
Gospel to bestow it upon them.

2 The Gospel is the only instrument by which God brings and conveys all that
good to the soul that it stands in need of, all spiritual and temporal good
that accompanies salvation.

God works nothing immediately upon the soul, but by the Gospel.

First, If any soul be converted to God, it is by the grace of God: And as
Conversion, so Sanctification, that is effected by the word of God; so likewise
in Edification, Salvation, and Preservation.

Use and Application.
Use. I come now to the Application, It may be I have been too long already;
but God knows that it may be the last time that I may trespass in this kind;
and I have the Apostles Example, who preached at Troas til midnight; but I
promise to have done in a great deal less time.

Use. In the Application I shall in the Apostles Example, Commend to you to the
grace of God.

My Brethren, and dearly Beloved, and longed for, now God by his providence is
taking me away from you, in the exercising of my public Ministry, I commend
you to God, and to the word of his Grace:

This I shall do, First, by exhorting and counsel; and then by prayer.

Use of Exhortation.
First, by way of Exhortation.

1, In reference to God, and then 2. In reference to the word of his grace.
First, of all, my Exhortation in reference to God, is, that you would commit
your selves to God: If it should be so much a Ministers care to commend his
people to God, its good reason they should commend themselves.

1. All a Ministers commending you to God, will be to no purpose: if you do not
commit your selves. I shall always make mention of you in my prayer, as long as
God shall continue me in this valley of tears; I shall pray that God should
build you up, and sanctify you; I shall pray for you, but God will not hear my
prayers, if you do not hearken to my counsel, To commit your selves to God.

2. Consider. If you can so commit your selv^es to God, as to get God to take
charge of you, you are made for ever.

God will be an All-sufficient God; in stead of all thy friends in the world,
you shall not need any that shall provide for you to protect you; God will be
all in all, in stead of father, instead of mother, houses, lands, relations;
God will be better to you then ten husbands, then ten Ministers; Ah, better
then ten thousand Worlds. God can sweeten all your enjoyments, God can provide
for you, and make you happy in the midst of the wants of creature comforts; God
is a Sun and a Shield, he will give grace and glory, And no good thing will he
withold from them that fear him.

God contains all in himself Eminenter; get God and you get all. Let the World
frown or smile, let it turn upsidedown; though the Mountains be thrown into the
midst of the Sea, though the World be set on fire, yet a soul that is in Gods
keeping is happy: God is a present help in time of trouble.

2 As God is an all-sufficient friend, so he is a firm and a fast friend to
them; My father and mother forsook me, then the Lord took me up, Psalm 27.10. My
flesh and my heart fails, but God fails me not; though my Minister and my
friends leave me, yet God will not leave me; he is engaged by his own promise,
truth, and faithfulness, I will never, never, never, etc. leave thee nor
forsake thee.

If you do not forsake God, God will never forsake you; if once you have so
committed your selves to God, as God accepts the charge, he has undertaken
that you shall never depart from him. It is part of the Covenant, and he is
engaged to all the Relations wherein he stands to his people, as a Husband, as
a Father, as a Master.

But you will say, How shall we commit our selves to God, that God may have a
charge of us? I will give you one direction for all.

1 Take God to be your God, and give up your selves to be his people; if you
will, before you and I part, heartily and unreservedly give up your selves to
God, to be his people, it will be the comfortablest day that ever I saw, though
in other respects it may be the saddest; as certainly God is your God, so
certainly he will keep you; if you will avouch your selves to be Gods, I will
avouch God to be yours.

1 You must take God to be the portion of your souls inheritance, lay up all
your happiness in God; for if you choose any thing else for your happiness
but God, God will have nothing to do with you; God will be all or nothing: Your
hearts must say as David's, Lord thou art my portion; whom have I in Heaven but
thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. He accounted all
nothing for God, God was his happiness God was his portion, God was his All in
All.

2. You must make God the center of all your love and delight; God will have
all from you, or nothing; you must not divide your affection between God and
the world, you must love nothing in comparison of him; love nothing but in
subordination to him; as you would have God to be wholly yours, so you must be
wholly his.

3 You must take God to be the strength and shield of your hearts; if you would
have God to take care of you, you must cast your care upon God, if you place
your hope any where else, there will be no sure hold; the Anchor of your hope
must be cast no where else; if you lay your burden any where else, God will not
lend you a finger to help you; but if you place your hope in God, God will help
you; your extremity shall be his opportunity.

4 You must take God to be the guide of your hearts; if you would have the
privilege of Gods guard, you must keep in Gods way; keep in Gods way, and you
will be sure of Gods protection; do you keep Gods precepts, and God will keep
your person; do what God commands, and avoid what God for bids, and then you
need not fear what will become of you.

Let the World frown, and Friends forsake you, resolve that you will follow God
wheresoever he leads you, then he will be your God all your days, and he will
guide you here by his counsel, till at last he bring you to his glory: And this
leads me to the second Exhortation, in respect to the Gospel.

Secondly Brethren I commend you to the word of Gods grace. I commend you to
the Precepts of God, to be obeyed by them; I commend you to the Promises of
God, to be believed by you.

1, Keep them, and hold them fast carefully; it is your treasure, it is your
life, keep it, and it will keep you, it is all that you can show for Heaven: I
leave it as a Depositum, if you part with it, take heed how you will answer it
at the last day; it is the talent which God has committed to you, for which
you will be commended for keeping at the great day. Hold fast the word of Gods
grace, there is old tugging by the Devil, and his Instruments, either to pull
you from the word, or the word from you. Let any thing go rather than the
Gospel, let your Friends, your Estates, your Lives, rather than let go the
Gospel.

Study Gods word, do not keep them by for no purpose: Search the Scriptures,
for in them you hope for eternal life. There Is the pearl of great price, there
is direction, there is comfort: this book of God will make you wise unto
salvation.

If you never hear Sermon more, you have enough by the use of the Bible to
carry you to Heaven; There Is Divinity, there is holiness and heaven almost in
every syllable, when you cannot have it preached to you. Be much in the study
of it.

Then practice it conscionably: Be not only hearers, but doers of it; let your
conversation be such as becomes the Gospel. It was the Apostles advice to the
Philippians, and it is mine to you, Let your conversation be such as becomes the
Gospel. Let your conversation become the Precepts, the Privileges, the
Promises of the Gospel. Having then thus commended you to God, give me leave
before we part, to commend God and his Gospel to you.

1. Make it your daily business to walk with God; make him the companion of
your lives; converse with God every day in the inward of your hearts: He that
is a stranger with God, God will soon be a stranger to him; and if you neglect
God one day, you may be to seek him when you may most need him.

2. Live in the daily exercise of grace and godliness.

1. Live in the continual exercise of Faith, live by it, you have need of the
exercise of that grace every day; you ca^ as well live without food, as live
without faith; it is that grace which feeds upon Christ.

2 Be much in the exercise of the fear of the Lord all the day long, be afraid
to sin against God; in the secret of your souls mind his presence, in all
places, in all company, in all businesses.

3 Be much in the exercise of Humility; live humbly and think better of others
then your selves: Humility will exceedingly adorn your profession.

4 Be much in the exercise of Repentance. Be frequent and constant in prayer,
Pray continually; do it spiritually, and do it exactly, as to the season of it.

5 Be fervent in spirit, serving the Lord. Whatever you do for God, do it with
all your might; do not put off God with the skin, but give him the marrow.

6 Be careful, not only to keep up secret, but Familyworship; the less
preaching there is in public, the more catechizing and instructing there
should be in private. I know no more likely means then the setting up the
worship of God in private families.

7. Prize the Sabbath; be strict and exact in the observation of the Lords day.
I have showed you many times wherein the spiritual observation of it does
consist; it is your seed-time, your market day; it is a sign you shall one day
celebrate an everlasting Sabbath with God in the highest heavens.

8 Be steadfast in the ways of God in a backsliding age* Keep your ground,
while others fall away, stand fast in faith; be not ashamed to own Christ
before all the World; teckon upon the reproaches of Christ, and count them
greater riches then the Treasures in Egypt. Do not place Religion in a few
shadows, when the substance is neglected, do not think that God will be put off
with the skin without the substance; and by your holy conversation labor to
put to filence the foolishness and ignorance of wicked men, that ^en may have
nothing to accuse you but in the ma^^ers of Jesus Christ, that you may cut off
occasion from them that seek occasion. Let no reproach make you lay aside
holiness; and say, If this be to be vile, I will be vile still. And love all
those that have been instrumental for your spiritual comfort.

Forget not to contribute to the necessities of the poor Saints; think that God
has given you your Estates for such a time as this, for this is acceptable to
God; Bless them that curse you, pray for them that despightfully use you, so
shall you heap coals of fire upon their heads; when you are reviled, revile not
again. Do your duty to your Superiors, to those that God has set over you,
and so carry your selves as it was in the case of Daniel, that they may find
nothing against you, save in the matter of your God. In all things let your
conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Jesus Christ, That I may rejoice in
the day of the Lord Jesus, that we have not run in vain, and labored in vain.

And labor to keep up that Christian love which in this place has been more
eminent than any where I know. I would preach St. John's Doctrine, Little
children, love one another: And that my expression may be pathetical, I shall
speak it in the words of the Apostle, in Phil. 2.1, 2, If there be therefore
any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the
Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like-minded,
having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind.

I now have but a word more, speaking of yours and mine own comfort under this
sad Dispensation.

1. It is a Ministers comfort, that when he is taken from his people, he can
yet Commend them to God, and to the Word of his grace, which is able to build
them up, and to give them an inheritance among them that are sanctified.

And truly, my dearly beloved in the Lord, this is my great work now, when I am
a dying to you as to my public preaching: My Beloved, I am very sensible that
it is a very sad and solemn thing for a Minister to be rent from a people that
he loves as his own soul, that he has labored among: for to bid adieu to
these solemn meetings, wherein I have preached to you, wherein we have mingled
our sighs and our tears before the Lord, wherein we have rejoiced, and sat down
together before the Lord at his Table, now to think that I must minister with
you, and for you no more in these Ordinances, methinks it is a beart-breaking
consideration; to think that I am now dying in this Congregation; to think that
I am now dying whilst I am preaching; but this is my comfort under these sad
thoughts, that I can commit you to God, and to the Word of his grace; to one
that is able to keep you, and to build you up, and to give you an inheritance
among them that are sanctified. Like a dying Father, I can commend you to the
care of such a Friend, infinitely able to supply all that I could not do for
you.

It is the comfort of a dying Father, when he sees his children weeping round
about him, that he can commend them to a faithful friend, willing to do that
for them that he desired to do, and a thousand times more.

I would hope that I have some children, that I have begotten to Christ by my
Ministry, toward whom my bowels yearn; but this is my comfort, that I can put
them into the arms of their and my heavenly Father, of their and my blessed
Redeemer, to be kept by the power of God.

There are many poor souls that are yet in the gaul of bitterness, and in the
bond of iniquity; and if the Lord has seen good, I would fain have seen of the
travel of my soul in their salvation; but I can commend them to God, who knows
them who belong to his Election, he can either restore me, or can do it by
another hand; and you that are in any measure grown in grace, I would be
willing to be helpful to your joy, and instrumental to your comfort, but I
commend you to God, who is able to give all grace to you, and to keep you
steadfast.

It will be some alleviation of sorrow, that though^ must leave you, and die to
you as to your Ministry, (...) I hope I may a while go up and down, and
converse with you, to be among you. The Lord grant this favor, that he may
behold your steadfastness.

2. This may be your comfort, as well as mine; the may be the comfort of all
those your Congregations, that are like to be made Widows by the Metaphorical
death of their Guides and Pastors; but I leave you in the hands of all grace
and of all comfort.

This is a black day upon Israel, when so many faithful Ministers are slain at
one blow; this is a day of gloominess and darkness in many Congregations, for
so many Ministers to be beheaded in one day!

What has England commanded? is it not some high Treason? If we look to the
cause of it, why so many Ministers are as dead in one day, as so many children
without a Father.

And if we look upon the cause, what has caused God thus to deal with us, we
must complain. Oh! our unfruitfulness! our fearful unthankfulness under the
mercies of God! This will be the Emphasis and fling of our grief; and this
should be the matter of our grief.

And then, if we consider the sad Prognostic, what it does seem to foretell:
It is a sign, that when God lays aside so many faithful Ministers, of some
scourge and calamity that is coming upon us.

But you that can lament this judgment, you that can lament the sad
deprivation of these powerful Ordinances; Remember, that though your Minister
be dead, God can raise you up others in their stead; and where the way of
instruments are wanting, he can do it without them; and those that are begot in
Christ, shall be preserved; and those that are yet unbrought in, who belong to
the Election of Grace, shall in Gods due time, have the effectual work of the
Spirit wrought upon their Souls; For he is able to build you up, and to give
you an Inheritance among them that are sanctified.

And though I take this solemn leave of you, as to this public Exercise, yet
if the Lord shall open the door, and take off those bands of Death that the Law
has laid upon my Ministry in regard of Conscience, who cannot conform, for
which our public Ministry is suspended, I shall cheerfully and willingly
return to you in this place.

But now, though your dying Minister, in respect to the Exercise of his public
Ministry, is leaving of you, yet I commit you into a safe hand, I commend you
to God, and to his Grace. Amen.

Mr Pledger 's Farewell Sermon.
Rev. 2.9, 10. I know thy works, and tribulation, and poverty; (but thou art
rich) and I know the blasphemy of them which say they are Jews, and are not,
but are the synagogue of Satan.

Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer; behold, the devil shall
cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried, and ye shall have
tribulation ten days: be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown
of life.


IN the former verse you have the superscription, and description of this
Epistle: the superscription by the mouth and hand of John, to the Angel of the
Church of Sinyrna, (that is) the Ministry of the Gospel, or (...) College of
Presbyters: As the whole Tribe of Levi in Malachy is called, the Angel of the
Lord; so here, the whole Tribe and office of the Ministry is called the Angel:
Angel is not a term that signifies a single person, but a name of Office. Then
for the Description (These things says the first and the last, which was dead
and is alive.) He is described by his eternity, by his suffering, and by his
reviving: I shall not speak of this, nor of the verses following the Text. I
shall speak of the Inscription or Narration of the Epistle, in these two
verses, wherein you have 1. A Commendation. 2. An Admonition, a piece of
heavenly Counsel.

1. You have a Commendation, I know thy works, etc. I like it well the pains
thou take in my service, for my servants sake; I know how thou have suffered:
I take (...) well, I consider all the reproaches that are vomited out against
thee.

2. Then you have the Counsel. 1. Fear none of these things. 2. The Arguments
to set it on.

1. It Is the Devil that shall trouble you: he is the prime Agent, he that never
took a good cause: Thou have certainly God for thee, if thou have the Devil
against thee.

2. This Devil shall be checked and restrained.

1. As to the number of them he shall deal withal: [The Devil shall cast some
of you into prison] He aims at all, but he shall come short of many.

2. In respect of the kind of the affliction. [Cast some into prison] He aims
at our souls, to disturb the peace of them, to cast us into Hell, I but it
shall be but into prison.

3. For the design of this affliction. [Not for destruction, but to try us] It
shall not be as wood in the fire, to be consumed: but as gold in the fire, to
be tried.

4. For the term of duration, it shall not be for ever [But for ten dayes] for
a time, for a set time, for a short time; perhaps thou shall lose thy life; but
be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a Crown of life.

Before I go out I shall endeavor to shine in the whole light of this Text in
these six or seven Propositions.

Pro. 1. First, Jesus Christ takes notice of all the work, and trouble, and
losses that we endure for him. There cannot be a godly word spoken but the Lord
hears it, takes notice of it; not a day of humiliation, not a tear, not a
prayer, not a sigh, not a cup of cold water, but the Lord sets it down: Item at
such a time thou did lose such a thing, hazard such a concernment. Now this
knowledge lies in two things. 1. It implies an Approbation. 2. A Recompense: I
know what thou do, what thou suffer, so as to approve it, and so as to
recompense it. Now then if God takes notice of what we do and suffer for his
Name, then either we must say, he has not good enough, or not time enough to
bestow that good upon us, or not faithfulness enough to perform his promise,
before we can be moved from his service.

Pro. 2. Secondly, I observe, Believers in their poorest condition, when they
have lost all, they are rich: I know thy poverty, but thou art rich. The only
wise man is the only rich man (so says the Philosopher) but the believer is
the rich man (so says the Wisdom of God in the Text.) And the riches of a
Believer lies in five things.

1. In his Interest, he has a God for his portion: Faith does unite and
implant into the Lord Jesus Christ; so that we are become spiritually rich to
the utmost degree of happiness: Says David, The lines are fallen to me in a
pleasant place, I have a goodly beritage. All that rich love of God, which is
stronger then death it self: A rich Covenant of grace shines in the Promises as
so many Pearls; he will not withhold any thing that is good, nor suffer any
thing that is evil to fall upon us, that shall not turn to good. How rich are
they that are rich (...) God?

2. Believers must needs be rich in their Relation^: Our communion is with the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ: They that are married to Christ, and
have an interest in him, they must certainly contract very honorable Allies,
the Brother of Jesus Christ, a Member of Christ: she that marries a Prince or
King, is a Queen. What title of honor shall we give to one that is espoused to
Jesus Christ,

3. The Believer is honorable in his possessions: to name but two, possession
of grace, possession of peace, grace and peace, there is your riches; so the
Lord salutes you in his Word, the least dram of grace is more then all the
world: And this is the character of one that hungers and thirsts after Christ.
And then for comforts which are grounded upon grace, and the work of grace: for
the spring of grace is a spring of joy: In the world you shall have trouble,
but in me peace: And in the midst of my troubled thoughts (says David) thy
comforts delight my soul.

4. A Believer is rich in regard of his expectation, that reversion, that
blessed hope that is reserved for him. A Believer his character is, to long and
look for the appearance of Christ the Believer is rich in the everlasting
Kingdom of glory.

5. A Believer is rich in the things of this life: he can live above these
things, he can be content without them; contentation is your riches; you shall
want nothing that is good; why then have we not enough? and if we have enough,
why do we not see our riches? because God does not shake down the acorns from
the tree of common providence, which he does to the herds of the world, but
feeds us with childrens bread, shall we therefore repine? Let us see our riches
even in the things of this life. He that believes on Christ, is in such a
condition as can know no want: He that is not in Christ cannot be rich: He that
is in Christ cannot be poo^. Judge not of of his condition by what he appears
outwardly. A believer is worth as much as the promises come to, which are his
Charter; as much as the Kingdom of Heaven comes to, which is his reversion.

Pro. 3. Christ takes notice of all the reproaches and blasphemies of his
Adversaries: I know the blasphemy of them that say they are Jews and are not,
but are of the Synagogue of Satan. Christ counts himself reproached, when his
servants and ways are reproached: The reproaches of them that reproached thee
are fallen upon me. A Christian does quarter Arms with Christ, therefore all
the reproaches of the black mouths, they are especially taken notice of by
Jesus Christ. There is not a word they can speak, but is presently recorded
among the Memorandums of Jesus Christ. Repent, if it be possible: the word in
thy tongue, the thought in thy mind may be forgiven; I say, if it be possible,
though a malicious scoffer does seldom return.

Pro. 4. Whatever the Children of God suffer at any time before the grave, they
must suffer still. I know thy works and tribulation, (nay yet the wind is not
over) in the next verse, Thou shall suffer.] After great expenses of blood and
treasure, still more heavy calamities: the water of tribulation does rise
higher and higher till the believer resists unto blood striving against sin:
you must expect it, you must go with your lives in your hands, resolving upon
the greatest trouble, to wade through a deep flood of calamities, not one piece
of the Cross excepted.

Pro. 5. Christ usually gives notice to his people in their sufferings, he
tells us beforehand. So Job 16.7. Mat. 24.9. Acts 9.16. There never did befall
any great trial, but the Church of God had notice of it. Abraham had notice of
Sodoms destruction: Noah had notice or the Old Worlds destruction: Abraham
again had notice of the ruin of Egypt: So the Antichristian trouble must come
upon the Church, rise higher and higher, specially in the last days: they are
set down exactly in the book of the Revelations: And the Reasons are,

1. That Gods people may not be offended when troubles come, Job 16.1. I told
you that you might not be offended. Look for them, that you may not be
terrified by reason of the unexpectedness of them.

2. That he might convince us, that there is nothing befalls us without his
privity: he that foresees them, he must needs see them; he that forecasts them,
he must needs have the ordering of them; Not a hair of your heads falls to the
ground without his counsel, without his hand.

That we might provide for them: Know you not the coming of the Son of Man?
When Christ comes with notable mercies, usually he sends his harbingers; we
must thereore be as Noab: Being warned of God, believing his word, he was moved
with fear, and built an Ark.

Pro. 6. What ever troubles come upon the people of God, they have no cause to
fear: Fear none of these things thou shall suffer: Be careful for nothing (it is
very comprehensive) there is a feat that we cannot be without, and there is a
fear we may not admit; A fear there is of dependence, this furthers our
preparation, prayer, renouncing our selves, flying to the Lord Jesus under his
wings: that is a blessed fear of trouble that makes us to come nearer to God:
But then there is a fear of Dispondency, Apostasy, a fear of Distraction, so as
to be dismayed, discouraged. There Is no ground of slavish fear as to God; no
ground of a fatal fear of man, of any thing that man can do to us: And the
Reason is.

1. All our sufferings are ordered by a Father: it is the Potion that thy Father
gives thee to drink: whatever bitter Ingredient there is in it, still it is of
thy Fathers procuring: why will thou suspect it to be poison, and afraid of it?
no, be encouraged.

2. Fear not: Christ stands by thee in all thy sufferings: The Angel stood by
Christ in his Agony to comfort him: but Christ stands by us in our Agony, in
our contending for the Faith: Fear not (says God) O Worm Jacob, I will be with
thee: He is always with us, though sometimes as to sense it is otherwise: nay
if Christ be nearer to us at any time, it is when trouble is most near us. ( O
Lord, be not far off, for trouble is near, says the Psalmist) That trouble is
blessed that engages God to be nearer to us, that engages us to come nearer to
God.

3. Fear not whatever it is that we suffer: there shall be sufficient strength
given to bear it, to go through it: God will never lay more upon thee than he
will enable thee to bear: and if thy strength be increased proportionably, it
is all one for thee to lift a pound weight, and to lift a hundred pound weight.

4. Fear not any of these sufferings, because none of them shall hurt thee: God
has said he will stave off all evil from thee (no evil shall come nigh thy
dwelling) and he that fears the Lord, shall not be visited of any evil, Prove.
19.23. No hurt shall come, nothing shall come to thee amiss (that is) as to thy
Soul, and the Soul is the man: there shall be no imparting to thy Soul, to thy
best interest; thou shall lose nothing but that thou can not keep, nothing
that enters into the other world to make up thy happiness, thou shall lose
nothing to do thee good; no loss of communion with God, no loss of Communion
shall not be diminished.

But why do I speak of no hurt; there shall come a great deal of good by these
troubles. When God calls thee to suffer, and thou will put him off with doing,
make it up that way, God loses by it, and thou do; but if you would buckle
your self to that service God calls for; active when it is active; passive when
it is passive, this is that piece of godliness that is great gain. Thou will
either live or die, and shall gain both ways; if thou live^, thy graces shall
be better, the spirit of God shall rest upon thee, if thou die, thy glory which
is weighty, shall be double, the weightier the Cross, the weightier the Crown;
be content to go as Christ did from the Cross to the Crown. Let us strive
against our carnal lusts, those few things that are ready to choke our faith,
disparage God, and cut the sinews of our endeavor to any service God calls us
to.

1. Consider our troubles are like to be great: here is the symptoms of Gods
displeasure upon us, here is the pouring out of such a providence among us, as
is usually attended with destructive Judgments. Sodoms calamity was coming
when one Lot was discharged: Germany's calamity was coming when one Luther was
taken away; Lord then what woe is this to sleep away so many faithful, painful
laborers at once! but it is our duty to suffer patienttly, and not complain.

2. As our troubles must be great, so, many will fear, and in fearing faint; we
see it come to pass, and you will find it more and more: There are those that
run with the Footman, that will not keep pace with the Horsemen, that may be
left behind, and be trod under foot: our troubles are likely to arise according
to all we can learn from Scripture and Providence, and very many there be that
will shrink.

3. Consider it is a very difficult thing to stand steadfast in a day of evil:
you cannot name any of Gods Children, but when they have indeed come to it,
their carnal fears have been working so as their feet have almost slipped, they
have been almost gone, but that for the promise of God, that he would lay no
more upon them than he would enable them to bear.

O but you will say, What will become of the public interest, of the name and
Church of God? and what will become of my private interest?

I answer, you have no ground of fear (according to Scripture) in either of
these respects.

First as to the public name of God, the interest of his Church, of his truth,
of righteousness, of a real Reformation, interest of our prayers and hopes, be
not afraid.

1. God bears a dear respect unto his people: they are represented in Scripture
by all names that may import dearnesse and nearness unto him: the interest of
his glory is bound up in his people: he calls Israel his glory: We know the
interest of men is that which moves the world: but the interest of God, of his
Glory, no doubt will be the ground of safety and security unto us, even till
God take us to Heaven. For the interest of Gods Justice, God made Hell; and for
the interest of his mercy and grace he gave Jesus Christ to die, to take effect
here amongst the Children of men; do you think God will forget his interest?

2. Remember Gods ways are in the deep: you cannot tell what God is doing;
when you think thoughts of destruction and confusion, my thoughts toward you
says God, are thoughts of peace: And truly God he does not save a Soul, nor
does not promote the Salvation of his Church in any eminent degree, but it is
in a way that is cross and contrary to the sense and expectation of flesh and
blood: insomuch you know the darkness of our condition has been the entrance
upon deliverance; as just before the day dawns, its the darkest of the night
when God looked and there was none to help them, says he, my arm brought
salvation.

Thus it is with you that are effectually called: you have received the
sentence of death; the entrance upon your deliverance, is the darkest time of
your condition.

3. God can do great things, Joel 2. Fear not, thy God O Sion can do great
things. It Is the disparagement that we offer to God, we ascribe more to the
Creature than we do to God: when we give way to carnal fear^, fear not what man
can do, because of the power of God which was his shield and buckler; Is any
thing too heavy for God? and when God does great things, he usually goes on to
do greater; though he may seem to suffer his work to be thrown back to
confusion, and his people may be ready to say, we thought he had redeemed
Israel, that degree of Reformation shall not be lost. You know in Luther's
time, take any special degree of Reformation in the Church, and it seemed to be
opposed by the gates of hell: when it was brought upon the stage to any hopeful
degree, then it was taken as it were utterly out of sight for a while: but it
was never lost: thus God is but making way for his own glory to appear in these
great works.

O but you will say, what shall become of my particular? It is enough God has
promised that we shall not want any thing that is truly good, and that nothing
that is evil, shall fall upon us, and lie upon us: though we do not see
deliverance, it shall be: whatever our sad thoughts and tremblings of heart may
be, yet give God the glory of his Word: Take these few Directions.

1. Strive to strengthen thy Faith. Faith is that which lays hold on Christ:
and Christ is your strength: therefore Faith is said to do that which Christ
does: let every day drive thee to a renewed act of Faith: Take heed, be not
shaken in the faith of the Cause, be not shaken in the Faith of Christ (fides
Causae, fides Christ^) Be not shaken upon the Cause, which upon utmost
examination, we find to be according to the word, hold that: Heaven and Earth
shall pass away, but not one jot and tittle of this Cause. And then do not
shake in the Faith of Christ, that is, in your laying hold, in your applying
your selves to him, in your resting and settling upon him; beg of God to
strengthen your faith.

2. Get more Self-denial: we must forsake all, we must not except any thing. A
man would part with his life as easily as with a pin off his sleeve, if he had
but some considerable growth in Self-denial.

3. Get a great deal of love toward that Christ, that loved us with a love
stronger then death: get love of that Christ that may be stronger then life.
Let nothing in the world be of any consideration with you, so us Christ may be
magnified in your bodies: love will breed courage, and cast out fear; slavish
fear before God, carnal fear before men.

Get a true insight into an account of suffering and troubles whence they are:
they issue from the same love with redemption of your souls from Hell, and your
glorification: God does every thing in pursuance of the purpose of his love: he
does every thing according to the platform and pattern of his thoughts toward
us from eternity. Consider what troubles are, and to what end; not to destroy,
but to try: to wean from the world, to fit for Heaven.

5. Get an infight into the vanity of the creature: you reckon the creature
some great matter, and that is the reason of your love, and of your fear.

6. Get the fear of God, that may overruled other sears. Fear not him that can
but kill the body, but fear him that is able to cast body and soul into hell
fire.

7. Keep a clear conscience, void of offense toward God and toward men: by a
heart abasing confession of what is past, and the application of the blood of
Christ, and by mortification and watchfulness therein, keep your selves from
evil for the time to come.

8. Get a better assurance of eternal life; a glimpse and sight of this would
make a man run through the very flames of hell. How comfortable was Stephen
when a shower of stones was about his ears, to see Jesus standing at the right
hand of God! I wonder how they dare to venture their life, that have no ground
of a better life: but for those that have a well-grounded hope of the mercy of
God, they say, We reckon these light affections, which are but for a moment, to
work for us a (...) more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Fear all any of
these things which you shall suffer.

Pro. 7. Christ does limit Satan, he has him in a string, him and all his
Instruments: ( The Devil shall cast some of you into prison, etc.) Every word
has its weight: Who shall do it? The Devil. What shall he do? Cast you into
prison: How far? Some of you: How long? Ten days: For what use? That you may
be tried. Christ, as he has Satan in a chain of providence, so he has a chain
of restraint; it is Christ that puts a circle about him, he cannot cause a hair
of your head to fall, he is in the hand of Christ, and they are under him, and
his hand, as they are against him: If God lets alone his Enemies, what shall
they not do? If God lets alone his People, what shall they do?

2. God has a special Providence about the things of his Church by way of
eminency, by way of permission, and ordination.

3. You will not deny but there is power enough in God to destroy all that are
against him, and to limit all, and all shall make to the praise of God, and to
his peoples good.

The Lord is exceeding merciful, he cannot hold when the Enemy comes to insult,
to blaspheme and revile; Now will I arise, says God, and set him at liberty
from him that puffs at him: There is not only a judging of their Enemies
hereafter, but a judging of them here: the world shall say, Verily there is a
God that rewards righteousness, verily there is a God that judges the earth.

3. God has a special design in hand; therefore just so far as he will carry on
that design God has toward his people, (which is always a design of
faithfulness) just so far shall the Enemy go, Isai. 10:

The Enemy means not so, he means to cut off a people not a few; but Gods end
was otherwise, and he will overruled them: this is the Comfort, there is a set
time, there is an end.

There is a difference between the afflicting of Gods people, and judging their
enemies: In the intention, and extension: one is for ruin, the other in
proportion; one is a light affliction, the other a load. And then for
extention, one is for ever, and the other is for time, for ten days, Then our
afflictions shall have an end, I and a comfortable end. Are not these two ends
comfortable, the end of our sins, and the end of our sorrow? God will restore
comfort to his mourners; let us be mourners during the time of mourning, God
will quickly cloth us with garments of praise: there shall be an end of our
sufferings, never an end of our joy and glory.

Pro. 8. To conclude in a word, Be faithful to the death: Be faithful in your
promises; in your vows and purposes, your covenants of obedience and
reformation; persist in the doctrine of the Gospel, and the worship of the
Gospel, and the Ministry of the Gospel, and office Christ has fixed in his
Church: be faithful by your most earnest, zealous desires before the Lord: Be
faithful to the death: He will never let you see death till all your fears are
conquered: He can presently take them away: He will certainly be present with
you in all your trouble. And remember, God in tender mercy and faisfulnesse,
for the present, accepts the unfeigned purpose to be constant and saithful to
him to the death.

Mr. Beerman's Farewell Sermon. At St Thomases in Southwark, August 17. 1662.
BEloved, I know you are not ignorant that I am called by Authority to depart
from you, which for Conscience sake we must obey, and were it not for the
breach of Conscience, I think I could be content to undo my self to stay with
you, I shall now in love and tenderness take my leave of you all, with that
large portion of Scripture, in the twentieth of the Acts, from the seventeenth
verse to the end, they were Paul's parting words to the Ephesians.

Ver. 17. And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and called the Elders of the
Church, and when they were come unto him, he said unto them. Ye know that from
the first day that I came into Asia, after what manner I have been with you,
serving the Lord with all humility of mind, with many tears, and temptations
which befell me through the lying in wait of the Jews, and how I kept back
nothing that w^^ profitable unto you, but have showed you, and taught you
publicly, and from house to house, testifying to the Jews, and also to the
Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, and
now behold I go bound in the spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the things th^^
shall befall me there, save that the Holy Ghost witnesses in every City,
saying, that bonds and afflictions abide ^e, but none of these things moves
me, neither count (...), life dear unto my self, so that I might finish my
(...) with joy, and the Ministry which I have received of (...) Lord Jesus to
testify the Gospel of the grace of God; and now behold I know that ye all,
among whom I have gone preaching the Kingdom of Heaven, shall see my face no
more. Wherefore I take you to record this day that I am pure from the blood of
all men, for I have not shunned to declare unto you all the Counsel of God.
Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock over which the Holy
Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own blood, for I know this, that after my departure grievous
wolves shall enter, not sparing the flock, also of your own selves shall men
arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away Disciples after them, therefore
watch, and remember, that by the space of three years, I ceased not to warn
every one night and day with tears. And now Brethren, I commend you to God, and
to the Word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an
inheritance among all those that are sanctified; I have coveted no man's silver,
or gold, or apparel. Yea, your selves know, these hands have ministered to my
necessities, and to those that were with me. I have showed you all things, how
that so laboring ye ought to support the weak, remembering the words of our
Lord Jesus, how he said, it is more blessed to give then to receive. And when
be had thus spoken, he kneeled down and prayed with them all, and they all wept
sore, and fell upon Paul's neck and kissed him, sorrowing most of all for the
words which be spoke, that they should see his face no more, and they
accompanied him unto the Ship. BEloved, I have read unto you the words of a
departing Minister to his Hearers. The case being my own, I thought I could not
pitch upon a more fitter place to take my farewell withal. I shall not stand to
open all these words, only speak a word or two at parting, as Paul did to the
Ephesians, and I shall only hold forth something to you by way of Analysis to
it, and thereby you may judge of the Analogy of it. In this parting speech of
Paul's you have two parts.

First, Paul's theirs carriage to them. Secondly, Paul's theirs carriage to him.
First, Paul's behavior toward them, that was very pious, as you may read from
v. 17. to v. 37.

Secondly, the peoples behavior toward their departing Minister, which you
have in the two last verses. Wherein is observable First, their love. Secondly,
their sorrow.


First, their love, expressed by kissing him, and accompanying him unto the
ship.

Secondly, their sorrow, expressed by their weeping, they could not part with
such a Minister with dry eyes, but says the Text, They all wept sorely,
sorrowing most of all for the words which he spoke, that they should see his
face no more. They wept, and they all wept, and they all wept sorely; a sore
weeping when this Minister and this people parted. From whence I note this,
That there is occasion and matter of great sorrow when people loose a godly
Minister. Paul was not the first Minister that ever parted with a people, nor
the Ephesians the first people that ever lamented the loss of a faithful
Minister. See how the people lamented Samuel, 1 Samuel 25.1. And Samuel died, and
all Israel was gathered together, and lamented Samuel. O that brave, that
powerful preaching Samuel is gone. How did Elisha lament Elius, catching hold
of his garments, and crying out, My father, my father, the Chariots of Israel,
and the Horsemen thereof. Christ himself when he saw the Children of Israel
scattered abroad upon the mountains as sheep without a shepherd, how did his
bowels yern toward them? but to name no more, take St. Stepen, Acts 8.2. when
Stephen was departed, dead and gone, devout m^^ carried Stephen to his grave,
and made great lamentations over him, they could not but lament to think that
that noble, courageous, and heart-daunting Minister should never preach more
before them. When Christ was put to death, how did his followers lament him? Is
it not a lamentable sight to behold a poor weatherbeaten rotten ship, without
Mast or Tackling, in a tempest? Good Lord, what will become of the Ship and
Mariners? Is it not a sad sight to see a flock of sheep environed with a band
of wolves, and no shepherd to protect them? thus it is with people when their
Minister is gone. Ministers themselves have wept and lamented, when they have
thought of departing from their own people, and that for these two causes.

First, because they knew they would corrupt themselves. suffer others to
corrupt them. Secondly, because they knew they would corrupt themselves. suffer
others to corrupt them.
First, because they knew they would corrupt themselves. Moses he knew this (
Deuteronomy. 31.29.) he is there leaving the world, and the people thereof. Call unto
me the Elders of your Tribes, that I may speak a word in their audience, and
call Heaven and Earth to record against them, for I am sure that upon my
departure you will utterly be corrupted, and turned from the way that I have
commanded you, for behold, I being yet alive with you in this day, you are
rebellious against God, how much more then after my death? I assure you it is
cause of lamentation to think on this. Thus it was with Joash, while Jehojada
that good Minister lived with him, and instructed him in the way that he should
walk, he kept to the true worship of God; but after Jehojada dyed, he turned
Idolater, and persecuted the sons of Jehojada, (2 Chronicles. 24.21.

Secondly, they knew that after their departure they would suffer others to
corrupt them. This was that that made Paul use these words to the Ephesians
(Ver. 29.) For I know that after my departure grievous wolves shall enter, not
sparing the flock. And therefore well may you mourn when a faithful Minister is
taken from you. I shall say no more, only a word or two to Paul's speech,
wherein you have.

First, Paul speaking to God for them. Secondly, Paul speaking from God to
them.
First, he spoke to them from God, and then prayed to God for them. I shall
divide this speech to them from God, into these two parts.

First, he spoke something by way of vindication of himself. Secondly, he spoke
something by way of exhortation to them.
First, You may observe in Paul's farewell speech, something by way of
vindication of himself; and it is not amiss for a Minister, when he is to
depart from a people, to say something in vindication of himself; for there are
enough that will, when his back is turned, lay falsehood and scandals to his
charge, which they never durst do to his face: Samuel knew this, and therefore
provided for it, in 1 Samuel 12.1. And Samuel said unto them all, Behold I have
hearkened to your voice, and have made you a King, now behold the King walks in
and out before you; I am old, and of gray hairs, and must now leave you, I have
walked before you from a child to this day, and now witness against me before
the Lord, whose Ox have I taken, or whose Ass have I kept? whom have I done
wrong to? or whom have I hurt? and of whose hand have I received a bribe to
blind mine eyes therewith? he stood here upon the justification of his life and
carriage toward them, that he had not been a self-seeking, or oppressing man
unto them; and thus did Paul vindicate himself to the Ephesians: give me leave
to divide Paul's vindication into four or five parts.

First, He tells them that he had constantly preached amongst them,
notwithstanding all the afflictions which encountered him, (v. 19.) Serving the
Lord with all humility of mind, with many tears and temptations which befell me
through the lying in wait of the Jews.

Secondly, He vindicates himself, by telling them the manner of his preaching,
( v. 20.) I have taught you publicly, and from house to house: you know I may
fitly apply this to my self, for I have not only taught you publick^^, but in
many of your houses also. But,

Thirdly, He vindicates himself (...) telling them the matter of his preaching;
and I bless God it has been my method ever since I preached among you (v 21.)
testifying to the Jews, and also to the Greeks, repentance toward God, and
faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ; and this is my rejoicing (now I may preach
no more) that I have spent my time in declaring unto you the sundamentals and
grounds of salvation and not in frivolous Ceremonies.

Fourthly, He vindicates himself by declaring the impartiality of his
preaching, (v. 27.) I have not shunned to declare unto yot all the Council of
God. Oh my Brethren, though I cannot say I have declared all the Council of
God; yet this through grace I can say, that I have not shunned to declare any
of it.

Fifthly, Paul does clear his Doctrine, and withal, himself, by telling them
he had preached freely, (v. 33. and 34.) I have coveted no man's silver, or
gold, or apparel. Yea, ye your selves know that these have ministered to my
necessities, and to those that were with me. I bless the Lord I can with a
good Conscience safely say, I have covered neither your silver nor gold,
neither am I a penny the richer for what I received of you; it was not a desire
of any thing of yours that made me at first accept of this place: yet this I
shall say for your honor, that you have richly and liberally bestowed your
favors upon me: but as there is something in his own vindication; So,

Secondly, there is something by way of Exhortation to them, (v. 18.) Take heed
therefore unto your selves, etc. Paul before he leaves them has something from
God to say to them; from whence I note this, That the Ministers of God, before
they quite leave, have something to say to them from God; it was thus with the
holy men of old: Jacob, when he was dying, called all his So^^ before him, and
to every one he gave counsel, and blessing; David when he was upon leaving the
world, he knew he should not live long, he calls all Israel unto him, says
thus unto them, (1 Chronicles. 28.8, 9.) Now therefore in the sight of all Israel,
the congregation of the Lord, and in the audience of our God, keep, and seek
for all the Commandments of the Lord your God, that you may possess this good
Land, and leave it for an inheritance to your children after you for ever. And
thou Solomon, my Son, know the God of thy Fathers, and serve him with a perfect
heart, and with a willing mind, for the Lord searches all hearts, and under
stands all the imaginations of the thoughts, if thou seek him, he will be
found of thee, but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever. Thus
you see it ^ath been the custom of holy men of olp, when they are leaving the
World, to say something to their people; so now here, I am come unto you this
day as a dying man, for you know when this day is gone, I must no more preach
among you; and I know you are come, to see what I shall leave you for your
Legacy, which that I may do, take these Twenty things, as Counsel, and Advice
from a dying man; and O that they may remain with you when I am dead. First, I
shall give you Ten by way of Caution, and secondly, Ten by way of Counsel; my
Cautions are,

First, Beloved, I beseech you, as you tender the welfare of your Souls, take
heed of breaking the Sabbath day, of Profaning the Lords day; it has been
observable, that wherever Religion has flourished among any people, there
they have ever been careful, and conscientious of the Sabbath day; and on the
contrary side, where Religion is gone to decay, and people grown to
profaneness, there they are always loose on the Sabbath day; pray remember,
I hope you will remember, for God calls upon you, and commands you so to do, (
Exodus 20. v. 8.) Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy: do not you take so
much liberty as some will give you: whoever you are that refuse thus to do, I
will leave this assertion upon you: thou wretched man, has God given thee Six
days, and reserved but one for himself? and will thou Rob him of that too?
what! if he had given thee but one, and kept six for himself, would you be so
vile, as not to keep them? how much more then, when God has given thee so much
preheminency in time, this is the first, be conscious in keeping the Sabbath
day.

Secondly, Take heed, and beware of Idolatry; this was John's caution to his
beloved Children, (1 Epist. 5. v. 21.) Little Children keep your selves from
Idols. There is no sin to which, nor no sin by which we are in more danger than
Idolatry.

First, there is no sin to which we are in more danger than Idolatry: Moses's
back was no sooner turned, but the people made them a brazen calf, and bowed
down to it, and worshipped it as their God. (Exodus 32. v. 4.) Jehojada was no
sooner dead, but Ioash returned to Idolatry; if we were not prone to this sin,
what is the reason all the world turns Antichristians so Universally.

Secondly, As there is no sin, to which we are in more danger, so there is no
sin by which we are in more danger, than Idolatry. I do confess, if you will
keep your garments clean, and undefiled with the mark of the Beast, it may be
you may come under shrewd temptations; yet I entreat you, as a dying man, as
you love your Souls, and for God's sake, flee from Idolatry notwithstanding
your temptations; for God has promised that under all the temptations that
happens to you, he will support you, if you fly, and withstand the thing you
are tempted to, (1 Cor. 10. v. 13.) there has no temptation taken you, but
such as is common to men, but God is faithful, and Will not suffer you to be
tempted, above that you are able to bear, but will with the temptation, also
make way to to escape, that you may be able to bear it; now see what use the
Apostle makes of this promise, in the next verse he follows with these words,
my dearly beloved, flee from Idolatry, seeing God will uphold us, let us
withstand any temptations, to this end, that God may uphold us; this is the
second Caution.

Thirdly, Take heed of Apostasy, of a degenerating, backsliding spirit; that ye
do not fall off from the truth, and ground of the ways of God, which ye have
known, and professed it is true; it may be for standing to your principles you
may lose the love of man; I acknowledge it may be so, but hear what God says,
If any man fall back, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him; if thou go on,
man's Soul may have no pleasure in thee, but if thou fallest back, Gods soul will
have no pleasure in thee; thou do by Apostasy declare to all the world, that
thou have made trial of the ways of God, and thou do not find them to be as
good as thou thoughtest they were, nay not so good as others: O take heed of
scandalizing the ways of God, here how God complains of those that so do (
Jer. 2.10.) Go unto the Isles of Chittim, and behold and send unto Kedar, and
take diligent heed and see, whether there be such a thing, has a Nation
changed their God, for those which are no Gods? but my people has changed
their glory, for that which will not profit. Hear O Heavens, and be astonished
at this, for my people have committed two evils, they have forsaken me the
fountain of living waters, and have hewed to themselves broken cisterns that
will hold no water; Whatever it is that would lead thee to Apostasy, beware and
fly it, especially evil company, (of which I shall speak more anon) let your
love to Christ be augmented, and love of your selves abased; for unless you
love Christ, very much, and your selves very little, I cannot hope that you
will stand to your principles.

Fourthly, Beware of Covetousness; it is Christ's Caution, ( Luke 2. ver. 15.
Take heed, and beware of Covetousness: here is a Caution, with a double
action, take heed, and beware: believe me Brethren it stands upon us so to do,
for it steals upon us before we be aware of it; there is no person will deal
more injuriously with a Christian than a covetous man will; he will betray his
Life (if it were in his hands) into his Enemies hands for Money, as Judas did.
A covetous man he will injure Christ in his Ordinances, he will not come at
them, for the love he bears to the World will not suffer himstruly (quoth he) I
have lost this, or that, while I was hearing a Sermon, I Will go no more, I must
stay at home, and look after my business; I could give you many instances of
this, but time will not give me leave; I shall only touch this one, what was it
but the Love of this World that kept those who were bid to the Marriage Feast
of the Great King of Heaven from coming? One had, bought a piece of Ground, and
he must needs see it; another had bought Oxen, and he must go to prove them; a
third had Married a Wife, and therefore he could not come. Of all persons in
the world, a covetous man, cannot, nor will not endure to bear the Cross of
Christ, ( Phillippians 3. v. 8.) For many walk of whom I have told you often,
and now tell you weeping, that they are the Enemies of the Cross of Christ,
whose end is dest^uction; who are these? what manner of persons are they? why
they are such who make their Belly their God, whose glory is their shame, and
who mind earthly things. A covetous man he will lie with Ananias and Sarhira;
he will steal with Achab, he will murder with Ahab, he will betray with Judas:
what will he not do to attain his covetous desire? this is the Fourth, beware
of covetousness.

Fifthly, You that have not taken warning yet, I beseech you take warning now;
have a care and avoid evil company, ( Ephesians. 5.11.) Have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them; come out from among
them, and be serarated from them. Never go into a wicked man's company, if
before you go, you have not a probability of doing good, or getting good.
Consider with thy self, is there any likelihood that thou by thy wholesome
reproofs may do him any good, if there be, then go on^; if not, draw back,
avoid them, fly from them, for their steps tend to perdition. By wicked company
those two things have been effected.

Good men made bad. Bad men made worse.
Good men have been made bad by wicked company, Jehosaphat that good King is in
an example of this, who by the company of wicked Ahab, was drawn to fight
against those whom God favored, and to help Ahab in his wicked enterprise.

Bad men have made those worse by evil company: Ahab was made worse by the
instigation of his wicked wise Jezabel. Oh can you bear when you are in their
company to hear them blaspheme the holy name of God, and not repove them.
Truly, if you can, it is a sign you are not so good as you should b^.

Sixthly, my sixth Caution is this: Oh have a care of having the least finger
on your hand against a Saint, it is dangerous to have a thought, word or act
against the people of God, it is dangerous to have a thought amiss of them (
Psalm. 62.3.) They imagine mischief against a man (that is against a Saint)
therefore they shall all be slain, for their bare imagination they shall be cut
off. It is dangerous to speak against them, How durst thou (says God to Miram)
to speak against my servant Moses; and immediately he smote her with leprosy
as white as Snow; It is dangerous to act against them, and it is forbidden by
God ( Psalm. 105.5.) Touch not my anointed, nor do my Prophets no harm. Perhaps
you would say you would not do them any harm, if you thought they were Gods
people. Oh but take heed lest they prove Gods people, and then it were better
for you, if a millstone were hung about your neck, and you cast into the Sea,
than to offend the least of them.

Seventhly, Let me beseech you all to take heed of complying with this sinful
world, whoever does, do not you: but take up that good resolution of Joshua's,
As for me and my House, we will serve the Lord. Though all else forsake God,
yet will not I, yet let not us, I beseech you (says he) that you would not
conform your selves to the fashions and manners of this wicked world. Oh take
heed of conforming your selves to the Conversation of this world, but walk
harmless, and shine as lights in the midst of a crooked, and perverse
generation, if we will comply with the world, I mean to be as most of the world
are, that is temporizers, time^servers, preferring the pleasing of a man,
before the pleasing of God, then we must lie in wickedness, as all the world
does (1 John 2.10.) for all that in the world is either the lust of the flesh,
the lust of the eye, or the pride of life, and these are not of the Father, but
abides in the wicked one, the Prince of the power of the air, after whom the
men of the world walk. This is the seventh, take heed of Conforming your selves
to this world.

Eighthly, Take heed of a hasty spirit when you are under sad dispensations,
when you are under sufferings, you are apt to seek, and (...) with relief, come
it which way it will, and on what terms it will. (...) ^ spirit, ( Esaias 26. v.
18.) He that believes makes not haste, hat is, he makes not haste to get out
of his afflictions; the people of Israel was of hasty spirits, and murmured
because they were kept so long in the wilderness, for which God slew an
innumerable company of them. Saul was of a hasty spirit, and by it lost his
life, and Kingdom. Jacob's Mother no sooner told him his Fathers intent, but he
was resolved to have the first blessing; though he cheated his Brother, and
lied for it, and so told his Father, that he was his eldest Son, but he himself
was afterward deceived by a lie, with having the eldest daughter given him
instead of the younger. Take David for your example. he waited Gods time, the
Kingdom was promised to him after Saul's death, and when Saul persued him, you
know David had him twice in his power, and with ease might have destroyed him,
but he would not, ^ar be it from me (says he) that I should touch the Lords
anointed. Let God smite him by the hands of his enemies, I will not, it is far
better to be Gods Bond-stave, then the Devils Freeman; do not use any the
least action whatever in an indirect way to deliver thy self, but patiently set
down, and wait Gods good time, which when once come, thy deliverance will
assuredly come with it. Take heed then of a hasty and su^len spirit under
afflictions; Some men when God takes away any comfort from them, are of so
sullen a spirit, there is no pacifying of them; God will now this day take
something from you, which I believe you would willingly keep; will you
therefore be of so sullen a spirit, that because you cannot enjoy all, you will
not enjoy any, but will rob your selves of all? what though you cannot enjoy
your Minister any longer, will you not make use of the Ordinances of God? I
beseech you refrain this spirit, and let the deprivation of one mercy be a
means to make you make better use of those that are left.

Ninthly, My ninth Caution is this, take heed of an ungodly Minister, I speak
not to any man's person in particular, neither can I because I know not as yet
who will succeed me; but whosoever he be, if he be wicked, beware of him; for
if he be ungodly, the people will follow him; for like Priest, like people: and
I pray God deliver you from such Ministers, as for doctrine do teach the
traditions of men; and cry peace, peace, when sudden destruction hang^ over
their heads: such Ministers may please you, but believe me they will never
profit you: but at last you will find, that through the ^ale of Security, you
are led to the pit of Perdition. They will tell you, you need not be so strict
and diligent in your conversations, nor Heaven is not so hard and difficult to
gain, as some would make you believe: believe them not, but remember, that
without holiness none shall see God; and that neither Fornicators, Adulterers.
Idolaters, Thieves, Murderers, Covetous persons, Drunkards, Revi^era, nor
Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven.

^ Gospel) only. Christ, when he was preaching to a throng of People (as I am
here this day) said unto them, Take ^eed, and beware of the leaven of the
Pha^isees which is among you. Oh that I had no cause to say, the leaven of the
Pharisees is among you! I mean, that there are many here that are but bare
professors; let me ask you that are only professors this one question, Is
Religion good or bad? if it be not good, what is the reason thou art not
ashamed to profess it? if it be good, what is the reason thou do but profess
it? by thy bare professing, thou losest the love of man; by no more then
professing, thou can never gain the love of God; so that on all sides thou
art like to be miserable: The world will hate thee for being so good, and God
will hate thee for being no better. What a sad thing is it that thou losest thy
comforts in this life by professing so much, and thy comforts in the life to
come, by no more then professing. Thus you have heard what I have to say by way
of Caution: I shall now speak to you by way of counsel. The former ten were
Negative, these shall be Positive.

First, I entreat you all, that above all things you would mind the one thing
necessary: that you would not trouble your selves so much with many things of
little concernment, but mind the great thing for which you came into the world.
Oh my friends, will you spend your time for that which will not profit you, and
your money for that which is not bread: Look after Grace, labor to get an
Interest in Christ, of which if you be unprovided, you will be undone for ever,
and it will be better for you, you had never been born: Oh, gain Christ, and
then you will be fitted for all times, all troubles, and all conditions that
can happen unto you; you will be endued with all wisdom and with all riches; if
you gain not Christ, all that God does to you, and for you, will n^ught at all
avail you.

Secondly, My second advice and counsel unto you is this, That you would live
as you would die, live to day as if you must die to morrow: Let me ask you,
would you be content to die in the state you are in? if my soul does not desire
to be in a better state when I come to die, then now I am in, I may very well
sit down satisfied; if not, then surely it greatly concerns me to look after a
better; would any man be content to die a Drunkard, I ask you that are
Drunkards, I do believe you will answer no; why then do you live in
drunkenness? How know you that God will spare you when you are drunk, until
you are sober again? we may read of many that have died in their drunken fits,
God does not always send his Herald to warn thee, before he sends his
Sergeant to arrest thee; how know thou but Death may strike thee on a
sudden? what will then become of thy Soul? Oh Beloved, I beseech you live not
in that you are unwilling to die in: Balaam wa^ not such a wretch, but he could
cry out, Good Lord, let me die the death of the Righteous.

^ are so bad husbands, but will lay up for a rainy day. I mean against a time
of sickness comes, wherein you will be unable to work; are you thus careful to
maintain your bodies? and will you be careless of your souls? Oh be careful to
provide for sto^my weathers, you have winter garme^s for your bodies to
preserve them from cold; ^h let patience be your winter garment to preserve and
keep your selves warm in afflictions; I know that he that will live godly in
Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution, and that through tribulation and
sufferings we must enter into the K^ngdome of Heaven: shall I not then provide
for them? but you may say, what, does persecution attend all the godly? a man
may escape them as well as suffer them? put case affliction should not come
thou will be never the worse for the being provided for them, for he that is
fit to die is fit ^o live, and that man that is fi^ to suffer afflictions is
fit to live without them; It was Paul's exhortation to the Ephesians. 6.10. Finally
my brethren, put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand
the wiles of the Devil: And it is wisdom in a man, to provide for a misery
before is comes; there is mention made of a Nation (the Spartans I think) that
uses to choose their King as we do our Lord May or every year, and whilst they
are in their annual Government, they live in all abundance of state, have all
the sulnesse their hearts can wish; but when their year is over, all their pomp
and glory is over too, and they banished into some obscure remo^e place for
ever, Where they spend the remainder of their lives in great want and misery:
One King (knowing this) being called to rule over that Nation, made such use of
his time wherein he reigned as King, that by his provident living, he heaped up
so much treasure, and sent it besore him to the place where he knew he should
be sent, as maintained him all his life time. Thus it is, God has appointed to
every one a time to live in, and that but a short time too, and in that time he
has appointed afflictions to attend us; if we will live godly in Christ Jesus,
is it not wisdom in us then to provide for them? Take heed then that to avoid
suffering, you do not commit sin; ^o commit sin, to avoid suffering; is as if a
man should run out of the mouth of a barking Dog, into the mouth of a devouring
Lion; what is the wrath of man to the wrath of God? Man can but dest^oy the
body and no more, but God can destroy both body and soul into hell fire to all
eternity.

Fourthly, My fourth word of counsel, and direction is this, be serious in
serious things; when you come to perform serious things, do ^^em seriously; I
do not know that ever I saw a man fall a sleep while he was telling of money,
for if he should, how could he tell whether it were right or no? Yet alas! too
too many sleep when they should be taking truth, not only by natural sleep, but
also by spiritual sleep; they are so ca^elesse in receiving the word, they
hear, and so la^y withal, that rather then they will try the word they ^ear,
they will take all for truth their Ministers tell them. Beloved, I believe you
will scarce put so much coufidence in a man, as to receive a sum of money
without telling it, because he says it is right; and yet will you receive all
that your Minister tells you is truth for truth, without trying it? you must
not be sluggish in your working for God, but put forth your selves to the
utrermost. You must make the Kingdom of Heaven suffer violence, and take it by
force, but then,

Fifthly, The fifth Direction which I shall give you, is about hearing the
Word, how you must behave your selves when you hear. I take it for granted you
will hear, I hope you will, for brown bread is better then none, and a little
is better then none at all; yet I entreat you take these two words of Direction:

First, Try the word you hear by the Truth.

Secondly; Try your selves by the Truth.

First, Try the word you hear by the Truth; if it be not consonant to that,
believe it not, let who will pre^ch it; Paul exhorts the Galatians so to do
(Chap. 1.8, 9.) But though we, or an Angel from Heaven preach any other
doctrine unto you then that which we have preached unto you, let him he
accursed: How, Paul accursed? sure you speak too high what if an Angel? must he
be accursed? Sure you will c^ll in your words again; nay, instead thereof, he
repeats them over again; as we said before, so I say again, if any one preach
any other Gospel then that which you have received, let him be accursed. If any
man pretend a Revelation from Heaven, and cannot bring Scripture for what he
says, do not believe one syllable. Take the noble Bereans for your example,
they would nor believe Paul's doctrine, until they had searched to see whether
it were so or no; but then, as you are to t^y the word you hear by the truth,
so try your selves by the word; you hear as a truth, that there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh,
but after the Spirit. Now try your selves by this truth, and see whether or no
you walk after the flesh, or after the Spirit: I have likewise two Directions
about the preaching the Word.

First, Do not you receive the Word for the persons sake that brings it? I am
apt to think, that many of you will receive a Truth of one man's bringing, which
you would not receive of another; and thus ye receive the Word of God with
respect of persons, which you ought not; but first receive the Word for its own
sake; and secondly, receive the person for the Words sake, (1 These. 5.12, 13.)
we beseech you brethren to know them which are over you, to (...) monish you,
and labor among you in the Lord, and to esteem of (...) very highly in love
for their works sake.

Sixthly, My direction in the sixth place, shall be concerning (...) times we
live in, and I shall tell you, how you ought to behave (...) selves in two
particulars.

First, Blame thy self most that the times are so bad; there is a general
complaint about the sadness of the times, but no particular; every one puts
the cause away from him, and instead of accusing themselves, are always
accusing others: Ahab he said to Elisha, Thou art he that troubled Israel:
Elisha said to Ahab, Thou art he that troubled Israel: Adam said to God, The
Woman which thou gave me did give to me, and I did eat: The woman she said,
The Serpent beguiled her: Thus do we put it off from our selves to others: No
man says with Jonas, for my sake is this come upon you, I am the cause of all
this: No man says, what have I done? would you have the times mend? Oh then,
every soul of you condemn your selves, and amend your ways, the times would
not be so bad, if we were not so bad; would you have the effect cease, then
seek to remove the cause. But then

Secondly, Pray not so much for better times, as better hearts; for had you
never so good times, and not good hearts, your blessings would be cursings,
good times, without good hearts, will but fatten you the sooner to the
slaughter.

Seventhly, If you cannot do the good you would, then do the good you can; many
people are so sullen, that because they cannot do all they would do, they will
do none at all. I beseech you, be not of this temper; what though you cannot
serve God in public, will you not therefore serve him in private? why may you
not do as S. Austin was bid to do. ( toll legit) take up and read? this will
be a reading and praying time with you; and now you cannot hear as formerly you
have done; oh pray more, and read more, and the less you have in Public, the
more you may have in private, you may read and pray, we are not forbidden that
yet, let us then make use of them.

Eighthly, My entreaty is unto you all, that you would be careful and
circumspect in your conversation. ( Ephesians. 5.15.16.) See then that ye walk
circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time, because the days
are evil. Walk as becomes the Professiors of the Cospel, and labor to be
blameless toward God and man. O^, what notice will there be taken, when any
Professor does but (...) aside, and do any thing amiss, it is the joy of wicked
men's hearts to see it, and how diligently do they watch for it, and often wish
i^? We have a Proverb, That one man may better steal a Horse, then ^^^ther look
on; I am sure a wicked man may better commit sevon sins, then a Professor one;
for it is the failings, the bad lives of Professors, that makes Religion ill
spoken of, and hinders many a weak soul from closing with it: sure think they,
their Religion cannot be good, their conversations are so bad; let us therefore
be wary, and careful in all our actions.

Ninthly, Mourn and lament for the sin you cannot hinder; it was ^^id of Lot,
(2 Pet. 2.8.) that his righteous soul was vexed with the wicked conversations
of the Sodomites. Oh that we were but so good as we should be, then sure it
would grieve us more then it does to see the wicked and abominable lives of
those among whom we live; though thou do not blaspheme God thy self, yet it
is thy God that is blasphemed, and shall not that trouble thee? how can thou
but reprove them whoever they be? When a sick man sees his Wife, Children,
Friends, and Physician, lamenting his condition, sure it will make him think
his condition is worse then he thought i^, or very bad at least, or else why do
they take on so, if there was no cause of fear? Thus it may be thy reproof may
work upon a wicked man, if when thou hear him blaspheme God, thou lamentest
his condition, and puts him in mind of his sad estate, it may make him lay that
to heart then, which he never did before.

Tenthly, The last thing that I have to beseech of you is, That you would love
one another: I have not at all sought to proselyte you to my way, but whatever
you see in whoever it be that is of God, oh love it, be he of what profession
he will, he is a godly man: Oh then love him, you cannot love God if you do not
love his people: let brotherly love continue; your Minister must not continue,
oh then let brotherly love continue. (1 John 1.20.) If any man says he loves
God, and hates his Brother, he is a liar, and the truth is not in him; for if
he loves not his Brother, whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has
not seen? We believe, says John in the next Chapter, that Jesus Christ is the
Son of God, and he that loves the Begetter, must also love him that is
begotten. You would be loath to do otherwise in civil business: will you refuse
commerce with a man, because he is contrary to you in opinion, because he is
not a Freeman of your City; be not then so far from loving one another, as to
bear hatred one to another. Thus you have heard what I had to say unto you by
way of caution and counsel: Oh that they may make such impressions on your
hearts, that they may be your continual practice in your lives and
conversations. I shall now close with the words of St. Paul (2 Cor. 13.11.)
Finally Brethren, Farewell, be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live
in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you: And the Lord grant,
that both ye and I, when we come to the Judgment Seat of God, render up our
Accounts with joy, and receive an immortal Crown with Christ in Heaven, until
which Day I beseech Almighty God to keep you, and preserve you in his fear.
Amen.

FINIS.
Mr. Lye's SERMON, Preached at the conclusion of the Morning-Exercise in
LOMBARD STREET.
John 13.17. If ye know these things, happy are ye if you do them.
IN these words two things observable; First, A Supposition, which is double.
1. If you know these things. 2. If you do these things. There be many that do,
but do not know, do not understand; there be many that know, but do not do, do
not practice. But our Savior to his Disciples is, If you know first, and then,
If you do: Knowing without doing is unprofitable; doing without knowing is
impossible. 2. A Position, If you so know, as to do, then (...) blessed, happy
are ye.

First, for the Supposition, which is double. First, If you know; this word
Knowledge in Scripture contains two things,

1. It intimates an act of the mind or understanding, If you know.

2. It (...) of the (...) faculty of the soul, if you ^o ^how as to (...) From
both these significations, you have these two Observations.

1. Our first great care should be this, with all seriousness to apply our
selves to the knowledge of the things of the Gospel; we must with the Angels
(...), stoop down to look into, to have a clear, through, perfect sight of those
things that are discovered in the Christall-glass of the Gospel. We must look
into the perfect Law of liberty, James 2.25.

2. As the word imports an act of memory, or remembrance, it affords us this
Observation, viz. Next to our knowing of it, should be our care to retain and
remember the glorious Truths of the Gospel. It Is all one, not to remember, as
not to know; we must not only attend to Wisdoms words, but must keep them in
the center of our hearts, Prove. 4.21.

2. If you do, hence observe, It Is not enough to know and remember, but we
ought to do according to what we know, and practice according to what we
remember. It Is some slight kind of happiness to know, but so to know, as to do,
this is the happiness; If you know, if you do. We must not only be hearers of
the word, but doers of the word. Knowledge without practice, it is Rachel like,
fair indeed, but barren; practice without knowledge (were it possible)
Leah-like, fruitful, but blear-eyed; both together, Rachel's fairness with
Leah's fruitfulness, a fit Spouse for a Solomon.

2. For the Position, Happy are you if you do them; hence observe, There is a
blessedness annexed to (...) knowing the Truths of God, as to remember, and
(...) to remember as to do the work of that word. I^ you know, if you do, not
otherwise, blessed are ye.

Thus I have cut the words in pieces. The second Observation is that I would
first commend from the supposition, If you knew, that carries in it an act of
memory; namely, That as it is our (...) care to know, so it should be our next
care to remember what we have known. To this end let me help your memories by
way of a Summary rehearsal of our Morning-Exercise. The first Sermon that was
preached to you was built upon Isa. 55.3. Hear and your soul shall live.

From that Text, this Doctrine, That that soul shall surely live, spiritually,
blessedly, eternally, that so hears, as to come to Christ himself. The grand
question upon that point was this, What is to be done that we may so hear?
'Twas answered, something was to be done before, something at, something after
hearing.

First, Before hearing; That holy duty of hearing calls aloud for holy
preparation; so much at least as settles the bent of the heart heavenward; so
much at least as makes us humble, and hunger after spiritual Manna; so much at
least as raises the heart into a posture of expectation of some divine and
spiritual good from God.

Secondly, a right demeanor in, or at hearing, which consists

First, The hearer ought to propound to himself spiritual, and right ends, and
that

1. Negatively, This must not be the hearers end, to come and judge either the
Word, or the Minister of it; nor

2. To come and hear things that will tickle his fancy, if he desire that, let
him go to those sinks of all wickedness, Play Houses; nor

3. Must we propose this our end, merely to better our parts; nor

4. Merely to know, much less merely to be known, that it should be said of
us, that we have been at the Morning-Exercise every day this month. But, our
end should be to profit by what we hear, Psalm. 119.33. We should hear that
our souls may live.

Secondly, We must labor to approve our selves true Gospel-hearers; And to
that end

1. We must be wakeful hearers; it is dangerous sleeping by a Candle set up by
God.

2. We must be Reverent hearers: in the fear of God we must worship, though
not toward, yet in his holy Temple.

3. Attentive hearers, our ears and hearts should be like Lydia's, open to
attend to those things spoken by Paul, Act. 16.14.

4. Receptive hearers: We must take in what we hear, Act. 2.41. And this must
be done with Faith, with Love, with Joy, with Delight, with Meekness, with
particular Application: and this too, not as the word of such a man, or such a
Minister; I abhor that wicked notion among you, the head of such a party, and I
know not what: But, as it is in deed and in truth the Word of God: That man
never hears as a Saint, that when he hears, does not look mostly at the Word,
as it is the Word of the God of Saints. And if thus we apply our selves to the
Ordinances truly, we are in immediate capacity to have the Glory, Spirit, and
Power of Christ to rest upon us in hearing; And this leads me to

The Second Sermon.
2 Cor. 12.9. Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that
the power of Christ may rest upon me.
FRom this Text, you had this truth, That a Christians chiefest glory under his
infirmities, is in the power of Christ resting upon him. In the prosecution of
this Point, there was these four particulars propounded to be opened and
prosecuted.

First, What kind of power of Christ it is which Christians may hope to have
experience of, notwithstanding all their infirmities? To this Question it was
thus answered; a power that Christ has with his Father, with whom he is
extraordinarily prevalent more than the fondling is with his dearest
affectionate Mother; A power of Christ's Spirit which inables us to do what God
requires, and to suffer what God commands; a powerful application of Jesus
Christ himself unto his people, and that, not only of light to them, but of
living, of spiritual growth, of spiritual strength, of strength unto Conquest,
yea to be more than Conquerours.

Secondly, What is it for the power of Christ to rest on the soul? (...), i. e.
for the power of Christ to come and take its residence in the soul; to make the
soul to be that which a Tent or Tabernacle is to him who takes up his repose
therein; to come and lodge in the soul of a Believer as in his Tent or
Tabernacle.

Thirdly, What is it for a Believer to glory in the power of Christ resting on
him? that is,

1. To have the heart so full of Christ, that it cannot contain it self, but it
must be bursting out, as it were, and running over in holy Exaltations and
Triumphs.

2. To be so much in the admiration of Christ, as that to a carnal eye it
makes a man seem to be ridiculous: what a goodly person was David in Michals
eye, when he danced before the Ark.

3. To rest on Christ so, as to look out for nothing else, etc. to terminate
and confine all the desires of the soul, in, and upon, and toward Christ Jesus.

4. To oppose Christ to any, to every thing that does in any way in the world
either injure or endanger him.

4. Why should a Christian rather glory in this power of Christ resting upon
him, than in any inherent grace that is given unto him? upon these Accounts,

1. Because all that a Christian by inherent grace is able to do himself, is
through Christ; I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me.

2. Because if there be any acceptance of what a Believer does with the Father,
this also is through Christ; the gift is accepted, not for the gift sake, but
for the sake of the merit of Christ.

3. If so be a Believer should glory in his graces, there is a possibility of
falling, but being clad with, and resting in the power of Christ, there is an
impossibility of miscarrying. Thus the Saints of God have their infirmities,
frailties, their multitude of frailties and infirmities: yet have they reason
to glory in that power of Christ which rests on them, on earth, but much more
reason if they will look up, and see the tongue of Christ engaged for them, i.
e. interceding for them in Heaven; And that lets me into

The third Sermon.
John 17.15. I pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but
that thou should keep them from the evil.
I Pray not that thou should take them out of the world, let them stay there,
and glory even in their very infirmities, but I pray that thou should keep
them from the evil. In this Scripture, you have our Saviors Intercession for
his Disciples Preservation. And in this his Intercession two things observable.

1. In the negative part, for what Christ does not pray, not that thou
should take them out of the world.

2. In the Affirmative part, that thou should keep them from the evil of the
world. For the negative part, wherein you have,

1. So (...) employed, not that thou should take them out^ (...) ^orld; This
implies that God has the disposal of (...) continuance in the world; else
Christ would never address himself to his Father, that he would not take them
out of the world: If so, then

1. Live constantly Believer, above the slavish fear of death. Times are not in
thine Enemies hands, no not in the Devils hands, but in Gods hands.

2. Be patient under the loss of thy dearest Relations: God has taken them
that has the disposal of our continuance.

3. Seek to God for a blessing on all those means which at any time are
prescribed or used for your preservation.

2. There Is something mainly intended. I pray not that thou should take them
out of the world, and that is this, That God will have his people oftentimes
continue in the world, though they meet with much trouble in the world. And if
so, this should teach you Believers, how to carry your selves in the midst of a
sinful, wicked, rude, God-hating, Saint-persecuting World, that is,

1. Patiently to wait Gods leisure, you must stay his time.

2. Carry your selves Innocently, be sure you in a salt Sea, like good fish,
retain your freshness.

3. Carry your selves Wisely, you walk among Devils, Snares, etc. walk wisely,
And

4. Walk Serviceably, continue you must, but it is Gods time, how short you know
not; therefore walk Serviceably. For the Affirmative part, but I pray that thou
should keep them from the evil of the world. Wherein something Absolutely,
and something Relatively: Take the words Absolutely, thence these four notions,
That thou should keep them from the evil.

1. Sin is an eminent evil, the (...).

2. That we are utterly unable to (...) our selves, But

3. God can keep his people, in, and from the evil of a sinful world.

4. That it is the godly only that are kept from the evil that is in the world.
But Relatively, especially, I pray, etc, No great matter of their sufferings,
but their sins, that is the thing, let them be preserved from that: Thence
observe, preservation from sin, is a far greater mercy then exemption from
suffering: And if so, Then

1. See the folly, the madness, of those, that embrace sin, to avoid suffering;
Take a stab in their hearts, that they may avoid a scratch upon their singer.

2. See the folly of those, that desire the removal of their Sufferings, rather
than of their Sins: Take away the Froggs, not my hard heart.

3. This shows what should be our greatest complaint in the midst of a
troublesome world, not my sorrows, plunderings, imprisonments, Lord, but the
scarcities of my soul, etc.

4. This shows the grand mistake of the nature of true safety. Men think safety
to be mearly to sleep in a sound skin, but it is not safety to be preserved from
danger, but from Sin. True, the men of the world, yea, the best of Saints are
too too apt to mistake in this case; there is a heart within them that is very
apt to think sometimes Sinning to be chosen rather then Suffering; not in
wicked men only, but in the best of men: for, as in water face answers to
face, so the heart of man, to man, which lets me into

The fourth Sermon.
Prove. 27.19. As in Water, face answers to face, so does the heart of man to
man.
IN this Proverb two things.

1. The Proposition, and that by a Similitude. As in water face answers to
face.

2. The Redition, So does the heart of a man to man. Or in the words, these two
generals to be observed.

1. A Glass.

2. An Object to be seen in this Glass.

1. A Glass, a notable one, that is two fold. A dead Glass, Water; A living
Glass, the Heart of Man.

2. The Object to be seen in these Glasses: In the dead Glass, the face of man
is to be seen; In the living Glass, the heart of man; There Is all the Species
and Complections, of the Sons, nay, of the Souls of the Sons of men to be
seen. That as by looking into the water, you may discern your own and other
men's Countenances, and that plainly and clearly; So, by looking into your own
hearts, if you could have a Casement into the hearts of other men, there may
you see, of what Spiritual Complexion, Constitution, and Make you are, as
clearly as a man may see his face in Water. As in Water, etc. From these words
this great Truth, that the heart of every man in the world is a looking-Glass.
It Is such a looking-Glass wherein he may see himself, his Condition,
Constitution, special Complexion whether it be morally, spiritually,
scripturally good or evil. For the right improvement of this looking-Glass,
three things necessary; which are optic principles but clear to those that
have either phisical or natural light.

1. There must be an Object that must be seen. And oh! what visible objects
are there in the hearts of men? Man is called a little world, a compendium of
the whole world. The heart of man is the man. The heart of man is like the Ark
of Noah, which contains all sorts, all kinds of clean and unclean Beasts: It Is
an Epitomy of Heaven and Hell: What is there in the heart of man? Who but God
can fathom the depth of it? There are more objects in the hearts of men, then
Stars in Heaven, or drops in the Ocean.

2. There must be light to actuate this object; If it were dark, we could never
see it. There must be light both to actuate the eye and object; Now this light
that actuates the eye and object, it is either the natural light, the light of
Nature, the light of Conscience, the light of common Illumination, the light of
the Word, or the light of the Spirit of God: By all these lights we come to
look into this looking-glass, our hearts.

3. There must be an Irradiation from the object, i. e. a beaming forth from
that object, some Species or Ideas that carries the object to the eye, and
clearly makes out to the sense what that object is: this beaming is by action
from the heart (mark it, for it may be as necessary truth as was Preached among
you) that look what the stream is to the Fountain, what the beam is to the Sun,
that the action is to the heart, whether the act be manent, or transient,
whether Internal in thought, purpose, election, affection, in joy, in love, in
fear; or External, in the life, in the practice, and in the conversation: So
that look as a puddle stream always declares a corrupt Fountain; So all your
humble holy, faithful thoughts, speak a clear spiritual heart within, a holy
Conversation speaks a holy Affection, and a holy Affection, declares a heavenly
Constitution, a new Nature. Now for the Use of this, is the heart of man a
looking-Glass?

1. See from hence, of what concernment the actions of men are, whether
Internal or External: The actions of men are like the streams, you may
certainly find the Fountain by them, they speak the heart, as the Root bears
the fruit: It Is of infinite concernment, it is the Fountain of what principles
within, and conversation without: descend but into thy own heart, etc.

2. This shows the sad condition of all natural poor souls, your hearts are
looking-Glasses, but they are looking-Glasses in a Dungeon of darkness, there
be Toads, Vipers, and Devils there, but thou can not see them, that have no
spiritual Light.

4. Here is Consolation to Gods People; Is the heart of man a looking-Glass?
What reason have they to rejoice in their hearts, that are the best
looking-Glasses in the world, not like our Gallants looking-Glasses that must
not bewray their wrinkles, sports, etc. But theirs will represent their Hearts,
Complexion, Condition, and Nature to them Nay, in that Glass may be seen the
face of a God: Nay further, because thy heart does answer to another heart, and
his to his, what ever Grace in any Believers, it is there in thy heart, semine
there is the seed.

4. By way of exhortation; Is the heart a looking-Glass, then keep the
looking-Glass very chary, make much of it; above all keepings keep thy heart,
and that with all diligence, in all places, at all times, and in all things; If
any thing under Heaven will keep thee holy, it is the keeping of thy heart.
There thou may see all thy spots, defects, desperate Hipocrisies, Infernal
Atheism, all the deliques of thy Soul: How prone to commit, as vile sins as
ever committed by the vilest of the sons of men; once more, keep it clean, and
keep it close: Look into thy heart, and thou shall find it to be a Copy of
the Role of Eternity, where thou shall see thy very name written in Letters of
Gold or Blood: for we looking into our hearts, may and do know, that we are
passed from death to live, and that upon this ground, because we love the
Brethren. And thus I advance to

The Fifth Sermon.
1 John 3.14. We know that we have passed fr^^ death to life, because we love
the Brethren.
IN these words five things.

1. A supposed Estate, in which we are all by nature, and that is an Estate of
death spiritual.

2. A peaceable Recovery, or mention of another state, an Estate of life.

3. A real Transition from this state of death to life, we are passed, etc.

4. An inseparable property of all Regenerate souls in the world, they do not
hate, but love the Brethren.

5. A comfortable Conclusion, that a Christian may make, from that property, he
may know, he may be assured by this, that he is passed from death to life,
because he loves the Brethren. The observation thus, a Christian may know his
real Conversion and Transition to eternal life, by this Character among the
rest, because he loves the Brethren. This proposition was slipped into these two
particulars.

1. That every Believer may have an assurance of his Transition from death to
life.

2. That love to the Brethren is one of the great eminent Symptoms of man's
Regeneration.

1. A Christian may know his real Conversion, and Translation to eternal life;
Such a great and real change is there wrought in every Believer at his
Conversion, and this wrought by such a great efficient, and infinite cause, the
Spirit of God, and this cause, working by such real and powerful means and
instruments, the great Word of God; and this done notwithstanding the great
opposition that is made by a poor sinner against the word; and when wrought it
has such real and grand, effects upon a Believer, that it is impossible but a
Believer must needs know this his transition from death to life.

Secondly, Love to the Brethren is the great symptom of men's Regeneration.
Love to the Brethren, not taken solely, singly, as if this was the only
Character, but concomitantly, taken with others, but beyond and above all
others; this is the privy seal of God on the soul, if ye have inflamed it with
love, he may know he is passed from death to life. The Use was of Confutation
of the Papists, those grand enemies to Gospel Truths, and Believers peace. They
abhor this Doctrine of Assurance, by it, their Purgatory would fall down, their
Popes Kitchen would grow cold. They tell us, Believers cannot attain Assurance
in this world; no.

1. Why has God commanded us to make our Calling and Election sure? and will
God command impossibilities, such as cannot be wrought by our, or his own power?

2. Other Saints have attained this Assurance, this New Name, and White Stone
within them.

Obj. That Is by extraordinary Revelation.

Answ. This is not upon proof: was not the Assurance of Gods people in
Scripture grounded upon general promises? Had they (many of them) either
extrinsecal signs or marks to assure them of it? did it not spring from
principles common to all Believers?

Obj. But suppose they have Assurance to day, they may lose it to morrow; man
is a mutable creature, he may be a Child of God in the morning, and a brat of
Hell in the evening.

Answ. It Is true, man is a mutable creature, yet is he preserved by an
immutable God: man is a weak creature, but yet is preserved by the power of God
unto salvation: man, as a Creature, is no less mutable in Heaven, than upon
Earth, there preserved by God, therefore why not here?

Obj. This is a doctrine that tends to looseness.

Answ. Not so, it did not work looseness in Paul, Job, etc. I labor more than
they all. Nothing under Heaven so sovereign to stave off, and preserve from
lust, as the assurance of Gods love to the soul. Such assurance comes from the
highest act of faith; and one of the great things of Faith, is, to purify the
heart and life. Such an Assurance must needs constrain the soul: The love of
Christ constraint^is. Nay, so far is it from inclining to looseness, that it
casts the soul upon its knees, lifts up the souls hands, sends him to Heaven
continually, constantly; arms it. with petitions, resolutions never to let the
Lord of Heaven and Earth alone, gives him no rest, begging of him as for other
things, so especially for this, Lord, as thou art pleased to give me the
privilege of enjoying promises, so, give me the power to perform duty. Thus,
says he, thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. And so I am come as
far as

The Sixth Sermon.
Matthew. 6.10. Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven.
THere is a twofold Will of God.

1. Preceptive, to be done by us.

2. Providential, to be done upon us. The Minister carried the words in the
last sense, the will of God be done upon us; hence 'twas observed, Gods
Children must not only do, but submit to their heavenly Fathers providential
will: They must not only do his will, the will of his precepts, but they must
submit to his will, the will of his providence. Let God do what he will, they
must lay down their head upon the block, and with patience and resignation,
say, Thy will be done. There are two grand Instances wherein Saints ought to
show this submission.

First, When God deprives them of spiritual privileges and enjoyments, they
must submit now, they must not murmr then, and that upon these considerations.

1. Suppose a deprivation of public Ordinances, yet the holy Scriptures are
left.

2. The holy Spirit too, that shall bring home the Scriptures to the conscience.

3. There are old experiences of former love to live upon.

4. Yet none can detain or debar us from making secret addresses unto God.

5. It Is a most noble thing, it becomes a Christian exceedingly, to live upon
pulse, yet thrive.

6. By the want of such public Ordinances God thinks fit to convince his
people of their folly, in sinning away the Gospel.

Secondly, When the Lord makes a breach upon our temporal comforts and estates;
now for submission, and that upon these accounts.

1. Come what will come, yet no strange thing is, or can happen to us, no
temptation but what is common to man.

2. With what comely submission have those old Believers behaved themselves to
the will of God; Eliah, Job, Samuel, Daniel, and the Captain of our salvation?
our blessed Savior, not my will, but thy will be done.

3. There Is a glorious day coming, when God will unriddle all his dark
providence, and show you that there is love in the bowels of them.

4. God has made a breach upon some of thy comforts, how many comforts has
he yet left thee?

5. Thou art now deprived of thy comforts thou have enjoyed twenty years, thou
have reason to be thankful it was continued so long, and not to murmr that
'twas taken away now.

6. Thou have some goods, the best of goods; there is no plundring a man of his
grace, no putting of him out of Gods favor.

7. God does thee a kindness in this; were it good for thee, it should be
continued to thee; He withholds no good thing, he takes away nothing but
what is evil, or would be so; this life is a transitory vapor, and had thou
enjoyed it, thou could not long.

8. Compare thy self with thy self, and others; the other day thou was a
pitiful poor brat, and what shall thou be? compare thy self with others; we
are low, how many thousands far beneath us?

9. All outward things are not properly, formally, good or evil; as we fancy
them to be good or evil, so they are; they are but fancies.

Use, Labor after this submissive frame of Spirit; get but this, and this will
evidence, that though he frowns, yet he favors thee, this will make thy
Faith appear to be a glorious Faith; it will show that the Kingdom of God is
not only come to thee, but in thee, and rules in thy heart to that end. But
what shall I do to submit?

1. Let not a day of adversity take thee unawares.

2. Do not overvalue thy self, do not think too great of thy self, that the
wind must not blow onthee.

3. Retract the superlative of thy desires, do not look at so much, as what is
necessary.

4. Design nothing as thy main end, and business, but the honor and glory of
God; mind but his honor, and let him alone, to take care of thy external
Comforts; Believer, who art so much in his heart. in his book, in his soul,
that he numbers the very hairs of thy head: And thus we fall upon

The Seventh Sermon.
Matthew. 10.30. But the very hairs of your head are all numbered.
FRom this Text you had this great Conclusion, The special and distinct
providence of God, extending to the smallest things and creatures, and in a
special manner to the smallest Concernments of Believers, is a great Argument
to remove their fears, and inordinate cares, and to quiet and confirm their
souls in confidence upon God. The very hairs of, etc. Is it so? then

1. We have no reason to repine at wicked men when they prosper; let them
ruffle, puff, throw, and swear, what then? they will cut off the head, no, they
cannot touch a hair.

2. Be not overmuch troubled with any particulat changes or passages in the
world; they are all managed by a particular and distinct providence.

3. Fear not man slavishly, this use our Savior makes of it.

4. This rebukes our inordinate and distracting cares; thou art mighty
inquisitive, what shall I eat? what shall I drink? wherewithal shall I be
clothed? Friend, thy hairs are numbered, content thy self, God will take care,
etc.

5. In all passages of the world, observe and acknowledge not only a general,
but be sure to observe a particular providence: and then conclude,

1. That nothing shall befall thee for want of faithfulness, sufficiency,
knowledge, love in God.

2. Nothing shall come unto thee, that shall in the least damnifie or injure
thee.

3. That all the plots, designs, contrivances, attempts of the Devil, and all
his party against Gods Church, are all under a providence, they are all
numbered. All the hours of thy sufferings, all thy tears, fears, griefs, pains,
wants, every one numbered. Thou tells the clock at midnight under thy pains, and
God tells thy pains more than thou the clock; nay more, the hairs of thy head
are numbered, therefore, not the meanest Believer in the greatest crowd is
over-looked by God. And then, all thy worldly concernments, thy relations,
diseases, etc. are all numbered. Nay more, remember this Believer, all thy
distrusts, disquiets, murmurings, dispondences, the meanest lust unseen, and
the most secret sin, are all numbered.

6. Are our hairs numbered? this is sad news for unbeleevers? are your hairs
numbered? then certainly your oaths, curses, contempts of Gods people, all your
sinful thoughts, words, actions, wilful omissions of commanded duties,
commissions of forbidden sins, all your disputings against God, his People, his
Word, Ways, Will, are all upon the file, they are all numbered.

7. What an encouragement is there here for poor sinners to come in to God. Do
but come in to God, and thou shall come into such a condition of safety, that
thy very hairs shall be all numbered; and if thou will not come in, certainly
thou are wanting to thy self; for, look as well as thou can to thy self, thou
have not a promise to keep one hair of thy head till to morrow morning; not a
promise of a sup of water, bit of bread; not a promise for one minutes safety,
till to morrow morning; And if so be that thou have not a God, no interest in
him, if God should turn his back on thee, a thousand to one but afflictions
come; and if afflictions come, thy heart's gone, thou having no spiritual
strength in heart, no eternal Rock of Ages to fly to, no wonder if thou faint
under them, and so thou will certainly do; if a Believer that has but little
strength, is apt to faint, thou that have no strength will utterly fall, when
afflictions finds thee. And this leads to

The Eighth Sermon.
Prove. 24.10. If thou faint in the day of Adversity, thy strength is small. THe
Observation from hence, was, To faint in the day of trouble argues a man's
inward strength to be but small. His judgment weak, his reason low, his graces
feeble, his inward comfort, peace, and joy not much, but very little. This

1. Shows whence our mis-givings of heart, whence our want of liveliness of
Spirit in and under troubles proceed, even from hence, that our strength is but
small.

2. Teaches us how to judge what our spiritual strength is; namely, this way,
how do thou bear afflictions? how is it with thee in a day of distress? do
thou faint, and fail, it argues thy strength is but small.

3. By way of dehortation; do not thou faint in the day of affliction, of
adversity. Take heed of fainting in three things.

1. Under work or duty, be it never so great, grievous, troublesome, or
dangerous.

2. Under the with-holdings of mercy, be they never so long detained.

3. Under afflictions, be they, or may they be never so grievous; whether

1. Public Afflictions, the afflictions of the Church of God: Suppose Sion is
now clad in Sackcloth, there is a time coming when she shall be arrayed in
Scarlet: when the Whores Scarlet shall be turned into Rags, the Churches Rags
shall be turned into Gold. Or,

2. Personal Afflictions, faint not under them, be it this, or that, or the
other, be they never so great, never so long, or never so many. But, what shall
I do to bear up my spirit, and to preserve me from fainting?

1. Live in the holy dependence, and filial fear of the great God: he that
fears God most, to be sure will faint least.

2. Strengthen grace; there are two graces to be strengthened, viz. Strengthen
Faith, I had fainted unless I had believed, etc. Strengthen Patience: dejection
of soul usually comes from impatience.

3. Be much in prayer: Is any man afflicted, let him (not go and sinfully
snivil and complain, but let him) pray.

4. Make use of heart-strengthening considerations; and that is,

1. Turn over the Promises; they are left on purpose as Gods Bottle, his Vial
of Cordials to keep the soul from fainting.

2. What ever befalls, remember it proceeds from Gods love.

3. All that God aims at, is, to do thee good.

4. Be the affliction never so great, it is as necessary as prosperity, as
health: this thy Physic, is as necessary as thy food.

5. The issue of all, a Crown of glory: These light afflictions which are but
for a moment, works out for us a far more excellent and eternal weight of
glory. And therefore, if so be there be such principles from which afflictions
flow, and such ends to which they are managed; it is no wonder Christ will not
pray that we may be taken out of the world, from Affliction, but kept in this
world, from the evil: So we fall on

The Ninth Sermon.
John 17.15. I pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but
that thou should keep them from the evil.
GOd has spoken once, yea twice have I heard this, that power belongs unto
God. When God is pleased to strike twice upon the same string, it seems he
has something more than ordinary mind, that you should observe the Tune. The
Doctrine was, That it is the Will of Jesus Christ, that his Servants should
continue in the world, though they meet with nothing but trouble in the world.
I pray not that thou should take them out of the world; let them stay Lord,
be thou but their Pilot, and then keep them at Sea as long as thou will. God
knows his Saints are very serviceable in their generation: They are, as it
were, a pillar of fire unto the rest of the world, for guide, and light; by
their doctrine and conversation they instruct the godly, and convince the
wicked: God will have his people stay in the world, that his power, providence,
mercy, and goodness in their preservation may more clearly be discovered; that
their afflictions here may work out for them an eternal weight of glory: These
are the reasons why God will have them stay in the world, etc. Then

1. Saints carry your selves as becomes such in midst of such a world, with
that wisdom, faithfulness, carefulness, humility, that may bring honor both
to your selves, and to your profession: Walk as Lights in the midst of a
crooked and perverse generation; walk closely, warily, innocently, patiently,
submissively, etc. all these are necessary while you are to converse here in
this wicked world.

2. ^^^m that truth, But that thou should keep them from the evil; observe,
preservation from sin is a greater mercy than exemption from suffering. Which
1. Informs us of a truth that carnal men will never believe till they come to
Hell, that that is the height of folly, which the men of the world count to be
the top of wisdom; they think it wisdom, to choose sin, rather than suffering.
2. This will evidence that the people of God are not such fools as the men of
the world think they are, but the wisest, that will choose the greatest
sufferings rather than the least sin. 3. This reproves those that will take
more care to have their afflictions removed, than sanctified. 4. Be more afraid
of sinning, and less afraid of suffering: what, afraid of a lash, my child,
no, be more afraid of a dis-inheritance; look on sufferings with Scripture
Spectacles; Labor for integrity and uprightness of heart, that preserves when
falling: Be watchful over thy thoughts and ways: Be a resolved Christian, if
thou be not, thou will turn an Apostatizing Christian: You must set your faces
as thorns, resolution is absolutely necessary, not only under, but before a
day of suffering: Be resolved for God, and be resolved against Sin, and that
for fear, least in a day of suffering thou should halt and founder, and so
lose the things which thou have wrought: which brings me to

The Tenth Sermon.
2 John 8. Look to your selves, that we lose not those things which we have
wrought, but that we receive a full Reward.
IN these words you have a Warning-Peice discharged to an Elect Lady, A serious
Item to an Elect Lady and her Religious Family, to look well to themselves that
they lose not the things they had wrought. And this is grounded on a double
reason.

1. From the Damage of such as begin well and hold not out, They lose the
things they have wrought. That were sad, that so much should be done, and all
should be lost at last.

2. From the Advantage and benefit if we do go on, then we shall receive a full
reward. The observation was, It much concerns all those, that have begun well,
that are looked upon by Ministers, and those that are godly, as if they were
truly godly, that have entertained the Truth and the Profession of the Truth,
to look well to it how they stand, to continue, to go on, to hold out in their
holy Profession and Conversation. Look to your self you Elect Lady, you her
Religious Family look to your selves, that you lose not the things you have
wrought. There Is all the reason in the world it should be so; The Election of
Believers ingages us it should be so, we are chosen that we should be so; If
we do not look well to our selves we may chance to lose all we have wrought. It
too too often falls out that after a hot fit of Profession, there comes a cold
fit of Apostasy, this cold fit of Apostasy caused by a sharp wind of
Persecution, or by a melting, thawing Sun of prosperity; either by our natural
inconstancy and mutability within, (we love new changes, we love to be
changable) or else the subtilty of Seducers from without. Again, there has
been, are, and will come trying seasons; were you never so sincere, think not
all the work over and done as soon as converted; As soon as come out of Egypt
there is a Wilderness and Red Sea to pass thorough, Mideanitish Women, Giants,
etc. to contest with: Therefore no wonder he writes, look to your self. Then

1. Here see Election shuts not out the use of means: You are an Elect Lady,
yet look to your self.

2. You scandalous Papists, the Doctrine of Perseverance we Preach, is no
Mother of sloth and security: Though you shall be saved, yet look to your
selves: you shall not perish, yet keep in the Ship.

3. Orthodoxness of Faith and soundness of Profession is not enough to make a
good Christian: Elect Lady, you make profession you are sanctified, but you
must look to your self.

4. It is not enough to have a well ordered Family, Oh Lady! look to your self
as well as to your Family.

5. The business of Religion is not the work of one day: As long as you have
life, look to your self.

2. For Exhortation; Look to your selves, take heed of Apostasy; Take heed of
that which occasions cold fits, after a cold fit comes a death fit, as after a
hot fit usually comes a cold fit. Apostasy is the quartern Ague of the Soul, if
it be not death it is extreme dangerous.

3. By way of Direction; Would you look to your selves? Look up to God, beg to
be strengthened with all might in the inner man: that he who has begun a good
work, would be pleased to finish it. To that end, Lord give strength while in
begging, and begging hearts, for continuance of that strengthening Ordinance
amongst us, that it may be never said as it was said of those precious
Israelites, the Word of the Lord was precious in those days, there was no open
Vision. Which leads me to

The Eleventh Sermon.
1 Samuel 3.1. The Word of the Lord was precious in those days, there was no
open Vision.
THe Word of the Lord was precious in those days? Was it not always precious?
Yes, but there is a twofold preciousness.

1. Of Worth and Excellency.

2. Of Want and Scarcity. The Word of the Lord had not been so precious to the
Israelites, in regard of its Worth and Excellency, therefore God made it
precious to them in regard of its Want and Scarcity. There was no open Vision.
Hence observe,

1. There has been, there may be such a day overtake a Church and People of
God, wherein the Word of God may be precious, that is, may be Scarce, Rare, and
hard to come by.

2. It Is most just with God to teach them how to prize the Word by the want of
it, that know not how to prize the Word of God by the worth of it. The Use was
for Direction, what to be done to prevent this judgment of a Scarcity and
Famine of the Word of God? 1. Learn to prize the Word by the worth of it. 2.
Improve the Word as to the fruit of it. 3. Adorn the Word in your lives and
conversations. 4. Be earnest with God in public and private for the blessed
continuance of that Word. Learn to prize the Word by the worth of it? We do
prize the Word, etc. Do you prize the Word in truth? Then

1. What has meant that horrible, wicked, general contempt of the Word of God,
and Ministers of that Word through the Land, though (blessed be God) they have
not taken the vilest of the people, and made them Priests, yet the best of
Ministers, have been esteemed as the worst and vilest of people? 2 What means
the want of the Word Read, Repeated, Looked into? 3. What means that general
disobedience to the Word? 4. Why are you so ready to sell the Truth, far more
ready than to buy it? 5. What means that easy forsaking of the blessed Truths
of the Gospel? That a Popish Jesuit, cannot come and vent one of his wicked
opinions, but presently let it be vomited, it must be sucked up by one or
other? 6. What means the having of the Faith of Christ in so much respect of
Persons, as has been here amongst us? judge our selves then for what is past,
and for the future learn to prize the Word according to its worth, consider
what an admirable excellent thing this Word of God is, and that may be known,

1. By the metaphors unto which it is resembled in Scripture, which speaks
either its profit, pleasure, usefulness, or necessity: Thy Word is a light to
my feet, what more precious than light, without which the world were but one
great Dungeon, etc. It Is compared to Bread, Manna, Food, Water, Precious
Stones, Rain, etc. Nay, it is more necessary: As they formerly, we can better be
without the Sun, then without Chrysostom: Love for God makes us sensibly to
say, we can as well be without fire or water, as without the Word of God. And
it is the more excellent because compared to those things: what they are
naturally, it is spiritually so, it is spiritual Bread, spiritual Water,
spiritual Pearl, etc. 2. By its precious Properties and operations. There is a
Scripture to me tastes like honey in my mouth. Psalm. 19.7, 8, 9. Where the
Word is discovered by its properties and operations. The Law of the Lord is
perfect, converting the Soul, the Testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise
the simple, the Statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart; The
Commadements of the Lord is pure, Inlightning the eyes; The fear of the Lord is
clean, enduring for ever. The Judgments of the Lord are true and Righteous
altogether. What, are these the Metaphors to which the Word is compared? Are
these the Properties and Operations of the Word? No wonder then Job sets such a
high valuation upon them as he does, in our

Twelfth Sermon.
Job 23.12 I have esteemed the Words of his mouth more then my necessary
food./hi
IN these words you have the matter and the measure of Job's valuation.

1. The matter of Job's valuation, i.e. The words, all the words of his mouth,
precepts as well as promises, threatenings and directions, as well as promises
and privileges. 2. The measure of his valuation, as his food, as his necessary
food; nay, more than his necessary food. Hence this truth was raised; The
Ordinances of God are exceeding precious to all truly Religious persons: All
the Ordinances of God, and amongst them, his Word, which is not the least part
of his Worship: This appears 1. From their desires after the Ordinances; My
soul pants, longs after, etc. 2. From their hearty content and satisfaction
in them. 3. From their bitter lamentation under the want of them. 4. From their
diligent endeavors to enjoy them.

Religious persons really understand their worth and want of them: They know
the Ordinances of God to be the food, the spiritual fodder of the soul: The
walks of God, where God is pleased to take his Turns; The Instruments of Divine
Glory. The Legacy of Christians; their Christian Armor and Acoutrements, to
contest with Sin, Satan, the World; and, as Stars that lead to Bethlehem, no
wonder the Ordinances are so precious in the esteem of all truly Religious.
Then 1. Know your privilege, yet you enjoy Ordinances. 2. Lament the sad
condition of those poor titular Christians on the one hand, that have
Ordinances, but enjoy them not; they know not the worth of them. And true
Christians on the other hand, from whom the Ordinances are gone, and whether
ever they will return they know not. 3. This reproves those to whom they are
not precious. But, how shall I know the Ordinances are precious to me? Answer,
If thou carries thy self toward them, as toward what thou look on as
precious: tell me, 1. Art thou greedy of all opportunities of enjoying them?
2. Heartily troubled when hindered of enjoying them? 3. Have thou a dear
respect of those that help thee to the enjoyment of them? 2. By way of
Conviction to those mad men that tell us of being above, i. e. without
Ordinances: what, was it ever heard of any of Gods Saints in Scripture that
ever they said they were above Ordinances? 3. For instruction to Christians: It
will be seasonable to consider what you ought to do if God should deprive you
of Ordinances: He did not say, it is probable, but such a thing is possible;
therefore make provision, lay in provision beforehand, provision of Knowledge,
of Grace, of Comfort, of Light against a day of darkness. And if it should
come, here is counsel given to us, and Consolation laid before us.

1. Counsel given us, if ever it should be. 1. Lament, bewail, mourn over the
Lords absence; weep till you can weep no longer. 2. Seek after, pursue them;
let them go where they will, be sure follow thou the Ordinances. 3. Be more
frequent and serious in the use of private Ordinances. 4. Frequently reflect
back on thy former enjoyments; oh the House, the Tabernacle of God, etc. And
reflect 1. To excite your thankfulness to God, that ever you did enjoy them. 2.
To suck strength from the Ordinances; to chew the cud, and get strength of
them. 3. For humiliation; for sinning away, and provoking God to take them away.

2. For Consolation, that the people of God may not utterly fail; then 1. Know
in such a condition, that though your condition be exceeding bad, yet better
than many thousands, they never had Ordinances. 2. God is able in such a case
to support without Ordinances: when he calls into the Wilderness, he can
carry along without Circumcision. 3. Remember those that have had them, but not
now, what is become of Sion? of the Church of, etc. 4. Your salvation may be
carried on without Ordinances. 5. There Is a time coming when you shall have no
need of Ordinances. In the mean time, if you cannot get up to the Ark of God,
take heed of bowing to the Calves at Dan and Bethel: If you cannot serve the
God of Israel, take heed you serve not the Gods of the Amorites. What you will
do I know not, be sure Joshna would not, choose you (says he) this day whom
you will serve; whether the Gods which your Fathers served, that were on the
other side of the flood, or the Gods of the Amorites, in whose Land ye dwell:
But as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord: which brings me to

The Thirteenth Sermon.
Josh. 24.15. As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord.
IN the words two things. 1. An indefatigable Retortation; Take your own
choice, follow your own discretion: If you will go and bow down to a dumb Idol,
to a Captive God, etc. 2. An admirable Dehortation: we are at a pitch, we are
resolved, and if there be any Attractive in me, or my family, you have it in
this, I and my household, we will serve the Lord. The Observations were,

1. Pious Governors of families are very zealous that their families, as well
as themselves, should serve the Lord. Never hope of thriving in godliness, till
you bring your Families right for God, to be of the same Religion with your
selves.

2. A true sincere Christian is resolved to choose and follow God, what ever
else the world choose and follow. 1. Sincere Christians have much more
satisfaction in the judgment and practice of God, his Word, Saints, than in
the judgment and practice of the World: He knows their judgment to be
depraved, their choice and practice corrupt, their end and conclusion worst of
all; therefore no wonder he makes a better choice. 2. They have the best
Testimony in the world for their choice, the Spirit and Son of God, that this
is their choice; therefore no wonder, etc. But how do they choose God? Answer,
they choose God as the object of their souls love, as the chiefest of ten
thousand, as the lot of their inheritance, as the companion of their souls, to
converse with him, as the Commander of their ways, to be guided by him, as a
shelter of their hearts, as a refuge to fly unto in the time of danger.

The first Use was by way of Examination; is God chosen as the chief object of
our souls love? can we truly say, there is none in Heaven but thee, none upon
Earth I can desire besides, or in comparison of thee? Can we say in having a
God, the lines are fallen unto me in a pleasant place, yea I have a goodly
heritage? Is communion with God our Heaven upon Earth? Is God the Commander of
our ways, as well as we hope to be the Savior of our souls? Is God our
shield, our buckler, our retreat in danger?

The second Use was by way of Consolation: Believers, have you made choice of
God? Happy are the people that are in such a case; thou have the best assurance
in the world, to come to the best possession in this world, peace, and joy;
Peace without, if not Peace within: And Joy, the best Joy in the world, Joy
unspeakable and full of glory. And truly, if so be that this be thy portion, in
having chosen God, it is no wonder thou do not Apostatize from him: It Is no
wonder that what ever comes upon a Believer, yet for that his heart is not
turned back, neither his steps declined from Gods way. And this leads to

The Fourteenth Sermon.
Psalm 44.18. Our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined
from thy way.
FRom these words two Observations.

1. In times of sufferings and afflictions; true Christians are to make a
narrow inspection into their hearts, to see how they stand affected. Thus did
the Church here.

2. To keep steadfast and close with God, notwithstanding all afflictions and
sufferings we undergo, either from, or for God, is the duty and commendation
of Saints. 'Twas our duty, and it is our honor, Lord, etc. In prosecution of
this point, these seven preliminary Thesis was laid down.

1. When man was first created, his heart stood rightly bent toward God, as
his great center and mark.

2. When man fell, his heart immediately drew off, and turned back from God.

3. Though this be the case of fallen man, yet poor creature, he sees it not.

4. The very Formalis Ratio of sin, that wherein the formality of sin consists,
is in this, not so much in sinning against God, by outward Acts, as in the
hearts departing from God.

5. All true Conversion to God begins at the heart.

6. It Is an argument of infinite love in God to bring back our hearts to him.

7. When once the heart of a Believer is brought back to God, no suffering or
affliction is able to turn that heart from him.

Quest. When may a man's heart be said not to be turned back, notwithstanding
all sufferings and afflictions?

Answ. 1. When a man still retains the same esteem and estimate of God that
ever he had. When Job looks upon God as a God fit to be blessed, though God be
plundering of him.

2. When a man retains still the same affections, the same love to him, delight
in him, fear of him, as much as ever.

3. When we hope and trust in God as much as ever: Though he kill me, yet
will I trust in him.

4. When we have the same resolutions to cleave to God as ever. If a God in
Israel, as long as a God in Israel; it is all one, makes not to the Gods of the
Philistines; this is for a man's heart not to be turned back from God. By way of
Use,

1. Learn, the heart of man is very apt to turn from God in days of
affliction: our heart is not, though their's were.

2. It concerns us in time of affliction and suffering, to see if our hearts be
not turned back from God. But, what means shall I use that I may not turn a
base Apostate?

Answ. 1. Be watchful over your hearts: they are exceeding slippery and
deceitful. The veryest Thieves in the World.

2. Be still bending of your hearts from the world and the flesh, unto God: As
you bend a crooked stick to make it straight.

3. Do not only bend but bind your hearts, tie them, shackle them, as you
would one that has broken Prison, by holy, serious, scriptural, necessary vows.

4. Converse much with God: That man that converses much with God, it is not
the frowns of men shall bring his heart off from God. To spur you on to this
duty with these motives.

1. If you turn from God, the Soul of God will turn from you: If any man draw
back, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him.

2. Keep close to God in such a time, and God will keep close to you. Here Is a
people, that not all their sufferings could make them fall from me. God
glories in such a people.

3. This will be one of the greatest comforts by way of Argument of your
sincerity, that your hearts is upright with God. This will make an Hezekiah
look up to God in time of sickness, with a Lord remember now how I have walked
before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart.

4. If you will not run from God by way of Apostasy, you may run to God and
find him a Sanctuary; and so you have it in

The Fifteenth Sermon.
Isa. 8.14. He shall be for a Sanctuary.
THe words are an allusion to a City of refuge and from hence this Observation,
Jesus Christ will be for a sure refuge to all those that make him their fear
and dread. And the truth is, there is the greatest reason in the world Christ
should be so, Saints stand in greatest need of this Sanctuary; They are a poor
weak, helpless, generation of Creatures, but they have a Rock of refuge; The
Conies are but a feeble folk, yet make they their houses in the Rocks: Christ
bears dearest love to them: They are most precious to him: They are his Jewels,
what will a man preserve, if he will not preserve his Jewels? Will Christ be a
Sanctuary? Then 1. See the true reason why the Saints of God are of such an
heroic Spirit, even when troubles look them in their faces, and ring in their
ears, they have a God to fly to, a Christ to rest on. 2. See the reason of
that consternation of Spirit that seises on wicked men in times of trouble.
Hide me from the wrath of the Lamb, why? They have no refuge to go to, and how
ever it is with them now, you shall hear nothing but howling and lamenting,
when God shall come to avenge the blood of his Saints. 3. Be exhorted to make
Christ your Sanctuary get into this City of Refuge, and for motives consider,
1. Your absolute need of a Sanctury: You are at the power of the world, in the
paw of the Devil, in the mouth of danger, in the mouth of Hell. 2. All other
things in the world are not sufficient to become a Sanctuary; You may run to
the Rocks, but they cannot hide you, you may make an arm of flesh your
strength, but it will prove an Egyptian Reed, and run into your hands, you may
make Riches your refuge, The rich man's wealth is his strong Tower, but rather,
it is a Castle in the Air, you may make honors your refuge, etc. All things
unable to be your Sanctuary. 3. Consider what a large, free, present, well
furnished, unchangeable Refuge and Sanctuary Christ is: There are many, nay,
all things in Christ, in which a poor soul may take Sanctuary: Do thou want
Righteousness? He is the righteous one: Do thou want Sanctification, Wisdom,
Redemption? He is all; in him, Refuge and Sanctuary may thou take, in his
Providence for thy Protection, in his Offices for thy Salvation, in his
Promises for thy Consolation; and amongst the rest, that which is like the
Dyamond in the Ring, see that great promise in

The Sixteenth Sermon.
Rev. 2.17. To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the Hidden manna.
TO him that overcomes i. e. Not that has by one, two or more acts Conquered:
But to him that overcomes, that has, and does, and is overcoming still, that
goes on Conquering and to Conquer.

2. To him that overcomes, thus, and this way, and this enemy, this greatest
enemy that God has, Truth has in the world, Antichrist especially, that keeps
my Truths inviolable, that in a Scriptural way opposes that greatest enemy I
have, and opposes him to a Conquest. To him that overcomes, that goes on to
overcome, that thus overcomes. Hence this observation; Believers are all a
Generation of Conquerours; all Conquerours; They are all like the Sons of the
Kings, but some Believers are more Conquerors then others, some, that lay
Antichrist upon his back, such as out shoot the Devil in his own Bow, that
stand out against Satan's greatest Batteries, that turn his Cannon on himself,
and cut off the head of that Goliath, with his own Sword; These are something
more then Conquerers. But how comes Believers to be thus Conquerours? Ans. They
are actuated with a six fold power.

1. With ability to discern all necessary, heavenly mysteries, and this inables
them to overcome Antichrist, as he is an Erroneous, Fawning, Heretical Prophet.

2. With a power to believe all things, even such things, as though they do not
contradict, yet exceed the reach of Reason.

3. With a power to do all duties, I can do all things through Christ that
strengthens me: These Conquerours cannot do any thing against, but any thing
for the Truth.

4. With a power to suffer all things: these Conquerours are ready, not only
to be bound, but to suffer, to dye for the name of Jesus, and to conquer by
dying.

5. With a power to forsake all things; To look upon all things, as dung and
dross, that they may win Christ.

6. They have not only a power of might, but of right too, as Kings to
conquer, etc. But what means are to be used to overcome in the sense of the
Text?

Ans. 1. Study well that little Book of the Revelations, Indeed the Book of
Books, the Book of sacred Scripture, in which we have at once the sum of the
Saints duty and privilege, and of Gods Care and Providence over his Church in
the latter days of the Church, etc.

2. Concoct this Book by a practical belief of what is revealed in it: do not
think your own notions to be Divine Revelations.

3. Familiarize the Cross of Christ, by daily expectation of it, and provision
for it; do not say (as Rev. 18.7.) I sit as a Queen and shall see no sorrow.

4. Labor by a prospect of Faith to Antidate those great joys God has
prepared for those that so suffer as to conquer.

5. Buckle on the whole Armor of God, and above all, leave not out the Shield
of Faith.

6. Let your love abound higher by opposition. That becomes a Martyrs Spirit
indeed; The more the wind blows it in thy face, let that blow up more of thy
blood into thy face; Let it warm thee more etc.

7. Live not by Example but by Rule: Those that follow the most, whither go
they? Wide is the Gate, broad is the Way, that leads to Damnation, and many
there be that enter therein: The Flock of Christ is a little Flock.

8. Esteem duty above safety. As one, it is necessary Rome should be: revived;
it is not necessary I should be preserved: It Is necessary Religion should be
advanced, the power of Godliness preserved, it is not necessary I should be in
this or that condition.

9. Indulge not the least sin, else thou will never be a Conqueror: That man
that will not lay down his Lust for Christ, will never lay down his Life for
Christ. A man can never be resolved for Christ's ways without, if not resolved
against all impurity within.

10. Harden and anoint your selves with practical improvement of Christ's
sufferings, in Christ's death: There was an inestimable price to purchase our
conquest, an infinite merit to strengthen, to encourage our Conquest, an
all-sufficient virtue to cause our Conquest, a pledge of our eternal Conquest,
we are Conquerours already, we do but gather the Spoil. Make use of Christ's
death as the merit, pattern, and motive of your Conquest.

11. Laboring for sincerity.

12. Get well acquainted with Divine Attributes and Divine Promises: and such
especially as may be most suitable for your condition.

13. Abhor the Relics of Superstition: The very Nest, the very Cage of the
Bird is unclean: Not a crum of that old Leaven, 'twill sower the whole Lump:
Antichrist is hugely like the Devil, let him get in but one paw, let him but
get in his head, he will quickly get in the whole body: If you would avoid the
paw of Antichrist, avoid as much as you can the very parings of his nails.

14. Get an experimental knowledge of Gospel Truths: They are your head
Professors that turn Apostates.

15. Let this be your first and chiefest care, your first and last, to seek and
serve God: Which if you do, as all other things, so this privilege of Conquest
shall be added unto you as your Crown: Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and
the righteousness thereof, and all these things shall be added unto you: which
opens the door to

The Seventeenth sermon,
Mat. 6.33. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and all
these things shall be added unto you.
FRom this Scripture you had a Remedy against Solicitous Thoughts and Fears,
given in this Proposition, that a serious Inquiry and earnest Pursuit of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and the Righteousness thereof, is an excellent remedy
against distracting cares and fears, about Provision and safety. Seek First,
and trouble your selves no more. Seek first the Kingdom of God etc. Two
questions was proposed and answered.

1. What is it earnestly to enquire after, and seriously to pursue, the
Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness? In this Question three things included;
the Object, the Act, the Order.

1. The Object, the Kingdom of God, the Kingdom of Heaven, and its
Righteousness. The Kingdom of Heaven, that is the Kingdom of Grace, and the
Kingdom of Glory; the Kingdom of Grace, as the means to the Kingdom of
Glory: The Righteousness of this Kingdom, that is sanctification, sincere
holiness in heart and life, which is the beginning, or the way to, and a sign
or pledge of our interest in the Kingdom of Glory.

2. The Act, Seek, i. e. bestir your utmost thoughts about, your utmost time,
care, and diligence upon these things.

2. Seek, i. e. set your choicest affections upon these things.

3. Seek, i. e. strive and labor, go forth in utmost endeavors for obtaining
of these things.

3. The Order, seek first; seek it first, in respect of time, begin with God,
remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth: seek it first, with the
greatest care, acquired diligence, industry, with the greatest seriousness. The
Kingdom of God is the most necessary thing, indeed, that one thing necessary;
It Is the most excellent thing, eternal, all other things are temporal; get this
and you get all; you get above the terrors of the world. The best way to have
the things of this world sanctified, is this, seek first the Kingdom of God,
etc.

2. How is this a remedy against distracting cares and fears?

Answ. 1. It is a remedy by divertion.

2. Present things seem little, when acquainted with eternal things.

Use 1. This reproves those that observe not our Saviors direction.

1. Those that are drowned in earthly things, give them Onions and Garlic,
take the Kingdom of Heaven, and Righteousness thereof who will: Let me have
my part in Paris, what care I for Paradise.

2. Others that are for the Kingdom of God, but not for the Righteousness of
that Kingdom: they are for the end, but they do not care for the way: they
would have the fruit, but they will not climb the Tree.

3. Others that could wish they had a portion in it, but in a slight and
perfunctory way; if Heaven could be obtained with a few prayers, this they would
do, but further they will not go.

2. Is this such an excellent way to cure our carnal fears and cares? what
advantage has a child of God above all other men in the world, both in this
life, and that to come; in this life, under a watchful providence; not a hair
of his head shall perish; but chiefly the privileges of an everlasting
Kingdom: he has a bird in the bush, and in hand too: choice enjoyments in
the hand, and in hope much more, but much more above, and this hope of his
shall not make him ashamed: The vision of his appointed comforts is for an
appointed time, and it will come; will come, said I? Faith looks out, and sees
it coming already; let but Faith look to Heaven, and he sees his Judge coming,
which brings me to

The Eighteenth Sermon.
Revel. 22.12. Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me.
THe Observation from the words was this, The Lord Jesus will certainly and
speedily come to Judgment, when he shall give reward equal to every man.
These two Questions was answered.

1. In what sense Christ comes quickly?

Answ. In Gods account, with whom a thousand years are but as one day. In our
account Faith sees him coming, though sense cannot: Faith makes future things
present; it is the perspective of the soul. Believers receive part of their
reward at death, and that is quickly?

2. Why does Christ defer his coming at all?

Ans. 1. To stop the mouths of the wicked: they will not have one word to
reply, they had time and space to repent.

2. Out of his dear love he bears to his Elect; There Is many of his Elect not
yet born, and though born; not new born, now these must be born, and new born,
and brought all in, and when that time is come, then he will come.

Use 1. Will Christ come quickly, and with a reward? then certainly remember
this Atheist, it is no vain thing to serve our Lord Jesus: What profit is it if
we serve him, etc? what profit? infinite profit, there is a reward coming.

2. By way of Exhortation, will Christ come? oh then

1. Prepare for his coming; labor to be prepared by his spiritual coming into
thy heart, that is the way to be prepared for his last coming: get thy
understanding enlightened in the saving Knowledge of Christ, thy will subdued,
and brought into subjection unto Christ, thy affections renewed, spiritualized,
thy conversation such as becomes the Gospel of Christ.

2. You that have made all things ready for his coming, look out after his
coming: The Table is spread, the Trencher laid, the dinner ready, the guest not
come, oh! when will he come; I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ;
come Lord Jesus, come quickly, every Saint will echo too, Come quickly. To
every Believer it shall be a most welcome coming, he shall come with a reward
of absolution and pardon of all sin, of vindication and clearing up of all
names: Believers bodies shall not only have a Resurrection, but their good
names. It shall be a reward of Coronation, all their Crowns of Thorns shall be
turned into Crowns of Glory.

3. Is Christ coming? will he come? This should bear up Believers hearts in
and under the sufferings they fear or feel. Christ comes quickly, therefore
fear none of those things which thou shall suffer. This gives us advance into

The Nineteenth Sermon.
Rev. 2.10. Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer, behold the Devil
shall cast some of you into prison, that you may be tried, and you shall have
tribulation ten days: be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a
Crown of Life.
WHence observe, 1. The people of God must suffer. Through tribulation, through
many tribulations they must enter into the Kingdom of God: From a cross into
Heaven: think it not strange, no not of the fiery trial, thou shall suffer. 2.
What ever sufferings the people of God either are, or may be in, they have no
just cause, ground, or reason of fear, i. e. of disponding, distrusting,
distracting fear. The Arguments for this point are in the Text.

1. The Consideration of who it is, that brings the People of God into
suffering, Is it God? God is the Disposer, but who is the great Executioner?
The Devil, whom God hates more than thou can, The Devil shall cast, etc.

2. It Is the Devil in a Chain. The Devil has two sorts of Chains. A Chain of
darkness, in which he is kept to the day of Judgment. A Chain of providence,
he is restrained in that, etc.

3. The Quality of the suffering should keep them from fearing: He shall cast
some of you into Prison, not into Hell.

4. The Design, to destroy you? no, but to try you: It Is well you are Gold,
else you would be presently destroyed and burnt.

5. The Duration, could the Devil have his design, it should be for ever: It Is
but for ten days.

6. God overrules all that befalls us, Christ always stands by the Believer
to take notice of every stripe, as well as of every hair of thy head, to own
thee in all thy sufferings, to sympathize with thee, to have a fellow-feeling
and compassion unto thee, to compose us, and sanctify all unto us, to order
the issue of all, that it shall be sure, speedy, and good, and by all these to
make us as like God, God-man, as possible.

Use. Then do not fear: Here we were forewarned and fore-Armed.

1. Forewarned, our suffering is like to be great, nay, it may be greater then
we may suppose: This to be sure, if our sufferings do but keep pace with our
sinings, I believe never such sufferings in England: If God lay Righteousness
to the Line, and Judgment to the Plummet, never such matter for his Justice in
England.

2. We should not fear because that is the spring of many other sins, Fainting,
Running, Lying, Perjury, and to do any thing in the world etc.

3. The best of men in such bad times, it will be as much as ever they can do
to keep themselves steady.

2. We were Fore-armed.

1. In reference to the Church of God: Do not fear, the Church of God is dear
to thee, but it is dearer to God. The Interest of God is more concerned in the
life, peace, and truth of the Church, then in mine, etc. If the great God will
not look to his own Interest, can the Church be safe? But doubtless he will.

2. In reference to our selves. Suppose many sufferings, yet the ways of God
are in the dark, as well as in the deep, there is no tracing of him, let him
alone, where thou can not trace him, admire him. God can, and has done, and
I bless God, I can set my Seal to that word that tells me, God will do great
things; Babylon must sink, his people must be called, the Kings of the earth
must hate that Whore, when God brings his people low, it is but making way for
the bareing and magnifying his own mercy; when the praise can be given to none,
now is a time for God to work. Now will I arise and show my self strong.
Therefore fear none of those things which thou shall suffer: Fear not oh! ye
Saints of the most high: It Is true, if you were carnal, natural, unconverted,
sinful, Idolatrous wretches, well might you fear the wrath of the Lamb, and him
that sits on the Throne: Were thou a filthy, drunken, unrighteous,
intemperate Faelix, thou might well fear thou have no God to run to, but being
a Paul thou need not fear: No, Paul can speak and act with so much
confidence even when he stands before a great Tribunal, ready to have a
sentence of death passed on him, that he makes his very Judge to Tremble. And
so you have it in

The Twentieth Sermon.
Acts 24.25. And as he reasoned of Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to
come, Faelix trembled.
IN these words you have the manner, matter, and effect of Paul's Preaching;
The manner, why Paul was reasoning; The matter it is of Righteousness,
Temperance and Judgment to come; the Effect, Faelix trembled. First, for the
manner of Paul's Preaching, as he reasoned, i. e. as he argued the matter, he
did propound it in a rational way, and pursued it before Faelix, and this he
does in a double capacity, as he is a Convert, and as he is an Apostle, as a
Christian, and as a Preacher.

1. As a Convert and Christian, and so he had reason to do, and make use of
that reason he had to show, though he became Righteous, yet Paul had not lost
his reason. Hence learn, true Religion will consist with right Reason. Blessed
be God for this Truth; We are apt to look upon men as mad men, if they will be
Righteous: It Is true, before Paul was converted, he had Reason but he used it
madly, but after Conversion he begins to be sober, and make the best use of his
Reason.

2. Look upon Paul as a Preacher, so he makes use of his Reason. And True
Reason may and must be used in Preaching the Gospel, yet with these two
Cautions.

1. Do not overvalue Reason; do not lift up the Servant above the Master:
Prize Grace more then Reason; Piety is better then Parts, though Parts are the
Ring of Gold, Piety is the Diamond in that Ring. As if, a man in a Pulpit
should come to show what a brave Scholar he is, this is to overvalue Reason.

2. Do not under-value Reason. We have had a strange fancy, that if a man that
could not read English would but come and talk and preach to us, he was far
more desirable then a Black-Coat that has been at University and learnt his
root there (as they say) you will be glad of such as these. This Learning has
spoiled all the world, do you not know how many Scholars are Atheists; and
their learning made them the worse, etc. This is not the fault of their Reason;
had they more Reason they would improve it better. It is want of Reason that
makes them not Crucify their Lusts: Because corrupt men many times reprove
that which is good, will you therefore cast it off.

2. For the Matter of Paul's Preaching, and here observe.

1. It Is suitable to his hearers, Faelix was a Judge though a corrupt one, and
so he reasons of Righteousness: He and his Whore lived in Adultery, and so he
preaches of Temperance, of Judgment to come, know, God will call thee to
judgment. Hence observe. The Gospel is then preached aright, when suited to
hearers hearts, conditions, constitutions: A man in the Pulpit ought not to
shoot at random, Paul speaks ad rem to his hearers, suitably tells them of
Righteousness, Temperance, Judgment to come.

2. Consider it with Relation to his Scope, which was, to bring them unto
Christ, and what does he do? He Preaches Grace, Mercy, and Peace, no, not a
word of that, but Righteousness, Temperance, Judgment to come. Paul was a
convincing Preacher, he knows his way to bring home Faelix and Drusilla, to
Christ, was first to convince them of their sin, and the wrath of God due to
sin. The whole sum of Paul's preaching is, a preaching by way of conviction:
Sin and misery must be preached for this end, that it may bring men unto
Christ; we must not make men half dead and there leave them, but bring them to
the Surgeon, all our conviction is only for this end, that you might be
brought to Christ, by Grace, to Glory.

3. For the Effects of Paul's preaching: Paul preached, and Faelix trembled:
does not Drusylla tremble? It Is more then probable, she brought Paul to preach
there, that Drusylla had a months mind to hear what he had to say, but Faelix
trembled; Hence observe, Those that are first in enjoying, may be last in
receiving the Gospel. Drusylla was a -- yet turns a wicked Apostate, yet when
come to hear a Sermon, her Heathenish Husband Faelix that served the Devil
instead of God trembled, but not she; Backsliding Professors from the Truth,
are infinitely farther from melting under the Gospel, then profane sinners,
that never heard of it. A man had far better go and preach to Heathens, then
Apostates. Then for the words, Faelix Trembled. Why? There was Righteousness
prosecuted and convinced, Judgment to come, threatened against him; Now his
knees begin to smite together, now the Writing on the Wall, now Faelix
trembles; Oh! poor soul, would thou not tremble at the hearing of the
Preaching of Judgment to come? submit to the Judge before he come: would
thou not have thy Judge to condemn thee then? Let him be now thy King to Rule,
thy Prophet to instruct, thy Priest to reconcile: Would you avoid the terror
of a Judgment to come? Accept of the offer of a Christ coming; coming did I
say? Nay, he is come already; Do but lay your ear close, to that third of the
Revelations, and the twentieth, you shall hear your Judge knocking, which
brings me to

The one and twentieth Sermon.
Rev. 3.20. Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice, and
open the Door, I will come in to him, and will Sup with him, and he with me.
THese are the words of our blessed Savior, words Coined as it were for the
close of the morning Exercise. A continued metaphor; wherein you have

1. An Important thing of weight intimated in that particle, Behold.

2. The state of men in the visible Church implied, though they profess a
Christ, high thoughts of him, and obedience to him, yet many, most of them keep
their hearts shut against him, behold I stand without at the door.

3. Christ's dealing or transaction with the poor Creatures for opening their
hearts to him, and that in four things.

1. His standing waiting, or dancing attendance on the soul, and the place
where: I stand at the door.

2. His earnest desire and importunity of entrance, and knock.

3. His call and Invitation, for where a hearing is enjoined, there must needs
be a calling employed.

4. The Argument or Motive he uses, to persuade poor Creatures to let him in.

1. Ab honesto, If he will but open, I will come in and take my abode: An
admirable thing to have such a Tennant.

2. A Jucundo, I will sup with him, I will vouchsafe him fellowship and
communion.

3. He shall sup with me; There shall be mutual fellowship between him and
me, what I have shall be his and what he has shall be mine: we will walk,
love, and lodge together; I will lodge with him, and he shall lodge with me.

4. To whom this invitation is made to every one, all, if any man or woman,
that ^ave slighted my Ministers voice, months, or years, if (...) he will
open, I will come in.

5. The Sinners Duty and Interest.

1. The opening the heart when Christ knocks, that is his duty, because Christ's
Invitation is his command.

2. His Interest, because then Christ will come in, etc.

The Doctrine was, When Christ knocks and calls, at the doors of our hearts,
it is our Duty and Interest, to open, admit, and let him in. These two questions
were proposed and prosecuted.

1. When or now, is Christ said to knock and call at the hearts of sinners?

2. How sinners are said to hear and open.

1. How is Christ said to knock and call at the hearts of sinners?

1. If you regard the means whereby he knocks, i. e. by natural light of
conscience within, or by the light of the Ministry and Gospel without.

2. If you regard the manner of Christ's knocking or calling, it is either
externally, by the Word, Ordinances, Providence (his Rod has a voice as well
as his Word) or internally, by the Spirit of God that accompanies that Word, by
the means of Grace, by the motions of his Spirit.

2. How are sinners said to hear his voice, and open?

1. For hearing, it must not be an external, but an internal hearing, a hearing
of the heart, through the heart; it must be a particular, distinguishing
hearing, it must know the voice of Christ; it must be a sensible, an humble,
satisfying hearing.

2. For opening; it is either

1. Sp^^^al opening, at first, when the door is shut, those everlasting doors
are at first open to entertain the King of Glory, in our first Conversion.

2. Progressive, i. e. when the soul opens more and more: for there is no door,
but its shut as close on him when after entrance, that it is as much as ever
Christ can do to creep in. This opening appears,

1. In parting with, and putting away what ever keeps possession of the heart
against Christ: The strong man must be turned out.

2. The soul freely consents to Christ, by an entire resignation to his Will
and Spirit, to take him upon those terms. And when Christ does thus knock and
call at the door of our hearts, it is our duty and interest thus to open
admittance to him.

The Use was for Exhortation, to plead with poor sinners, that yet, oh! yet
they would open to Christ Jesus knocking and calling: Arguments here there was
used, if they did not melt, 'twas not because they were not powerful, but our
souls marble.

1. It Is a matter of greatest importance, more than your earthly Joyntures, it
concerns your everlasting souls, souls that are more worth than ten thousand
worlds; whether you will now believe it or no, you will hereafter.

2. Consider the person that comes to call; who is it? It Is a King that stands
at your door; it is the King of Kings, God of Gods, that stands there.

3. It Is he that deserves admittance, a God of abundant, superabundant love;
by his undertaking he has deserved admittance: will you keep out your Father?
your Mother? thou wretch, that wast rescued the other day, will thou keep out
thy Redeemer?

4. It Is he that has a great love and affection for you, how ever you have
dealt with him: Thou that brought him Hell, yet can he never be at quiet till
he has brought you to Heaven.

5. Consider the posture, I stand, must you sit and I stand?

6. I have stood a long time, I have been staying and waiting for you so many
years; I can reckon every day and night I have stood and waited for you: you
would have abhorred to have waited on the greatest man in the world, as I have
waited on you, a worm; nay, I stay still waiting for you;

And This one thing sticks yet with me; I stand ready to depart; I have
knocked a great while, but now knock no more; what if this should be the last
knock you should hear? How many did knock, and the last knocked, yet I stand; I
knock this once more; it is very questionable whether Christ will ever knock
again, at least in such a way, and by such means; never did Christ knock more
louder.

7. I stand at the door, a poor cold place: I stand despised and contemned: but
besides, many in the mean time are let in, and I kept out, and that out of my
own house.

8. I stand at the door, ready to have my patience turned into fury; therefore,
let me come in quickly.

9. I stand, I that am blessed in my self, I that can make thee infinitely,
eternally blessed* I that am, etc, do stand, therefore prithee, prithee open.
What Is that? It Is hear and know, remember, believe and do. And this would give
me a fair Retreat into my Text; If you know these things, happy are ye if ye
do them. I beseech you to consider, you have known these things, cursed,
wretched for ever are ye, if ye do not do them, happy for ever if you do them.

Thus I have given you a short account of these things lately delivered to you:
you must not impute any of my weaknesses to my Reverend Brethrens labors that
went before; the God of Heaven bless you, and reward them a thousand-fold. And,
oh! what ever God does, keep up this exercise in the midst of us. You have
abundantly reaped Gods Spirit; I hope there is something done in this
Congregation, that Eternity it self shall never be able to blot out. I confess
this is no fasting day, but yet however we may make it such a day, as, since
God is pleased to give us an Ocean, to return to him some drops. Beloved, It Is
very probable that it will be the last motion that ever I shall make to you
while I live in this way; If I were now to go from my Pulpit to my grave, this
would be the double motion I would make to you.

1. For Gods sake prize the Word of God.

2. Labor to prize the Word of God by the worth of it, that you may never come
to prize the Word of God by the want of it. And if you would express your
prizing of the Word, express your love, charity, bowels, to poor Ministers of
the Word: never any man repented he had given so much to a good use, doubtless
my children wants it now, or my wife wants it now, etc. And I can assure you, I
think there was never so many thanksgivings made to God for this City of
London, as for their abundant charity in this respect.

FINIS.

