A Seasonable Prospect FOR THE VIEW and CONSIDERATION OF Christians. BEING A
Brief Representation of the Lives and Conversations of Infidels and Heathens,
in our Age, as to Religion and Morality.

TOGETHER With some Reflections thereupon, in Relation to us who profess
Christianity.

To which is now added, Many of the Wise and Virtuous Sayings of the Ancient
Heathens.

The Second Edition.

Fides esse sine Charitate potest, prodesse non potest.

By a GENTLEMAN.

LONDON, Printed by J. L. for Luke Meredith, at the Angel in Amen-Corner, 1691.

Price Stitched 4 d.

THE PREFACE.
Christian Reader.
MEeting accidentally with a Printed Relation (made by one Mr. Edward Terry,
Student of Christ-Church Oxford; and after Chaplain to Sir Thomas Row,
Ambassador to the great Mogol; and after his return Home, was Minister or
Rector of Greensted in Middlesex) of the Religion, Lives, and Manners of the
Mahometans and Heathens in that vast Empire of the Great Mogol, called Indostan
or East India: And judging it a very faithful and authentic Account, being
from his own certain Knowledge and Experience, gained by his Residence at the
Mogol's Court, for several Years in our Age, as Chaplain to the English
Ambassador there. And finding by his Relation a great Sense of God among them,
and many excellent Moralities practiced by them from that weak natural Light,
and that false Religion they enjoy; and considering seriously, the great
failure of too many Christians among us therein, who have not only the same
Light of Nature, and that very much improved by Learning and Education for
their Guide; but also the glorious Light of the Gospel, and Revelation of the
ever blessed Jesus; and considering how much this is to the great Scandal and
Reproach of our said Holy and Excellent Religion, and will be also our great
Condemnation at last; that this Light thus come into the World to us, yet we
love Darkness rather than Light, because our Deeds are Evil. I thought it not
amiss to make public this short Account of The Conversations of Infidels and
Heathens, Contemporary with us, with some Reflections thereupon, to shame us
Christians (if it were possible) out of our contempt of God, Religion, and his
Ministers, our gross Immoralities and Vices, which are so much (God knows)
abounding among us at this day; and that we may prudently consider our eternal
Safety and Welfare. To which, in this second Impression, I have made the
Addition of many of the Discourses and Sayings of the ancient Philosophers and
wise Heathens; together, with some other Passages omitted in the former.
Farewell.

A Seasonable Prospect FOR THE VIEW and CONSIDERATION OF CHRISTIANS. BEING A
Brief Representation of the Religion, Lives, and Conversation of Infidels and
Heathens.
First, Their Piety toward God.
1. In Their frequent Devotions in public, and their great Zeal and Reverence
therein.
THE Author relates, That whatever diversions or Impediments they have either
at Home or in a Journey, they constantly pray five times every day, viz. at six
a Clock in the Morning, and at Nine, and Twelve, and in the Afternoon at Three
and Six. The Mogol the Prince himself does so, and the meanest Shepherd that
waits on his Hock in the Field; and if they can they perform their Devotions in
their Mosquits or Churches.

They wash their Feet, and then entering their Mosquits or Churches, they put
off their Shoes, and as they begin their Devotions they stop their Ears, and
fix their Eyes, that nothing may divert their thoughts; then in a soft and
still voice they utter their Prayers, wherein are many words most significantly
expressing the Omnipotency, Greatness, Eternity, and other Attributes of God,
casting themselves low upon their Faces sundry times, and then acknowledging
that they are burdens to the Earth, and poison to the Air; being so confounded
and ashamed, as they seem not to dare so much as to lift up their Eyes to
Heaven; but after all, comfort themselves in the Mercies of God, through the
mediation of Mahomet.

It happened, That I having once some discourse with a Mohammedan of good
quality (says the Author;) and discoursing with him about his frequent
praying, I told him, That if himself and others of his profession, who did
believe it a duty to pray so often, would conclude their Petitions in the Name
of Jesus Christ, they might find much comfort in those frequent performances of
that great duty. He answered, That I needed not trouble my self with that; for
they found as great comfort as they could desire in what they did: and
presently he gave me this relation.

There was (said he) a most devout Musselman, that is to say a zealous
Mohammedan, who had his habitation in a great City where Mahomet was zealously
professed, and that Man for many years together spent his whole days in the
Mosquit or Church; in the mean time, (not minding the world at all) he became
so poor, that he had nothing left to buy Bread for his Family; yet
notwithstanding his poor condition, he was resolved still to ply his Devotions;
and in a Morning (when perceiving that there was nothing at all left for the
further Subsistence of himself and Household) he took a solemn leave of his Wife
and Children, resolving for his part to go and Pray and Die in the Mosquit,
leaving his Family (if no relief came) to famish at home. But that very day
there came to his House a very Beautiful Young man (as he appeared to be) who
brought and gave unto his Wife a considerable quantity of Gold bound up in a
white Napkin, telling her, That God had now remembered her Husband, and sent him
his pay for his constant Pains taken in his Devotions; withal, charging her not
to send for her Husband, (for though he had taken such a solemn leave of her
that Morning) yet he would come home to her again that Night, and so he
departed from her. The Woman presently bought in some necessaries for her House
(for they had eaten up all before) and further made some good Provision for her
Husband, against his coming home in the Evening, (for so he did) and finding
all his Family very cheerful and merry, his Wife presently told him, That there
had been such a one there (as before described) and left so much Gold behind
him, with the forementioned Message delivered with it. Her Husband presently
replied, That it was the Angel Gabriel sent from God, (for the Mahometans speak
much of that Angel,) and he further added, That himself had nothing to bring
home unto her but a little Grit or Sand, which he took up in his way homeward,
and bound it in his Girdle; which he presently opening to show her, it was all
turned into precious Stones, which amounted unto a very great value. The
Seventh part of which, as of his Gold likewise, he presently gave to the Poor;
(for, said he, a Musselman is very Charitable;) and then made this Inference
and Conclusion of his Discourse with me: That if we do not neglect God, God
will not forget us, but will, when we stand most in need of help, supply us.

2. In their Observations of their Sabbaths, and other Festivals and Fasts.
Their Liturgy is in the Arabian Tongue, not understood by many of the common
People, yet is repeated by the Moolaas or Priests, and also by the common
People. The Mahometans also rehearse the names of God and Mahomet certain times
upon beads, as the papists do their prayers.

The devout Mahometans, in a solemn manner, assemble, in their Mosquits or
Churches, where by their Moolaas or Priests (upon Fridays which is their
Sabbath) some selected parts of the Alcoran are publicly read unto them, which
their Moolaas or Priests never touch without an Expression of much outward
Reverence, and then they deliver some precepts which they gather out of it. And
they never see their Alcoran, and hear any part of it read, without a great
show of Attention, Affection and Reverence.

They keep a solemn Lent, which they call Ramjam or Ramdam, which begins the
first New Mood, which happens in September, and so continue it that whole Moon.
And during all that time, those that are strict in their Religion forbear their
Women, and will not take either Meat or Drink any day during that time, so long
as the Sun is above the Horizon, only after the Sun is set they eat at
pleasure. The last day of their Lent they Consecrate as a day of Mourning, to
the memory of their deceased Friends; when I have observed, (says the Author)
many of the meaner sort seem to make most bitter Lamentation (besides what they
do at their Friends decease, when they howl and cry many whole days for their
Friends departed) and then at night they fire an innumerable company of Lamps
and other Lights; and when burnt out, the Lent is ended, and the people take
their Food as before.

The day after the Ramjam or Lent is ended, the most devout Mahometans in a
solemn manner assemble at their Mosquits or Churches, and hear some select
parts of their Alcoran read unto them.

The Hindoes or Indians also being Heathens, have little Churches called
Pagods, built round and standing under green Trees, wherein are Images of
monstrous Shapes. but for what end the Author knows not. He relates, That both
Men and Women, before they go to their Devotions (which is very frequently)
wash their Bodies, which they think avails them much toward their cleansing
from Sin; and they ascribe a certain kind of Divinity to Rivers (especially to
the famous River Ganges,) whither they flock daily in Troops to wash themselves.

The day of rest or Sabbath, which the Hindoes or Indians observe, is Thursday,
as also many other Festivals or Times of public Devotions they observe very
Solemnly, as also Pilgrimages.

And they never hear their Law or Precepts read to them by their Bramins or
Priests, without a show of great Attention, Reverence and Affection.

Their Bramins or Priests (as the Author affirms) have told him, That they
acknowledge one God, whom they describe with a Thousand Eyes, and a Thousand
Hands, and as many Feet; as being all Eye to see, all Feet to follow, and all
Hand to smite offenders; thus they express his Power. The consideration whereof
makes them (as the Author testifies) very exact in their dealings with Men,
most carefully observing that Royal Law, in doing to others but what they would
be contented to suffer from them.

Now that Book of their Law, which they call the Shester, or the Book of their
written Word, has been transcribed in all Ages, ever since the first delivery
of it (not long after the Creation, as they say) by the Bramins, out of which
they deliver Precepts unto the people.

Both Men and Women, before they go to their Devotions (which are very
frequent) wash their Bodies (as I related before) led hereunto by a certain
Precept, (as they say) given them by their Lawgiver, Breman, which requires
them daily to observe their times of Devotion expressed by their Washings, and
Worshippings, and Prayer to God, which must be all done, say they, with purity
of Heart.

The Precepts delivered to them from him they call Breman, are these;

First, Thou shall not kill any living Creature whatever it be, having Life in
the same, for thou art a Creature, and so is it; thou art endued with Life, and
so is it; thou shall not therefore spill the Life of any of thy fellow
Creatures that live.

Other Precepts they mention as delivered by their Lawgiver, viz. 2. To observe
times for Fasting, and hours for Watching, that they may be better fitted for
their Devotions. 3. directions about their Festivals, wherein are required
also, To take their Food moderately not pampering their Bodies. 4. And
concerning Charity, they are commanded to help the Poor as far as possibly they
are able. 5. Not to tell false Tales, nor to utter any thing that is untrue. 6
Not to Steal any thing from others, be it never so little. 7. Not to Defraud
any by their Cunning in Bargains or Contracts. 8. Not to Oppress any, when they
have Power to do it.


All which are observed by these Hindoes or Indians (as the said Author
affirms) with much strictness, several of them being very good Precepts, having
the impression of God upon them.

There are also another sort of Heathens among them, called the Persees, who
have a Book of their Religion delivered by their Prophets, in which (as the
Author was informed) are these Precepts following, I. To have Shame and Fear
ever present with them, which will restrain and keep them from committing many
Evils. II. When they undertake any thing, seriously to consider whether it be
Good or Bad, Commanded or Forbidden them. III. To keep their Eyes and Hearts
from Coveting any thing that is another, and their Hands from hurting any one.
IV. To have a care always to speak the Truth. V. To be known only in their own
Businesses, and not to inquire into, and to busy themselves in other Men's
Matters. VI. Not to Entertain or Believe any other Law, besides what they have
delivered to them by their Prophets.


Their Priests they call Daroos or Harboods, above which they have a Chief or
High Priest, they call the Dostoor, who not often appears openly, but when he
does he meets with much Reverence and Respect given unto him by the Common
People; and so do their other Churchmen which are his Inferiors, unto all
which they allow free maintenance for their more comfortable Subsistence, and
those Churchmen, by their Law, are commanded to dwell near, and to abide much
in their Egares or temples, to give advice unto any that shall repair unto
them. They observe diverse Feasts, and immediately after each of them a Fast
follows.

3. In their Zeal in their Religion, and not enduring that Religion should be
Contemned and Neglected.
As they cannot bear that any one should affront or contemn their Religion,
both the Mahometans and the Hindoes, or Indians: So there is not any one among
the Mahometans, which at any time mentions the Name of our Blessed Savior
Jesus Christ, but he mentions it with high Reverence and Respect; for they say
of him, That he was a good Man and a Just, that he lived without Sin, that he
did greater Miracles than any other before or since. They call him the Breath
of God, but cannot conceive how he should be the Son of God. Yet they conceive
of us Christians to be so unworthy and so unclean, that they will not eat with
us any thing that is of our dressing, nor yet any thing that is dressed in our
Vessels. And the Author affirms, That he has often heard the Natives, the
Hindoes, which lived near the Port where our Ships arrive, say thus in broken
English, Christian Religion, Devil Religion, Christians much Drunk, Christians
much do wrong, much beat, much abuse others.

The Mahometans and many others among them, are very forward, and zealous to
vindicate and promote that which they call their Religion, (according to that
saying of Philo Judaeus, Vbi de Religione, ibi quoque de vita agitur: We must
act for Religion as we would strive for Life) and so do they.

Among the Mahometans there are many Votaries; they are called Derveeses, who
relinquish the World, and spend all their days in Solitude and Retiredness,
expecting a Recompense. They are well content, as they say, to suffer and wait
for it in that better Life to come. Those are very sharp and strict Pennances
which many of these People undergo voluntarily, and far exceed those of the
Romanists. They crying out continually in these or the like Expressions, God
Almighty look upon me, I Love Thee, I Love not the World; but I Love Thee, and
do all this for thy sake, Look upon me, God Almighty. These People after this
Retirement, will choose rather to Famish than stir from their Cells, and
therefore are relieved by the Charity of others. Again, I have there seen (as
the Author speaks) them who merely out of Devotion, have put such massy Fetters
of Iron upon their Legs, as that they could scarce stir with them, and then
covered with Blue Mantles, (the color of Mourners in those parts,) they go as
fast as they are able, many Miles barefoot upon the hot parching ground in
Pilgrimage, to visit the Sepulchers of their Saints.

4. In their great Reverence and Respect they give to their Priests, and other
Devout and Holy Persons.
The Moolaas or Mohammedan Priests are distinguished only by their Beards, which
they wear long, whose Calling gains them very much Esteem and Reverence among
the People; yet there is also another order of Moolaas or Priests, called
Seayds, who derive themselves from Mahomet, who live much retired; but when
they appear openly, are most highly Reverenced. The Mogol himself would often
visit the Cells of those he esteemed Religious, as if they had been Demigods:
As all Religions are there tolerated, so the Mogol would speak well of all of
them, and he would speak most Respectfully of our Blessed Savior Christ.

And here may I insert a very strange Story, that the Author affirms he had
from several credible Persons of several Religions, of an Evidence or
Attestation the Devil was forced to give to the Truth of the Christian Religion.

The Author relates, That (but a few years before his abode there) a Juggler of
Bongala (a Kingdom famous for Witches and Men of that Profession) brought an
Ape before the Mogol, (who was over greedy to please himself with Novelties,)
professing that he would do many strange Feats or Tricks; the Mogol was ready
presently to make a trial of this, and forthwith called some Boys about him;
and plucking a Ring from his Finger gave it one of them to hide, that he might
make a trial whether or no the Ape could find it out; who presently went to the
Boy that had it. The Mogol made some farther Trials like this, where the Ape
did his part as before. And before the Ape was taken out of his Presence, this
strange following and unexpected thing came into the King's mind: There are
(said he) many Disputes in the World, about that true Prophet which should come
into the World. We, said the Mogol, are for Mahomet, the Persians Magnify
Mortis Hale, (being also Mahometans,) the Heathens or Hindoes have many whom
they very highly Magnify and Extol, as Bremaw, and Breman, and Ram, and
Permissar; the Persees are for Zortoost, the Jews for Moses, the Christians for
Christ; unto which he added three more, of which the Author had not their
Names, which made up the number of Twelve, who have all their several followers
in that part of the World; which Twelve names he caused to be written in Twelve
several Scroles, and put together, to see if the Ape could draw out the name of
the true Prophet. This done the Ape put his paw amongst them and pulled forth
that Paper or Scrole with the name of Christ. The Mogol, a second time caused
those Twelve Names to be written again in Twelve other Scroles and Characters,
and put together, when the Ape, as before, pulled forth the Name of Christ.

Then Mahobet-Chan, a great Noble Man of that Court and in high Favor with the
King, said, That it was some Imposture of the Christians (although there were
none that did bear that name there present) and desired that he might make a
third trial, which granted, he put but Eleven of those names together,
reserving the name of Christ in his Hand. The Ape searching as before, pulled
forth his Paw empty, and so twice or trice together, The King demanding a
reason for this, was answered, That happily the thing he looked for was not
there; he was bid to search for it, and then putting out those Eleven Names one
after another, in a seeming indignation rent them; then running to Mahobet-Chan
caught him by the Hand where the Name of Christ was concealed; which delivered
to him, he opened the Scrole, and so held it up to the King, but did not tear
it as the other. Upon which the Mogol took the Ape, and gave his Keeper a
Pension for to keep him near about him, calling him the Divining Ape: And this
was all that followed upon this admirable thing, except the Wonder and
Amazement of that People. Now for this Relation the Author believed it was
true, because it had been often confirmed to him there by diverse Persons, who
knew not one another, and were differing in Religion, yet all agreed in the
Story, and all the Circumstances thereof. But this by way of digression.

Also the Priests and Ministers of any Religion, find Regard and Esteem amongst
the People: As to my self (says the Author) who was very young while I lived
there, yet when I was first brought into the Mogol's Presence, standing near
the Ambassador, I being but a little distance from the Mogol, he sent one of
his Grandees to me to let me know that the King bad me Welcome thither, that I
should have free access to him when ever I pleased, and if I would ask any
thing he would give it me. And very many times afterward, when I appeared
before him, he still would show tokens of Civility and Respect to me. And I
never went abroad among the People, but those that met me upon this account
that I was a Padre (for so they called me) a Father or Minister; they would
manifest by their Behavior much Respect to me. There was also as I have heard
a Jesuit of very much Fame and Renown, called Jeronimo Xaveria, who was sent
for by Achabar Sha, the late King's Father, 1595 to argue before him the
Doctrine of Christianity, there being always present during the disputation a
Moolaas, or Mohammedan Priest, and a Third Person, who followed only the Light
of Nature; and these Two were to object what they could against the Reasoning
of Xaveria.

The said Jesuit, Xaveria, in the Mogol's own Language (which was a great
advantage to him) began first to speak of the Creation, and then of the Fall of
Man, in which (says the Author) the Mahometans agree with us.

Then he laid down diverse Grounds to bottom his Reasonings on; viz.

That Man was made by his Creation a most Excellent Creature, endured with the
Light of Reason, which no other sublunary Creature besides himself had.

That Man, thus endued, must have some Rule or Law to walk by, which he could
not prescribe unto himself and therefore it must be given him from above.

That this Law was first given unto man from God, and afterward confirmed by
Prophets sent into the World, in diverse Ages, from God.

That this Law thus delivered must needs be one Law, in all things agreeing in
it self; but so did not the Law of Mahomet.

That this thus delivered was most conformable to right Reason; But so was not
the Law of Mahomet.

That man fallen from God by sin, was not able to recover himself from that
Fall; and, therefore it was necessary, that there should be One, more than a
man, to do it for him, and that One could not be Mahomet.

That this One was Christ, God as well as Man. God to satisfy, (the Mahometans
themselves confessing that Christ was the Breath of God) and Man to suffer
death, as he did.

That Christ the Son of God coming into the World, about that great work of
satisfying God's Anger against man, for sin, it was necessary that he should
live a poor and laborious life here on Earth, (at which the Mahometans much
stumble;) and not a Life that was full of Pomp, and Pleasure, and Delicacy.

That the Gospel of Christ, and other holy Books of Scripture, which the
Christians retain and walk by, contain nothing in them that is corrupt and
depraved; but there is very much to be found in their Alcoran which is so.

That the great Worth and Worthiness shining in the Person of Christ, was by
far more ex ellent, than any thing observable in Mahomet; (for they themselves
confess, that Christ lived without Sin, when Mahomet himself acknowledges,
that he had been a filthy Person.)

That the feigned, and foolish, and ridiculous Miracles which they say, were
done by Mahomet, were nothing compared to the Miracles done by Christ, who (as
the Mahometans confess) did greater Miracles than ever was done before or since
him.

That there was a great deal of difference, in the manner of promulgating the
Gospel of Christ unto the World, and the introducing the Laws of Mahomet.

That Christ has purchased Heaven for all that believe in him, and that Hell
is prepared for all others, that do not rely on him, and on him alone for
Salvation.

There were many other particulars besides these; all which the King heard
patiently at several times.

And after he had heard him One Year and half he sent him back to Goa
honorably, with some good Gifts, telling him he would call for him again, when
he had a convenient time, which Time or Season neither of them both ever found
afterward.

These Discourses with many more, were given me, (says the Author) in Latin by
Francisco Corsi, a Jesuit, resident at the Mogol's Court: Who was a Florentine,
aged about Fifty Years; who, (if he were what he seemed to be,) was a Man of a
severe Life, yet of a fair and affable disposition: When he came to be first
acquainted with my Lord the Ambassador; he told him, that they were both by
Profession Christians; though there was a vast difference betwixt them in their
professing it. And as he should not go about to reconcile the Ambassador to
them, so he told him it would be Labor, in vain, if he should attempt to
reconcile him to us; only he desired that there might be a fair Correspondency
betwixt them, but no disputes. And further, his desire was, that those wide
differences betwixt the Church of Rome and us, might not be made there to
appear; That Christ might not seem by these differences to be divided amongst
men, professing Christianity; which might be a main Obstacle and Hindrance unto
the great Design and Endeavor, for which he was sent thither, to convert
people unto Christianity there; and, that he should be ready to do for my Lord,
all good Offices of Love and Service; and so he was, (says the Author.)

The Precepts of Mahomet owned in the Mogol's Country are (says the Author,)
these that follow.

1. That God is a great God, and the only God; and Mahomet the Prophet of God.
2. That Children must obey their Parents, and do nothing to displease them
either in Word or Deed. 3. That every one must do to another, that and only
that, which he would have another do to him. 4. That every man five times every
day, must repair to the Mosquit or Church to pray there; or wheresoever he is
he must pray every day so often; if not in the Church, then elsewhere. 5. That
during one whole Moon or Month in every Year, every man come to Years of
Discretion, must spend the whole day, betwixt the rising and setting of the
Sun; in fasting. 6. That every one out of his Store must give unto the poor
freely and voluntarily. 7. That every one (except the Votaries which renounce
Marriage) must marry to increase and multiply the Sect and Religion of Mahomet.
8. That no man must kill or shed Blood.
The said Francisco Corsi had not only free access unto the King, but also
Encouragement and Help by gifts he bestowed upon him. Here the Jesuits have a
Liberty to convert any they can work upon; and the Mogol declared, Such should
not lose his Favor by turning Christians. And the Author says, It was told
him for a certain truth, That a Gentleman of Quality and a Servant to the
Mogol, would needs be Baptized and become a Christian: Whereupon the King sent
for him, and both by promises and by threats, strongly attempted to turn him
again to Mahometanism, (for a trial, it seems of his constancy,) but he replied
to the Mogol, That he was most willing to suffer any thing in that Cause, that
the King could inflict, and as for the Rewards profer'd him, he would not
accept of any thing in the World to forsake his said Religion: Whereupon the
Mogol wondering at his constancy, told him, That if he could have frighted him
or brought him out of his new Profession, he would have made him an Example for
all Waverers; but now he perceived that his Resolution was indeed to be a
Christian; he bid him so continue, and with a reward dismissed him.

Both the Mahometans and the Hindoes or Indians, give their Priests not only
Honor and Respect as aforesaid, but allow them comfortable maintenance, and
that freely without grudging.

5. In Building of fair Mosquits or Churches, and then not suffering them to be
profaned or converted to common uses.
In the Mosquits or Churches of the Mahometans, built of Stone and many of them
Marble, a man may take notice of excellent Workmanship; but they will not
permit any of their dead to be Buried in them.

And it was very observable at the City of Mandoa (a place Ruinous, where the
Mogol for some time resided) that there were not a few unfrequented Mosquits or
Churches, and although the People were marvellously straightened, who attended
the King, for Room for their excellent Horses, they would not make Stables of
any of them, although forsaken and out of use. Also the late Mogol, about the
beginning of his Reign, caused a Temple to be built in Agra, his chief City,
for the Jesuits.

Another principal or choice City of his Empire, being called Lahore, betwixt
which and Agra is a long Walk or Road of 400. Miles in length, shaded by Trees
on both sides, which is very remarkable.

There are, besides their Mosquits, many other goodly Monuments which are
richly adorned, built to the memory of such as they have esteemed Paeres or
Saints, (of whom they have a large Calendar,) in which are Lamps continually
burning, attended by Votaries; and many transported with Devotion daily resort
thither to contemplate the Happiness those Saints enjoy.

Now as to the Hindoes or Indians, the Author was informed that at a chief City
called Nagracet, they have an Idol Temple or Chapel, most richly set forth,
being Seeled and Paved with plates of pure Silver, curiously Embossed over head
in several Figures, which they keep exceeding bright by often rubbing and
burnishing it, and all this to the honor of an Idol they keep there, called
Matta.

2. Their Justice and Righteousness to Men, and Temperance and Chastity as to
themselves.
1. In their Dutifulness to their Parents.
THey are (says the Author) exemplary in their Piety and Dutifulness to their
Parents. The poor Hindoes and Heathens, notwithstanding they serve for very
little, but for Five Shillings a Moon or Month for their whole Livelihood; yet
they will impart at the least, half that little when their Parents are in want,
choosing rather to want themselves than that their Parents should suffer.

Yea the Great Mogol or Prince (as the Author testifies) would often show great
Expressions of Duty and strong Affections to his Mother then living, so that he
that esteemed the whole World as his Vassals, would sometime be one to help to
carry her in a Palankee upon his Shoulders.

2. In their Loyalty, Fidelity and great Affections to their Prince, and humble
Subjection to their Superiors.
The People in general have so great Respects to their Prince, that although
(being very neat) they shave themselves often, yet when their Prince is pleased
to send any of them unto any place of Government, or upon any other Employment,
they cut not their Hair at all, till they return again into his Presence, as if
they desired not to appear beautiful, or to give themselves any content while
they live out of his sight. And when ever the Mogol sends his Commands to them
by Letters, those Papers are entertained with as much respect as if himself was
present. The Governor to whom they are sent, well accompanied, goes out to meet
the Messenger; and as soon as he sees the Letters, he alights from his Horse,
falls down on the Earth, and then takes them from the Messenger, and lays them
on his Head, so carries them to the place of public Assembly or Council to be
read. And the Mogol's Subjects, that are near him, will attend many of them
constantly to see him, when he exposes himself, for that purpose, in a Balcony,
as he usually does three times a day: And when they see him they will cry out
with a loud voice, Live, O great King; or thus, O great King, Health and Life;
and his subjects will do any thing he commands them; yea, if it be for the
Father to kill the Son, or the Son the Father.

The People all in general are very civil, and usually keep themselves within
the bounds of commands received from their Superiors, over which they do not
pass. They happily considering, that as in a natural Body, so in a Body
politic, there must be Hands and Feet as well as Head, and every part must
keep its Station, the Foot not meddling with the business of the Head, further
than to receive commands from it. And the meaner sort, to their Superiors, use
these abject and lowly ceremonies of Reverence, by putting their Right Hand to
the Earth.

3. In their Civilities to each other and to Strangers; and their compassionate
and merciful Natures to all, even the poor Beasts; yea also, even to noxious
Animals.
In their intimate and hearty Salutes, they take one another by the Chin, and
cry either Father or else Brother; they express in words their minds in these
good wishes to one another, God give you Health, and the other replys, The same
Health God give you; I wish you the Prayers of the Poor, I wish one Good after
another to come to you every quarter of an hour. The people are here generally
as Civil to Strangers, as to their own Countrymen: The better sort, when they
entertain you, do it with much Humanity, first rising up to you, they bow their
Bodies, and then entreat you to sit with them.

They are very tender in preserving the Lives of all Inferior Creatures
whatever; and the Banjans, or the Priests of these Hindoes, have (as they say)
Spittles to recover Lame Birds and Beasts. And this from this consideration,
That they cannot give Life to the meanest Creature; But I rather think they do
it (says the Author) in Obedience to a certain Precept, given to them by their
Prophet or Lawgiver Bremaw, before mentioned, as also that the Opinion of the
Transmigration of Souls may probably be another Cause.

4. In their Chastity and great detestation of Adultery and Fornication also,
and the great respects their Widows show to their deceased Husbands.
It is true, the Law of Mahomet allows four Wives to any that please to be
troubled with so many, and as many Women besides as they can get, whom they
command as Wives. The great Mogol (says the Author) is said to be married to
Four Wives, and to have a Thousand Concubines, yet he had but Six Children: The
Mohammedan Priests content themselves with one Wife, and so do some other
Mahometans who may marry four. One of the Mogol's Sons, Sultan Coob-Surroo, a
Prince of a very lovely Presence, fine Carriage, and the very love and delight
of the common People, (by means whereof he had been tempted into Rebellion in
his younger days;) contented himself with one Wife, which with all Love and
Care accompanied him in all his Streights.

The said Prince meeting one day accidentally with the English Ambassador, and
discoursing him, amongst other things told him, That it was a great shame for
the Successor of Tamberlane, who had such infinite Riches, to suffer a Man of
his Quality to come so far unto him and to live so long about him, and not to
give him some Royal gift. And he farther added, That for himself he was a
Prisoner, and therefore could do him no good, but he would pray for him; and so
he parted from the Ambassador. The strict Votaries of that Religion marry not
at all: And it is observed, that those Mahometans, who have most Wives and
Women, are most jealous, and their Jealousy is such, that they will not suffer
the Brothers, or the Fathers of their Wives to come to them, except in their
presence. And a continued Custom, by this restraint, has made it odious for
such Women as have the Reputation of honesty, to be seen at any time by any man
besides their own Husbands, and such as those before named their Relations, and
by them but very seldom. But if they dishonor their Husband's Beds; or being
unmarried are found incontinent and filthy, (professing Chastity,) rather than
they shall want the severest Punishment, their own Brothers hands will be first
against them, to take away their Lives, and for so doing shall be commended,
and not questioned for the same.

Here is a free Toleration, notwithstanding, for Whores, who are Listed and
Enrolled (as they say) before they can have liberty to keep such an open House.
Some of the finer sort of these Strumpets, at certain times, appear in the
presence of the Mogol, before whom they sing their wanton Songs, playing on
their Timbrels.

As for the Hindoes or Indians, they take but one Wife, and of her they are not
so fearful and jealous as the Mahometans are of their several Wives and Women;
they also suffering their Wives to go abroad whither they please. Their Widows
immediately after their Husbands are dead, cut their Hair, and spend all their
Lives following, as Creatures, neglected both by themselves and others; whence
to be free from shame, some of them are ambitious to die with honor in their
Husband's Funeral Pile, and she that is once thus resolved never starts back,
but goes singing to her death; and although not bound, yet never offers to stir
out of the Flames.

There are another sort of Heathens (as I mentioned before) in Indostan or
India, called the Persees, who take also but one Wife, who has liberty to go
abroad, as the Wives of the Hindoes.

The Mahometans being very jealous (and as Solomon speaks) Jealousy being the
Rage of a Man, so eminently it appeared such in this sad Story related by the
Author. viz. The Mogol, says he, one day found one of his Eunuchs kissing one
of his Women, whereupon he put her to this cruel death; caused her to be set in
a hole in the ground up to her Head, there to be parched and killed by the
violent heat of the Sun. In which torment she lived one whole day and the night
following, until the next day at Noon, crying out most lamentably, Ah! my head,
my head; and the Eunuch was brought to the same place, and there in her sight
was cut in pieces; so hateful a thing Adultery is to them, or so much as a sign
of unlawful Wantonness in their Women.

5. In their great Temperance and Moderation in Meat and Drink.
Neither the Mahometans nor Hindoes, as I conceive (says the Author) are given
to their Palate, although the Country affords great Plenty of excellent good
Provision, but are very careful and temperate in their Diet. The Mahometans
feed not freely on any Flesh. Such Meat and Drink as their Law allows, they
take only to satisfy Nature: The word for a Drunkard signifies also a Madman:
And the Hindoes or Indians in general, eat no Beef at all, having a great
esteem of Kine, but some of them, and especially the Banjans in general, which
are a very strict Sect among them, will eat of nothing that has had or may
have Life; others will eat Fish and no living thing else. And both the
Mahometans and the Hindoes or Heathens most of them will rather die than taste
any thing their Law forbids, like the Rechabites. By reason of their great
Temperance in Eating and Drinking, (as the Author affirms) they live to our
Age, notwithstanding the great and intemperate heat of the Country, and there
are more old People among them than among us. And as for Wine they make none,
because their Law forbids the drinking it.

6. In their great Industry, Laboriousness, and Diligence in their Callings and
Trades.
The Mahometans in general, it is true, being the Lords and Conquerors of the
Country, are given to an idle course of Life; but the Hindoes or Indians, those
ancient Inhabitants of the Country, are a very industrious People. It is true,
all their Learning is only to Read and Write, yet many of them are men of very
strong Reason, and I never saw (says the Author) any Idiot or deformed Person
among them. They are in short very Laborious, they plant the Ground, breed
Cattle, and make all manner of Manufactures of the Country, making use of their
Hands, Fingers, Ears, Feet, and Toes in some of them. They show much Ingenuity
in their curious Manufactures, their Silk Stuffs which they most artificially
Weave, intermixed with Gold and Silver sometimes, as also in stained Callicoes,
and all other their Indian Quilts, Carpets, etc.

7. In the great Diligence, Industry, and Fidelity of the Hindoes or Indian
Servants.
They serve for reasonable Wages (never exceeding Five Shillings a Moon or
Month) with which they are well satisfied, paid usually to them the next day
after the Change, before hand; and they stand to be hired in the Market place
usually; and if their Salary be not paid to them exactly at the time, they will
be ready to quit their Service; but so honest are they, that if they be bidden
to provide themselves of other Masters, they will not stir but serve out the
time for which they have received pay, yea even to an hour, before they depart.
And as their Fidelity is great, so is also their Diligence very Exemplary; they
keep within call of their Masters, and will not at any time stir without leave,
especially had from their Masters.

8. In their great Fidelity in Trusts committed to them.
The Mahometans, but more especially the said Hindoes or Indians are very
square and exact to make good all their Engagements, and so faithful as to
special Trusts committed to them, that if they be assaulted at any time, they
will rather die in the defense of their Trust than forsake it, and those that
entrust them in time of their need: And if they be entrusted with the Carriage
or Security of any Riches, and they know of the Riches you carry, they would be
so far from injuring or wronging you of the least Penny of it, that whosoever
should attempt the Robbing or Spoiling of you, they must make a way through
their Blood before they could be able to effect it.

9. In their exact Justice and Honesty in their way of trade in Buying and
Selling.
As by the Laws or Customs current among them in India, they imprison for debt
and hang fetters on them, so many times they will sell their persons who are
the debtors, and their Wives and Children into bondage when they cannot
satisfy their debts. The Hindoes or Indians are so very just in their
dealings, that if a man will put it to their consciences to sell the Commodity
as low as they can afford it, they will deal honestly and squarely with him;
but if a man offer them much less than their price, they will presently say,
What, do thou think me a Christian that would go about to deceive thee?
surely (as the Author speaks) for moral honesty it is most true, that these
Heathens do marvellously exceed us Christians; for many of these Indians, poor
souls, walk according to that light of nature they have, and are unreproveable
in these respects, and doubtless if they knew more and better would do better
in other things.

10. In their sobriety as to their Apparel.
As they are civil and courteous in their Speeches and Behavior, (as was
mentioned before) so are both the Mahometans, and the ancient natives, the
Hindoes, modest and civil in their habits, being much alike herein. They are
all very civilly clad; they never pride it in any new fashions. The habits of
all from the highest to the lowest are all made of the same fashion, which they
never alter or change: pure white and fine Callicoe Lawn is for the most part
the highest of all their Bravery, which usually they wash every day: the Women
go habited somewhat like the Men, those of them of greatest quality are adorned
with many Rich Jewels.

11. In their Charity.
They have no Inns for Travelers; and therefore, in great Towns especially,
Rich men out of Charity, build large Sarraas or Houses for lodging, where any
Travelers may find house-room, and use it without any recompense. Other Rich
men make public Wells and Tanks or Fountains for public use and benefit.
Others maintain Servants, who continually attend upon Roadways that are much
traveled, and there offer unto Passengers water for themselves and their
Beasts, which must be freely taken, as it is freely given. The Mogol does
continually relieve many poor people.

Also to conclude this Section I shall relate a generous and noble piece of
Charity and Mercy in a great man in pardoning a most high affront and abuse
offered him by one of our Nation, an Englishman: The business was thus: At
Surat the Embassador's Servant, his Cook, being one day drunk, and staggering
homeward, in his way met the Governor of Surat's Brother, as he was riding to
his House; the Cook made a stand staying himself upon his Sword and Scabbard,
and cried out to the Governor's Brother, Now thou Heathen Dog. He not
understanding his foul Language, replied civilly in his own, Ca-ca-ta? which
signifies, What say thou? The Cook answered him with his Sword and Scabbard,
with which he struck at him, but was immediately seized on by his followers,
and by them disarmed and carried to Prison. The Ambassador had present
Intelligence of this abuse by his drunken Servant, and immediately sent word
unto the Governor's Brother, that he was-not come thither to countenance any
disorderly Person, and therefore desired him to do with him what he pleased;
upon which he presently sent him home, not doing him the least hurt. But as the
Author well observes, who was the Heathen Dog at this time? whether the
debauched drunken Cook, who called himself a Christian, or that Sober and
Temperate Mohammedan, who was thus affronted?

12. In their speedy Justice in their Courts or Judicatures, and their quick
Executions of Malefactors.
Although (says the Author) I could never learn any Laws they had, yet they
always pretend to proceed in their Trials in their Courts, secundum allegata
and probata, according to proof of Matter of Fact. Murder and Theft they punish
with Death, and with what kind of Death the Judge pleases to appoint: Some are
Hanged, some Beheaded, some Empailed and put upon Stakes, some torn in pieces
by wild Beasts, some stung to death with Snakes, and others killed by Elephants.

The great Mogol will himself sit as Judge in any matters of Consequence, that
happen near him.

There are no Malefactors that lie more than one night in Prison, and many
times not at all, being speedily upon his or their offense brought to their
Trial, and from their Sentence to their Execution. And this round Dealing, and
quick Justice, and Execution (as the Author thinks) keep? the People in such
awe, as that there are not many Malefactors.

Now may I add also here (as not impertinent) a remarkable Relation of the
Author of the death of a great Mohammedan, Atheist, and Contemner of God. There
was, says he, a very Eminent Man, a great Soldier, and in high Favor with
the Mogol, but was noted above others of the Nation, to be a great Contemner
and neglecter of God; who on a certain time sitting in daliance with one of his
Women, she plucked an hair from his Breast, which grew about his Nipple, in
Wantonness, without the least thought of doing him hurt: But that little wound
presently began to fester, and became afterward incurable. When he saw he must
die he uttered these words.

Who would not have thought but that I, who have been so long bred a Soldier,
should have died in the Face of my Enemy, either by a Sword, or a Lance, or an
Arrow, or Bullet, or by some such Instrument of Death. But now (though too
late) I am forced to confess, That there is a great God above, whose Majest I
have ever despised, that needs no bigger Lance than an hair to kill an Atheist,
a despiser of his Majesty. And so desiring that these his last words might be
told unto the King his Master, he died.

Some further remarkable Passages omitted in the former Impression.
The Mahometans begin their Year the tenth of March, but the Hindoes or Indians
the first of March; and their Year is divided into thirteen Months or Moons,
dividing the Day into four parts, and so also the Nights; which they subdivide
into eight parts, measured according to the Ancient Custom, by Water dropping
out of one Vessel into another; by which there stands a man to turn that Vessel
up again, and then strikes with a hammer upon a concave piece of metal to give
notice of it. They having no other Clocks or Sun-dials (says the Author.)

The Hindoes or Indians (says the Author) believe there are Devils, but that
they are so fettered that they cannot hurt them.

The Women are habited (says the Author) somewhat like the Men, they have
their Ears bored in several places for little Pendants; and the lower part of
their left Nostrils, where they wear a ring, with little Pearls hanging at it
when they please.

As to the great Mogol's Leskar, or Camp-Royal (says the Author) it consists
of a vast number of Tents, all of them white, but only the Mogol's, which is
red, and far higher than the rest: This said Camp is at least five miles from
side to side of the same. The Mogol having one hundred thousand Soldiers
waiting always upon him, besides the Grandees near him carry their Wives and
Families along with them, which makes up an exceeding great number of
Attendants upon him. When the Camp removes, the Mogol gives notice, by drums
beating about midnight.

There was two Comets or blazing-Stars (says the Author) appeared while I
lived at the Mogol's Court; the one, Northward, like a long blazing Torch or
Lance fired at the end; The other, Southward, was round like a boiling pot
boiling out fire. And although the Astrologers told the Mogol that he needed
not fear, for they concerned not him nor his; but other places. But not long
after, these blazing-Stars appeared, their usual Season of Rain (which was
never known to fail them till then) failed them, and this caused such a Famine
and Mortality in the South parts of his Empire, that it did very much unpeople
it. And in the Northern parts of his Dominions the Mogol's son, Sultan Caroon,
raised a Rebellion against his Father, who was overthrown and taken Prisoner,
and kept in Confinement by his Father.

The Conclusion.
NOW, O Christians, consider seriously all these things faithfully related by
the Reverend and Worthy Author.

First, Shall Mahometans not mention the name of our Savior, at any time, but
with high reverence and respect; and shall we, Christians, not learn good
manners toward our Blessed Lord and Master, but daily express our contempt of
him, by our Blasphemies, Oaths and Curses?

Shall the poor Heathens believe that God has a thousand Eyes and a thousand
Hands; and yet we Christians live so as if we did not believe he had one Eye to
see, or one Hand to revenge the Violation of his Laws?

Shall Mahometans (whatever Diversions or Impediments they meet with) be Five
times a day (after great preparations) with very great Reverence and humble
Adoration, even with their Faces to the ground, at their Devotions in their
Mosquits or Churches, if they conveniently can come at them, however else
where? And shall we Christians make no conscience of our being twice a day
(after due preparation) at our Devotions at our Churches, (if it may be) with
lowly Reverence and humble Adoration upon our Knees? But however, if that
cannot be, at least in our own Habitations.

Shall both Mahometans and Heathens be strict observers of their Sabbaths and
other Festivals, and times of public Devotions, and their times of Lent, of
Mortification and Fasting; and that with great Affection, Reverence and
Adoration? And shall we Christians be indifferent, and careless, and remiss in
the Religious Observation of our Sabbaths or Lord's days, and other Fasts and
Festivals of the Christian Church, and of our Lent and times of Mortification,
and come short of them in our Affections, Reverence and Devotion at those holy
Assemblies?

Shall the Mahometans and Heathens be zealous and in good earnest in their
Religion, for the promoting the same; yea have many strict Votaries therein,
that impose upon themselves great Self denials, very sharp and strict
Pennances? And shall we Christians be careless and indifferent in our Christian
and Holy Religion, and not matter what becomes of it, even betraying the cause
of Christianity, while we faintly maintain it? (And they, certainly, would
hardly die for Christ who dare not speak for his honor (as one has well
observed.) And shall we scoff at all Christian Self-denials and Mortifications,
and deny our selves in none of our sensual carnal Pleasures and Vanities; but
think to swim with ease to Heaven through a Deluge and Sea of Sensuality, and
worldly Delights?

Shall both Mahometans and Heathens have their Priests in very great Esteem and
Veneration, never, at any time, meeting them in the Street, or any other place,
but testifying the same by lowly reverencing them; and also allowing them
comfortable maintenance? And shall we Christians slight, neglect, and despise
our Priests and Ministers, our Spiritual Fathers; yea testify the same to
their Faces, when we meet them, by our rude and irreverent Behavior toward
them? And grudge and repine at their competent and comely maintenance, which
not our selves but the Laws of our pious Ancestors have bestowed and settled
upon them? And this, notwithstanding, our blessed Lord and Master has plainly
told us. That he that despises you (meaning his Apostles and Ministers)
dispiseth me, and he that despises me, despises him that sent me.

Shall both Mahometans and Heathens, be at a great deal of pains and cost, to
erect neat and splendid Mosquits and Tempies, for the Worship of God and of
their Idols; not suffering them to be polluted and profaned in any kind, not
so much as suffering their dead to be buried therein? And shall they have, in
great esteem, those who are zealous in their Religion, build also stately
Monuments for the honor, and to preserve the memories of their deceased Saints
and Devotes of their Religion? And shall we Christians be negligent in
Repairing and Beautifying our Churches built ready to our Hands? Shall our
Christian Temples lie neglected; yea, many of them Ruinous, very many, if not
most of them (in the Country) like places rather for the entertainment of
Beasts, than for Men and Women to worship God in? And thus lying despised,
neglected, profaned; Are they not more also Polluted and Unhallowed many times
by our assembling there, by means of our sordid Irreverence, by our slight,
careless, slovingly, inanimate serving of the living God in them? And shall we
Christians scorn, contemn, and deride the Devotes in that Religion, which we
profess to own as ours? And shall we slight and neglect those days and times
appointed to commemorate our Saints and Servants of God, famous in their
Generations, for their Sanctity, Labors and Sufferings?

Shall Mahometans and Heathens be exemplary in their dutifulness to their
Parents, especially the poor Heathens, not suffering, at any time, their
Parents to be in want, but parting with half of that little they have for their
support and subsistence? And shall there be such horrid complaints among us
Christians, of the undutifulness (if not Barbarity) of Children to their
Parents in our days; that it would make a man's ears to tingle and heart to
ache, to hear all that may be said in this Respect?

Shall both Mahometans and Heathens have very great Respects and Reverence for
their Superiors and Governors, for the preservation of Order and Government,
and public Peace? And more especially, shall they abound in affectionate
Loyalty to their Prince and Sovereign, although a Tyrant? And shall we
Christians be deficient herein; yea, untractable, mutinous, and rebellious
against our Governors, and so highly disloyal as to resist the Lord's anointed,
our gracious Prince, when our Religion, nevertheless, assures us, That they
that resist shall receive to themselves Damnation?

Shall there be much love, and good will, and accord among Heathens one toward
another, as also equally exhibited by them to Strangers; yea, extending their
good Nature, Humanity and Pity, even to the very bruit Creatures subjected to
their use? And shall we Christians, abound in discord and dissension, and shall
we malign, hate, bite and devour one another, and make our Lord and Master, the
Prince of Peace, a Patron of Dissension, and his Gospel of Peace a Religion of
Discord? And shall we be more uncivil to Strangers than these Heathens; and
also be cruel and merciless toward our Beasts, when as our Religion also
instructs us, That a good Man is merciful to his very Beast?

Shall both Mahometans and Heathens have a great detestation of Unchastity,
especially in such single Women who pretend to it; and so great an abhorrence
of Adultery, that the very Relations and Kindred of the Offenders, of either
sort, will be themselves their speedy Executioners, and deprive them of their
Lives, and think they do a just Act therein (their Law permitting it?) And
shall we Christians, who own a Religion of the greatest strictness and purity
in the World, make little account of these Sins, as if we had forgot our
Religion, and were transformed into Beasts; and having lost all shame and
modesty, design to vie with Sodom?

Shall both Mahometans and Heathens not indulge their Palates, but be very
temperate and moderate in Eating and Drinking, and have such an abhorrence of
Drunkenness, that they have but one word in their Language to signify both a
Drunkard and a Madman? And shall we Christians be the Epicures of the World,
so abound in Excess, Debauchery and Drunkenness, and without all sense of shame
and in the sight of the Sun, as if we were the Disciples and Votaries of the
drunken God Bacchus? Shall that Sin of Drunkenness which is the Mother of
Heaviness, the joy of none but the Devil, and is big with a Thousand Evils, (as
one of the Fathers speaks) overspread the Nation?

Shall the Heathens be very laborious and industrious, diligent and careful in
their Trades and Callings, abhorring Idleness? And shall we Christians abound
in Improvidence, Carelessness and ill Husbandry, giving our selves up to Ease,
and sensual Pleasures, to the prejudice and ruin of our poor Families, brought
hereby, many times, to a morsel of Bread?

Shall the poor Heathen Servants (although they have very small wages allowed
them) be very Just and Honest, Diligent and Laborious, abounding in all
Fidelity to their Masters and Mistresses? And shall Christian Servants be Idle,
Careless and Unfaithful, not fit to be confided in and trusted? and shall this
be still the general complaint, in our days, made by all sorts and degrees
among us, of their Wretchlesness and Unfaithfulness?

Shall the Heathens be very faithful in Trusts committed to them, that they
will sooner lose their lives than either betray or forsake a trust, committed
to them in any concern? And shall we Christians be perfidious and unfaithful
one to another, and that to this degree, that it is become a very Proverb among
us, Where shall we meet with a Man that we can trust? And in matter of Money or
Profit, I will not trust my own Father? But a Man of honor and integrity (as
one observes) will sooner break his heart than his word. He will not forfeit
his Parole, even to an Enemy, no not if he had a thousand Crowns and Lives at
Stake.

Shall the Heathens observe exact Justice in their way of Trade, in Buying and
Selling, and be so honest therein, that a man may trust them safely and not be
cheated? And shall we Christians be the only traders in Wickedness, in lying,
cheating, overreaching one another in our commerce and trading? What a
reproach and shame is it to Christianity, that we should be according to the
Proverb, (Homo homini Lupus) As Woolves to prey upon and devour one another:
And that Heathens should exceed us Christians in common honesty? For, it has
been observed in our days, so sordid are most People grown, that their faith is
not so dear to them as their profit.

Shall both Mahometans and Heathens, be modest and sober in their Apparel,
steady and constant in their Fashion, never altering the same? And shall we
Christians, many of us, not know what belongs to modesty and sobriety in our
Clothes and Attire; and so fickle and inconstant, varying our Fashions as often
as we renew our Garments?

Shall Mahometans so abound in Charity to the Poor, that a Mussulman, or zealot
in their Religion, will give a seventh part of his Estate toward their relief?
And others of them be of such noble and public Spirits, that for general and
public use and benefit, they will be at great Expenses in building Sarraas or
public Inns, for entertainment of Strangers in their Journeying, and of Wells
and Fountains, with persons to attend them, for refreshing of weary Travelers;
and be noble and generous in forgiving high and insolent affronts and injuries
offered to them? And shall we Christians be of close, and private, and selfish
uncharitable Spirits, wholly Circumscribed within our own concerns, as if we
were born only for our selves, and give far less in Charity to the Poor than a
Mohammedan? And shall we Christians think it also a piece of honor and
gentility (upon an affront and injury offered to us) to be inexorable,
implacable and cruel, never to remit the injury?

Shall a new Mohammedan Convert be so zealous and constant to his new profession
of Christianity, who neither by threats or promises, made by his Powerful and
Tyrannical Prince, and his Lord and Master, could be prevailed upon, to retract
and renounce the same? And shall we who have been long Educated in
Christianity, not be zealous and constant to our holy Christian profession, but
fickle, wavering and inconstant?

And let all our Atheistical Christians, defiers and neglecters of God and
Goodness, take warning from the great Example before mentioned, of the
Almighty's remarkable Justice and Vengeance (in that strange providence related
before) against a Mohammedan Atheist, which extorted such a free and ingenious
Confession and Acknowledgment from him in his Distress and last Agony; and let
them become so wise, as either cease to be Creatures, and remove themselves (if
they can) out of the reach of the Almighty, or else cease to defy him.

In short, let us, Christians, seriously consider these things, and how
prevalent Mahometanism and Heathenism has been upon the minds and consciences
of these Infidels and Heathens, to the producing of commendable and virtuous
Actions and Conversations. And shall not the holy Religion of the ever Blessed
Jesus, brought down from Heaven to us by the Son of God, in which was fully
manifested to the World, the divine Love and Goodness, a Religion exceeding, in
worth and goodness, all the Religions that ever were in the World; delivering
to us the sublimest and best Precepts, for the happy regulation of our Lives
the greatest and highest encouragements for the animating us thereto, from the
example of our Lord and Master, by assuring to us the divine Assistances of the
holy Spirit, to be our aid and comfort in our Christian course and warefare;
and by bringing Life and Immortality to light, (setting open the Gate of
Heaven,) and assuring to us (as our reward) an immortal Crown of Glory in the
highest Heaven. And, notwithstanding all this, shall our Lives and
Conversations come short of these Mahometans and Heathens, who have had none of
these aids, to whom these glad tidings of Salvation never came? shall our
Conversations come short of these, who we believe come short of Heaven?

What a sad thing is it to consider therefore, That Christians very many of
them, may go to School, and learn of Infidels and Heathens to reform their
Lives and Manners? To see them, who profess Christianity, this best Religion in
the World, to be given up to a Reprobate mind, to Stupidity, to Carelessness,
and Neglect of all Religion and Virtue, as if they had wholly divested
themselves of their Reason, and lost all sense of God and Goodness.

Alas! it is to no purpose to talk like Christians and live worse than
Infidels; this was it (as a great Man observed) that made the Philosopher to
say, That there was nothing more glorious than a Christian in Discourse,
nothing more miserable in his Actions. Certainly Christians, especially
reformed Christians, should be distinguished from Heathens, not only by their
Faith, their Profession and Discourses, but by their Manners, their Lives and
Conversations, which should be much better than those of Infidels and Heathens.
I shall conclude in the words of the Pious and Learned, Pudeat, Pudeat, illos
nomine tenus Christianos, qui ad hanc rem Ethnici rectius sapuerunt: May it
shame, may it shame those who call themselves Christians, to consider that very
Heathens have lived better and more Christian lives than they.

And as a late worthy Divine of our own expresses it, What man then deserves
the name of a Christian, that notwithstanding all the means of Grace which God
affords, does strive to make himself equal with a Beast, that basely uses his
noble part? that is like a Feather shaken with the Wind, and lies down at the
Feet of every Pleasure, and cannot sustain the load of the least Grief; that
vexes and frets at every Cross, as if the Devil ruled the World, and trembles
at death as a Child does at a Friend with a Vizard on. God expects sure that
we, Christians, should be men of another sort, and that Philosophy (or
Heathenism) should not beget more lusty and vigorous Souls than Christianity
can.

And as another speaks, It is an abominable thing to belie the Truth, even in
words; but the lie of Life is the most pernicious of all others. With what face
can we then exclaim against the baseness of a lying Tongue, when our whole
Practice and Conversation is but one continued lie all through; viz. Our
Profession Christian, our Conversations Heathen; yea, worse than Heathen. And
let us with Seriousness and sorrow consider therefore, may not the Heathens say
to us, (as it is related the Heathens in America, did to the Spaniards.) Qualis
iste Deus, quiae tam impuros, and sceleratos filios habet? What kind of God is
he who has such impure and wicked Sons?

Almighty God, who show to them that be in Error the Light of thy Truth, to
the intent, that they may return into the way of Righteousness; Grant unto all
them that are admitted into the Fellowship of Christ's Religion, that they may
esehew those things that are contrary to their Profession, and follow all such
things as are agreeable to the same, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.
AN APPENDIX.
Now as an Attendant to the foregoing Discourse, why may I not add (and not
improperly) some choice and excellent Discourses and Sayings of the Ancient
Wise Heathens? Collected, some from the Authors themselves; others from the
Discourses of our Protestant Divines, viz.

1. Of Knowledge and Wisdom.
SEneca says, There is a world of things to be studied and learned, therefore
we should discharge the mind of things unnecessary to make way for greater
matters; Our danger is the being mistaken in things, not in words; and in
consounding of Good and Evil.

Man is endued with a reasonable Soul, and the Knowledge of things is very
suitable and pleasant to it; Music is not more pleasant to the Ear, nor Beauty
and Proportion to the Sight, than Knowledge to the mind of Man.

Those that have the greatest Reputation for Wisdom and Understanding, are
ignorant and blind, and what they do see is very darkly, and with much
Imperfection; those that know most know very little.

The Fountain and Original of all mischief is that we live not according to
Reason but Opinion. -- But I will do nothing (says Seneca) out of Opinion but
all things out of Conscience.

It is (says he) the bounty of nature that we live, but of Philosophy that we
live well; which is in truth a greater benefit than Life it self.

Where is a rambling head (says he) there is a certain sign of a sickly Mind
or Humor.

It Is a good Argument of a well composed mind, when a man loves home, and to
keep company with himself.

Not a few there are, that provided they may save their Bodies, never care what
becomes of their Souls.

Many Books and much Acquaintance brings a man to a Levity of Disposition, and
a liking of Change. And what is the body better for meat, that will not stay
with it?

And this wise Heathen goes on thus. Wisdom delights in Openness and Simplicity
in the forming of our lives, rather than in the Niceties of the Schools, which
at best do but bring in Pleasure without Profit.

Wisdom and Virtue requires a Tutor, though we can easily learn to be vicious
without a Master.

Assure your self (says he) That no man gives a better account of his time,
than he that makes it his Study to make himself better; and to this end observe
thy self as thy greatest Enemy, so shall thou become thy greatest Friend.

Aristotle being demanded, What was the fruit of all his Study and Philosophy
as to himself?

Answered, To do those things out of a natural Willingness that others do by
Compulsion.

Let this truth be confessed and remain for ever. That they who are well
instructed, easily become good men. In his Book De Legibus. And he gave
sometimes this advice to his Scholars, That when they took notice of any thing
bad, or of ill report which they beheld in others; That every one of them
should ask himself this question, Number ego feci tale? (i. e.) Have not I done
the like?

And Tully tells us, That nothing can be well taught without example.

And the Ancient Pythagoreans (as a worthy Divine has observed) were wont when
any Person forsook their School, to set a Coffin in the place where he used to
sit, and then to make a solemn Funeral for him; bewailing wailing him with
Tears, as one that was really dead.

Tully says, Every Creature has its proper Perfection. The proper Perfection
of the Mind is Reason; the proper Perfection of Reason is Virtue; and the
proper Perfection of Virtue is Integrity.

It Is not enough to remember (says Seneca) and to understand, unless we do
what we know.

The Pythagoreans made the chief end of moral Philosophy, to be the curing of
the Soul of its sick diseased Passions; and to bring it to a healthy Complexion
and an athletick sound Constitution which consisted in virtuous Actions.

There are some Writings (says Seneca) that stir up some generous Resolutions,
and do as it were inspire a man with a new Soul; they display the Blessings of
a happy Life, and possess me at the same time with Admiration and with hope.

And nothing (says he) is more unworthy and dishonorable, than for a man to
live to a great Age; and yet has no other fruit of his Life to show, but only
his living long in the World.

Concerning God, and the Knowledge and Love of him.
Tully, calls him Optimus Maximus, God the best and chiefest being.

And Seneca says, the Knowledge of God is the most excellent Knowledge: he is
the most excellent object, and therefore the Knowledge of him must needs be so;
for all Science is valuable according to the objects thereof; where the one is
worthy and excellent the other is so too; where the one is mean and worthless,
the other is not valuable or regardable; and hence it is that even in this
World, the knowledge of God surpasses all other Knowledge whatsoever it be.
Take away this inestimable good, and life it self is not worth the Labor and
Care of it. O Quanta res est homo, nisi supra humana se erexerit. (i. e.) O
what a wretched and contemptible thing is man when he does not advance and
raise up his mind above humane Affairs? And again. Quid infelicius Ama^o^ esse,
et non Dei (i. e.) What greater Unhappiness can possibly befall any man, than
to be a lover, and not of God?

And Plato tells us, That Love was the Ornament of all, both of the Gods and
Men.

The Dominions of the Soul above are boundless; this very Contemplation gives
us force, Liberty and Nourishment, and the mind is there at home; and it has
this Argument of its Divinity, that it takes delight in what is Divine -- There
it is that it learns the end of its proper being; the Knowledge of God -- By
the help of Philosophy, the soul gives the slip to the Body and refreshes it
self in Heaven.

Wealth, honor and favor, may come upon a man by Chance; nay may be cast upon
him without so much as looking after, but Virtue is the work of Industry and
Labor; and certainly it is worth the while, to purchase that good which brings
all other along with it.

Good Lord, think I (says Seneca) if men would but exercise their brains, as
they do their Bodies, and take as much pains for Virtue, as they do for
Pleasure!

Faith Justice Piety, Fortitude, Prudence, are venerable, and only the
Possession of Good men; but a plentiful Estate, a brawny Arm, and a firm Body
are many times the portion of the wicked; the Virtue we commend is high and
illustrious, not that it is a Happiness only to be free from evil, but because
it dignifies and enlarges the mind, because it prepares it for the Knowledge
of heavenly things; and makes it capable even of conversing with God himself.

All men (says he) seek for Comfort and Satisfaction and Joy, but yet are
ignorant, and know not whence that Satisfaction and Joy that is durable and
lasting, arises.

Fools that we are, what would we be at? that have neither wit enough to advise
our selves, or to take counsel of others. Is it pleasure we seek? God has
provided pleasures for us in Heaven: If it be pleasure in this World that we
covet, why do we not give it our selves in the Blessing of a well composed and
virtuous mind? (O the admirable Divinity of a Heathen.)

That Is a pleasure (says he) substantial, sincere, unchangeable, and
untainted, whereas the Enjoyments of he Flesh are weak and short lived, only
varnished over -- both afraid and ashamed of the light.

Pleasure is mean, servile, transitory, tiresome, sickly, the good of the
Belly, and only the felicity of Brutes.

And accordingly Peregrinus of Athens used to say, That a wise man would not
sin although the Gods should never know it.

The pleasures of the vulgar (says Seneca) are ungrounded, thin and
superficial, but the other are solid and eternal; and the most miserable of all
Mortals, are they that deliver themselves up to their Palates or their Lusts.

He that subdues his carnal Lusts, shall easily keep himself untainted with any
other. So that Reason does not encounter this or that Vice by it self; but
beats down all at a blow.

The Joy of a wise man (says he) stands firm without Interruption, in all
places, at all times, and in all Conditions; his thoughts are cheerful and
quiet.

For indeed there is not any greater effect of true Wisdom, than the equality
and evenness of our Joy, and accordingly it was observed by Xantippe, Socrates
his Wife, That he always returned home with the same calm temper of mind as he
went out with.

Of Justice, Honesty and Integrity.
Justice and Prudence in Conjunction (says Tully) will give a man what Credit
he pleases; but taking them apart, Justice even without Wisdom, may do very
much, but Wisdom without Justice is nothing worth. Justice may beget Confidence
without Wisdom; but Wisdom can do nothing without Justice.

And Plato defined Virtue to be the Harmony of the Soul.

And honest Socrates will tell us, That Simplicity and Truth is a great and
wise thing; but Cunning and Deceit is a mean and foolish thing. And that the
Just man and the happy man are all one.

And other Heathens tell us, That where Fidelity is once abandoned, there
Falsehood and Perfidiousness takes place, which is branded with the highest
Cheat in Humanity; and that in presenting him that is false and perfidious, we
therein undertake the Cause of all mankind.

Now as to their saying, (says Tully) that when a thing is very profitable,
the advantage justifies it; though it were not honest otherwise: Let me tell
you, that it must be so, and not be made so: For there is nothing profitable
which is not honest, and it is not honest, because it is profitable; but it is
profitable, because it is honest.

And he that defends an Injury, is next to him that commits it.

And take away the Opinion (says he) of a man's Integrity, and the more crafty
and subtle he is; by so much is he the more hateful and suspected.

It costs us (says Seneca) a great deal of time and other men's ears, a great
deal of trouble to purchase the Character of a learned man, wherefore I shall
even content my self with the courser Title of an honest man.

He says O quantum mali est nimium subtilitas? O what a great Evil and
Mischief is too much Cunning?

It is not enough to be just where is honor to be got, but to continue so in
defiance of infamy and danger.

Not only the chiefest, but the only good consists in what is honest and
virtuous.

The Graces of an honest Mind (says he) will serve us upon the way, and make
us happy at our Journeys end. A peaceful Conscience, honest thoughts, virtuous
actions and an Indifference for casual Events, are Blessings without end,
Satiety or Measure. There is no Cheerfulness like the Resolution of a brave
mind; that has Fortune under his feet, he that can look Death in the face, and
bid it welcome; open his door to Poverty, and bridle his Appetites; this is the
man, whom Providence has established in the Possession of inviolable delights.

It is clear (says Tully) that whatsoever is done with a timorous, abject,
mean, and broken mind, cannot be profitable, because it is flagitious,
dishonorable, and shameful: as the Action of Regulus would have been; if he
had rather consulted his own interest than that of the Public.

Light is not more inseparable from a Sunbeam, than Pleasure and Peace of Soul
is from a State of Purity and Integrity, says another.

Make it no longer a matter of dispute what are the marks and signs of a good
man, but immediately set about it and endeavor to become such an one, says
Antoninus.

As to the Providence of God in the World.
Man is a feeble Creature, (says Seneca) and impotent for his own defense in a
thousand Cases that happen every day: It were therefore a most melancholy
Condition of Life, if we were not under the shelter of a Providence; if we had
no Patron, if there were not a supreme Genius, a higher nature continually
sollicitous for our Protection. -- Nothing but childish Cowardice, could tempt
a man to wish to live one day, if he were confident there were not such a thing
as a Providence. -- This erects a mans-mind, and fortifies his Spirits, this
suffers him neither to fear, nor to wish for death; but enables him both to
live patiently and die bravely.

Which was verified in honest Socrates, who resolutely told his Enemies, and
his Judges; you may kill Socrates, but you cannot hurt him.

And Seneca says, That the Consequent of the trust in a Providence, is the
great Encouragement to all generous Enterprises and Performances, etc.

Marcus Antoninus Philosophus says, That he would not be willing to live one
day in the World; if he thought there was not a God in it.

Epictetus says, It is among our first Rudiments; that there is a God, and
that his Providence is over all things. Know ye O men! (says he) that every of
you is committed to a certain diligent and excellent Keeper and Observer; such
is every man's Genius appointed by God, so that thou art never alone.

Of the Sense of God, and of Religion and Virtue.
Plutarch says, They that look upon God, as the chief Rewarder of good and
evil, and fear him accordingly, are thereby freed from other perplexing fears.
Such persons have more inward peace than others, who indulge themselves in their
Vices, and dare to commit any Wickedness. Such a man has a truly great and
generous mind, who can resign himself up to God's Disposal. The greatest
Liberty is to submit to the Laws of God our Sovereign.

Plato defines virtue to be the Harmony of the Soul.

And Hierocles says, That Philosophy advances the Soul into the divine
likeness.

And another Philosopher tells us, That the subduing our Wills to the Will of
God; is indeed the Substance of all Religion, and that the highest and
costliest Sacrifices were never prized like the Sincerity of an honest heart.

Imitate him (says he) whom you worship.

And both Plato and Epictetus will have Man's great end to consist in following
of God.

Every thing (says Antoninus) is designed for some kind of work, Beasts and
Plants the Sun and Stars, and what do you conceive your business to be? Sensual
Pleasures. Bethink your self a little better; whether this be suitable to your
natural Sentiments, to the Nobility of your mind, and those excellent Faculties
with which you are endowed. Every man's chief end should be a Resemblance of God
and being made like to the Deity.

And Epictetus further excellently, thus discourses. If I had been (says he)
a Nightingale or a Swan, I should have employed the time of my Life in such a
way as is suitable to the Condition of those Creatures; But being made a Man
capable of serving and worshipping that God from whom I had my Being, it is but
reason that I should apply my self to this, as being my proper work and
business. And therefore hereunto will I devote my self, as being the chief
Employment to which I am designed, etc. and concludes it to be his duty wholly
to devote himself to the praises and worship of that God who was the Author of
his Being.

And Hierocles in Carm. Aur. has this excellent passage. He there advises to
second all our Endeavors with prayer to God, and then to be careful of
pursuing our Prayers with Endeavors.

It is not granted to men that have been in an Error or Fault to see their
mistake, until first they are very weary of it. Brutus in Epist. ad Pergamen.

Concerning Religious Worship and prayer to God.
Aristotle most excellently discourses, where he states that to be the most
desirable proportion of all worldly Felicities and Enjoyments; which, is most
consistent with men's devoting themselves to the business of Religion, and that
to be either too much or too little, of Wealth or Honor or Power, etc. when
men are hindered in their meditating upon God, or their worshipping of him.

And the Saying of Pythagoras (mentioned by Tully and Plutarch) was; We are
never better than when we approach to God, when we (as Tully speaks,) Rebus
Divinis operam damus (i. e.) are employed in the Duties of divine Worship.

The better sort of Heathens (as one tells us) said of Prayer; that it is our
Conducter unto God, brings us into his divine Light, sets us in his Presence,
draws him to us by a divine persuasive Rhetoric, and powerful Sympathy with
him; nay, knits and unites us unto the first Being, and moves his bountiful
goodness to communicate all good things unto us; it being the opening of the
Soul to God, that he may fill us.

And Plato tells us, That as well Greeks as Barbarians, at the rising and
setting of the Sun and Moon, used Prostrations; and he resolves. That all men
who have the least degree of Wisdom and Sobriety, call upon God, when they
begin to move toward any undertaking whether it be great or small.

And Porphyry long after tells us, That all wise men in all Nations have been
very diligent and frequent in Prayers, as that which is of mighty Importance.

We are enclosed (says he) here in this Body, as in a Prison, like Children
separated and at a great distance from their Parents, who ought to pray to the
Gods, who are their true Parents, about their return to them; and who ever they
are that do not thus pray to them, will find, that they are no better than
Fatherless and Motherless Children, who will have none to take care of them,
and be kind to them, when they are loosned from these Bodies; to which they are
now chained.

There is a Form of Prayer as I have heard, of Xenophon's, viz. Grant us this
day, things that thou know to be good for us, whether we ask them or ask
them not; and turn evils from us though we ask them.

Aristotle at his death cries out to God thus, O Ens Entium, miserere mei, (i
e.) O thou great Being of all Beings, have mercy upon me.

Also it is said, That an ancient Greek Poet, used thus to express himself in
his Prayer to God; Hearken unto me, O Father, thou great Wonder of Mankind; who
takes a special Care of an everlasting Soul.

The Nature of God, (says Tully) may justly challenge the Worship of men,
because of its superlative excellency, Blessedness and Eternity: For whatsoever
excells has upon that account a Veneration due to it, God is to be worshipped
because of his excellent Majesty, and incomparable Nature.

And Seneca cites this Passage out of Aristotle; men (says he) are never more
concerned, than when they have to do about God; we should enter into the
Temples with a humble and a composed demeanor, when we approach to Sacrifice;
it should be with all imaginable Expressions of Reverence and Modesty in our
Countenace and Carriage.

And accordingly in the entrance upon the Worship of the Gods, they cried out,
O procul absint Prophani! Let all Profaneness be avoided and not come near.
And they had that Admonition in their Worship, Hoc age, (i. e.) be intent upon,
and mind what you are about.

Seneca says, He only can truly worship God, who knows him; That the first
step unto divine Worship, is to believe the being of God, and then to demean
our selves toward him suitably to the greatness of his Majesty. Would you
render him propitious to you, endeavor to be good (says he.) That Man does
only truly worship God, who labors to be like him.

And Maximus Tyrius (discoursing concerning those diverse Solemnities wherewith
several Nations did honor their Gods) says, he would be loath by denying any
of those to derogate from the honor of the Deity; but men should chiefly
labor to have him in their minds, they should principally endeavor to know
him and to love him.

Eusebius (as a Divine tells us) has quoted Menander a Greek Poet, viz. In
vain (says he) do men endeavor to make the Gods propitious, by their costly
Sacrifices; If they would have the divine Favor, let them love and adore God
in their hearts: be just and holy in their Conversations.

If true Worship of God did consist (says Persius) only in costly Sacrifices,
then such alone as were rich could be Religious; whereas God is more ready to
accept the meanest Offering from a Person of a just, worthy and generous mind,
who does truly love and devote himself to him, than the most pompous, costly
Sacrifices from others. Give God, says he, Resolved Right, pure Thoughts, a
Mind raised high.
A Soul engraved with noble Honesty.


If one (says Seneca) could but see the mind of a good Man, as it is
illustrated with Virtue, the Beauty and Majesty of it, (which is a dignity not
so much as to be thought of without Love or Veneration) would not a Man bless
himself at the Sight of such an Object, as at the Encounter of some
supernatural Power? -- It is by an Impression of Nature, that all men have a
Reverence for Virtue -- Men are only vicious for the profit of Villainy, for at
the same time they commit it they condemn it.

No wonder then the Heathen Xenophon tells us, That there is no fairer
Possession in all the World, than Virtue and Goodness.

And that wise Tully thus judges, That he is mistaken who thinks any
Discommodity, either of Body or Estate to be sorer than the Vices of the Mind.

And Plutarch tells us of a People, who did use upon Festival days, to
present unto their Sons certain drunken Slaves; that by the view of that Vice
of Drunkenness, they might learn to avoid it.

Riches (says Aristotle) make men haughty and insolent.

And farther, ( Seneca says) God could not traduce these things of the World
which men so much desire more, than by taking them from the best of Men, and
giving them to the worst.

As to the Patient bearing the Evils and Troubles of this Life.
It is the natural Property of Virtue to make a man serene and cheerful (says
Seneca.)

And farther he thus discourses, That Man must needs be unjust and unequal,
who does not think fit to leave to God the Giver unto the Liberty of his own
Gift, to resume it again when he pleases.

Epictetus says, In all those Conditions which seem hard and grievous unto me,
I do thus dispose my self: I consider they come from God, and I do endeavor
not merely to submit, but to assent to him in his Dealings, not only out of
necessity, but out of choice. Let a Man in Affliction think that nothing comes
to pass but what ought to be; and let him (says he) not take upon him to
reprehend Providence; it is best for a Man to bear what he cannot mend, and to
follow God (by whom all Events are disposed) without murmuring. Let us (says
he) bespeak God as Clea these did; Let the great Governor of the World lead me
into what Condition he pleases; am most ready to follow him, or suppose I
should find a Reluctance against his Dealings with me, yet I will ^^ill follow
him though it be Sighing, and suffer that as a^ evil wretched man, which I
ought to bear as a good Man with Patience and Submission. -- It becomes Men to
speak and live up to this Principle. He only is a truly generous Man, who does
thus resign up himself to God, and on the contrary, he is a little Wretch, of a
degenerate find who struggles against him, having a hard opinion of the
Government of the World, and thinks it fitter to mend God than himself.

One man (says Seneca) values his Peace above his Honor; another his Honor
above his Safety: and not a few there are (that provided they may serve their
Bodies) never care what becomes of their Souls.

We are beset with dangers, and therefore a wise Man should have his Virtues in
Readiness to encounter them; whether Poverty, loss of Friends, Pain, Sickness
or the like, he still maintains his Post. Whereas, a Pool is surprised at every
thing. It Is bitter to be forced to any thing; but things are easy when
complied with. It is much easier (says he) to check our Passions in the
beginning, than to stop them in their Course. There is nothing so hard but
Custom makes it easy to us.

And elsewhere, he says that Anger is but short Madness. There is no surer
Argument of a great Mind, than not to be transported to Anger by any Accident.
The Clouds and the Tempests are formed below, but all above is quiet and
serene, which is the Emblem of a Brave Man, that suppresses all Provocations,
and lives within himself, modest, venerable and composed. -- It is of all
Passions the most powerful. -- There is not any Mortal that lives free from the
danger of it. -- Nay the learned, and Men otherwise of exemplary Sobriety are
infected with it, and it is so potent a Passion, that Socrates durst not trust
himself with it. Sirrah, (says he unto his Man) now would I beat thee if I were
not angry with thee. Nor is it fit (says Seneca) that a Servant should be in
his power, that is not his own Master. This Passion does not solicit and
mislead us like other Passions, but it runs away with us by force, and hurries
us on with an irresistible Temerity as well to our own as others Ruin.

As to rish Judging.
It is a good Caution (says Seneca) not to believe any thing till we are very
certain of it, for many probable things prove false, and a short time will make
Evidence of the undoubted Truth. -- Without much Candor and Simplicity and
making the best of every thing, there is no living in Society with Mankind. --
We should chide our selves where we are overcredulous. -- No man is so
circumspect, so considerate; or so fearful of offending, but he has much to
answer for. -- The wisest of all Mortals have their Failings, and no Man living
is without the same excuse. -- We are all obliged in Humanity to bear one with
another; The great Lesson of Mankind, as well in this as in all other Cases is,
To do as he would be done by.

As to Friendship and Society.
The love of Society is natural (says Seneca) but the Choice of our Company is
matter of Virtue:

But we must leave the Crowd if we would be happy.

Est Solatium vitae cui pectus aperias. (says another) (i. e.) It is the
Solace or Comfort of Life, to have a faithful Friend, to whom thou may open
thy mind.

There is a great Difference in Bodies, and there are as great Diversities, and
Varieties in our minds (says Tully) who further adds, That Socrates, among the
Greeks was a gentle and a pleasant Companion; A Wit that lay much upon innocent
Railery, and had an excellent Faculty of speaking his mind, under an agreeable
disguise.

All appetites (says Seneca) have their proper Objects, and in the Knowledge
and Fruition of them they find their Content and Satisfaction, and in the
absence of them they find Misery and Torment. -- Men have an Appetite and
Inclination to a sociable Life, and therefore in the Company and Society of
seconds they find Pleasure and Repose. Noble Examples stir us up to noble
Actions -- but ill Example, Pleasure, Ease, are no doubt (says he) great
Corrupters of Manners. -- As an ill Air may endanger a good Constitution, so
may a place of ill Example endanger a good Man. Great Examples give both
Authority and Excuse to Wickedness.

It Is Philosophy that gives us a Veneration for God, a Charity to our
Neighbor, that teaches our duty to Heaven; and exhorts us to an Agreement one
with another.

The wise Cato has observed, Nihil agendo, male agere discis, (i. e.) by
Idleness or doing nothing, you will most certainly learn to do ill, for our
busy mind like nature will admit of no vacuum.

Concerning evil Habits.
Both Aristotle and Gallen say, Custom is an ascititious nature. And Gallen
says, A habit in any thing is a lasting, and hardly dissolvable Disposition;
long use and exercise at last becomes Nature.

So that (says another) much of our Impotency to Good, is derived upon us by
Familiarity with Sin.

And Seneca says, there is nothing so hard but Custom makes it easy to us.

And Tully says, So great is the Infection of evil Custom, that the seeds of
Virtue communicated to us by nature are choked by it, and Vices contrary
thereto are begotten, whereupon arose that Saying, Vincere Consuetudinem est
dura Pugna. It is a hard and difficult Contest, to conquer a Habit and Custom.
But however, it is as true a Saying, Solus Amor nescit difficultates, (i. e.)
Only Love knows no Difficulties.

Concerning Atheism and Irreligion.
Plutarch styles Irreligion to be a kind of Stupor and Madness: whereby men are
deprived of their Senses: And he asserts it to be a very improper thing to
ascribe true Reason to those who do not acknowledge and adore the Deity.

Tully says, Esse Deos qui negat, vix eum sanae mentis existimem (i e.) I can
hardly think that Man to be in his right mind who is an Atheist and destitute
of Religion: And he further proceeds, Why should any style such a one a Man,
who by what he sees in the World, is not convinced of a Deity and a Providence,
and of that Adoration he owes to the Deity? And he calls Atheists, Hosts
humani generis, the great Enemies of Mankind. And says, That among all the
living Creatures that are in the World, there is none but Man that has any
Notion of a Deity; and amongst Mankind, there is no Nation so wild and
barbarous but pretends to some Religion.

And the Satyrist speaking of Religion and a Sense of Divine things: It Is this
(says he) that distinguishes us from bruit Creatures, that we have Souls
capable of Divine Impressions.

And as to Profaneness, neglect and contempt of God and Religion, Seneca thus
discourses; That several Countries do appoint several Punishments for the
Violation of Religion, but every Country appoints some, and it does not any
where escape unpunished.

And Plato would have it punished capitally, as being a thing of most
pernicious Consequence to Government.

And Tully ascribes all the good Fortune of the Romans to their Piety and
Devotion.

As to common Swearing.
Tully says, Seeing that an Oath does call down God for Witness, and propose
him for Umpire and Voucher of the things it says; therefore to induce God in
humane Affairs upon small and slight accounts, does imply Contempt of him,
wherefore we ought wholly to shun Swearing, except upon Occasions of the
highest Necessity.

And to swear at all (says another Heathen) except where it is necessary; does
not suit with a wise man.

Socrates says, Reverence an Oath

But Seneca says, I advise principally that men do not easily swear at all (i.
e.) in light and small matters.

As to Government of Nations and Countries.
Plutarch styles Religion to be the Cement of all Communities, and the chief
Basis of all Legislative Power; and that it is much more easy to build a City
in the open Air without any ground to found it upon, than to establish
Government without Religion.

Plato said that virtuous, honest and good men, are the Pillars and Support,
the Preservers of the World.

Take away, says Tully, the awe of Religion, and all that Fidelity and Justice
so necessary for the keeping up of humane Society must perish with it.

Menander says, The King is a living Image of God.

Dietogenes the Pythagorean says, That God has given a Prince his Dominion,
and that the King having a Power uncontrollable, and being himself a living
Law, is the Figure of God among men.

And with Homer the Prince of Poets, does Plato the Prince of Philosophers
agree; (as Bishop Usher tells us) That the Regal Office is a Divine good among
Men, and makes his King as it were a God among Men.

Pliny tells the Emperor Trajan, That God gave him to be his Substitute
toward all Mankind.

And Plutavch out of Plato, prefers a Monarchy before all other Governments.

Marcus Aurelius, says, Of a free Monarchy none may be Judge but God.

Plutarch sets this down as a chief Point of that natural Skill Philopaemen
had in Government; That he did not only rule according to the Laws, but
overruled the Laws themselves, when he found it conduce to the weal-Publick.

And most excellent, for the supporting of just Government, is that saying of
Tacitus the Roman Historian, Bonos Principes expetere debemus, qualescumque
pati, etc. (i. e.) That Subjects ought to desire and pray for good Princes, yet
to bear with the bad, as they do with dry and unseasonable Seasons of the Year,
and as they bear with Patience, Storms and Tempests, and all other the evils of
this Life.

And Tully says, I prefer an unjust Peace before a most just War.

It is a very hard matter (says Tully) for a Man to observe the Tenor of true
Equity (which peculiarly belongs to Justice) in the inordinate appetite of
Superiority and Dominion, nothing can be honest, but what is just, and
therefore it was notably said by Plato. As that Knowledge which is divided from
Justice, is rather Craft than Wisdom, So that Courage which is bold and
adventurous is rather Temerity and Fool-hardiness, than Valor, if it be
carried on by Passion and Interest rather than for a common Good: Wherefore
(says Tully) all men of Valor, and great Undertakings, should be likewise Men
of Goodness, Simplicity, Candor, and Friends of Truth: which are all
inseparable from Justice. But the mischief is, that this Tumor and Elation of
Mind, breaks out many times into a pertinacy, and an ambitious desire of Rule.
-- No Man can be said to be truly Heroic, that depends for his Reputation upon
the Opinion of the Multitude.

And Tully (speaking of the Greek verses of Euripides, intimating that a Man
might for a Crown be unjust) says, It was a Lewd and horrible thing done of
him to make that the Exception of a Crime, which of all Crimes, is it self the
most abominable.

But we need not wonder at the strange Opinions of Men in our Times. When
Aristotle has told us in his Metaphysics, we embrace (says he) Opinions
because of their Affinity to the Complexion of our minds, and the Agreeableness
to our Lives and Manners.

Plutarch tells us how the tail of the Serpent rebelled against the head,
because it did guide the whole Body; and drew the tail after it whithersoever
it would; therefore the head yielded that the tail should rule, but then it
being small and wanting Eyes, drew the whole Body Head and all, through such
straight Passages and Holes and Thickets, that it soon brought the Serpent to
Confusion.

And Titus Livius tells us, That when the People of Rome made a factious
Combination to rebel against their Governors, Menenius Agrippa went unto them,
and said, That on a time, all the Members conspined against the Stomach, and
alleged that she devoured with Ease and Pleasure what they purchased with
great Labor and Pains; And therefore the Feet would walk no more; the Hands
would work no more, the Tongue would plead no more, and so within a little
while the long fasting of the Stomach and want of Meat, made weak Knees and
feeble Hands, dimm Eyes and a faltering Tongue and a heavy Heart; thereupon,
perceiving presently their former Folly, they were glad to be reconciled to the
Stomach again, which seasonable and wise Discourse reconciled the People to
their Governors.

A Prince is liable to be judged by none but God, says Dion.

And Horace says to this purpose, Kings rule their Subjects, God alone
Awes those dread Sovereigns in their Throne.


Seneca speaks, That Nation or People that God intends to destroy, he first
infatuates.

Tully says, It Is the same thing, whether a Man wills before to have any thing
done, or rejoices in it when it is done. He is (says he) as guilty that
applauds, as he that persuades to it.

It was Seneca's prognostic of the Monarchy that had been founded by Caesar;
That the denying of Obedience to it would prove the undoing thereof; for such
an Accident as this (says he) will be the Bane of the Roman Peace; it will
bring the Fortunes of so great a People unto utter ruin. -- As long as it
knows how to endure the Reins, it will be safe: which if at any time it shall
break, or when shaken off, shall not suffer to be put on again -- This high
Empire will fall in pieces, and the Dominion of this City will expire together
with her Obedience.

The afflicted States of Kings, says Tully, do easily draw the helps of many
unto pity, and especially of them who are either Kings themselves, or do live
in a Kingdom; the Regal name being by them esteemed to be great and sacred.

The Sense of the Heathens, as to the future State of Rewards and Punishments
after this Life.
First, As to their Elyzium. It was a resolute Answer of Mundanus an eminent
Gymn sophist, to Alexander, when he threatened him with Death; viz. That he did
not fear Death, but rather wish it, in that it was a Change into a more happy
State.

And it was the Answer of the Oracle to Amelius (enquiring what was become of
Polinius's Soul) That he was gone to Pythagoras, Socrates, and Plato, and as
many as had born a part in the Quire of heavenly Love.

Lucan says, Victurosque Dei celant ut vivere durent
Felix esse mori:
-- in Doctor Brown's English thus. We are all deluded, vainly searching ways,
To make us happy by the length of days;
For cunningly to make's protract this Breath,
The Gods conceal the happiness of Death.


And the Sense herein, of Antiphanes a Heathen Poet, the learned Grotius gives
us, which is thus rendered in English by the Translator.

Lament your Friends with Sorrow moderate,
They are not lost, but gone before, where Fate
Disposes all: and we in order must;
One after one be turned to the same dust;
We meet at the same Inn, by several ways,
And in another World shall see new days.
And as to their Tartarus or Hell, Virgil having begun to relate some of the
infernal Torments, passes over the rest in silence, because of their multitude,
declaring that though he had one hundred Mouths, and as many Tongues, and a
Voice of Iron, yet should he not be able to recite so much as their Names.

I shall draw to a Conclusion and make use of the words of a late worthy
Author; That indeed Moral Virtues were never so established by the Light of
Reason as they are by the Laws of the Gospel, and our Obedience endeared to us
by nobler Promises than the Pagan Philosophy were ever made acquainted with,
and these Promises attended with all the Motives of Credibility; and likewise
enforced under severer Penalties than either Virgil or Homer in all their
Romantic Description of Elyzium or Tartarus, ever dreamt of. Nor is there in
all the Ethics of the Grecians or Romans, such an Inducement and incentive to
practical Obedience, as the Incarnation of the Son of God, That God so loved
the World, that he gave his only begotten Son to die for us, that we might not
perish but have eternal Life; nor such a matchless Pattern of universal Virtue,
as the Life of the ever blessed Jesus sets before us. So that upon the whole,
we Christians that have the Light of the Gospel, the sacred Writings of the Old
and New Testament, are more inexcusable in our Failures, and criminal in our
Miscarriages, than those that lived under the Conduct of mere Reason, were. And
to which let me adjoin that notable Saying of Salvian, viz. After what manner
is Jesus Christ at this day honored among us Christians, when the being his
faithful Disciples, is an Occasion to make one less esteemed of men! How can
the Corruption of the World come to any greater Extremity than to hold Religion
for a mean and dishonorable thing, when on the contrary it is Religion only
that truly deserves Honor and Regard, and to which all Divine and Humane Laws
have ever given great Respect and Deference; yea so far, that the very feigned
Deities of the Heathens were thought worthy of Gold and Silver Temples, when
even the true God (who gives all Beauty and Luster to Gold and Silver and
precious Stones) is scarcely honored by us within Stone Walls. Alas! as
another Author tells us, The great Wisdom of many in our times consists only
in getting Money (the grand Antichrist of the World) which in the very Letter
of the Text, they exalt above God and Religion.

But a wise man (says Seneca) studies rather to fill his Mind than his Coffers.

And may I conclude with these serious Cautions of Seneca and Virgil.

That Kingdom (says Seneca) is in an unstable and cottering Condition, where
Impudence abounds, and where is no regard of Religion, Justice, Fidelity and
Integrity.

Discite Justitiam moniti, and non temnere Divos, says Virgil.

Be admonished and learn Righteousness, and cease to contemn God and Religion
any more.

ERRATA.
PAge 37. l. 3. r. (says Seneca.) p. 39 l 1. for presenting, r. prosecuting.
p. 41. dele the 10th line.

Books Printed for and Sold by Luke Meredith, at the Angel in Amen-Corner.
Books written by the Reverend Dr. Patrick, now Lord Bishop of Chichester.
THE Christian Sacrifice: A Treatise, showing the Necessity, End, and Manner of
receiving the Holy Communion; together with suitable Prayers and Meditations
for every Month in the Year, and the principal Festivals in memory of our
blessed Savior: In Four parts. The Ninth Edition corrected.

The devout Christian instructed how to pray and give thanks to God: Or, a Book
of Devotions for Families, and particular persons, in most of the Concerns of
humane Life. The Eighth Edition, in Twelves.

And Advice to a Friend. The Fourth Edition, in Twelves.

The Glorious Epiphany, with the devout Christian's Love to it, in Octavo.

The Book of Job Paraphrased, in Octavo, new.

The whole Book of Psalms Paraphrased, in Octavo, Two Volumes.

The Proverbs of Solomon Paraphrased, with Arguments to each Chapter, which
supply the place of Commenting.

A Paraphrase upon the Books of Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Solomon, with
Arguments to each Chapter, and Annotations thereupon, in Octavo.

The Truth of Christian Religion, in Six Books; written in Latin by Hugo
Grotius, and now Translated into English, with the Addition of a Seventh Book
against the present Roman Church, in Octavo.

Search the Scriptures; A Treatise, showing that all Christians ought to read
the Holy Books; with directions to them therein: In Three Parts.

A Treatise of Repentance and of Fasting, especially of the Lent Fast: In Three
Parts.

A Discourse concerning Prayer, especially of frequenting the daily public
Prayers: In Two Parts.

A Book for Beginners; or a Help to Young Communicants, that they may be fitted
for the Holy Communion, and receive it with profit.

Books written by Jer. Tailor, D. D. and late Lord Bishop of Down and Connor.
THE Rules and Exercises of holy Living, and holy Dying: the Eleventh Edition
newly Printed, in 8.

The Golden Grove; a Choice Manual, containing what is to be believed,
practiced and desired, or prayed for: the Prayers being fitted to the several
days of the Week; also Festival Hymns according to the manner of the Ancient
Church.

A Collection of Offices, or Forms of Prayer in Cases ordinary and
extraordinary; taken out of the Scriptures and the ancient Liturgies of several
Churches, especially the Greek. Together with a large Preface in Vindication of
the Liturgy of the Church of England. The Second Edition, in Twelves.

The Psalter of David, with Titles and Collects according to the Matter of each
Psalm; whereunto are added Devotions for the Help and Assistance of all
Christian People in all occasions and Necessities. The Tenth Edition; in
Twelves.

Books written by the Reverend J. Goodman, D. D.
THE Penitent pardoned; or a Discourse of the nature of Sin, and the Efficacy
of Repentance, under the Parable of the Prodigal Son.

A Winter Evening Conference between Neighbors; in three Parts.

The Old Religion demonstrated in its Principles, and described in the Life and
Practice thereof.

Boanerges and Barnabas: Judgment and Mercy, or Wine and Oil for wounded and
afflicted Souls. In Two Parts. By Fra. Quarles. The Tenth Edition, in Twelves.

The Saints Legacies: or a Collection of certain Promises out of the Word of
God. Collected for privatence: but Published for the Comfort of God's People.
Together with the Saints Support in time of Trouble. The Thirteenth Edition. In
12o.

Bishop Cozen's Devotions, in Twelves.

The Countess of Morton's daily Exercise; or a Book of Prayers and Rules how to
spend the time in the (...) vice and Pleasure of Almighty God. The Thirtee^^^
Edition, 24.

THE END.

