Sad and Deplorable News FROM Fleet Street, OR, A WARNING FOR LOVERS, That are
either INCONSTANT or too FOND;

BEING A Full and True Relation of a Gentleman, that having been Seven years in
Love with a Lady, and now fancying that she slighted him, and preferred others
before him, flung himself desperately out of a Window Four pair of Stairs high,
near Fleet-Bridg; on Friday the 12th of this instant June, 1674.

Where he was battered all to pieces with the violence of the Fall, and
miserably dyed.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by D. M. 1674.

Sad and deplorable NEWS FROM Fleetstreet.
MAN is but a Lump of Clay Kneaded together with Tears and would be the most
dull and Phlegmatic thing imaginable, had not Nature, or rather the God of
Nature, furnished him with variety of passions; that as the change of Tides and
several Winds preserve the Sea from putrefying, so these by a continual
Agitation should keep him from drooping into a Lethargy of stupidity or
idleness. To fancy to live wholly without Passions in this world, is a
Romantic Dream of the Stoics; but to endeavor to moderate and keep them in
their right bounds, is the duty, and should be the business, of each real and
prudent Christian.

Passions and Affections are necessary and useful Subjects provided they make
no Insurrections, Mutinies or Rebellions to dethrone Reason, that just Queen
Regent and Sovereign Monarch of the Microcosme: Every man is such another
Creature as the Poets Fancy wise Chiron, Tutor to the great Hero Achilles, to
have been half a Man and half a Beast, only we should so far imitate that
prudent Fiction, as to keep the manly part uppermost, and make the under-girdle
Lusts, together with the irascible and concupiscible faculties, subservient to
the dictates of the Rational part.

But amongst all the Passions, as there is none so pleasing and noble, so there
is none so dangerous and violent as that of Love: It first surprises us by
stealing in at the eyes as gently as the Morning-dew into the Bosom of a
Flower; but no sooner has it got to the Heart, and taken possession of the
Soul, but (like Nero after his peaceable Quinquennium) it turns absolute Tyrant
on a sudden; ingrosses all our thoughts, puts the Breast upon the wrack, scorns
the guidance of Reason, defies the advice of Friends, grows more violent by
opposition, despises safety, braves dangers, embraces Ruin; and in a word,
torments us with a thousand Inquietudes, which being more insufferable than
death it self, hurries the afflicted Patient to Court that King of Terrors to
put a period to his otherwise endless Misfortunes. Of the mischiefs arising
from hence, all Histories are full, and every day surprises with deplorable
Tragedies; and we are sorry we have this unhappy occasion to increase the
number of those fatal Instances. The Story whereof is briefly thus:

A Gentleman (well descended, and of very good natural parts as well as
acquired ones; of a sweet civil and obliging Temper; a kind of Disposition that
more easily admits Loves Impressions, and continues them longer, and with a
greater violence of Passion than any other) near seven years ago fell into the
Acquaintance of a Lady, whose amiable Person and Qualities immediately kindled
such Flames in his Breast, that it was impossible for him longer to maintain his
Liberty against such irresistible Charms: Those that ever were wounded with
Cupids Darts (and few can wholly escape them; Love being a kind of Small Pox,
which every body has had, or else must expect) may partly imagine the Tumults
and Confusions this new Guect soon made in his discomposed mind. To describe
the Agonies of this amorous Fever, or his passionate Complaints, would perhaps
relish too much of the Romance for a Pamphlet, or possibly raise too great a
Tempest of Grief in some kind sympathizing Souls, that languish now under the
like disasters. Let it suffice to say, That he was too wise to be ignorant that
the Cure must be sought from whence he received the Wound; and therefore with a
discreet Address endeavored to unvail his Affection, and discover his passion
to that Cruel Fair One which was the Cause of them.

It Is an undoubted Truth, That we are generally too credulous and apt, out of a
kind of self-flattery, to fancy that which we wish and hope for; Upon this
score, perhaps, rather than any Encouragements given by her, he built some
pretensions, which it may be she never intended him; and in this kind of
unsettled state, their amorous Intrigue had now spun out a Thread of seven years
length.

It must be confessed that Ovids Receipt, Vt Amoris Ama; Love if then would thou
be beloved, is the best Philtre or Love-portion in the world; yet cannot it be
denied, That there may be some Cases wherein even this Charm cannot take place,
there may be pre-ingagements a natural Aversion, or a thousand other obstacles
that may hinder from corresponding with every persons Addresses, though never
so serious and affectionate. What the Causes in this particular Amor might be,
we cannot certainly assign; His Person was proper, and one would think rather
inviting than displeasing; his Humor excellently good and obliging; his Estate
not contemptible, and his Practice (which was toward the Law) considerable;
yet all these attractions it seems would not conquer or at least six this
Ladies heart, but that (especially for a Twelve months space last past) she
gave him some sleighting Disincouragements, which it seems he not being able to
bear, has for a considerable time been liable to extravagant Melancholy Fits;
and about two months since attempted to hang himself in the Balcony of the
house where he lodged near Fleetbridge, but was prevented by a Coachman that
passing by espied him; since that he has several times bin with his Mistress,
and lately gave her and some friends a Treat at a Tavern, where She not
appearing so kind and Complaisant to him as he expected, He went home very
discontented, and though he went in the daytime about his business since; yet
he still seemed much troubled, and never appeared truly merry or satisfied.

Melancholy is no doubt, the properest Soil for the Devil to sow his Tares in,
when Men abandon their Reason and forsake Gods Grace, that would restrain them
being hurried away with desperate passions, till all the Soul is in an uproar;
then this watchful and ever busy Enemy steps in, suggesting black thoughts of
Despair, and advises a Man to be his own Executioner, aggravating the Miseries
of our present Vexations, but concealing these endless Torments we run the
hazard of, by such a precipitate dispatch, contrary no less to Nature than the
Laws of God and Man.

Whether the Violence of his affectionate Passion had deprived him of the use
of his Reason, so that he might be numbered amongst the Phrensical or
Distracted, we cannot say, but this is too lamentably true, that on Friday the
12th of this instant June, 1674. He coming home to his Lodging, and being about
ten a Clock at Night retired up to his Chamber, which was a fine large Room up
four pair of Stairs, but forwards toward the Street, no body being with him,
on a sudden opening the Casement, he violently cast himself headlong into
Fleet Street about the middle of which he fell down, and broke his Head even to
the Brain, besides bruising most dreadfully all parts of his Body. This sad
unexpected Accident brought together several People (then abroad in the Street)
about him, by whom he was taken up dead, but being known and carried into his
Lodging, and some means used, he came again to Life, but was never able to
speak one word, and a little after midnight expired.

We shall not forestall the Readers thoughts so far as to make tedious
reflections on this sad and unhappy Accident, nor can we do it without
difficulty or partiality; For what shall we blame the Coyness and Cruelty of
Women, or the Folly and over fondness of Men? If it be hard measure for a man
to have his passionate Affection slighted; it is sure no less unjust and
unreasonable to expect a Woman should Love where she does not like; It will be
better to advise all by this woeful Example to take heed not to engage their
Affections too far on any (though the most pleasing) Earthly Object, and to
raise their Love to a higher and more noble flight, by placing it on that
Divine, Infinite and Adorable Beauty, where it can admit of no Extreme, and
shall be sure not to be frustrated of unspeakable Returns of Favor and
Goodness, whose Love infinitely surpassing the Love of Women, disdained not to
dye for us, even whilst we were Enemies, and in whose glorious Arms, we may
safely without jealousies, distrusts or fears, without apprehension of change,
or cloying satiety, Repose our selves in a sweet Eternity of unutterable
Felicity.

FINIS.

