Sad and Dreadful News from the Strand, Giving an Account of a most Dreadful
Fire which happened there last Night, and Consumed to Ashes Four Persons, with
a Relation of its Beginning, and the manner of its Discovery, etc. 27. Jan.
169^/3
LAst Night, or rather this Morning, between the Hours of Twelve and One, broke
out a most Sad and Lamentable Fire at the House of one Mr. Cartwright a Dyer,
near the May Pole in the Strand, over against Sommerset-House, there were
several Families Inhabiting in the House besides the Dyer, viz. a Joyner,
Tailor, and some Genlewomen that Washed Point and Gawse, etc. The Fire was
first Discovered by some Persons that was casually passing by, who knocked with
all their Might at Mr. Cartwright's Door; but several of the Inhabitants did
not take the Alarm, before the Fire over-master'd them, and they became a Prey
to its devouring Flames. The Master of the House, Mr. Cartwright, with one
more, threw themselves out of the Window, and were caught in Blankets by some
Persons in the Street, and as some say, a Child was likewise thrown out at the
same time, and Saved; but five or six others, ha^ a more harder Fate, being, as
it is feared, all Burnt Four of them are already taken up Dead among the
Rubbish, the others are Searching for.

As to the manner how this Fire began, it is generally supposed to be
occasioned, by the Carelessness of a Gentlewoman, who was smoothering of her
Gawse with Brimstone, and left the Fire and fell a Sleep, such Care was taken
by the Indefaticable Industry of the Noble Lord Craven, and other Worthy
Patriots, yet notwithstanding it burnt with great Violence for the Present, and
by Four in the Morning the Fire was Mastered, and by Six in a manner wholly
extinguished, effecting in that time, no more than two Houses, and part of the
Strand May Pole was Burnt.

London, Printed by W. D. in St. Bartholomew's-Close.


