THE SECRET HISTORY OF THE REIGNS OF K. CHARLES II. AND K. JAMES II.

Printed in the Year 1690.

PREFACE.
IT is one of the Encomiums given to Suetonius, That he made Public to the
World, the Vices and Miscarriages of the Twelve Caesar's, with the same freedom
with which they were by them Committed. And there is no question, but one of
his chiefest reasons for so doing, was this, Because he would not deceive
Posterity; and all agree that he was Contemporary with the Three last. So that
the Enormities of Domitian could not but be fresh in his Memory when he wrote
his Life; and there might be several Persons Living, as might have the same
Partial Affections for Domitian, as there are now Adorers of C. II. and J. II.
For which reason there is a wary Caution among some People, That Truth is not
always to be spoken. Which perhaps may be sometimes True, but as the Case
stands with these Sheets, not at all to be taken notice of; The pains of this
short History, being as well to Vindicate, as to Inform; and written in
Opposition to one of the French King's most Scandalous Libels, and bitter
Invectives against our Present Sovereign; Entitled, The True Portraicture of
William Henry of Nassau, etc. Now to have made a Particular Answer to all the
Extravagancies and Impertinent Flams of a Malicious Libeller, would have been a
Fending and Proving, altogether fruitless. It was therefore thought the more
concise way, to bring the Two Last Reigns upon the Stage, and then let all the
World judge of the Furberies and Tyranny of those Times, and the Integrity,
Sincerity, and Sweetness of Their Present Majesty's Reign. As for the Truth of
what is here contained, I will not Apologize for it; for as to the more secret
Transactions, the Consequences and Events are my Testimonies; and for what was
more publicly carried, there are the loud and general Complaints of the
Kingdom to confirm it. So that I shall say no more.

THE SECRET HISTORY, etc.
WHEN Charles the Second was restored to the Thrones of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, never any Monarch in the World, came to the Possession of so large a
Dominion with more Advantages to have done good for himself, to his Subjects at
home, and to his Allies abroad: The People all experienced in Martial
Discipline, as having but newly sheathed the Sword of Civil War and Foreign
Conquest, so that their Valor was dreaded abroad wherever he should have
menaced an Enlargement of his Territories. Besides all this, he had the Love of
his Subjects, equal, if not superior, to any Prince that ever reigned before
him; and he had the Affection of ^is Parliament to the highest degree.

But after all this, he was no sooner set^ed in his Throne, but through the
Influ^nce of Evil Consellors upon a dispositi^n naturally vicions and easily
corrupted with Effeminate Pleasures, he abandoned himself to all manner of
Softness and Voluptuous Enjoyments, and harboring in his Bosom the worst of
Vices, base Ingratitude, betrayed himself that he might betray his People. For
where the Constitution of a Nation is such, that the Laws of the Land are the
Measures both of the Sovereigns Commands, and the Obedience of the Subjects;
whereby it is provided, that as the one are not to invade what by Concessions
and Stipulations is granted to the Ruler, so the other is not to deprive them
of their lawful and determined Rights and Liberties; there the Prince who
strives to subvert the Fundamental Laws of the Society is the Traitor and the
Rebel, and not the People who endeavor to preserve and defend their own. Nor
must we ascribe the Miscarriages of his Reign altogether to the remissness of
his Nature; but to a Principle of Revenge, which his Mother had infused into
him, not so much for the loss of her Husband, but out of her inbred Malice to
the Protestant Religion, which no where flourished in that Splendor as in
England, fostered an^ cherished by the vowed Enemy of this Nation, his Brother
the D. of York, who ha^ been openly heard to declare in his Bed chamber at St.
James's, That he was resolved to be revenged upon the English Nation for the
Death of his Father: And what an Ascendant this Brother had over him, the whole
Kingdom has felt by sad and woeful experience. For indeed the King had all along
an Affection for him, so entire and baneful to the Nation, that he could only
be said to Reign, while his Brother Ruled. With all these Royal Virtues, and
imbred and fomented Animosities, to render him at his return a Gracious
Sovereign to this Kingdom, let us trace him from his Cradle to find out those
Princely Endowments, which invisibly increasing with him as he grew in Years,
dazzled in such a manner the Eyes of the doting Politicians of that Age, to
recall him, against that known and vulgar Maxim of Common Prudence.

-- Regnabit sanguine multo
Ad Regnum quisquis venit ab exilio.
When he was but very young, he had a very strange an unaccountable Fondness to
a wooden Billet, without which in his Arms he would never go abroad, nor lie
down in his Bed: From which the more observing sort of People gathered, that
when he came to Years of Maturity, either Oppressors and Blockheads would be
his greatest Favorites; or else that when he came to reign, he would either be
like Jupiter's Log for every Body to deride and contemn; or that he would
rather choose to command his People with a Club, than rule them with a Scepter.
And indeed they that made the first and last Conjectures found in due time they
were not altogether in the wrong. For the Throne was no sooner empty by the
death of his Father, before he could be permitted to seat himself in it, but he
gave us a plain discovery what sort of People they were, who when he came to
Reign were most likely to have the Principal Room in his Favor and Trust, and
by whose assistance he was in hopes to tyrannize over his English and Scottish
Subjects.

For when the Parliament of Scotland sent to him, as he was then cruizing about
Guernsey, to treat with him about receiving him to be their King, he would not
so much as transact with them, till he had first sent to Ireland, to assure
himself whether those Rebels, who had murdered no less than two hundred
thousand Protestants were in a condition or no for him to cast himself upon
their Assistance. But those hopes failing, in regard they were in a fair way to
be subdued themselves, he was at length inclined to entertain the Overture made
him by the Scots. And yet even then was his mind so full fraught with the
thoughts of Despotical Dominion, and purposes of introducing Popery into his
Territories, that had it not been for the P. of Orange, he would never have
complied with the Terms which the Scots had order to propose, though no other
than what were necessary for the security of the Lives, Liberties, Laws, and
Religion of his People. And how he employed his wooden Billet afterward, may
easily be understood by his many acts of barbarous Tyranny over those poor
People, and the Slavery under which the whole Nation began so lately to groan.

Being admitted to the Scepter of Scotland, at what time the Scourge of English
Victory hung hourly over his Head; tho he was diligently watched and observed
by Men of Piety and Virtue, he could not forbear the satisfaction of his
Youthful Inclinations to all manner of Wantonness and Lasciviousness: insomuch
that having in the Year 1650 to the many Fornications and Adulteries which he
there committed, added the perpetration of a Rape upon a modest and virtuous
Lady, he had incurred the general disatisfaction of his best Friends. However
since they had brought him in, and restored him to the Regal Dignity, and that
what was done could not now be undone, they deemed it no less their Duty, to
retrieve him, if possible, from those infamous and violent Courses, and to that
purpose concluded, that the Danger, as well as the Sin and Scandal of the
Crimes he had committed, should be privately represented to him by some of the
most sober Noble Men and Ministers. But some declining the Office, as
apprehending it would be ungratefully received by the young King, others not
deeming they had that Awe upon him which was sufficient, it came at length to
be devolved upon the Marquess of Argyle. For they supposed, that if he hearkened
to any Person it would be to him, not only by reason of his Quality, but
because he had been the chief Instrument of persuading and prevailing with the
Parliament to call him home to inherit the Crown of his Ancestors, when most of
the Members were thinking to exclude him. But tho that Noble and Prudent Peer
managed the Address, which upon that Occasion he made to the King, with the
highest Piety of a Christian, and the greatest Submission of a Subject; yet the
King looked upon it as so Sacrilegious a Crime, that any one should presume to
rebuke him for his Darling Pollutions and Impurities, that he resolved that
nothing should expiate the Offense but the Blood of that Great and Virtuous
Nobleman.

It is true, he was destroyed upon a pretended legal Process, but they who
considered that it was for strained Faults and Failings of a Person who never
acted but in a public joint way, without any sinister or treasonable Design
against the King or his Father, and against which he was either able to defend
himself by Acts of Approbation or Oblivion in verbo principis, then which there
could not be a more Supreme, Sacred, and inviolable Security; or by an
insuperable Necessity: They who remembered the Marquisse's faithful Endeavors
for restoring the King to the Crown of Scotland, thought it a severe Case, and
looked upon his Condemnation as unjust, and his Life an ungodly Sacrifice to
the angered Lust of a Lascivious Prince. He had called God and all the Records
of Heaven to witness his Innocence, as to the most pungent Articles against
him; and to avoid giving the Parliament the trouble of a Defense, in all
humility he threw himself down at the Kings Feet, and wholly submitted himself
to his Mercy. Nay, when all this would not do, he put in a Justification for
himself, so full of Reason and good Proof, as was thought would have satisfied
all Mankind. But notwithstanding all this, such was the remorceless Cruelty of
our good natured Prince of Mercy and Clemency, that nothing but so Noble a
Person must be a Victim to his private Animosity.

Nor does the getting him put to death by a seeming Course of Law excuse or
extenuate the Guilt of the Fact, but is rather an Aggravation of it before God
and Men, in regard the Law which is designed for the security of Men's Lives,
was here wrested and perverted to their Destruction.

And in imitation of this unjust Prosecution it was, that when the D. of York
hunted the Son of this Noble Man to death, and was told by the Scot's Lawyers,
that there was nothing in what the Earl had said or done which could be made
Criminal by the Law of the Land, his Highness was pleased to reply, But cannot
it be wrested to Treason?

Nor was the King less early in Hypocrisy and breach of Promise. For the
confirmation of which to be a Solemn Truth, there needs no more than to lay the
Foundation of the Proof upon his own Words and Solemn Engagements. For in the
Kings Letter to the Speaker of the House of Commons just before his
Restoration, he has these Words.

We assure you upon our Royal Word that none of our Predecessors have had a
greater esteem of Parliaments than We have, as well in Our Judgments as from
Our Obligation. We do believe them to be so Vital a part of the Constitution of
the Kingdom, and so necessary for the Government of it, that We well know,
neither Prince nor People can be in any tolerable degree happy without them;
and therefore you may be confident, that We shall always look upon their
Counsels, as the best We can receive, and shall be as tender of their
Privileges, and as careful to preserve and protect them, as of that which is
most near our Self, and most necessary for our own Preservation.

This in part demonstrates his Prevarications with Man: Now for his
Prevarication with Heaven, we must produce another Paragraph of the same
Letter, wherein he uses these flattering Expressions.

If you desire the Advancement and Propagation of the Protestant Religion, We
have, by our constant Profession of it, given sufficient Testimony to the
World, That neither the unkindness of those of the same Faith toward Us, nor
the Civilities and Obligations from those of a contrary Profession, could in
the least degree startle Us, or make Us swerve from it, and nothing can be
proposed to manifest Our Zeal and Affection for it, to which we will not
readily assent. And We hope in due time our Self to propose something to you
for the Propagation of it, that will satisfy the World, that We have always
made it both Our Care and Study, and have enough observed what is most like to
bring disadvantage to it.

As for the first, his Veneration for Parliaments, the succeeding Transactions
of his Reign, which are to be related, will manifestly make it appear how far
those Words were from his Heart, when dictated by his Lips.

And as for the second, his Zeal for the Protestant Religion, nothing could
render him more a Hypocrite then such a Profession, when at the same time he
was both himself a Papist, and under Promises and Obligations to the Pope and
the Romish Clergy, to destroy the Protestant and introduce the Roman Catholic
Religion, as afterward appeared by the Attestations of Ocular Witnesses, who
often saw him at Mass during his Exile: and was yet more evident by a Letter
under his own Hand, written in the Year 1652. to the Pope himself; which once
was printed in Whitlocks Memoirs; but upon the considerations of the danger
that might ensue upon divulging it at that time to the World, torn out before
the publishing of the Book. However to supply that defect, we shall here insert
the Propositions that were sent by him to Rome, while he was in Scotland,
professing the Presbyterian Religion, and carried thither and pressed forward
by one Dalie, an Irish Priest, and Confessor to the then Queen of Portugal,
under the Title of Propositions and Motives for and on the behalf of the most
Invincible King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, to Pope Innocent X. in
the Year of Iubilee 1650. Which Dalie, taking France in his way, spoke with the
Queen Mother, and received her Directions for the better management of the
Affair.

Most Blessed Father,
Our Agent at present residing at Rome, with all humility shows to your
Holiness, That the principal cause and occasion of that Regicide tyrannically
perpetrated upon the Person of Charles the First, Father of that foresaid
Charles the Second, by his Rebels and cruel Subjects (the like whereof was
never heard of from the beginning of the world, not only not among civil
Nations, but even among the most barbarous themselves) have been the graces,
favors and concessions* so often and so many ways extended to the Catholic
Religion, and the Assertors and Professors thereof, in the Kingdoms both of
England and Ireland: The truth of which appears, in that the foresaid Charles
the First gave Authority to the Marquess of Ormond by several Commissions, for
the establishing and perfecting all Conditions with the Confederate Catholics
of the Kingdom of Ireland, of sufficient security for the Catholic Faith.
Furthermore, the said Charles the First, tearing lest the said Ormond (being an
Heretic) should not satisfy the said Confederates in all things; He sent
thither the Marquess of Worcester, a Man truly and wholly Catholic, with a
more ample Commission; in which Commission the said Marquess of Worcester had
full Authority of concluding a Peace with the said Confederate Catholics, and
of giving them Conditions altogether satisfactory, as well concerning Liberty
of Religion; as also as to other Injuries that had been done unto them, which
the said Marquess of Worcester, making with them an absolute Peace, did
abundantly fulfill.

Further, this appears in that the said Charles the First, even in England it
self, did by Commissions set the Catholics, namely the said Marquess of
Worcester, Sir Arthur Ashton, and many others, over his Armies, and made them
Governors of Cities, Castles, and strong Holds, notwithstanding the clamor of
the People against it, and which was not a slight Motive of the Regicide
committed upon him, whereby it appears, that although the said King Charles the
First died not a Catholic, yet he died for them.

Again, (most blessed Father!) the same Agent most humbly represents, That the
present King Charles the Second, the true and undoubted Heir of the foresaid
Charles the First, and of all his Kingdoms (to whom the said Kingdoms belong of
right, according to that of Christ, Give to Caesar the things that are
Caesar's,) while his Father yet lived, was known to have good and true Natural
inclinations to the Catholic Faith, following which, and going on in his
Fathers steps, he did not only recommend it to the Marquess of Ormond, but gave
it him in express Command to satisfy in all things the Confederate Catholics
in Ireland, namely, That he should grant them the free exercise of their
Religion, That he should abrogate the Penal Laws made against them, and that he
should restore to the said Catholics, whether Laics or Ecclesiastics, their
Lands, Estates, Possessions, or what other Rights did at any time belong unto
them, and by the said Laws had been unjustly taken away; in obedience to which
Commands, the said Marquess in the Name, and by the Authority of the said two
Kings, namely, Charles the First and the II. made and concluded a firm Peace
with the said Confederate Catholics; by the conclusion of which Peace, the
said present King and all his Dominions, has involved himself with the
Catholics in an irreconcilable War against the Parliamentarian Regicides of
England, whose Blood therefore the said cruel Tyrants insatiably thirst after,
as they did after his Fathers.

The said Agent further offers to your Holiness, That the inhumane Regicides do
wickedly usurp to themselves in the Dominions aforementioned, all the Authority
of the King, do most cruelly persecute all the Catholics both in England and
in Ireland, partly by condemning them to Banishment, partly by thrusting them
into Prisons, and otherwise corporally punishing them; and lastly, by putting
them to death, a Witness of the truth hereof, is that great slaughter made by
Cromwell, in the taking of the two Cities of Drogheda and Wexford, and other
places, where all the Catholics without distinction of either Sex or Age were
slaughtered; witness hereof also the raging persecution and death of Catholics
in England: by all which, and by their Parliamentarian Decrees, themselves, and
their Covenant with God (as they call it) it is evident even beyond the
clearness of the light of the shining Sun, That these Tyrannical Regicides do
ultimately intend and put forth all their Power for the utter destruction of
all Catholics, and to extirpate by the Roots, and wholly to extinguish the
Catholic Faith throughout the World, openly asserting and boasting with great
glory, that these things being once finished in those Dominions, they will then
invade France, and after that run through Germany, Italy, and all Europe,
throwing down Kings and Monarchs, whose very Titles are most odious and
abhorrent unto them: Briefly, they have no other thing in their Aim than these
two, namely, The extirpation of the Catholic Religion, and the destruction of
Monarchy: To which wicked Machinations of theirs, forasmuch as they could never
have any the least hopes, that either the King or his Father should at any time
in the least assent; they have put the one to death* and the other to exile:
And these Rebels now with a nefarious boldness, have lately called themselves a
Commonwealth.

To meet with and prevent the infernal endeavors of such Rebels, our Agent
most humbly offers to your Holiness the following Propositions.

1. That your Holiness would make an annual supply out of your own Treasury
unto the said Charles the Second, of considerable sums of Money, suitable to the
maintaining the War against those Rebels against God, the Church, and Monarchy.
2. That you would cause and compel the whole beneficed Clergy in the world, of
whatsoever Dignity, Degree, State or Condition soever, to contribute the third
or the fourth part of all their Fruits, Rents, Revenues, or Emoluments to the
said War, as being Universal and Catholic. And that the said Contribution may
be paid every Three Months or otherwise, as shall seem most expedient to your
Holiness. 3. That by your Apostolic Nuncio's your Holiness would most
instantly endeavor with all Princes, Commonwealths, and Catholic States,
that the said Princes, Commonwealths, and States, may be admonished in the
bowels of Jesus Christ, and induced to enter into, and conclude an Universal
Peace; and that they will unitedly supply the said King. And that they will by
no means acknowledge the said Regicides and Tyrants for a Commonwealth, or
State; nor enter into, or have any commerce with them. 4. That by the said
Nuncio's, or any other way, all and every the Monarchs of all Europe may be
timely admonished, and made sensible in this Cause; wherein, beside the
detriment of the Faith, their own proper Interest is concerned: The foresaid
Tyrants being sworn enemies to all Monarchy, as they themselves do openly
assert, both by Word and Writing; and to that end, both in Germany, Spain,
France, Polonia, etc. and in the very Dominions of the Great Turk, they have
raised dangerous Insurrections; being raised, they foment them: and to that
purpose, they supply the Charge, and make large Contributions to it. 5. That
your Holiness would command, under pain of Excommunication, ipso facto, all and
singular Catholics, That neither they, nor any of them, directly nor
indirectly, by Land or by Sea, do serve them in Arms, or assist them by any
Counsel, or help to favor or supply them any way, under whatsoever pretext.
Holy Father! The premised Remedies are timely to be applied, by which the
Catholic Faith, now exposed to extreme and imminent hazard, may be conserved;
an infinite number of Catholics may be preserved from destruction, Monarchy
may be established; and the most invincible King of Great Britain restored to
his Rights: All which things will bear your Holiness to Heaven with their
Praises, whom God long conserve in safety, etc.

The Propositions and Motives abovesaid (if occasion be) our Agent will more
largely set forth viva voce.


Nor could there be a more evident Demonstration of the Kings kind Inclinations
to the Head of the Romish Religion, whom he had so dutifully courted from
Scotland, then that soon after his Return, he justified the Bloody Massacre
committed by the Papists in Ireland in the Year 1641. For that the Lord Antrim
appearing at the Court of Claims guilty of those execrable Murders, and of
that most detestable Rebellion, and being thereupon to forfeit his Estate, as
he had justly deserved, the King, by a Letter under his own Hand, as well to
the Privy Council, as to that Court, avowed, That whatever the said Lord had
done, it was by Commission and Authority from his Father; Which as it serves to
clear a great portion of our Doubts and Suspicions of the Son's Integrity to
the Protestant Religion; so it was a shrewd Argument, that all that glister'd
in the Father was not Gold.

But being eager to be restored, he was forced to put on a Protestant Mask, and
to wear one Religion in his Face, another in his Heart; and no question but he
had Plenary Toleration from his Ghostly Father for what he did. He had watchful
Eyes over him. And to show that as he was a great Lover of Comedies and
Enterludes, so he could act his part with e're a Moon or Lacy of 'em all, there
is a Story must not be omitted, which may serve to light us into the Occasion
how he came to gain the Addition of Pious. Otherwise, as it is impossible for
us to give any Account why Virgil so often gives the Epiphet of Pious to his
Hero AEneas, after he had so dishonourrably cheated and broke his Faith with
Queen Dido; so is it as little to be expected that we should afford a Reason
why Charles the Second should be so universally dignified with the Name of
Pious, after such a Prank of Hypocrisy as we are going to relate. Certainly he
could not be thought to be akin to AEneas; for we can never deduce his
Extraction from the Loins of Anchises (perhaps from Venus we might) and
therefore the Cause must be sought for nearer home. Well then, the Story is
this.

While he lay at Breda, daily expecting the English Navy for his
Transportation, the Dissenting Party fearing the worst, thought it but
reasonable to send a select Number of their most eminent Divines to wait upon
his Majesty in Holland, in order to get the most advantageous Promises from him
they could, for the Liberty of their Consciences. Of the number of these
Divines, Mr. Case was one, who with the rest of his Brethren coming where the
King lay, and desiring to be admitted into the King's Presence, were carried up
into the Chamber next or very near the King's Closet, but told withal, That the
King was busy at his Devotions, and that till he had done they must be
contented to stay. Being thus left alone (by Contrivance no doubt) and hearing
a sound of groaning Piety, such was the Curiosity of Mr. Case, that he would
needs go and lay his Ear to the Closet door. But, Heavens! how was the good Old
Man ravished to hear the Pious Ejaculations that fell from the King's Lips! --
Lord, -- since thou art pleased to restore me to the Throne of my Ancestors,
grant me a Heart constant in the Exercise and Protection of thy True Protestant
Religion. -- Never may I seek the Oppression of those who out of the tenderness
of their Consciences are not free to conform to Outward and Indifferent
Ceremonies. -- With a great deal more of the same Cant. -- Which Mr. Case
having overheard, full of Joy and Transport, returning to his Brethren, with
Hands and Eyes to Heaven up-lifted, fell a congratulating the Happiness of
Three Nations over which the Lord had now placed a Saint of Paradise for their
Prince. After which, the King coming out of his Closet, the deluded Ministers
were ready to prostrate themselves at his Feet; and then it was that the King
gave them those Promises of his Favor and Indulgence, which how well he after
performed, they felt to their sorrow.

Soon after he arrived in England, where he was received with all the Pomp and
Splendor, and all the Demonstrations of Joy that a Nation could express; but
then, as if he had left all his Piety behind him in Holland, care was taken
against the very first Night that his Sacred Majesty was to lie at Whitehall,
to have the Lady Castlemain seduced from her Loyalty to her Husband, and
enticed into the Arms of the happily restored Prince. Which was not only
Adultery, but Incest in the Lord's Anointed, it being the Opinion of several
Persons, who had reason to know more than others did, that she was his Sister
by the Mother's Side, as being begotten by the E. of St. A. upon the Queen's
Body, after the Death of C. the First: which is the rather to be believed, for
that I my self have often heard Mr. R. Osborn, then at Paris with the Exiled
King, affirm, That he saw the said E. and the Queen solemnly married together.

But he was more kind to the D. of Portsmouth, than to any of his Mistresses;
and thence it was, that she might not lie under the Scandal of being a Whore,
that after he had made her a Duchess, he made her also his Wife; that is to
say, he married her by virtue of his Royal Prerogative, at the Lord A's House,
by the Common Prayer Book, according to the Ceremonies of the Church of
England: A thing in some measure justifiable in a Prince, since the Law allows
all Men one Wife; and therefore a King, who is above Law, may surely have two.
And upon this ground perhaps it was, that upon a Lord Mayor's Day, being at Mr.
Eaton's in Cheapside, where the King usually stood, upon some Discourse that
brought it out, she cried; Me no Whore; if me thought me were a Whore, me would
cut mine own Throat. And by the same Dispensing Power he provided also for her
Children: And therefore having no less adulterously begotten a Daughter upon
the Lady Wood, he joined her in holy Wedlock to one of his Sons whom he had
begot after the same Legitimate manner upon the Body of the Duchess of
Cleveland; according to the Answer of Tamar to Ammon, of which he wanted not
Sycophant Priests enough to put him in mind.

But these were Peccadillo's readily forgiven by the Religion which he inwardly
embraced, which could readily dispense with such Trifles as these, provided he
went thorough-stitch with the Work which his Ghostly Fathers had cut out for
him. Which was the reason, perhaps, that he made choice of a Devotion so
conformable to his lustful Inclinations. For certainly what was said of Harry
the Eighth, might much more properly he said of him, That he spared no Woman,
whether Virgin, Married, or Widow, in his Venereal Heats; Which filled his
Court so full of Pimps and Panders, that there was hardly any Preferment about
his Person for any other. This was that which rendered the D. of L. one of the
most ill-favored of Men, so amiable in our Caesar's Eyes: And this was that
which advanced several others to their gilded Coaches, and Places of the
greatest Honor and Profit about the Court. Tho nothing was more mournful, then
to see those vast Sums of Money which the Parliament so profusely gave him for
the Honor and Security of the Nation, so extravagantly and prodigally wasted
upon his Strumpets, of which two were Common Harlots, of Actresses taken from
the Bawdy Stage to his Royal Bed. A thousand Pounds every Munday-morning, for
the Smiles of a Gilt; when his necessary Servants pined and starved for want of
their weekly Board-wages, and the strength of the Kingdom, his Seamen, were
forced to serve his Enemies for Bread.

Thus from the first hour of his Arrival into these Kingdoms, (for I dare not
call them His) he set himself by his own persuasion and influence to withdraw
both Men and Women from the Laws of Nature and Morality, and to pollute and
infect the People with all manner of Debauchery and Wickedness. He that ought
to have shone like the North Star in the Firmament of Royalty, to direct his
Subjects in the Paths of Virtue and Honesty, was the Sovereign Ignis fatuus to
misguide them into all the snares of Ruin and Perdition, Execrable Oaths were
the Chief Court-Acknowledgements of a Deity; Fornications and Adulteries the
Principal Tests of the Peoples Loyalty and Obedience. And whether it were to
affront God who had preserved and restored him to his Throne, or to be revenged
upon the Nation, for inviting him so unanimously to weild the Scepter of his
Ancestors, certain it is, that he made it his business to live in defiance of
the Fear and Authority of God, and to poison and corrupt the Minds, and deprave
the Manners of the English People, as might easily be observed through the
whole Course of his Reign.

But the King had been well instructed in his Exile, and had sufficiently
learnt in his banishment that undoubted Maxim of Tyranny, that the only way to
alter the settled Government of a Nation, and to introduce Slavery and Popery,
the support of Thraldom, was to weaken and make soft the Military Temper of the
People by Debauchery and Effeminacy, which generally go hand in hand together.
Knowing therefore that Regis ad Exemplum totus componitur Orbis, he gave these
lewd Examples himself, on purpose, that after he had thus Enervated the Minds
and Resolutions of his Subjects, he might the more easily trample upon their
Necks, and reduce them under the perpetual Yoke of Antichrist, in expectation
of his Mothers Blessing, and to fulfill the Agreement between himself, the Pope,
and the French King.

Certain it is, that the Kingdom was never in a better Posture for the King to
work upon it, then at the time of his return into England. For such were the
Contests for Superiority, among those who had taken upon them the Government
after the death of Oliver, such the Confusions and Disorders that from thence
arose, that no body could probably see where would be the End of the general
Distraction, unless it were by reducing all things to their Primitive
Condition, under a Prince whose Title was so fair to the Crown. Though a great
Blunder in Politics, which the necessity of Affairs at that time made to pass
for an Act of Prudence. But such an Act it was, to which all Parties were the
more inflamed by the Kings reiterated Oaths, Promises, and Declarations, to
those of the Church of England, to maintain the Protestant Religion; to the
Dissenters, that he would indulge their tender Consciences with all the Liberty
they could rationally desire, and to All in general, that he was a most really
zealous, and unalterable Protestant. And so infatuated they were with these
ingratiating Wheedles, that should all that knew him beyond Sea, both at Colen
and in Flanders, have spoken their discoveries with the Voices of Angels; nay
should the Letter which he wrote with his own hand in the year Sixty two to the
Pope, have been shown them in Capital Letters, they would have been all looked
upon but as Fictions, and Inventions to obstruct the Happiness of the Nation.
The People therefore adored him as the end of all their Miseries, the
Dissenters, upon the Relations of their Ministers returned, thought themselves
happy in the reports of his Mercy and Piety, and the Parliament doated upon his
Oaths and Promises, so that no Prince in the World could ascend a Throne with
more Love and Affection, or with a greater Reputation in the Opinion of the
whole Nation. What could be more inhuman, more immoral, more barbarous, then by
all the Violations of Royal Faith and the Word of a King, to disappoint the
Hopes and Expectations of a People that had such a Confidence of his Religion
and Virtue? Though perhaps such a failure might have been attributed to his
Weakness and want of Conduct. But to set himself, after so high a Veneration of
his Virtues, such a prostrating of their Lives and Fortunes at his Feet, in
Combination with a Foreign Prince, the only professed and mortal Enemy of
their Welfare, to destroy their Religion, subvert their Laws and Liberties, to
undermine and impoverish their Estates and Fortunes, and to reduce a Plump,
Wealthy, and Well-nourish'd Nation, into a Skeleton of a Kingdom, what could be
more infernally ungrateful? Yet that this was the Study and Practice of his
whole Reign, the following Passages will make Geometrically demonstrable.

The King was not ignorant that he was furnished already with a stock of
Gentlemen, who being forced to share the Misfortunes of his Exile, and
consequently no less embittered against those whom they looked upon as their
Oppressors, he had molded them to his own Popish Religion and Interests, by
corrupting them in their Banishment with him, to renounce the Protestant
Doctrine and Worship, and secretly reconcile themselves to the Church of Rome:
Insomuch that Mr. R. offered to prove one day, in the Pensionary House of
Commons, that of all the Persons, yet Persons all of Rank and Quality, who
sojourned with the King abroad, there were but three then alive, viz. P.
Rupert, the Lord M. and Mr. H. Coventry, who had not been prevailed upon by his
Majesty to go to Mass. Nor could their being restored to their Estates at his
return, separate them from their Masters Interests; for that besides the future
Expectations, with which the King continually fed them, and the Obligations
that the Principles of the Religion, to which they had revolted, laid them
under, they had bound themselves, by all the Oaths and Promises that could be
exacted from them, to assist and cooperate with him in all his Designs for the
Extirpation of the Protestant Religion and introducing of Popery; though they
were dispensed with from appearing barefaced. So soon therefore as the
Parliament that gave him admittance into the Kingdom was Dissolved, the King
called another, the first of his own Calling; and so ordered the Matter, that
the greatest part of the Masked Revolters got in amongst the Real Protestants:
By which means all things went trim and trixy on the King's side. They restored
him the Militia, which the Long Parliament had wrested out of his Fathers
hands; they sacrificed the Treasure of the Nation to his Profuseness and
Prodigality, the only Virtue in him that saved us from utter Ruin; for had he
been more sparing he had done us more mischief. They offered up the Rights and
Liberties of the People, by advancing his Prerogative; and what was most
conducing to the King's Popish Designs, they made him, by private Instructions,
those Penal Statutes, which divided the two prevailing Protestant Parties, and
set them together by the Ears, by arming one Party of the Protestants against
all the rest; such a darling advantage to the Papists, and upon the obtaining
of which, he set so high a value, that neither the necessity of his Affairs at
any time afterward, nor the Application and Interposure of several
Parliaments, for removing the grounds of our Differences and Animosities by an
Indulgence to be past into a Law, could prevail upon him to forego the
advantages he had got of keeping the Protestants at mutual Enmity one with
another, and making them useful to their own Designs, of supplanting the
Protestant Religion, and re-establishing the Idolatry of Rome. Nor was this
all, but that he might carry on his Popish Designs the more safely and covertly
under the cursed Mask of Hypocrisy, he procured the passing of an Act in his
Pensionary Parliament 1662. whereby it was made forfeiture of Estate and
Imprisonment, for any to say the King was a Papist, or an Introducer of Popery.
Nevertheless, notwithstanding he was thus become a Protestant by the Law of the
Land, to repeat how he exerted the Power given him by the P2rliament; how he
persecuted and prosecuted the Protestant Nonconformists from one end of the
Kingdom to the other; how he caused them to be Excommunicated, imprisoned and
harrass'd, when nto a Papist in the Three Kingdoms was so much as troubled or
molested, is a thing that would be altogether needless, as being so well known
to the World, and still too sadly remembered by Thousands of Families, that to
this day too deeply wear the Scars of his Cruel Dilaniations. However it showed
sufficiently the aim of our dear Defender of the Protestant Faith, which was to
weaken and enervate the Protestant Party, that so they might be come the more
easy Prey to Popish Rage and Cruelty, when the blessed Hour should arrive, for
the putting in Execution those bloody designs with which he had been so long
travailing; which because he could not carry on without assistance, therefore
although he were sometimes obliged by the necessity of his Affairs, and in
compliance with the Times, to palliate his Contrivances, to make use of sincere
and real Protestants, yet they who were admitted into his secrets, and in whom
he placed his chiefest Trust and Confidence, were always Papists. He who would
needs have himself enacted the best Protestant in his Dominions, took no
notice, that whosoever was reconciled to Rome, stood debarred from all Offices,
and obnoxious to several kinds of punishment, but still out of the number of
Papists, or else such as were of no Religion at all, (which was the same thing
for his purposes) chose his Ambassadors, Generals, Ministers of State, and many
of his greatest Bishops too. What else recommended Sir W. Godolphin to be
Ambassador in Spain, or Sir Lionel I. to be his Plenipotentiary at Nimeguen,
and afterward his drudging Sham-plot Secretary. It was his being a zealous
Roman Catholic that preferred the Lord Clifford to the Treasurers Staff, with
several others of the same stamp to other high Preferments, more Eminent for
their Dignities than for their Parts; and lastly, what was it but this
Indulgence, and finding ways to dismiss the Papists without any harm or damage
when Indicted or Presented at the Sessions, that advanced so many Beneplacito
Judges, and continued them in their Places.

I had almost forgot another very great kindness which the same Parliament did
him; which was at the Private Instance of the King, to abrogate the Triennial
Act, by which the sitting of Parliaments once in three years was infallibly
secured to the Kingdom. So well did his Majesty know where the Shoe pinched
him; and so crafty was he to take his Advantage from the Delirium and Frenzy
the Nation was in upon his Restoration, to obtain the repealing of the
Principal Laws by which his wriggling into Arbitrary Government would have been
curbed and restrained.

But whether it were that the Prodigal Zeal of those Members began to cool,
conscious perhaps that they had already opened too large a Gap to Tyrannous
Invasion upon the Liberties of the People, which they had so treacherously laid
at the Kings Mercy; or whether it were that the King resolved to quicken his
pace to Arbitrary Rule, to the end he might see Popery flourish in his own
Days, certain it is that his next Attempt was to make the Parliaments
themselves the Ministers and Instruments of his own Popish Ambition, and our
Slavery. In order hereunto he falls a buying and purchasing, at certain and
annual Rates, the Votes of the Members; at what time the greatness of the
number of those who stood ready for Sale, as well as their Indigencies and
Lusts, made the Price at which they were to be bought so much the easier. Now
being thus hired by his Majesty, with their own free Offerings of the Nations
Money; How many Bills did they pass into Acts for enslaving and ruining a third
part of the Kingdom, under the Notion of Phanaticks and Dissenters, and all
this in gratitude for their Sallaries, and to accomplish the Will and Pleasure
of their Lord and Master the King, whose bought and purchased Vassals and
Slaves they were?

All this while what can we say or think other, but that the Purchaser as well
as the Sellers were equally guilty of betraying the People who had entrusted
them? And then to make a President by Law for Tyranny, those Hirelings
empowered the Justices of the Peace to disseize Men of their Estates, without
being convicted and found guilty by Legal Juries, of the Transgressions whereof
they stood accused: By which they not only overthrew all the Common and Statute
Law of the Land, but they subverted and altered the Fundamental Constitution,
in making English Men liable to be ruined at the Arbitrary Pleasure of the
King. And as an addition to this, those Mercinary Members, by the Orders and
Directions of their most Pious and Protestant Paymaster the King, past another
Law, which was styled the Act for Corporations, by which Men of Principles and
Integrity were debarred all Offices of Magistracy in Cities and Corporate
Towns. The woeful Effects of which the Kingdom not long after both saw and felt,
in the Surrenders of Charters, and betraying of Franchises, by Persons upon
whom the Government of the Corporations came to be devolved by Virtue of that
Act. For that had it not been for that Act which excluded so many honest, able,
and virtuous Men, the Persons whom the King for his by-ends nominated for fit
and loyal Men, would never have risen above the Office of Scavengers, or
Headboroughs, or Constables at the highest. To this, as a thing that mainly
contributed to the King's design of enslaving us, we may subjoyn their passing
an Act whereby they did both limit and confine the number of those that were to
present Petitions to the King, not to exceed Ten Persons. Let the Matter to be
represented be never so important, or the Grievance to be redressed never so
illegal and oppressive, yet it was made no less then a Riot, if above Ten
Persons addressed themselves to the King to crave the Benefit of the Law. A
Trouble which the King carefully provided against, knowing how many Laws he had
to break, and how burthensom and oppressive he must be to the People, before he
could complete the Fabric of Slavery and Popery which he was erecting.

Nor was this all; for the King strenuously pursuing his Design of being
sincere and cordial to the destruction of his People, had so bephilter'd them
with his Potions of Aurum Potabile, that they passed another Act to his Hearts
desire, whereby they placed the whole and sole Power of the Militia in the
King: not only encouraging him to use Force in compassing his Arbitrary
Designs, but binding up the Hands of the People from defending themselves
against armed Violence upon their Religigion, Liberties, and Lives. Add to this
the vast sums which they gave him, beyond what the Support of the Government,
or the Defense of the Nation required: Which might have produced fatal
Consequences, but that the King knew as little a Measure in spending, as that
unhappy Parliament did in giving. The King therefore conscious of his own
Failing, and finding that through his own Wastfulness, and the Importunities of
his consuming Misses, he could not depend upon any limited and definite Sum for
accomplishing his Promises to his Holy Father the Pope, and his trusty
Confederate the French King, got Two Bills prepared and carried into the House,
the Passing of which had completed the Nations Misery, and made him Absolute.
The one was to empower his Majesty upon Extraordinary Occasions (of which he
would not have failed to have been the Judge as often as he pleased) to raise
Money without a Parliament: And the other was, for settling a Universal Excise
upon the Crown. The Passing either of which, the King well knew would have soon
^nabl'd him to have governed by Basha's and Ianizaries, and redeemed him from
having any further need of Parliaments, or any apprehension of having the
Instruments of his Tyranny impeached by Them.

But what the King had so finely projected to enslave the Nation, and obtain
whatever he had a mind to, proved the Ground of their Disappointment, and the
Occasion of the Nations Escape from the Snare that was laid for it. For the
Mercenary Members foreseeing that the passing these Bills would have put an end
to their Pensions, by rendering them useless for the time to come, consulted
their Gain, and preferring it above what the Court styled their Loyalty, fell
in with the Honest Party, and so became assistant in throwing out the Bills.
However, the very bringing the Bills into the House, was as clear an Evidence
of the King's Intention to alter the Government, and enslave the Nation, as if
they had passed into Laws. And some of his Minions, that knew the King's Drift,
and the inside of his Heart, were so zealous for him to have gained this
Arbitrary Power, that they would have it argued and spoken to in the House of
Lords. And who but the Popish Lord Clifford should be the Man that ventured to
undertake the Business? And accordingly, he made a long Harrangue in praise of
Absolute Monarchy, and how much it would be for the Interest of the Kingdom to
have his Majesty entrusted with a more unlimited Authority. Which some of the
Lords resenting, with a Warmth and Indignation becoming Persons, who by the
Constitutions of the Governmeut were designed for a Bulwark against the
Encroachments of Regal Power, and as a Fence about the Liberties of the People,
the Motion not only died without being seconded, but Clifford, even by him who
had encouraged him in his Attempt, was called a rash Fool for his pains.
However, Pious AEneas finding the Nation grew sensible of his covert Intentions
and Encroachments upon their Laws and Liberties, and despairing to get any more
Acts passed in Parliament toward the promoting his Designs, resolved to husband
the Laws he had already obtained, as much as he could, to the Ruin of the
Nation; and where they failed of being serviceable to his Ends, to betake
himself to other Methods and Means. And therefore, besides the daily
impoverishing, confining, and destroying of infinite numbers of honest and
peaceable People, under pretense of executing the Laws, he made it his Business
to invent new Projects to tear up the Rights and Liberties of the People, by
ways and means which had not the least shadow of a Law to countenance them; of
which more in due place.

Having made this fair Progress toward the enslaving both the Souls and Bodies
of his own Subjects at home, let us take a View of his Zeal to the Protestant
Religion abroad. And first, for the Protestants of France, his Care and
Tenderness for them may be easily conjectured from hence, that the first Edicts
issued forth by Lewis the Fourteenth for their Persecution, bear date with the
Time and Year of his Most Protestant Majesty's Restoration. And from that day
to this, in stead of interceding or concerning himself in their behalf, he has,
by his own Example, and his strict Correspondence with the French King, both
countenanced and encouraged their Oppression; which the French King at that
time, when he was formidable in the Love of his Subjects, durst no more have
prosecuted, than Mazarine durst proceed in his Fury against the Hugonots, when
more Pious Oliver bestir'd himself in their Favor. But our Protestant Monarch
was so far from sending Succor to the French Protestants, that he betrayed
those to the Rage of the French Tyrant, that came to invoke his Aid in their
behalf.

For when Monsieur Rohan came into England, to acquaint his Pious Majesty with
the Resolutions taken at Paris, to persecute, and if possible, to root out the
Reformed in France, and proposed such Overtures to the King as would have been
greatly for his Glory and Interest, yet no way contrary to the Allegiance of
that poor People, he remitted the Monsieur to his Brother the D. of York, who
not only informed the French Ambassador of the Gentleman's Errand, but placed
him behind the Hangings, to hear whatever Monsieur Rohan had to represent and
propose to him. Which although the Ambassador could not but abhor in the two
Brothers, and was ashamed of in himself, yet he could do no less then inform
his Master of what he had seen and heard. Upon which the poor Gentleman, upon
his Return out of England, was so narrowly watched, and so closely pursued,
that being apprehended upon the Borders of Switzerland, he was carried back to
Paris and there broken upon the Wheel.

Nor did it satisfy the King, and his dear Brother the Duke, to have thus
betrayed as well as abandoned the Protestants in France; but with the utmost
Malice that Popery could inspire into them, they sought the Destruction of the
Seven United Provinces, upon no other Account but of their being Protestant
States, and for giving shelter to those who being persecuted by himself and his
Confederate the French Tyrant for their Religion, fled thither for Protection
and Safety. For knowing what in due time they intended to bring upon the
Protestants at home, they thought it most requisite to destroy those Protestant
States in the first place, that there might remain no Sanctuary for their
persecuted Subjects. And indeed, abating this and one more Ground of their
Quarrel with those States, never was a War undertaken upon more unjust and
frivolous Pretenses, then those Two which the King engaged in against the Seven
Provinces, in the Years 1667. and 1672. Nor can any thing justify the
Discretion and Wisdom of those Wars, had they not been undertaken merely in
subserviency to the promoting Popery and Slavery; seeing that upon all other
Grounds that Reason and Prudence can suggest, it was the Interest of England,
as still it is, to preserve the Government of Holland entire. Nor can we have a
truer Account of the Grounds upon which the two Monarchs of England and France
agreed the War against Holland in the Year 1672. then by the Representation
which the French Ambassador made of it both at Rome and Vienna. For though his
Public Declaration pretended no more but that it was to seek Reparation for
the Diminution of his Glory, yet the Account he gave to the Pope of his
Master's, and consequently of our Protestant Monarch, his strict Confederate's
undertaking that War, was, that he did it in order to the Extirpation of
Heresy. And in the same manner they sought to justify the Piety of that
Enterprise to his Imperial Majesty, by alleging, That the Hollanders were a
People that had forsaken God, and were Heretics, and that all good Christians
were bound to associate and unite for their Extirpation. Upon which account, it
seems, our King and the Duke thought fit to exchange the Appellation of Good
Protestants for that of Good Christians. However, from hence it was plain what
sort of Good Christians they were, since it was as evident, that their uniting
with France in that War, was to destroy the Protestant Dutch Heretics. And
that we may yet more fully understand the Motive upon which the King embark't
in that bloody and expensive War, it is worthy observation, how that when the
French King made it one of his Propositions upon which he would be contented to
receive the States into his ancient Friendship, That they should not only allow
the Public Exercise of the Roman Catholic Religion over all the United
Provinces, but that they should appoint a Sallary to the Priest allotted to the
Churches which the Papists by that Demand were to enjoy; the King of England
being no less concerned for Popery then his Brother of France, gave the States
to understand by his Plenipotentiaries, That without their Concession of the
foregoing Demand of the King of France, he could not return to Peace with them.
So that not only from the Motive upon which the War was commenced, but from the
Proposals which he urged them to consent to, in order to a Peace, we have a
most convincing Proof of his Majesty's being no zealous Protestant, but rather
quite the contrary; and of his pious Inclinations to the Extirpation as well as
weakening the Protestant Religion in the United Provinces. Certainly a most
thankful Acknowledgment, and Royal Requital of those Provinces, for the many
Kindnesses which they had vouchsafed him during his Exile, and for their
Favors, their liberal Entertainments and the high Honors which they had paid
him, when he made their Country the last Stage of his Retreat, in order to his
Return to his Crown and Kingdom. But this must be ascribed to his Zeal for
promoting the Catholic Religion, which attones for all Defects of Justice and
Gratitude, and ought to be imputed to those Principles of Popery which he had
sucked in with the French Air, and which have a peculiar Virtue and Faculty to
expel all Morality and good Nature.

These being the real Grounds and Motives that induced the King of England to
begin that Impolitick War against the Dutch in the year 1665. whatever was
openly and publicly pretended, how strangely was the Parliament deluded and
blinded by the King's Oaths and Protestations of his Zeal for the Protestant
Religion! What vast Sums of the Subjects Money they gave the perfidious
Monarch, to defray the Expenses of that unnecessary and baneful War, is too
well known; and yet after all, saving one brisk Engagement, ill-manag'd, though
with some Loss to the Dutch, at length no Fleet was set out, and the choicest
of the Royal Navy either burnt or taken in Harbor, to save Charges. And though
the French at length joined themselves in assistance with the Dutch against us,
yet by the Credit he had with the Queen Mother, he so far imposed upon Charles
the Second, no less ready for his own private Conveniences to be imposed upon,
that upon assurance, which no Man of Prudence and Foresight would have
believed, that the Dutch would have no Fleet at Sea that Year, he forbore to
make ready, and so incurred that ignominious Disgrace at Chatham, the like to
which the English never suffered since they claimed the Dominion of the Sea.
And which was more, as he had been beholden to his great Friend the King of
France for the Ignominy he had suffered, so was he glad to receive the Peace
from his Favor, which was concluded at Breda.

And now we come to the best Act that ever he did in his Life, had he had the
Grace to pursue it; which showed how happy a Prince he might have been, had he
been ever faithful to his own and the Interests of his People, and that
Religion which he outwardly professed.

For upon conclusion of that Peace, having leisure to look about him, and to
observe how the French had in the Year 1667. taken their Opportunity, and while
we were embroiled and weakened by the late War, had, in violation of all the
most Sacred and Solemn Oaths and Treaties, invaded and taken a great part of
the Spanish Netherlands, which had always been considered as the Natural
Frontier of England; the King then prompted more by his own Fears, then out of
any kindness he had for the Nation, judged it necessary to interpose, before
the Flames that consumed his next Neighbor should throw their Sparkles over
the Water.

Thereupon he sent Sir William Temple, then his Resident at Brussels, to
propose a nearer Alliance with the Hollanders, and to take joint Measures
against the French: Which Proposals of Sir William Temple's being entertained
with all Compliance with the Dutch, within Five days after Two several Treaties
were concluded between the King and the States: The one, a Defensive and
Stricter League than before, between the Two Nations; and the other, a Joint
and Reciprocal Engagement to oppose the Conquest of Flanders, and to procure,
either by way of Mediation, or by Force of Arms, a speedy Peace between France
and Spain, upon the Terms therein mentioned. And because Sweden came into the
same Treaty within a very little while after, from the Three Parties concerned
and engaged, it was called the Triple League. In pursuance of which, the Treaty
of Aix la Chapelle was also forced upon the French, and in some manner upon the
Spaniards, who were very unwilling to part with so great a Part of their
Country by a Solemn Treaty. But both the King and the Hollanders thought it a
very great and good Work, and judged it an extraordinary Happiness, not only
for Spain, but for all Europe, to come off with a broken Pate, and to have at
least for that while kept France from going farther.

Besides all this, to tie the Knot the faster, and take even the very thoughts
from the French King of ever stirring, or being troublesome to his Neighbor,
the King sent an Extraordinary Envoy to several Princes of Germany, to invite
them into the Triple League, and his Minister to persuade them to it, laid open
with no less heat then plainness, the danger all Europe was in; urging the
insensibility of most Princes, and their carelessness, the watchful Ambition of
the French, the Greatness of their Forces, and the little Reason there was to
trust him. In fine, omitting nothing that could Alarm all the World, and
procure a general Confederacy against the Common Oppressor. More than this, in
regard the Spaniards were very much wanting to themselves, by their
backwardness in the Payment of the Subsidies promised to Sweden; the King af
England, being not without some fears, least the Swedes should fall off, uless
the Money agreed upon, were paid them without farther delay; he offered to
advance part of it himself, and had accordingly done it, in case the Dutch
would have advanced the rest.

The Kidg of France thus stopped in his Career by the Tripple League, and by
the Peace of Aix la Chapelle, soon after concluded, though for a while he
dissembled his dissatisfaction, yet resolved to untye the Tripple Knot whatever
it cost him. To which purpose the Duchess of Orleans was sent over, as one
that would be a welcome Guest to her Brother, and whose Charms and Dexterity,
joined with her other ad^antages, would give her such an ascen^ent over him, as
could not fail of Success; and indeed she acquitted her self so well ^f her
Commission, that she quite supplanted all the King's good Councils, and by
yielding to his Incestuous Embraces, while the D. of B. held the Door, so
charmed his most Sacred Majesty, and he quite and clean forgot his Tripple
League, and entered into a new and stricter Alliance with France than ever. It Is
true, the Peace was dear bought by the Zealous Lady, in regard it cost her her
Life upon her return into France. For though she might seem to have atton'd for
the Crime, and to have merited forgiveness from her Husband, by the
advantageous League which she had pleasantly syren'd her Brother to make with
the French Monarch; yet jealous and incensed Orleance was not so much a lover
of his Country, as to remit the Indignity done to his Bed, or such a Bigot as
to pardon the Woman that had sacrificed his Honor to the Interest of Popery.
However the Articles being thus sealed at Dover by his Majesty, the Marquis of
Belfonds was immediately sent hither, and a Person of great Honor sent
thither, and so the League it self being drawn into form, was ratified on both
sides.

This Treaty was for a long time a work of Darkness, and lay long concealed*
til^ the King of France to the end the King of England, being truly set forth
in hi^ Colors, out of a dis^air of ever being trusted or forgiven by his
People hereafter, might be push't to go on barefaced and follow his steps in
Government, as well as Religion, most treacherously and unkinglike, caused it
to be Printed at Paris; tho upon Complaint made at the French Court, it was
again stifled, and the Author though he had his instructions from Colbert, to
humor the King, committed to the Bastile for a short time, and then let out
again. However the Book being Printed, some few Copies lit into safe hands;
from whence take the Substance of that Mystery of Iniquity as follows.

After that M. de Croisy, the French Ambassador at London, had laid before the
Eyes of the King of England, all the Grounds which his Majesty had of Complaint
against Holland, etc. He told him, that the time was come to revenge himself of
a Nation that had so little respect for Kings; and that the occasion was never
more favorable, seeing many of the Princes of Germany were already entered
into the League; and that the King of France was powerful enough to be able to
promise to his Allies in the Issue of that War satisfaction, both as to their
Honor and Interests, whereby he prevailed with that Prince to enter into
secret Alliance with France. And for his greater Assurance, and the more to
confirm him, Henrietta Duchess of Orleans went for England, and proposed to
her Brother, in the Name of the Most Christian King, that he would assure him
an Absolute Authority over his Parliament, and full Power to establish the
Catholic Religion in his Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland. But withal
she told him, that to compass this, before all things else, it would be
necessary to abate the Pride and Power of the Dutch, and to reduce them to the
sole Province of Holland; and that by this means the King of England should
have Zealand for a Retreat in case of necessity, and that the rest of the
Low Countries should remain to the King of France, if he could render himself
Master of it.

This is the Sum of that famous League concluded at Dover, framed and entered
into on purpose, for the Subjugation of these three Nations to Popery and
Slavery.

However as at first this Treaty was kept so close, that it was no way to be
discovered, so before the Effects appeared, it was necessary that the
Parliament, after the old wont, should be gulled to the giving of Money, for
the carrying on this grand and deep Conspiracy. The Parliament met October. 24.
1670. where the Lord Keeper Bridgeman, guided more by his Instructions than by
any knowledge he had of the devilish Design, omitted nothing to make Both
Houses sensible of the great Service done to England, and in a manner to all
Mankind, by chaining up the devouring Lion, that was never satiated with Prey;
and the more to incite their Liberality, he told them of several other Leagues,
which the King, for the good of his People, and the Advancement of the Trade of
the Nation, had made with other Princes; as the D. of Savoy, the King of
Denmark, and the King of Spain; by which, as his Lordship was pleased to say,
it was evident, that all the Princes of Europe sought his Majesty's Friendship,
as acknowledging they could not secure, much less improve, their present
Condition without it; concluding, that for the Support of these Alliances, the
annual Charge of His Majesty's Navy, came to no less than Five hundred thousand
Pounds, nor could be maintained with less.

Upon the telling of which Story, notwithstanding the immense Sums lavished to
no purpose, or rather to our Loss, in the former War with Holland;
notwithstanding they had given the Additional Duty upon Wines for Eight years,
amounting to Five hundred and sixty thousand Pounds, and confirmed the Sale of
the Fee farm Rents, no less their Gift, being a part of the Public Revenue, to
the value of one Million, and Eight hundred thousand Pounds, they could not
hold, but gave with both hands again a Subsidy of Twelve Pence in the Pound to
the real value of all Lands, and other Estates proportionably, with several
more beneficial Clauses in the Bargain; to which they joined the Additional
Excise upon Beer, Ale, etc. And lastly the Law Bill, which being summed up
together, could not be estimated at less than two Millions and half.

So that for the Tripple League here was a Tripple Supply, and the Subject had
now all the reason to believe, that this Alliance which had been fixed at first
by the Public Interest, Safety and Honor, was by these three Grants, as with
three Golden Nails, sufficiently clinched and rivetted. But now therefore was
the most proper Time and Occasion, for the King and his chosen Ministers to
give Demonstrations of their Fidelity to the French Monarch, and for his Sacred
Majesty by the Forfeiture of all these Obligations to his Subjects, and the
Princes abroad, and at the Expense of all this Treasure, given for quite
contrary Uses, to recommend himself the more meritoriously to his Patronage.

The Parliament, therefore, after they had given all this Money, were presently
Prorogued, and sat no more till the latter end of February, 1672. that there
might be a competent time allowed, for so great a work as was designed, and
that the Architects of our Ruin might be so long free from the busy and
odious Inspection of the Parliament, till the work were finished. And now all
Applications made by his Majesty of Great Britain, to induce Foreign Princes
into the Garranty of the Peace of Aix la Chapelle, ceased; while on the other
side, those who desired to be admitted into it, were here rejected. The Duke of
Lorrain, who had always been a true Friend to the King, and for his Affection
to the Tripple League, had incurred the French King's Displeasure with the loss
of his Country, Seizd upon in the year 1669. against all the Laws not only of
Peace, but Hostility; yet by virtue of the Dover Treaty, was refused the favor
to which others had been so earnestly invited; and though his Envoy was sent
back with Complements and many Expressions of Kindness, yet he was told withal,
that the French Invasion was a torrent not to be stopped at that time: which
was as much as to say, the Case was altered and the Tripple League must
signify nothing.

At the same time also the Emperor, by a Letter, invited himself into the same
Garranty, in conformity to one of the Articles of the said Treaty of Aix. Upon
receipt of which Letter, the King assured the Spanish Ambassador, that he was
glad his Imperial Majesty was so ready to come into the League, and told him,
he would cause an Instrument to be prepared in order to his Admission. But when
the Resolution was taken, and orders given for preparing the said Instrument,
it was moved, that Mr. Secretary Trevor, (who was not initiated in their holy
Mysteries) might not have the drawing of it, though it was his proper Province.
By which means the Popish Cabal having made themselves sole Masters of the
thing, at first a reasonable honest Draught was brought in; but before it was
perfected, Monsieur Colbert being consulted, the King was possessed with an
opinion, that the admitting the Emperor would be attended with dangerous
Consequences, and that in case he came into the League, his Majesty would be
engaged in all his Quarrels, and bound to make his Forces March into the
farthest parts of Germany, as often as it should happen to be Invaded by the
Great Turk; which Secretary Trevor opposed as much as he was able, and
endeavored to satisfy the King, that the Garranty of the Tripple League, as
well as of the Treaty of Aix, related only to Hostilities, either from France
or Spain; yet the wary Men of the Cabal being on the King's side, carried it,
and so the Emperor was put off with a Flamm.

Nay, so soon as the Two Confederate Monarchs had thus made a shift to cut the
Gordian Knot, the now pitiful, but formerly vaunted Tripple League, was
trampled under foot, turned into Ridicule, and less valued than a Ballad.
Insomuch, that to talk of admitting others into the Tripple League, was
reprehended in print as a kind of Figure of Speech, commonly called a Bull.

And farther, to show how much he hated the thoughts of the Triple League,
which he had made for the good of Christendom, his most Sacred Majesty suffered
an Agent of his, one Marsilly, whom he had sent to invite the Switzers into the
Garranty, who was Surprised and taken Prisoner by the French, in the execution
of the Commands he had not many Months before received from Whitehall, to be
broken upon the Wheel at Paris, tho one single Word from the King would have
saved his Life. Neither did he take it ill, that upon the Scaffold, Twenty
Questions were put to him relating to his own Person: or that in such a public
and infamous Place, a strict inquiry should be made as to what had passed
between him and the King of England; for that was the best Title they could
afford him for all his late Favors.

And thus it is plain, that the Tripple League was broken, for no other ends
than to be subservient to the ends of the French King, to ruin the Dutch, and
to bring the Three Kindoms of England, Ireland, and Scotland, under the Yoaks
of Arbitrary Power and Roman Catholic Idolatry, after a total Abolition of the
name of Parliaments, and subversion of the Fundamental Laws, Gratias tibi
piissime atque invictissime Rex, Carole Secunde. And tha^ he might not, as much
as in him lay, meet with after-rubs, Mr. H. C. dispatched into Sweden to
dissolve the Tripple League in that Kingdom; which he did so effectually, by
cooperating with the French Ministers in that Court, that the Swede after it
came to Rupture, never assisted to any purpose, or prosecuted the Ends of the
said Alliance, only by arming himself at the expense of the League, first under
a disguised Mediation, acted the French Interest, and at last threw off his
Vizard, and drew his Sword on the French side in the Quarrel. And at home, when
the Project ripened and grew hopeful, the Lord Keeper was discharged from his
Office, and both he, the D. of Ormond, Prince Rupert and Secretary Trevor, were
discarded out of the Committee for Foreign Affairs, as being too honest to
comply with the Intreagues then on foot: Mr. Trevor being the first Secretary
of State that was ever left out of a Commission of that Importance.

All things being so well thus far disposed toward a War with Holland, there
wanted only a Quarrel, and to pick one required much invention. The East India
Company was summoned to know whether they had any thing to object against them:
but the Dutch had so punctually complied with all the Conditions of the Peace
at Breda, that nothing could there be found out. And as to the Tripple League,
they were out at the same time in pursuance of it, and to be ready upon
occasion to relieve the the Spanish Netherlands, which were then threatened by
the French. But at length a way was found out that never happened, because it was
never so much as imagined before, by sending the Fanfan, a sorry inconsiderable
Yatcht, but bearing the English Flag, with Orders to sail into the middle of
the Dutch Fleet, single out the Admiral, and to fire two Guns at him; a thing
as ridiculous, as for a Lark to dare a Hobby.

However, the Commander in Chief, in respect to his Majesty's Colors, and in
consideration of the Amity between both Nations, paid the Admiral of the Yatcht
a Visit, to know the reason of his Anger; and understanding it was because the
whole Fleet had failed to strike to his Oyster-boat; the Dutch Commander
excused it, as a thing that never happened before, and therefore could have no
Instructions in it; and so they parted. But the Captain of the Yatcht having
thus acquitted himself, returned full freighted, with the Quarrel he was sent
for. Which yet for several Months was passed over here in silence, but to be
afterward improved as the design ripened: For there was yet one jolly prank
more to be played at home, to make the King more capable of what was shortly
after to be executed upon his Neighbors.

The Exchequer for some years before, by the Bait of more than ordinary Gain,
had decoyed in the greatest part of the most wealthy Goldsmiths, and they the
rest of the Moneyed People of the Nation, by the due payment of Interest, till
the King was run in Debt, upon what account no body knew, above Two Millions:
Which served for one of the Pretenses in the Lord Keeper's Speech at the
Opening of the Parliament, to demand and obtain a Grant of the forementioned
Supplies, and might plentifully have sufficed to disengage the King with Peace
and any tolerable Good Husbandry. But as if it had been perfidious to have
applied them to any of the Purposes declared, instead of Payment, it was
privately resolved to shut up the Exchequer, lest any part of the Money should
have been legally expended, but that all might be appropriated to the Holy War
in prospect, and those far more pious Uses to which the King had dedicated it.

This Affair was carried on with all the secrecy imaginable, lest the
unseasonable venting of it should have spoiled the Wit and Malice of the
Design. So that all on a sudden, upon the First of January 1671. to the great
astonishment, ruin, and despair of so many interested Persons, and to the
Terror of the whole Nation, by so Arbitrary a Fact, the Proclamation issued
forth, in the midst of the Confluence of such vast Aids and so great a Revenue,
whereby the Crown published it self Bankrupt, made Prize of the Subject, and
broke all Faith and Contract at home, in order to the breaking of both abroad
with more advantage.

What was this but a Robbery committed upon the People under the Bond and
Security of the Royal Faith? by which many hundreds were as really impoverished
and undone, as if he had violently broken into their Houses, and taken their
Money out of their Coffers. Nay, that would have looked Generous and Great,
whereas the other was base and sneaking. Only it seemed more agreeable to his
Majesty's Temper, to rob his Subjects by a Trick, than to plunder them by
direct and open Force.

Of alliance to this, only with some more G^ains, if more could be, of Vileness
and Unworthiness in it, was that Action also, of seizing part of the Money
collected for the Redemption of Slaves out of Argiers, and fetching it from the
Chamber of London, where it lay deposited to that end, into the Treasury, from
whence it was to be disposed and made use of for the Enslaving the Nation.
Could there be an Action of greater barbarity, than to take the Charity and
Benevolence of good People, which had been given toward the Releasing of poor
Christian Captives from Mohammedan Thraldom, and to turn it either into Wages
for his Myrmidons, or into Pensions to reward suborned Witnesses for swearing
the Innocent out of their Lives?

There remained nothing now, but that the King, after this famous Exploit upon
his own Subjects, should manifest his Impartiality to Foreigners, and assert
the Justice of his intended Quarrel with the Hollanders. Thereupon the Dispute
about the Flag, upon occasion of the Fanfan Yacht, was started afresh; and a
great noise was made of infamous Libels, horrid Pictures, Pillars set up, and
Medals coined to the infinite dishonor of his Majesty's Person, his Crown and
Dignity; though not one of those Libels or Pictures could be produced; and as for
the Pillars, they never had any Being, but in the Imaginations of those that
made it their Business to raise Jealousies between the two Nations. It Is true,
there was a Medal coined, which might have been spared; but so soon as it was
known in Holland that Exceptions were taken at it, the Stamp was broken to
pieces.

Then the Difficulties which arose about the Surrender of Surinam were improved
to the height, and this after Secretary Trevor had adjusted the Matter with the
States. Though these things were handled so nicely, as if they had been afraid
of being prevented in their design, by receiving all the satisfaction they
could have desired from the Dutch. The Dutch therefore being not conscious of
any Provocation which they had given the English, but of their readiness, if
there had been any, to repair it, and relying upon the Faith of the Kings
Treaties and Alliances, pursued their Traffic and Navigation through the
English Seas without the least suspicion. And accordingly a numerous and rich
Fleet of Merchantmen from Smyrna and Spain, were on their Voyage homeward near
the Isle of Wight, under a small Convoy of five or six Men of War. This was the
Fleet, in expectation of which the King had so long deferred the War to plunder
them in Peace. The Wealth of this was that, which by its ponderous weight,
turned the Balance of all his Public Justice and Honor. With this Treasure
he imagined he should be in stock for all the Wickdness he was capable to act,
and that he should never after this Addition stand himself in need, nor his
Instruments in fear of a Parliament. To this purpose Sir R. H. being pitched
upon for the Exploit, according to his Instructions, fell in among them, with
the Squadron under his Command: But the Dutch Merchantmen themselves, and
their small Convoy, so bestir'd themselves, that Sir Robert finding himself not
strong enough, was forced to give over the Enterprise; So that all the Booty
that was gotten hardly sufficed to pay the Surgeons and Carpenters.

And so hotly did the King pursue his Chase of the Protestant Religion, that
while he was so piously and justly Violating his Royal Contracts upon the Sea,
in order to his mastering the Protestant Religion abroad, he at the same time
was undermining and sapping it at home. For while he was trying his Fortune in
Battle with the Smyrna Fleet, a Declaration for Liberty of Conscience was
Printing off at the Press, as a more proper means than Fasting and Prayer, to
propitiate for Success to his Enterprise, and to the War that must second it.

By this Declaration, all the Penal Laws against Papists, for which former
Parliaments had given so many vast Sums, were in one Instant suspended, in
order to defraud the Nation of all that Religion which they had so dearly
purchased, and for which they ought at least, the Bargain being broken, to have
been reimburs'd.

By all which, it was plain that the King did all that lay in his power toward
the advancement of Popery and Slavery, but that still his luck was naught. For,
having been thus true to his great Design, and made so considerable a Progress,
though with an inauspicious beginning, at length he thought it high time to
declare the War, after he had begun it. And though in subservience to France
and his Dover T^eaty, he undertook to be foremost to discompose the State of all
Ch^istendom; and though he made himself Principal to all the horrid
Destructions, Devastations, Ravage and Slaughter, which after that ensued, yet
had he the Confidence, in the winding up of his Manifesto, to expose the
following Words to the World.

And whereas we are engaged by a Treaty, to support the Peace made at Aix la
Chapelle, We do finally declare, That notwithstanding the Prosecution of this
War, we will maintain the true intent and Scope of the said Treaty; and that in
all Alliances which We have, or shall make in the Progress of this War, We have
and will take care to preserve the ends thereof inviolable, unless provoked to
the contrary.

And yet it was as clear as the Sun, that the French had by the Treaty of Aix
la Chapelle, agreed to acquiesce in their former Conquests of Flanders, and
that the English Swedes and Hollanders, were reciprocally bound to be aiding
against whomsoever should disturb that Regulation: Besides the League Offensive
and Defensive, which the King had made with the States General; all which by
this Conjunction with France, was dashed in pieces. So that what is here
declared, were it reconsilable to Truth, yet could not consist with
possibility, unless by one only Exception, that the English, who by their new
league with France, were to be the Breakers of the Peace of Aix, and by the
Tripple League, were to fulfill their Obligations to both Parties, should have
sheathed the Sword in our own Bowels.

But such was the Zeal of the King and his select Instrument, for the Promotion
of Slavery and Popery, that it easily transported them to say what was untrue,
or to undertake what was impossible, for the Service of the French.

And now the French King seeing the English engaged past all retreat, comes in
with his Fleet; not to fight, but only to sound our Seas, to spy our Ports, to
learn our Building, to learn our way of Fighting, and to consume ours, and
preserve his own Navy. For no sooner had the D. of York, as the design was
laid, suffered himself to be shamefully surprised, but the Vice Admiral, the
Earl of Sandwich, was sacrificed, and the rest of the English Fleet so torn and
mangled, that the English Honor was laid not in the Dust, but in the Mud,
while his Royal Highness did all that was expected from him, and M. d'Estrees,
who commanded the French, did all that he was sent for.

There were three other several Engagements of ours with the Dutch the next
Summer. But while nothing was tenable at Land against the French, so it seemed,
that to the English every thing was impregnable at Sea, which was not to be
attributed to the want of Courage or Conduct of the then Commanders, but rather
to the unlucky Conjunction of the English with the French, like the Disasters
that happen to Men by being in ill Company.

In the mean time, the hopes of the Spanish and Smirna Fleet being vanished,
the slender Allowance from the French not sufficing to defray farther Charges,
and the ordinary Revenue of His Majesty, with all the former Aids, being in
less than one years time exhausted; the Parliament, with the King's most
gracious leave, was permitted to sit again at the time appointed. At what time,
at the King's and the Lord Keeper's usual daubing way, the War was first
communicated to them* and the Causes, the Necessity, the Danger so well painted
out, that upon the King's earnest Suit, the Commons, though in a War begun
without their Advice, readily Voted the Royal Mumper no less than One million
two hundred and fifty thousand Pounds; though they would not say it was for the
War, but for the King's extraordinary Occasions.

Nevertheless it was but yet a Vote to Embryo; and therefore now beginning in
grow more sensible of the true Causes of the Quarrel they prepared an Act
before they let the Money-Bill slip out of their Hands, by which the Papists
were obliged to pass through a new State Purgatory, if they intended to be
capable of any Public Employment.

The Declaration also of Indulgence was questioned, which tho His Majesty had,
out of his Princely and Gracious Inclinations to Popery, and the Memory of some
former Obligations, granted for the sake of the Papists, yet greedy after the
Coin, he was pleased to cancel at the humble request. as he pretended, of the
Parliament, and declared, it should be no President for the future: After which
compelled by his want of a fresh Supply, he passed the Bill concerning the
Papists, in exchange for the Money; and then the Parliament growing uneasy,
they were again sent a Grazing for a good while. The King hoping when he had
the management of the Cash, to frustrate the Effect of the Act which he had
passed against his good Friends the Roman Catholics.

And now the King having got the Money in his Hands, a new Project was set on
foot to set up an Army in England, for the introducing of Slavery and Popery,
under pretense of Landing in Holland: Which was raised with all the Expedition
imaginable; over which, as Colonel Fitzgerald, an Irish Papist, was made Major
General, so were the greatest number of the Captains and other Officers of the
same Stamp. And because that pretense was soon blown over, it was afterward
still continued on foot, under the more plausible Color of a War with France.

But after all these cunning Contrivances to alter the Religion and Government
of the Nation, the King being disappointed in all his Projects, and finding
that the Parliament, grown more sensible of his abstruse designs, and alarmed
at his extraordinary new Militia, both Burthensom and unnecessary for any other
Employment but the support of Arbitrary Power, would give him no more Money,
but began to call his Ministers in question, was forced to make a Peace with
the Dutch, and disband the Army to his great regret. However, what he could not
do at hope, he resolved to do abroad; and therefore the English, Scotch and
Irish Regiments, that were already in the French Service, were not only kept up
in their full Complement, but new numbers of Soldiers were daily transported
thither, to make up in all a constant Body of Ten thousand Men. Which was done
on purpose that he might have an Army trained up under the French Discipline
and Principles, ready seasoned to be called back into England for the Execution
of any opportune Enterprise upon his Protestant Subjects.

Thus far we have seen the King's inveterate Malice to his Neighbors and
Allies the Dutch, merely upon the account of their being Protestants, and
Protectors of the Protestant Religion, and his pernicious Conjunction with the
French King, to their utter Destruction and Desolation. A continued Series of
Treachery and Faith-breaking, which only that Romish Principle, That there is
no Faith to be kept with Heretics, could have infused into his Breast. Now let
us take a short view of his Carriage, from the beginning of his Restoration, to
the French King, the Mortal Enemy of his Subjects, and the Religion which they
profess.

It is well known in general, how much the Extraordinary Kindness of Charles
the Second to Lewis the Fourteenth, has contributed to that vast increase of
Shipping and Experience in the Art of Navigation, to which they are now
arrived; which no Prince in the World that might have been so strong at Sea as
his Majesty might have been, with half the Expense which he squandered away to
ruin the nation, had he been sensible in the least of his own Grandeur, the
welfare of his ow Subjects, and the danger of having so potent a Rival for the
Dominion of the Sea, which God and Nature seemed to have appropriated to
himself. We have been told of brisk Messenger sent to the French Kings, so soon
as they did but lay the Carcass of a pitiful Flyboat upon the Stocks. But such
was the Complaisance of our Supine Monarch, that he not only connived at the
industrious Preparations of the French King, but lent him his helping Hand to
make him Master of his own Rights. When they had none of their own, he sent
Vice-Admirals, and other considerable Sea-Officers, to encourage and promote
the setting out of their Fleets. He pitied their want of Experience in Sea
Affairs, and out of Compassion and Brotherly Love, lead their rare Seamen by
the Hand, trained them up in his Fleets, and among the best of his Seamen,
taught them the Skill which they had been forcod to toil for by the Experience
of many Ages; and to crown all, even to fight for them, and to interpose
between them and Danger, with so good Success, that the French Squadron, as if
the Engagement had been only designed for a Diversion and Entertainment to
them, came off as fresh and as whole, as when they first sailed out of their
own Ports, was such an unparalleled Kindness, that nothing but the
extraordinary hopes the King had placed in him, of being his great Assistant
for the compassing of his pernicious designs upon his own Subjects, could have
made him condescend to.

But to come to Particulars, It was a strange Demonstration of the King of
England's kindness to the French Interest, though to the unspeakable Detriment
of his own People, that after all those Expressions in the Lord Keeper
Bridgman's Speech, of the Treaty between France and the King of England,
concerning Commerce, wherein the King would have, as he said, such a singular
regard to the Honor and Trade of this Nation, notwithstanding the intolerable
Oppression upon the English Traffic in France, ever since the King's
Restoration, he had not in all that time made one step toward a Treaty of
Commerce or Navigation with him; no not even at that time, when the English
were so necessary to him, that he could not have begun the War without them,
and therefore at such a Conjuncture might probably have condescended to some
Equality of Terms. But the King of England well understood how careful the
French King was to preserve and increase the Trade of his Subjects, and that it
was by the diminution of that Beam of his Glory, that the Hollanders had raised
his Indignation. The King therefore, the more to gratify him, made it his
constant Maxim, to burden his English Merchants here with one Hand, while the
French in his own Territories loaded them no less with the other. So that when
the English Merchants in London had prepared a Petition to the King and
Council, to complain of the Oppression which their Factors and Agents lay under
in France, with a true State of their Case, and a short account of their
Grievances, information thereof was given to the Court, by which means the
Perusal of the Papers being transmitted by the King ^o his Instruments, all
further Prosecution of the matter was stopped by his Conni^ance and Authority,
and the Merchants were put off with a Promise, that the French Ambassador
should be acquainted with their Complaints, and that they should be redressed
through his means. Which proving ineffectual, upon their farther Applications
for redress, they were Hectored, Brow-beaten, Ridiculed, and might have met
with fairer Audience from Monsieur Colbert.

Nor was it only in the matter of Commerce, that the King of England had
obliged the French Tyrant, but even in the War it self. For that except the
irresistible Bounties o^ so great a Prince, to some particular English
Instruments, and a little Subsistence Money for the Fleet, frugally parted
with, the King of England had put him to no Charges, but the English Navy Royal
had served him all along, No Purchase, No Pay. He had tied the French King to
no Terms, had demanded no Partisson of Conquests, had made no humane Condition,
but had sold him all for those two Pearls of high Value, the True Roman
Catholic Worship, and the true French Government.

So soon as the Peace was concluded betwixt England and Holland, by the Awe of
the Parliament, the French King, as a mark of his Displeasure, and to humble
the English Nation, let loose his Privateers among the English Merchants;
insomuch that there was no security of Commerce or Navigation, notwithstanding
the Public Amity betwixt the two Crowns, but at Sea they Murdered, Plundered,
made Prize, and Confiscated all they met with: Their Piccaroons lay before the
Mouths of our Rivers; hovered all along the Coast; took our Ships in the very
Ports, so that we were in a manner blocked up by Water; and in this manner it
continued from 1674. till the latter end of 1676. without Remedy. And yet all
this while that the French made these intolerable Depredations, and Piracies
upon the Kings Subjects, they were more diligently than ever supplied from
England with Recruits, and those that would go voluntarily into the French
Service were encouraged, others that would not pressed, imprisoned, and carried
over by main force and constraint: And by the King's connivance, his own
Magazines were daily emptied, to furnish the French with all sorts of
Ammunition, of which the following Account affords but a small Parcel, in
comparison of what was daily conveyed away, under color of Cockets for Iersey.

Granado's without number, shipped off under the pretense of unwrought Iron.

Lead Shot One and twenty Tuns.

Gunpouder Seven thousand one hundred thirty four Barrels.

Iron Shot Eighteen Tun Six hundred Weight.

Match, Eighty eight Tun, nineteen hundred Weight.

Iron Ordinance, Four hundred forty one; Quantity, Two hundred ninety two Tuns,
nine hundred Weight: Carriages, Bandaliers, Pikes* etc. the quantity uncertain.

All this, and what more beside, not then discovered, was exported from London
to France, from June 1675. to June 1677.

And thus was the French King gratified for undoing us by Sea; by Contributing
all the King could rap and rend, of Men and Ammunition, to make him more Potent
and Formidable to us by Land.

Another great Instance of the King of England's extraordinary Kindness to the
French King was this, that while he stormed at the Dutch for not promoting as
he pretended, the coming away of some Families that were unwilling to leave
Surinam; he found no fault with the French for keeping him above four years out
of St. Christophers; nor for destroying in the mean while that part of the
Island which belonged to his own Subjects. So great a piece of rudeness it was
thought, to press too hard upon the French King for performance of Articles on
his side. Nay, the French Commanders in those Parts, did not scruple to assert,
that there was a very good understanding, in relalation to that Island, between
the English and French Court; so great a kindness the King had for the French,
so little for his own Subjects.

Nor must we omit, that when the Orders of the French Privy Council, Commanding
all their Sea Officers and Commanders in the Islands of America, to secure to
their Master the Soveraignity of those Seas, were brought by a Person of
Quality into the Cabinet Council at Whitehall, they were at first declaimed
against, but soon buried in oblivion, and put up amongst the useless Papers,
though the French, in pursuance of those Commands proved afterward so
vexatious to the English, that thethen Governor of Iamaica sent word, that
notwithstanding their old Quarrel with the Spaniards, it was much easier to
keep a good Correspondence with them, than with our dear Allies the French.

Nor must it be forgot, as an Eminent Mark of our Sovereign's Deference to the
French Interest and manner of Government, that in the year 1677, upon notice
that a Great French Ambassador was coming over into England, he Adjourned his
English Parliament, that he might have the more Elbow room to entertain his
better beloved Friends. For all things at that time moved between France and
England, with that punctual Regularity, that it was like the Harmony of the
Spears, so that immediately after the Recess of the English Parliament, over
came the D. of Crequi, the Archbishop of Rheimes, M. Barillon, with a Train of
three or four hundred Persons of all Qualities, (you would have sworn they had
been the Lords Spiritual and Temporal of France, with a proportionable number
of their Commons) met the King at New Market, so that it looked like another
Parliament; and that the English had been Adjourned for their better Reception.

Much of their business no doubt was concealed, but so much came to light, that
they pressed the King to continue his Subjects in the Service of France; because
the Parliament at that time most earnestly pressed, and was preparing a Bill for
their being called home. They also demanded an Abolition of all Claims and
Demands from the Subjects of France, upon account of all Prizes made of the
English since the year 1674, till that day and for the future. And the King on
the other side required a further supply of French Money. And certain it is,
that though the English Parliament was kept a loof from the Business of War,
Peace and Alliance, as improper for their meddling withal; yet with those three
Estates of, France all things were negotiated and transacted with the greatest
confidence imaginable. To which purpose they were Adjourned from New Market to
London, and there continued till the return of the English Parliament, but then
dismissd home, though with all the Signs and Demonstrations of mutual Affection
imaginable.

And indeed the effect of their Negotiation soon after appeared; for the
Parliament still insisting, that the King's Subjects might be recalled out of
the French King's Service; pressing the King to enter into a League Offensive
and Defensive, with the States General, and taking up a Resolution, that they
would proceed upon nothing, till satisfied in the Business of the French
Affairs and Popery; they were put off by Adjournments from time to time, or as
it may be more truly said, kicked from Adjournment to Adjournment, as from one
Stair down to another, to the end the French King might have the more leisure
to complete his Conquests in Flanders.

And from this last usage of his Parliament, we may justly take occasion to
recollect his Behavior all along to the Grand Council of the Nation, of which
in his glavering Letters before his Restoration, he had so high an Esteem, and
thought them so necessary for the Government of the Kingdom, that neither
Prince nor People could be in any tolerable degree happy without them; yet to
which his Malice was so inveterate, after once he came to be safe in his
Throne, that no Man could use them with more Scorn and Contempt.

His first Parliament began at Westminster the Eighth of May 1667. a Parliament
so kind to him, and so confident of the Sincerity and Integrity of his Words,
that they gave him back the Triennial Bill, and laid themselves at his Mercy,
to do with them what he pleased; whereas before they had power to Assemble
every three years by an Enacted Law. And no less frankly they surrendered the
power of the Militia into his Hands; of both which Acts, being done in haste,
they had leisure enough afterward to repent.

But notwithstanding all the great Kindness of this Parliament, and their more
than extraordinary Liberality to the King, of several Millions of the Peoples
Money, which was with the same profusion wasted upon his Pleasures, and the
carrying on his Designs for the Introducing of Popery and French Government,
not a Penny hardly for the good of the Nation, while the Seamen were fed with a
Bit and a Knock, and the Merchants that supplied the Stores of the Nay were
cheated of their Money, and never paid to this day; with what Scorn and
Contempt he used them, and how far from that Esteem and Veneration he professed
to have for them, while he was wheedling for his Restoration, is apparent to
all the Kingdom. It Is true, the King continued them till all men of Impartial
Knowledge and Judgment thought them Dissolved by Law; and till at length they
were Dissolved by himself the Twenty fifth of January 1678. Not that they Sat
so long; but were discontinued and contemptuously spurned from Meeting to
Meeting, many times by the intimated Orders, and to promote the Designs of the
French King, and never suffered to Sit, but when the King was in extreme
necessity of Money. Among the rest of these Prologations, there was one at a
time when the greatest urgency of Affairs, the greatest danger that ever
threatened the Welfare of this Nation, required their Sitting, when they were
diving into the bottom of the Popish Plot, and endeavoring to bring to condign
Punishment the chief Instruments which the King had made use of to compass his
Arbitrary and Popish Design. But then it was that the King to screen his wicked
Ministers from Public Justice, preferred the Caresses of the expanded
nakedness of a French Harlot, before the preservation of three Nations. For
then it was, as Mr. Andrew Marvel, with a Satirical Indignation expresses it.
That Carwel, that Incestuous Punk,
Made our most Sacred Sovereign drunk;
And drunk she let him give the Buss,
Which still the Kingdom's bound to Curse.
This was the Effect of that nights bloody debauch, which continued till the
morning, and all the morning till the Parliament was Dissolved, or Orders at
least given for the doing it. For the Duke of York, and the rest of the
Conspirators, being very uneasy under the terrible Inspections which the two
Houses made into the Secrets of this Popish Plot, but lately discovered, would
not endure their Sitting any longer. On the other side, the King, being alarmed
by the detection of so many designed Contrivances against his Person, to remove
him out of the World, for which the Papists had so little reason, unless it
were to make him more hasty than stood with the Rules and Methods of his
Politics, was the more willing to let the Parliament sit, for fear of
exasperating the Nation at such a ticklish Conjuncture of Affairs as at that
time, when all the Protestants of the Kingdom were awakened by such dreadful
Consternations and Jealousies. What therefore could not be obtained by open
Persuasion when His Majesty was sober and sensible, must be wrested form him
when he was intoxicated. To this purpose Portsmouth was fully instructed what
to do, and as being privy to the whole Conspiracy against the Kingdom, was
entrusted to manage the Business. The Night was spent in Carousing and
Buffooning, so that His Majesty by Morning was far from that Condition in which
he used to appear at Chapel. In the Morning Portsmouth retired with the King
and two Great Ladies more, into a more Private Room, where to bind him the
faster in her Charms, and that he might have no time for second Thought, the
three Ladies placed themselves before his Eyes in the posture of the three
Naked Goddesses, in expectation of their Sentences from the Trojan Sheepherd;
and in that Posture going to the Sport of Questions and Commands, when it came
to Portsmouth's turn to Rule, she asked her Monarchical Subject, whether he
would have Two Commands and One Question, or Two Questions and One Command: To
which when the King replied, One Command and Two Questions: The Strumpet
presently cried our, Then I command ye to Dissolve the Parliament. Ahassuerus
could have said no more, nor have been more absolutely obeyed; for that very
Morning the Parliament was Prorogued accordingly; notwithstanding all that P.
Rupert, when he heard the Resolution was taken, could urge with all the
vehemence imaginable against it; while the D. of York stuck close to his
Brother, and told him his Cousin raved. So that the Duke, that advised for the
Ruin of the Nation, was believed; but the Prince, who spoke his mind freely
for the good of the Kingdom, was dismissed for a Madman.

So well did the King act his part, that when his well-meaning Counselors lent
their assisting hands to prevent the Consequences of French and Popish
Dictates, they were mistaken in the Man, and gave their wholesome Advice to him
that was bound not to take it, and was himself the Primum Mobile of all the
Disorders which they besought of him to remedy.

During this Sessions of Parliament, many foul things came to light: For while
the King had raised an Army, and pressed the Parliament for Money to maintain
them, under pretense of making a War with France, which was the earnest desire
of all the Protestant part of the Kingdom, the Parliament were fully informed,
that while the King boasted of the Alliances which he had made for the
preservation of Flanders and the Protestant Religion both at home and abroad,
he was secretly entered into Treaties and Alliances at the same time with the
French King; and Mr. Garraway of the House of Commons had gotten a Copy of the
Private Treaty between the King of England and the French King, at the same
instant, that the Secretary and all the Court Pentioners cried out a War;
insomuch that such of the Conspirators as were in the House began to blush when
they saw the Cheat so palpably discerned. It was farther discovered, that a
great Favorite of the Duke's had been sent over into France, under a pretense
of Expostulating, and requiring satisfaction for the Injuries which the English
had received from the French: but in reality, to carry the Project of Articles
for the Peace, and to settle and confirm all things fast about the Money that
was to come from France, and to agree the Methods for shamming the Confederates
about their Expected Alliances. They found themselves cheated of all the Pole
Bill Money, which they had given so little a while before, upon the assurance
of a War intended against France; the greatest part of which they perceived was
imediately, though appropriated to the French Wur only, converted to other
uses, as the paying of old Debts, so that very little was left to pay for any
Necessaries bought, or to be bought, toward the pretended War with France.

Nor were they ignorant of the real Design, for which the King had raised his
Army, and what care the King and his Brother took, that there should be no
other Officers in that Army, than what were fit for the Work in hand, which was
to introduce Popery and French Government by main force; Four parts of Five
being downright Papists, or else such as resolved so to be upon the least
intimation. The Duke recommending all such as he knew fit for the Turn, and no
less than a Hundred Commissions being signed by Secretary W. to ^ish Papists,
to raise Forces, notwithstanding the late Act; by which means both the Land and
Naval Forces were in safe hands: And to complete the Work, hardly a Judge,
Justice of the Peace, or any Officer in England, but what was of the Duke's
Promotion. Nor were they ignorant of the private Negotiations carried on by the
Duke, with the Kings Connivance, with the Pope and Cardinal Norfolk, who had
undertaken to raise Money from the Church, sufficient to supply the King's
Wants, till the Work were done, in case the Parliament should smoke their
Design, and refuse to give any more. Nor was the Parliament ignorant what great
Rejoicing there was in Rome it self, to hear in what a posture his Majesty was,
and how well provided of an Army and Money to begin the Business.

The Parliament also understood, while they were laboring the War with France,
and to resist the growth of Popery and Arbitrary Power, that the King underhand
assisted the French with Men and Ammunition of all sorts; and soon after that a
Cessation was concluded both at Nimeghen and Paris; and that the King had got
some money from France for that Jobb; by which means the French King was now
sure to hold all his Conquests abroad, which, had England been real to the
Confederates, might have been easily wrested again out of his Hands. But it
seems it was not so much Money as the King expected, which made him angry, so
that he began to threaten, that if the French King did not perform his Promise
of 300000 l. Annuity for three Years, he would undo all he had done against the
next Parliament. But the French King derided those vain Threats, menacing in
his turn, that if the King of England would not be content with his Terms, and
do and say to the Parliament, according to his directions, he would discover
both him and his Correspondents, in betraying the Nation, and discover all his
secret Contrivances against the Kingdom, as afterward he Published the Dover
Treaty at Paris; which was the reason, that after that, His Majesty of England
never durst disoblige the French Monsieur, but became a perfect Slave to his
Interest: a Bondage he never needed to have undergone, had he been but half as
sincere to his English Parliament. But to them he was never true, with them he
always broke his Faith and Royal Word; insomuch, that after they had given him
Money to Disband his Army, he employed the Money to another use, and kept up
his standing Forces, to the great Terror of the People in all parts of the
Kingdom.

So that now all things running on the Papistical side to their Hearts desire,
what with Popish Soldiers, Popish Officers, Popish Counsels, Popish Priests
and Jesuits swarming about the Town and Country, and France at leisure to help
them who had helped him to be more a Conqueror by the Peace, than he could have
expected by a War; the Duke of York was for the Kings pulling off his Vizard,
and for setting up Alamode of France, according to what had been so often
debated at White hall and St. James's.

But while the King and his Brother were thus riding Post to ruin the Laws and
Religion of the Kingdom, the Discovery of the Popish Plot by Dr. Oats, broke
all their Measures for a time, by laying open the Secret Contrivances of our
English Castor and Pollux for the introducing of Popery and Arbitrary
Government.

This Plot was no sooner made known to the King, but he imparts it to the Duke,
not the knowledge of the Plot, for that they both knew before, but the News of
the Plots being discovered. Upon which they set themselves, with all the care
they could, to stop the farther Progress of the Discovery. To which purpose the
Duke gives notice of it to his Man Coleman, and the Priests and Jesuits in the
Savoy; by which means, what Papers and Persons were to be concealed, and
conveyed away, was carefully looked after. All this while by this ^easonable
detection of the King and his Brother to the Priests Jesuits, Oats himself
narrowly escaped Massacred.

Oats finding himself thus betrayed and abandoned by the King, applies himself
to Sir Edmund Bury Godfry, with a Scheme of the Plot fairly drawn up, by that
means to be introduced before the Council, to have the Business there unfolded;
which with much ado was done; and Oats sent for to be Examined at Whitehall;
where he managed himself with that Courage, that though he were Browbeaten and
opposed most strenuously, though there were many that studied by all the ways
imaginable to dash and confound him, yet it was impossible; he stood as firm as
a Rock, and gave such pregnant Reasons for what he said, that the Council, how
unwilling soever to meddle, or stir in his behalf, yet at last were
constrained, by the clearness of his Evidence, to grant Warrants for the
seizure of several Priests that Night, who were taken and sent to Prison.

Upon this followed the Assassination and Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfry,
perpetrated by the Countenance and Connivance of the King, as well a, by the
Contrivances and express Command of the Duke. For proof of which, a little
opening of the Cause and Occasion, and a short relation of the Effects,
Consequences and Events which enstied upon it, will both enlighten us to the
truth of the Matter, and confirm our Belief, who were the Authors of and
Accessors to it*

For, as has been already said, that Gentleman had received an Information upon
Oath from Dr. Oats, about a Plot against our Laws, Lives and Religion. But
finding something in the Deposition that reflected upon Mr. Coleman, with whom
he had an intimate Acquaintance, he thereupon took an opportunity to let him
understand what Information he had receeived, and to tell him, that the only
way to justify his own Innocence, was to contribute all his Endeavors and
Assistance to prevent so Bloody (...) Design. But Coleman, instead of denying
^he Truth of those things which Sir Edmund related, or offering his Endeavors
^o obstruct the Progress of it, or to de^eat the Success of the Plot, not only
ac^nowledged that there was a Conspiracy against our Laws, Liberties and
Religion, but that it was advanced so far, and seconded by Persons of that
Quality in the Nation, and Figure in the Government, there was no possibility
to give a Let or Disappointment to it. And more particularly he told him, that
the King was the Principal Author and Chief Promoter of the whole Design of
overthrowing the Protestant Religion, and altering the Government: which
Coleman calling to mind after his being committed to Newgate, and considering
that by that means Sir Edmond was enabled to come in a second Witness against
him: he therefore ordered it so; as not only to get the Duke acquainted with
his own danger, but that His Highness and others, whom he had mentioned in
conversation with Sir Edmund, were in the seem Predicament, and would certainly
be brought upon the Stage. To which he received this Answer from the Duke, That
he should not be apprehensive of any danger from Sir Edmund, in regard there
would be a way found to prevent his hurting Coleman, or any body else. Now that
he was thereupon most barbarously Murdered, is a thing too well known: and then
by whose Authority it was done, the Circumstances make it plain.

First, the Circumstance of the Place, as being committed in one of the Courts
of the King's Palace, in some of the Apartments of which the Murdered Body was
also concealed for several days. The next circumstan^e was, the guarding of the
Gate and Avenues of the Palace so strictly all the time, and denying the People
their wonted Liberty of access to the House, and passage through, which could
not have been done, but by the King's Authority. Nor would the Duchess of
Portsmouth, and somebody of the same Sex, greater than She, have adventured to
have gone and viewed the Body, while it lay there concealed, by which they
involved themselves in the Guilt of the Crime, but that they knew they could
not be called to an Account for it, considering by whose Connivance and Command
the Fact was committed. Nor was it a less Argument that the King was privy to
the Fact; That he protected from Justice both the Duke and others which were
charged with that Murder: Than which nothing more than the doing of it with
his own hands, could lay him under the Reproach and In^amy of it before Men,
and under the dreadful Guilt of it before God.

Add to this, That when we consider the Motives that urged the necessity of
this Murder, which was Coleman's having acknowledged to Sir Edmund, that the
King as well as the Duke was in the Conspiracy to alter the Government, and
overturn our Religion, it would be nonsense to believe the King less willing to
have him destroyed than his Brother: Since no Body at that time was so sorry
for the detection of that part of the Plot as the King; neither did any body
labor afterward to baffle the belief of it, as he did. Nor had he any thing
in the World to excuse himself for so doing; but that he was the principal
Author of all that part of the Popish Plot, which related to the overthrow of
the Laws and Religion of the Nation, and the destruction of the chief and most
zealous Protestants in the Kingdom, as was sufficiently acknowledged by
Coleman, not only to Sir Edm. Godfrey, but to the Committee of Parliament that
examined him in Newgate. Which was so plain, that nothing influenced those
Gentlemen to conceal that part of his Confession in their Report to the House,
but their pity and compassion to the King, which would not permit them to
expose him so black, as in truth he was to the Nation; though it was as
certain, that they frequently imparted their Knowledge to their Frinds.

Nor did it a little add to confirm the Truth of what is here related, That
Emissaries should be sent from the Court to deal underhand with the Coroner,
and the Jury, to have gotten a Verdict of Felo de se. But the proofs of his
being murdered were so apparent; such as his Neck being broke, and the
cleanness of his Shoes, that nothing could corrupt the Jury from bringing it in
otherwise than it was.

Under these Distresses did the King and the Duke labor: Terribly afraid of
the approaching Parliament, for the sake of their Popish Minions and
Instruments, whose utmost care and industry could not prevent it, but that
several of Coleman's Letters and other Papers were found, which detected the
Negotiations of the King and Duke (for all the World can never separate them by
maintaining that the Duke durst ever have transacted such Treasons abroad,
being then no more than another Subject, without his Brother's Consent) so that
they were in an extraordinary quandary, whether the Parliament should Sit or
no. But the King's extreme necessity for Money, prevailed upon him to let them
Sit: Besides that, the King, who all along acted under his Protestant Mask, was
sensible that the Kingdom would have cried out shame, had he put off the
Parliament of such a Conjuncture of Combustion and Distraction as that was.

^

(...) spent the Money upon his other Occasions* and kept up the Army (...).
Nevertheless, to excute the Fraud and Ch^at which he had put upon the disgu^^ed
Nation, he tells the Parliament, That he had been obliged to k^ep up his
Troops, to keep his Neighb^urs from absolute Despair; and that he had been
solicited from abroad not to disband them. Now, was ever such a Story told by a
Prince, and vouched in the face of the Nation by a Bred Lawyer, viz. his
Chancellor, to justify the Breach of a Law of the Three Estates of the Kingdom
as soon as made, and then to fl^m the Parliament off, with Christendom and the
Worlds commending us for breaking our own Laws, to patch up a Peace, which
tended to nothing but the Ruin of those for whom it was made? The sum of which
was, in short, That the King, to serve his own Arbitrary Ends, had run h^mself
(...)

(...) that many Papers of great Importance had with a more than ordinary
Industry been conveyed away; yet by those that were found, so much appeared,
that the House Voted it to be a damable Plot, to root up and destroy the
Religion and Government of the Kingdom; and privately got the Lord
Chief Justice S^broggs to sign Warrants for the Apprehending the Popish Lords;
which was done accordingly: And, for their further Security, they prepared a
Bill for putting the Nation into a posture of Defense, and for raising the
Militia throughout the Kingdom to be in Arms for so many days. Which passed
Both Houses without any difficulty; but the King, out of his Zeal to the
Protestant Religion, refused to pass it. And then it was, that the Parliament
found too late the Compliment which they had passed upon him in returning him
the Power of the Militia, which he made use of to keep up Standing Armies for
their Destruction, but refused for the Security of the Nation.

This therefore not prevailing, they began to provide against Papists sitting
in either House; and framed a Bill with a Test to be taken by every Member of
both Houses, or else to lose their Seats. This, though his Protestant Majesty
durst not openly oppose himself, yet after a close Consultation held at St.
James's* he ordered all his Instruments in the Lords House to withstand the
passing of it there; which though they could not effect, yet they prevailed so
far, that they got a Proviso in it for the D. of York whereby they did him the
kindness as to declare him a Papist to all the World.

After this, the Parliament proceeded to the impeaching of such Persons as they
had found to be deepest in the Contrivance of all our Mischiefs; but That His
Majesty looked upon as a Business that so nearly concerned his own Honor, that
like his Father, when the D. of Buckingham was accused of poisoning his Father,
he would not endure the Parliament in such a Iehu-like Chase after the Popish
Conspirators, but foot-ball'd them again with a Prorogation for several Months.
So careful was his Protestant Majesty to stifle as much as in him lay, and to
prevent the Prosecution of an Infernal Plot, which he knew was so deeply laid,
like the Axe of Popery, to the root of all his Protestant Dominions.

Nor was this all; for so soon as he had dismissed the Parliament, and had
secured his Accomplices, he took all the care imaginable to discredit Oats and
Bedlow's Evidence; Forty One was again inculcated into all the Ignorant Pates
about the Town, and Merry-Andrew Roger had his Pension out of the Gazetts
continued to ridicule the Plot, which he did in a most lewd and shameless
manner; and Money given to set up a new Divinity Academy in a Public Coffee
House, to act the Protestant Whore of Babylon, and give about his
Revelation-Cup to the Raw Inferior Clergy, and instruct them in better Doctrine
than ever they learnt in the University.

Nor did he stop at the endeavoring to discredit the Testimonies of those
Witnesses, but sent his Head-Emissaries to corrupt them to a denial, and
retracting what they had discovered; and when that would not do, Knox and Lane
were suborned to accused Otes of Buggery, thereby to bave taken him. Acts of
the foulest ignominy, which whether a Protestant King would have encouraged, to
the ruin of the Religion which he professed, in partial postcrity will
determine with a clearer and more unclouded sight: For we, God knows, are so
dazzled with those Illustrious Beams of feigned Protestant Majesty, that we are
not able to stare upon those Rays without blinding our Eyes, out of a false
Devotion to the Sun of our vain Imagination.

Add to this, his endeavoring to corrupt the yet untainted Members of the
House, and buy their Votes, to the utter exhausting of his Treasure, for that
which was then called Secret Service. And which was more than all the rest, his
Dissolution of this Enquiring Parliament, at the Solicitation of the Duke, and
the rest of his guilty Minions, by the Advice of a certain Lady, who to save
her Husband from the Impeachment he lay under, persuaded them to get the King
totally to Dissolve the Parliament; using this Argument, That in regard the
Nation were so dissatisfied in this, it would be a means to gain him the favor
of the people, and baffle the Impeachment, by getting it Dissolved; especially
when it should be known, that it was done by his procurement: So that the
Lady's Advice being followed, the Parliament was as easily Dissolved, as it had
been a little before lasciviously Prorogued, after a continuance of Seventeen
Years, to the great Admiration of all men; tho indeed it proved in some measure
a happy day for England* For the Dissolution so enraged the Band of Pensioners,
finding their Service so slighted, and their livelihood lost, that they began
to talk loud, and discovered those things which were no way for the
disadvantage of the Nation.

But here we are t observe the extraordinary Diligence of his Protestant
Majesty, to get the next Parliament fit for his Turn, which was suddenly to be
called, to stop the mouths of the People.

To which purpose all the Money that could possibly be spared out of the
Chequer, was issued out to C. B. to manage the Elections all over the Kingdom,
under the old Notion of secret Service, in one Article 1500 l. in another 2000.
and the Guinea's stew about the Country far and near to the Corporations, to
hire places, and get fit men, the Heads of the Counties and Corporations were
sent for, and told what men would be serviceable and acceptable to the King;
and particularly the Gentlemen of Essex were sent to, by the Chapter Just.
Schroggs, and cautiones that they should not choose Mildmay, whatever they did.
And new Charters were obtained for some Corporations, with new Privileges, and
(...) them down to be hung out at the Windows, to animate the People to choose
such men as they were directed. What could more have been done by a Protestant
Prince, to destroy his Protestant Subjects, and advance the Roman Catholic
Cause?

But when the Conspiraters saw that nothing would, but that they perceived that
they were deceived in their Expectations by the unanimous choice of the People,
then all ways were studied to put them upon Rocks, and to set them together by
the Ears, and throwing in Bones among them, and by working them to fly upon the
Ministers of State, as the only infallible means to blow them up; as being sure
of the King's Resolutions to interpose between them and danger, whatever became
of the Parliament and Kingdom. If this failed, the King was furnished with
another contrivance, which was so cajole and delude them, by pretending all the
Sincerity and Reality in the World, when he meant quite the contrary; and
rather than miss of his Designs, to publish himself to Posterity, the greatest
Knave in nature; and to let the world know how much he could outdo Tiberius in
dissimulation.

To this purpose, when the Project of the King's rejecting the Commons Choice
of their Speaker, failed, tho it were done on purpose by the King to pick a
quarrel with the House as soon as they sat; the King pursuing his old methods
of speaking with his Lips, what was farthest from his heart, went to the House
of Lords, and there tells the Parliament a plausible Story, how he had
consented to the Exclusion of the Popish Lords from their Seats in Parliament;
to the Execution of several Criminals, both upon the score of the Plot, and the
Murder of Sir Ed. B. Godfrey; but above all, how he had commanded his Brother
to absent himself from him, because he would not leave the most malicious men
room to say he had not removed all Causes which could be pretended to influence
him toward Popish Counsels. In all which there was not one word of Thruth, as
to the Motives that engaged him to do what he did.

For as to the Exclusion of the Popish Lords, he knew it was what he could not
avoid, unless he would have absolutely thrown off his Protestant Mask, which he
was sensible it was not seasonable for him then to do. As for the Jesuits that
were hanged for the Plot, he pleased himself as well as the people, by
sacrificing a few inconsiderable Miscreants to his own Revenge, for
ingratefully plotting against his Life, who had all along been so faith^ul to
their Cause; and indeed it was but just they should dye like Knaves and
Traitors, who had been such fools to mistrust so true a Protestant Prince. As
to the Murderers of Sir E. B. G. what could he have done less, except he would
have exposed himself to the Clamor of the whole Nation? That would have been
the greatest folly in the world, for a Man that loved to sleep in a whole skin,
as he did, for the preservation of three or four Rascals convicted of a bloody
Murder, to have sacrificed his Honor and his Safety to public Scandal and
Resentment.

And then as for the Removal of his Dear Brother, it was done after a long and
deep Consultation upon these Considerations: First, That the Duke's being out
of the way, might stop the farther Examination of the Plot in relation to
himself, and thereby one of the Chief Conspirators be preserved safe: And
secondly, For a show that the King was such an Enemy to Popery and Popish
Councels, that he would not suffer so much as the Breath of a Brother near him,
for fear of infection. For in these Gracious Protestant Acts, lay all his hopes
of making the Parliament give Credit to his Words, and getting Money from them,
at a time when the French King most treacherously failed him Tho while the King
was thus endeavoring to cast a Mist before the Parliament's Eyes, it was most
certain, that before the Duke went, the King had promised him, That nothing
should be acted or done, without being first imparted to him; insomuch, that
the Speech which was to be made to the Parliament, was concluded on before he
went; and tho he were absent in Flanders, where Expresses reached him almost
every hour, yet the Grand Politicians of the Conspiracy staid behind, and
watched his Affairs at home, as diligently as if he had been here in person.

Nevertheless the Parliament, not being to be deluded by all those seeming Acts
of Protestant Grace, took little notice of those gaudy Trappings of the King's
Discourse, but fell briskly to work upon the Plot, and the Murder of Sir E. B.
G. to which purpose they made choice of a Secret Committee to pursue that
Business, by whose means great things were discovered; insomuch, That there
were very few of the chiefest of those who were nearest about the King, and
most effectually possessed His Ear, but were found to have some hand or finger
in the Grand Conspiracy. According to the Proverb, Show me the Company, and
I Will tell thee the Man; which put the Parliament to lay all other
Considerations aside, but those of securing the Nation against Popery and
Arbitrary Government; in order whereunto, they began to think of bringing the
Lords and others in the Tower to their Trials: And upon a report of their
Committee, of the D. of York's Letters, wherein it appeared what great joy had
been conceived at Rome for the Duke's Conversion, even to draw Tears from his
Holiness's Eyes, with several other Papers, discovering much of the
Court-Intreagues with Rome and the Fathers; they Voted the hopes of his coming
to the Crown, to be one of the chief Causes of the Popish-Plot; and ordered a
Bill to disinable him to inherit the Imperial Crown of the Realm.

These Proceedings were of so high a Nature, and so directly tending to the
overthrow of that structure, which the King and the Duke, with the assistance
of their Popish Counsels had been so long and so assiduously erecting, that it
was thought requisite to treat them with all the Art and Subtilty imaginable;
which produced two of the greatest Masterpieces that ever were acted by the
Conspirators ever since their first designing Popery and French Tyranny. The
first was to blind and cozen the House of Commons, by seeming to show an utter
dislike of all former Councils that had brought the Nation to the condition it
was in. In pursuance of which, the old Council was dissolved, and the greatest
Sticklers against the Plot, and for the Protestant Religion, chosen into their
room, to the end the King might not be thought to be any longer influenced by
Popish Advice; and that if any miscarriages happened, they might be all laid to
their charge; or that miscarriages might receive a more candid interpretation,
as being done by such good men, against whose fidelity the Nation had no
exception. And thus were those Gentlemen gulled in, under pretense of the
King's more particular trust and favor, to countenance many illegal
contrivances, to retrieve the bad condition of the Papists, under the notion of
their Approbation: So that if Dissimulare be Regnare, never had any Monarch
more of Kingcraft in him than ours had, to the destruction of his own Subjects.

The next Device was to turn the whole Plot, and the Odium of it, upon the
Protestants, under the notion of Presbyterians and Fanatics: Which how well it
pleased the King, will afterward appear.

The first Project had this effect, That many of the Leading Men for the
Country, of both Houses (for the same alterations were made among the
Commissioners of the Treasury, and Lords of the Admiralty) being inveagled and
drawn aside by the Temptations of Places both of Profit and Honor, their
vigor began to cool, and the unbiassed Party in both Houses were left to stand
by themselves. Four or five of the most Popular in the Council were wrought
off; and whatever Matters were of importance for carrying on the Popish Cause,
were first agreed on in the Private Cabal, and then brought into the Council;
where if such Matters met with strong opposition, the King's Pleasure that it
should be so, overruled the Debates, and all things passed as ordered by the
King in Council, not with the Advice of his Council. And then such as did not
heartily join, had good words given them, and were told that all was meant
well; which made several give credit, and believe the rest were real. By which
means, all that was done by the King and His Coadjutors, was acted behind the
Curtain, and the Popular Gentlemen were only made use of as Vmbrello's to shade
the Conspirators from the scorching Heat of the Peoples Discontent: So fine and
subtle were the Wiles of Popery, above the reach of plain and downright
Protestant Politics.

But in the midst of these Court-Intriegues to run down the Plot, the House of
Commons went on vigorously both against the Plot, and the Pop^sh Delinquents;
which grated so hard upon the Popish Party, and was such an obstruction to
their Designs, That the King compassionating their Grievances, more than those
of his Protestant Subjects, gave way to the Dissolution of the Parliament; yet
with promise of another to meet toward the latter end of the year, under
pretense of frequent Parliaments; but, in reality, to try if He could get
another fitter for his turn.

And now the King having laid aside the Parliament, and freed his Instruments
from the Terror of it, was so far from not permitting himself to be influenced
by Popish-Councellors, that he began to play his old pranks; and first of all
the popular Protestant Lords of the Council were by degrees decently laid
aside, and the Duke was sent for home; the Lord Shaftsbury for opposing it,
being severely reprimanded in Council, with a wonder how any person that sat
at that Board, durst so boldly affront his Royal Highness? For the Face of
Affairs was changed, and the King was now swimming in his own Element again.
Only it was strange that he was no more concerned to see the strain of the
whole Kingdom run against him: For notwithstanding all his industry to have
brought in his Band of Pensioners again, it was found, the new-chosen
Parliament, which was by this time ready to sit, was likely to prove worse for
his turn than any of the former: Which made him have recourse to his old shift
of Prorogueing, which was done by Proclamation, to gain a little time for the
acquitting of Sir G. Wakeman, which the C. J. Scroggs had engaged to his Prince
for a Gracious Smile, and to the Portugal Ambassador for a round sum of
Guinea's to help him out with his purchase in Essex. To which purpose, how he
acted his part, is so well known, that I need not here repeat it: only thus
much, That as it redounded very much to the Butcherly Indigent Chief Justice,
and together with many other good Offices, continued him for a while in his
Place; so it was no less for the advantage of the Papists, who from thence took
the boldness to affirm there was no Popish Plot. So kind was His Protestant
Majesty to help out his desponding Friends at a dead lift, in order to the
Sham-plot, which he was afterward designing.

For now the Parliament being put off, was at leisure to advise with his Popish
Instruments, who were no less sedulous to give their advice to the utmost that
their active Brains could reach. By this sedulity it was, that the Meal-Tub
Anti-Plot was contrived, and hatched: Only Tools were wanting to manage, and
carry on the Treacherous Design. Therefore not knowing where else to find
Miscreants fit for such Diabolical Enterprises, all the Goals about the Town
were raked for needy Profligates. It will be needless to give a particular
History of that which has been so sufficiently discovered for an abominable
Imposture: It shall only therefore suffice to give the World an account, when
the King and his Accomplices had laid the Contrivance to trepan the chiefest
part of the Nobility and Gentry of the Nation, that would not comply with his
Popish and Tyrannical Designs, what Favorites those Rakehells were to His
Sacred Majesty, upon the account of the Villainy which they had undertaken to go
through with. For it is well known, that when Dangerfield was fetched out of
Newgate, and presented to Old Rowley at White Hall, as a fit Instrument for the
Devilish work of the Meal-tub-Plot, then resolved upon, the King was so
overjoyed he had found such a Rascal for his turn, That he set him down on a
Couch, kissed him, hugged him, and embraced him with all the caresses of Love
imaginable, insomuch that the Newgate-Bird himself could not choose but be
surprised at his Sovereigns kindness. His entertaining afterward the same
unpardoned Coyner, and common Cheat, privately in his Closet for an hour
together at a time; and ever and anon giving him his hand to kiss, was no less
an argument of his pious Indulgency to premeditated Villainy; while his Princely
Favors and Familiarity were only reserved to encourage audacious Treachery;
and his Frowns only bestowed upon the Detectors of the public Enemies to God
and his Kingdom. To which, we may add the severity used in checking the Lord
Mayor, for taking Dangerfield's Discovery after he was committed to Newgate,
for meddling, as it was termed, with that which nothing concerned him. And
indeed, it may be said of the Meal-Tub-Plot, That it was a piece of Treachery
so foul and ignominious, that it would have hardly passed for curr^nt in open
War against a public Enemy; and which aggravates the Crime yet more, was His
Majesty's Liberality of several times to Dangerfield, besides his allowance of
Twelve pound a week out of the Privy-purse.

The miscarriage of this blessed Design, caused a second proroguation of the
Parliament, upon hopes of 200000 l. from France, which was dexterously
prevented by the Duke of Buckingham; which the King so ill resented, that his
Attorney General had Orders in Council to Indict him of Buggery, with a Design
to have taken away his Life, and repair the French disappointment by the
Confiscation of his Estate, had the project taken. Never so much Villainy in
contrivance, never so much Money ill spent, and never worse luck.

But nothing could daunt the Popish Projectors; and therefore, though the
Meal-Tub-Conspiracy was quite baffled, yet there was another quickly hatched,
of the same stamp and nature, though carried on by other Instruments. Nell
Wall, an Irish Papist, and a Wench formerly employed only to empty Close-stools
at White Hall; but afterward, for her Religion, advanced to be one of the
French Dutchesses Women, and so to the King's Favor, by which she became a
great States-Woman, as well as a common Whore. To this Woman a great part of
the Popish Secrets were discovered, and by her means Fitz-Harris was first
introduced to the Duchess, and then to the King, where he was told, That the
Plot would undo them, unless a way could be found to make a Counter-plot:
therefore he was bid to try all ways to effect it; for that no Cost should be
spared, but such Rewards should be given as were fit for so great a Service.
Draw, Painter, here, England's pious Protestant Monarch, Counter-plotting with
his Popish Concubine, and her Close-stool Wench, against his Parliament and
Kingdom in favor of those that sought the destruction of both. The business of
this Irish Tool, was to find out Seditious Lampoons and Pamphlets, and carry
them to White Hall, where he had Audience, and private Conferences with Nell
Wall, the Duchess, and the King himself; and where he had sometimes given for
secret service, a Hundred, and Two Hundred Pound at a time; and was no less
slabber'd by his Gracious Sovereign, than Dangerfield had been before. So
zealous were We for the Popish Cause, that rather than miss of the Designs of
enslaving the Nation by Arbitrary Government and Popery, that We would have
declared our selves even to have kissed the Tail, as well as the Cheeks of the
most Contemptible Creatures in the World.

Nor must it be omitted as an Argument of His Majesty's great Zeal for the
Protestant Religion, That when one Sergeant, a Priest, made a discovery of the
Popish Plot from Holland, which he caused to be transmitted to the Court, with
an intention to have discovered several others, he was first bribed off by
Pillory-Carr, then sent for into England, slightly and slily examined, had his
Pardon given him, and sent back with Five Pound a week, to say no more. And in
this game, that we may understand by whose Countenancing the thing was done,
Sir. L. Ienkins showed the utmost of his Parts and Fidelity, being just entered
Secretary in the room of another, who did not care to venture so far as that
both Fool, as well as Knave, did. Among whose good Services to his Master, we
may reckon his endeavors as much as lay in his Power, to conceal the Murder
of the Priest at Abbeville in France, upon intimation that he was coming into
England, to make a farther discovery of the Plot: Which together with his
fasting, and other infallible tokens, showed him to be plainly, what was well
enough known before, Father Goff's Creature, as well as the King's and Duke's.

Nor was it a thing less astonishing to the Nation, to see the Parliament
prorogued from time to time, no less than seven times, before permitted to sit,
on purpose to get time for the Popish Duke to settle the Protestant Religion in
Scotland, and to the end the Conspirators might get heart and footing again,
and retrieve their Losses in England; and in this Interval it was, that
Messengers were sent to their Friends at Rome, and others their Associates, for
Money to strike while the Iron was hot, in regard that Scotland by this time
was secured, and all things in such a forwardness, that now or never was the
time; but the Pope, had such an ill opinion of our Sovereign's Fidelity, that
he slipped his neck out of the Collar, and in imitation of him the rest excused
themselves upon the score of their poverty.

Thus missing money from Rome, and the rest of their Popish Associates, and the
King of France refusing to part with any more Cash, there was no way but one at
a forc'd-put, which was to let the Parliament sit, and to make them the more
willing to give money to undo the Nation, the King in a framed Speech told
them, of the wonderful Advantageous Alliances for the Kingdoms good he had made
with Foreign Princes, and particularly with H^lland; and how necessary it was
to preserv^ Tangier, which had already run him in Debt. Upon which
Considerations the Burden of his Song was More Money.

But the Parliament Incensed at the frequent Prorogations, fell upon
Considerations more profitable for the Kingdom, such as were the bringing to
Condign punishment the Obstructers of their Sitting, the Impeaching of North
for Drawing the Proclamation against Petitioning, and three of the Judges for
dismissing the Grand Jury, before whom the Duke was Indicted of Recus^ncy,
before they could make their presentiments, the prosecution of the Popish-Plot,
and the Examination of the Meal-Tub-Sham; all which they looked upon to be of
greater moment, than the King's Arguments for his wants. For it was well known,
that by His per^idious Dealings abroad, he had so impaired his Credit with all
the Foreign Princes, to whom he sent, that they slighted his Applications, as
one upon whose Word they could never Rely. And as for the preservation of
Tangier, there was nothing less in his Thoughts: A fine Credit for a Prince,
and an excellent Character to recommend him to Posterity, that he had no other
than his own Sinister ends upon the Grand Council of his Kingdom, nor no other
way to work them to those ends, unless by forging untruths, to make them
accessory to the betraying of the people, that had entrusted them.

The Parliament therefore bent all their Cares to secure the Kingdom from
Popery; ^oncluding that the Dukes Apost^tizing from ^is Religion, was the sole
Evil, under which ^he N^^^ons in a more particular manner ^roaned and
consequently, that he was to (...) Dismo^^ted. But the King being re^^lved not
to forsake his Brother, whatever ^^came of the Kingdom, out of a pro^ense
^alice to the Nation, and ^oresight of the Miseries which his Brother's
Government would bring upon the people, rather than out of any natural
Affection that he bore him, took such a high Resentment against these honest
and just proceedings of the Houses, that after he had Sacrificed the Lord
Stafford to his hopes of obtaining money; upon the Dukes undertaking to furnish
him, he Dissolved this Parliament too, with promise of another at Oxford, to
sweeten the bitter Pill which he had made the Nation to swallow.

In the mean time, all the Care imaginable was taken to bring the
Protestant-Plot to perfection; preparative to which, Judges were selected, with
Dispositions, Thoughts, and Minds, as Scarlet as their Gowns. And the Choice of
Sheriffs was wrested by force from the people, that they might pick out Juries
without Conscience and Honesty. A Plot contrived by Perfidiousness and
Treachery, beyond the parallel of History. A Plot with Parisian Massacre in the
Belly o^ it, designing no less an Innundation of Innocent Protestant Blood,
under the color and forms of Justice; and yet, who but he who in his last
wheedling Speech to pick the Nations Pocket, had promised to Consen^ to any
Laws against Popery, at the botto^ of it? Who but he, the Suborner and
Instructor of Fitzharris, and the Gratifier of him too with his own Hand? And
why was W -- p readmitted to his and his Brother's Favor, but to be the
principal Broker for Witnesses, and grand Minister of Subordination for the
carrying on this bloody Design; that since he could not advance his Fortune by
the prostitution of his own Daughter, he might do it by betraying the Innocent
to slaughter. What a crew of Devils in the shape of Men, a Regiment of
Miscreants, in whom all the Transgressions of the Law, and Morality, were
mustered together? I say, what a band of such Caitiffs were rendevouz'd, and
with that Money which Parliaments gave to promote the Security of the Kingdom,
carress'd and pampered, even to excess, for the destruction of the Innocent?
And all this at the expense of him, that bore the Style and Character of our
Gracious Sovereign. For full proofs of which, there needs no more, than to look
into the Trial of Fitzharris himself, and observe the Shuff^ng and Hectoring of
Portsmouth, and her Close-stool Wench, Mrs. Wall, when they were asked the
Question about the Money that was given him at White Hall; and yet one would
have thought that the modest and humble Address, and Petitions of so ma^y
Parliaments to secure the Lives and Religion of his people; that the care and
tenderness which they had still, out of mistake, for his person; that the
prostrated Complaints of a distressed Nation; and that the foresight of these
dismal Calamities he was bringing upon three spacious and opulent Kingdoms,
might have interceded for some Compassion, had there been a grain of common
Humanity in his Adamantine Heart; or that the heat of his Lust had not
petrified all his pity.

And yet as horrid as this Plot was, which nothing could equal, but that horrid
Plot of his own, which this was contrived to cove^ and stifle by excelling it,
was carried on with all the vigor imaginable; insomuch, that the more fatal
Libel than the Gorgon's Head that was to kill unseen, was ready prepared for
the Work, and the Train ready to take fire, had not Everard's Jealousy of some
design upon himself, outwitted Fitzharris, and first betrayed him, to save his
own Bacon.

To recite the particulars of a Design already so well known, and publicly
exposed to all the World, would be a repetition altogether needless. This
however was observable, that we were come to the height of Tiberius's Reign;
when Informers, and (...) Accusers, a sort of Men found out for the Ruin of
the Public; and for the punishment of which; no Laws can be too severe, were
encouraged and courted with Rewards. Nullus a poena hominum cessavit dies;
decreta accusatoribus precipua premia; nemini delatorum fides abrogata; omne
Crimen pro Capitali receptum, etiam paucorum simpliciumque Verborum. No day
passed without some punishment inflicted; great Rewards given to Informers; no
Informer but what was believed; all Crimes were adjudged Capital, though merely
a few idle Words. Such a Harmony there was between these times, and the
pernicious Reign of that Master in Cruelty and Dissimulation, Tiberius.

But the Roguery being discovered, while Fitzharris thought to have put Everard
upon this Dilemma, either to hang, or prove the Libel upon others, he came to
run himself into the Noose. Lord! into what an Agony it put the King, the Duke
his dear Brother, and their then juggling Instruments! that the King, who a
little before was so overjoyed with the account of the Contrivance, which was
given him at White Hall, that he could hardly contain himself from displaying
the Raptures of his Soul, was now so highly incensed against Fitzharris, that
he was heard to say, He should die, if there were no more Men in England. But
his Confession to the Recorder, Sir George Treby, and others, what the design
of the Conspiracy was, that is to say, to thrust papers into the pockets and
Lodgings of such and such Gentlemen, and then to seize them with the papers
about them; so enraged his Employers, that he was presently locked up in the
Tower, out of the reach of all Men, but the Lieutenant, to damn him for
spoiling so hopeful a Design; and Secretary Ienkins, who was only admitted to
him, either to threaten or cajole him with fair promises into a Recantation.
But above all things, there was such a dread among the Conspirators, lest the
Parliament should come to the knowledge of the depth of the Design, that their
resolute insisting to have the Cognizance of the Crime within their own
jurisdiction, was the occasion of their sudden Dissolution. After which, a
Chief Justice was exalted on purpose, to hang Fitzharris out of the way, to
prevent his farther discovery, though the rejecting of Fitzharris's Impeachment
by the Lords, was a thing so new and unusual, as to the Proceedings of
Parliament, that the Commons, who knew the Law, as well as the Judges, voted it
a Denial of Justice, and that no Inferior Court should dare to try an Offender
by them impeached. But the Judges overruling the Law, and the Court overruling
the Judges, no sooner was the Parliament Dissolved, but Fitzharris was Hanged,
and by that means many a Mystery of Iniquity concealed.

The dissolution of this and the foregoing Parliament was justified by a
Declaration in the King's Name, which being published with all the severity and
reproach that could be cast upon those worthy Patriots, verified the Report of
what the King had been heard to say, That he would make the name of Parliaments
to be forgotten in England.

However, the Parliament being blown up, and the King running away in a
pretended pannick fear from Oxford, to color the ensuing projects of Plotting
and Subornation, no sooner was he settled again at London, and Fitzharris
Hanged to the great joy of those that adored him before, but the Gazett was
crammed with Addresses from all parts of the Nation, to thank the King for his
expressions and promises to Govern by Law, which was no more than his Duty: But
those Addresses were only signed by the unthinking, loose, and rascally part of
the people, who were not sensible of the mischief which was thereby intended,
which was, to make the Nation out of Love with Parliaments, thereby to unhinge
the Government, and to introduce Tyranny and Arbitrary Power. And that th
Addressorse were only the Canaille of the Kingdom, with only a Tool of Quality
at the Head of them, the Conspirators well knew; which was the reason they
never durst adventure to call any more Parliaments upon the Credit of their
Addresses, notwithstanding the mighty brags of their Number and Reputation in
the Countries.

As for the Trial of Fitzharris, I shall say nothing of it, as being already in
Print. Only this is to be observed by the way, That no Attorney or
Sollicitor-General durst have been so officious, as to go to the Grand Jury
themselves, make fine Speeches to the Jury, and solicit the finding of the
Bill, had they not been encouraged to do what they did by Men of highest
Authority in the Nation: Nevertheless the Jury would not proceed without the
Opinion of the King's Bench, which was, That they must find the Bill, without
taking notice of the Impeachment. For which the Valor of the C. J. being
highly applauded at Court, was sufficient to let the World know what sort of
Justice influenced the Court: And which might also be as well farther discerned
by the Judges overruling the weighty Arguments of Fitzharris's Council in
behalf of his Plea, tho the most Learned Lawyers in the Nation, without giving
any Reason at all for what they did.

Nor was it less observable what care and industry was used at Court, after
they had got Fitzharris condemned, and under the terror of Death, to make him
disown his Confession in Newgate, and accuse Sir G. Treby, Sir R. Clayton, and
the Sheriffs, of forcing the Information from him; and to lay the Libel to the
Lord Howard: And for this, they could find out no other Instrument but one H --
s, who was said to be a Papist, and Chaplain to the French Duchess. But the
hard Case was this, That when they had got him, in hopes of his Life, to
retract all that they desired, yet he must be hanged at last; though, for fear
he should again, when he saw himself deluded, make a Counter-Recantation, he
was buoyed up with assurances of Pardon, till the very moment of his being
turned off the Ladder. For whatever the Conspirators pretended, they never
designed his Pardon, but only to get a Recantation from him; and after he was
hanged, to make it public in print, on purpose to cast an odium upon Persons
of worth and sincerity, and wipe off the Reproach of their Infidelities from
themselves. However, H -- s gave him a Passport to Heaven for that he had done:
For b^ing asked by Fitzharris's Wife, who knew the falsehood of her Husband's
Recantation, Whether her Husband, having wronged so many Innocent Gentlemen,
could be saved, if he went out of the World with such a Lie in his mouth? H --
s told her, Yes, and accordingly did absolve him as well in his Wifes presence,
as upon the Cart before he was executed. Though Fitzharris not willing to trust
to the Doctor's Absolutions, for the ease of his Conscience, wrote two Letters,
one to his Wife, and another to his Father, discovering the whole mystery of
his Recantation; which he gave sealed to the Doctor, by him to be delivered to
his Wife; Which the Doctor promised to do, but like a faithless Priest of Rome,
carried them to White Hall, where they were never heard of more. Which may give
an occasion to posterity hereafter, among the rest of the Tragedies of this
Prince's Reign, to insert this Story, under the Title of the Trepanner.

But Fitzharris being hanged, out comes his pretended Recantation, which his
Wife hearing cried about the Streets, and viewing it, asked H -- s, whether
those were her Husband's papers, or no? Who told her, They were. To which, when
he replied, That then her Husband was damned, for that she knew all those
things to be false: H -- s made answer, Never fear that, for I gave him
Absolution before he departed.

However upon the Groundwork of this Recantation, a Committee of Subornation
was erected at White Hall, consisting of L. I. the L. C. and four more, by
whose directions W -- p muster^d up together Turbervil, Dugdale, and all the
Irish Evidence who had been most conversant with the E. of Shaftsbury, upon the
account of the Irish Plot, together with one Booth, by whom a full detection of
the whole Villainy has since been made, with a full disclosure of all the
Artifices made use of, to have corrupted the Integrity of that honest Gentleman
C. Wilkinson. And all those Varlets were now listed and received into pay by
the said Committee of Subornation; and a Swearing-School being set up by W --
p, according to his directions from the Committee, he gives to every one their
distinct Cues and Lessons, to con and get by heart against occasion should
serve. By the settlement of the Committee, which was approved, as was every
thing else they did by his Protestant Majesty, Smith, alias Barry, and Dugdale,
were to have their Arrears paid, and their Sallaries to go on. Fitzgerald was
to have all the Money he wanted for bringing the Evidence in, and present
supplies for such as could be got to take part in the V^llany. The Macknamars
were to have, one of them Forty, the other Twenty Shillings a week; Hains and
Denis the same proportion: Fitzharris's Wife had Fifteen pound a month, and her
Maid Twenty shillings a week; and the inferior Scoundrels, such as Eustace
Commins, Twelve shillings a week: And for the more convenient defraying of
these Expenses, it was, That His Majesty was so earnest with the Parliament for
Money, under the pretense of Foraign Alliances, and the preservation of
Tangier. What will posterity say, when they shall hear of a Prince exhausting
the public Treasure, to support Subornation, Perjury, and the Charge of
ungodly and Arbitrary Trials; to cover an Infernal Plot, contrived by Priests
and Jesuits, and to which himself was privy, with the Ruins of his Innocent
people? For after Ages will need no other proofs to clear their Impartial
Judgments, than the fatal consequences of the Bloody Combination: Which being
rightly observed, they will find by the eagerness of the chase, how maliciously
and industriously these Bloodhounds hunted after Blood, and how closely they
pursued their Innocent Game, till they had driven them into the Pit of
Perdition.

Colledg's Trial is too well known to be here repeated; but after Ages will
observe, how he was removed from London, where he had been acquitted, to
another remote Country, where his Prosecutors were assured of his Destruction,
by deluded Ignorance, and partial Knavery; how he was accused, and testified
against by Naboth's Evidence, the scandal and reproach of all mankind, whose
Memories stink upon the Earth, and would soon be forgotten, but that their
Names are made use of to transmit the Infamy of their Employers to posterity.
They will observe, not only how he had been long barricadoed up from all
Advice; but how his Pockets were ransacked of all the Papers conveyed to him
just before his Trial, on purpose to deprive him of all helps to make his
Justification; how he was denied the Panel of the Jury, and the assistance of
any Friend to stand by him. They will observe, that his Prosecutors were in
great want of Evidence against him, when they were forced to rake the Goals for
Miscreants to Swear against him; and give from thence a shrewd conjecture of
the sufficiency of their Testimony. They will observe how eagerly and
vehemently the King's Council labored the Prisoner's downfall, as if they had
been to have forfeited their Places, had he been acquitted. All which
severities were palpable demonstrations of that Innocent Man's being determined
to Destruction, right or wrong, on purpose to lay the foundation of farther
Butcheries.

So that being fleshed by this Success, the next attempt of the King's Justice,
was upon the Earl of Shaftsbury, for the same pretended Treason for which
College had suffered. And here posterity will make the same Observations and
Conclusions in general, as in Colledge's Case: But more particularly will after
Ages easily conclude from hence, that it was not for any Contrivance of his
Lordship, but by a project of Court and Popish Revenge, to destroy a person,
who by his Courage, Wisdom, and Good Intelligence, had Opposed and Defeated so
many of their Designs against the Religion and Welfare of the Nation. For that
this Plot upon his Lordship was so early Communicated to Rome and other Foreign
parts, That it was talked of at Paris, and in Flanders, some time before his
Lordship was Imprisoned in England. They will observe the Injustice done his
Lordship, in refusing to let him see or know the persons that deposed against
him, which was not denied either to Coleman, or the Jesuits; and which being
so contrary to Law, was a plain Demonstration, that either the Witnesses were
not thought of credit sufficient to support the Confinement of so great a Peer;
or else that it was not convenient to trust the general course of their Lives
to be scrutinied too soon. They will admire at the horrid Injustice done his
Lordship, in refusing to give an Oath to those that offered to have sworn two
Indictments of Subornation against the False Testimonies produced against his
Lordship; The first president of such an Illegal Obstruction of Justice.

They will observe the Treachery that was used to have betrayed his Lordship
into the Snare. For what greater piece of Treachery could there be, than after
they had intercepted a Letter directed to his Lordship out of France, from a
Gentleman that had commanded a Regiment of Horse in the Service of C. the I.
which Letter was only to desire his Lordship, to befriend him with a Receipt of
the Gout, they added to it a Postscript, wherein the Gentleman is made to tell
his Lordship, That he was able to furnish him with Forty Thousand Men from
France, to oppose the D. of York: and so sent it back again into France, to
have been returned into England, and intercepted a second time, but that by a
strange providence the Letter happened into the Gentleman's own hands, who was
not a little consternated at the alteration.

The Motives that induced the Court to begin with this Great and Eminent Peer,
will be easily discernible to succeeding Ages. For to what man of Sense and
Reason, is it not apparent, that it was the Policy of the Court, That their
Revenge against this Earl should not be adjourned, till they had tried the
Credit of their Witnesses upon other considerable Persons, for fear lest by his
Lordship's Industry and Abilities, he should not only have detected and exposed
the whole Intreague, but have broken the Engine, by which the two Brothers
thought to have made themselves Absolute Lords of the Laws and Religion of the
Kingdom. For which reason, it was thought best to assault him, by way of
surprise, and to hurry him to prison, upon a pretended Conspiracy, which People
would be astonished at, but not have time to unravel. For the King and his
Brother were assured, That the convicting of the E. of Shaf^sbury upon a Charge
of Levying War, and Conspiring to seize his Person, would be a kind of moral
proof against every other Person whom they had a mind to accuse of the same
Crime. Since people would be easily persuaded, That a Person of his prudence
and conduct, would not easily embark himself in such a dangerous Enterprise,
without a proportionable number of persons, who by their Power, Quality, and
Interest, might be supposed to be able to carry it on. So that all the Noblemen
and Gentlemen of England, that ever had any Converse or Acquaintance with the
Earl, supposing them to be persons obnoxious to the Court, were involved in his
Ruin.

But it will remain an Eternal Monument of Reproach upon Royal Subornation,
That after all the Industry of the Court, and their obsequious Instruments,
after all their laying their heads together, to form cohering and probable
Proofs of the charge intended to be laid against him, after an Illegal Trick
devised to have Tried him within their own Jurisdiction of the Verge; which was
so contrary to Law, that it was exploded by their own Been placito Lambskin
men; that at length he was acquitted by a Grand Jury, the most Substantial for
Estates, Integrity, and Soundness of Judgment, that had been returned for many
years in the City, to the never dying praise of the two Sheriffs, Mr.
Pilkington and Mr. Shute. A Disappointment, which so incensed the King and his
Dear Brother, That they resolved to make an Islington Village of the Chief
Metropolis of the whole Nation; and what they could not do by Fire, to effect
by wresting from them their Franchises and Privileges, far more Ancient than
the descent of those that wrested them for a time out of their hands. For this
Reason, the Attorney General was ordered to bring a Quo Warranto against the
City Charter, under the pretense of their Petitioning for the Sitting of the
Parliament; a thing so far from being a Crime, that it was the undoubted Right
of the Nation. And yet such was the awe, which the Antiquity and Legality of
the Charter had upon the Judges, that the Fountain of Justice was forc^d to
shift his Chief Justice, till he could fix upon one that durst adventure to
pronounce Sentence against it. Which as it was the greatest Invasion that could
be against the Ancient and Fundamental Constitutions of the Kingdom, so it
plainly laid open the King's Pious intentions of Governing by Law, which
according to the new Interpretation of the Court, was the downright Subverting
all that was most Sacred and Valuable in the Nation. For what was all this
Bustle for? But as Charters of all other Cities and Corporations were chopped and
changed throughout the Nation, to the end the King might have it in his power
to violate the electing of a Parliament, and nominate and obtrude upon all
Persons of the Kingdom, his own Slaves and Creatures, Papists, and Traitors to
their Country; so by reducing one of the most Ancient Corporations, and
levelling it with one of the meanest Villages in the Kingdom, that he might
command the Mayor and Sheriffs, and by their means the Juries of the City, on
purpose to have the Lives of all his Protestant Subjects at his mercy.

And that this was his end, was apparent by the Consequences; for when once the
King by the overthrow of the Charter, had made sure of his own Sheriffs and
Juries; Heavens! how were the Laws of God and the Kingdom wrested by
misinterpretation! how were the Precepts even of Morality it self transvers'd;
the Witnesses for the King caressed and countenanced in their known
Subornations; the Testimonies for the pretended Criminals brow-beaten and run
down, and all the Arguments of Law and Reason, urged by the most Learned
Council of the Nation, overruled by Hectoring and Swaggering Judges, to take
away the Lives of the Lord Russel, Coll. Sidney, Armstrong, Cornish, and
several others, merely to gratify the Rage of Popish Revenge. Such were the
Violences of the Court at that time, in the defiance of Justice, as if all fear
of giving account to future Parliaments, had been thrown off, or that they
never intended to be troubled with them more, till they had framed the Nation
into such a posture, as to choose such Members as would not only forgive such
Villainies, but go sharers with them in the Spoil of the Kingdom. And indeed the
eager Thirst of all the Great Men at White Hall, was so apparent, that nothing
could be more, by the violent Contests for Sheriffs fit for their Turns, before
they were Masters of the Charter; insomuch, that they labored it with that
Zeal, as if they had been contending pro Aris and Focis; and some of them were
heard to say, That upon that hung all their hopes; and without it they were
undone. For by the Verdicts of such Juries that such Sheriffs should return,
they were in hopes to cut off all that in their Stations had appeared for the
Exclusion of the Duke, or had showed their constant Zeal for the Protestant
Religion, and the Laws of the Land; which is easily demonstrable from the
Catalogues of those that suffered, or were forced to shelter themselves in
Foreign Countries from the Malice of their Revengeful Prosecutors. Nor was it
less remarkable, that as all along they embarked themselves in Designs
pernicious and destructive to the King and Kingdom; So that the structure of
this was built upon as wicked a foundation, was evident from the Instruments
selected and encouraged by the favor of the King and his Brother, to promote
it. For as they made use of the Scum of the World to perjure men out of their
lives; so they made use of the Scum of the City, such as Dodson, Masters,
Cradock, Mern, and others of the same stamp, to give them the command of Juries
proper to complete the Tragedies. A most ready and clever way to extirpate by
degrees, the Patriots of our Religion and Liberties. But that this was the
Design of getting Court-Sheriffs, Sir G. Iefferies, who well knew the minds of
his Superiors at White Hall, was neither afraid nor ashamed to own. For having
after the Trial of Sir Patience Ward, desired him to give his Worship a Meeting
at Sir Robert Claytons; he there told him after an insulting manner, That he
had satisfied his Revenge for the Loss of the Recordership; and besides, that
having such Sheriffs as they desired, they had now the Law in their hands, and
could have the Life of whomsoever they pleased. Otherwise it had been
impossible, but for the Treachery of the Judges that encouraged the Injustice
of a packed Jury, to have found the Lord Russel guilty of death, when the whole
of what was villanously sworn against him, was in the opinion of far more
honest, and equally Learned Lawyers, but Misprision of Treason; or to have
convicted Colonel Sydney upon Innuendo's, made out of old Papers found in his
Study, and never published.

But then followed the barbarous and horrid Murder of the Earl of Essex, which
how far it could be laid to the King's Charge, is somewhat as yet in the dark.
However, that the King could find no other Morning to accompany his Brother to
the Tower, but that very Morning that the Earl was murdered, will no doubt
very much augment the Suspicion of future Ages; and it will be as odly looked
upon, that when Letters and Proposals were sent to some Great Persons near the
King, That if His Majesty would but grant a Pardon to two or three Men that
should be named when the Favor was granted, the whole Mystery of the
Contrivance should be discovered, and the Contrivers and Actors be particularly
detected; such a Proposal should be slghted and neglected.

There was also another Letter, containing the same Offers, addressed to the
Countess of Essex, and sent open to one Cademan, a Bookseller in the
New-Exchange, which was also carried to one of the Secretary's; notwithstanding
all which, there was not the least syllable published to encourage any
Inquisition after that Nobleman's Blood; which as it amazed all rational people
at that time, so it will reflect upon the King himself, and his memory to all
succeeding Ages.

Now, after all these Tricks and Stratagems of the King, to introduce Tyranny
and Slavery, to stifle the Popish-Plot, by throwing it upon his Protestant
Subjects; after such an obstinate and steadfast Conjunction with the sworn Enemy
of the Nation, the French King, for the Subversion of our Laws, Liberties and
Religion; after so many Slights and Contempts to put upon the Grand Council of
the Kingdom, which he never Assembled, but to empty and drain the Purses of the
Nation; so that there was not a Law which he consented to for the public Good,
not a gracious Speech or Declaration to protect and preserve the Protestant
Religion, which the people did not purchase at a dear rate, while the
Dissenters, among the rest, paid for the very Thorns and Briars that tore their
own Backs; all this designed on purpose to render the Name of Parliaments
odious; and lastly, a League concluded with the French King, for their total
Subversion. After so many Bloody Executions of the chiefest Patriots, and
constant Assertors of the Protestant Faith, to believe the King, by whose
Authority, and by whose Countenance and Permission all this was done, to be
that sincere Protestant which he professed himself to be, is for a Man to shut
the Windows of his Understanding against the Light of common Reason.

But to shut the Door against all Objections that can be made in his behalf;
there is one proof yet remaining behind, which must be an undeniable
Convincement to all the World, of the truth of what has been hitherto said, as
standing still recorded under his own Hand, if the Original of the Instructions
be Exant, and that is the following Memorial of his Ambassador to the King of
Poland, in the year 1667.

Most Illustrious Prince,
THE King, my Master, has Commanded me to let Your Majesty know the Resolution
he has taken in all Points, to concur with the Most Christian King, in giving
Your Majesty all possible Ass^stance for the Establishing Your Majesty's Title
in such ways, as Your Majesty shall think most effectual for the securing Your
Crown and Dignity, and the further Honor of Your Queen, and Royal Issue: The
King my Master being truly sensible of the Great Misfortunes of those Princes,
whose Power must be bounded, and Reason regulated by the fantastic Humors of
their Subjects. Till Princes can be freed from those Inconveniences, the King
my Master sees no possible prospect of establishing the Roman Catholic Religion


If this be not enough to discover his Inclinations, and the whole drift of his
Intrigueing Reign, there can be nothing sharp enough to penetrate the stupid
and besotted Bigotry of those that stand up in his Justification. But
notwithstanding the wilful Blindness of such People, it is to be hoped, that
other Men less biassed, and having the same just pretenses to common
Understanding, have a greater value for their Reason, than to forfeit it to
Prejudice, and an Interest, now exploded by all the sober part of the World:
And having once disintangled their Judgments from the Encumbrances of Iure
Divino Nonsense, they will then find, that the whole Course of his Reign, was
no more than what this Memorial discovers; and that the frequent Breaches of
his Word and Promises, both to his Parliaments and People, were but the Effects
of the Religion he professed and owned in his Ambassadors's Memorial; one of
the chief Principles of which it is, Not to Keep Faith with Heretics; and by
which, he was obliged to be more faithful to the King of Poland, than the King
of Heaven. Hence it was, that notwithstanding his Declaration from Breda,
designed and penned, to obtrude a seeming appearance of Truth, and specious
Face of Integrity upon the Nation; after he came to be Restored and Settled; we
found our selves deceived in all that we expected from the Faith and Credit of
his Royal Word. To which, we may subjoyn that other famous Declaration, upon
shutting up of the Exchequer; Wherein, tho his Sacred Word, and Royal Faith,
were in plain emphatical Terms laid to Pledge for Repayment, yet the Events in
the Ruin and Impoverishing of so many Families, did no way consist with his
graciuos and solemn Promises.

As for the Covenant, whathever the Oath were, it matters not here to dispute;
but they who were Witnesses of his taking it, observed, that if ever he seemed
Sincere in what he did, it was in binding his Soul by that solemn Oath; and yet
he not only openly and avowedly broke it, but caused it to be burnt in all the
three Nations, by the Hands of the Common Hangman. Where can we find a more
matchless piece of Dissimulation, than in his Signing that Declaration in
Scotland, which he published under the Title of A Declaration of the King's
Majesty, to his Subjects of the Kingdoms of Scotland, England, and Ireland;
which, because it has lain long dormant, and was doubtless designed to have
been buried in Oblivion, may not now be unseasonable revived again, to show how
much the World was deceived in him; and how little reason his Admirers have to
have so high an Opinion of him. The whole is too long to be Inserted in these
few Sheets; but that which most conduces to our purpose, is as follows.

HIS Majesty taking into Consideration, the merciful Dispensation of Divine
Providence, by which he has been recovered out of the Snare of Evil Counsel,
and having attained so full a Persuasion and Conscience of the Loyalty of his
People of Scotland, with whom he has too long stood at distance, and of the
Righteousness of their Cause, as to join in one Covenant with them, and to cast
himself and his Interests wholly upon God, and in all matters Civil, to follow
the Advice of his Parliament, and such as shall be entrusted by them; and in
all matters Ecclesiastical, the Advice of the General Assembly, and their
Commissioners; and being sensible of his Duty to God, and desirous to approve
himself to the Consciences of all his good Subjects, and to stop the Mouths of
his and their Enemies and Traducers, does in reference to his former
Deportments, and his Resolutions for the Future, declares as follows.


Here is a Jove Principium, the Motives that induced His Majesty to make this
Declaration, were no Considerations of State Policy; but in acknowledgment of
the ill-merited Mercies of Divine Providence conferred upon him, a Covenant
between God, the People, and Himself, like that of David in Hebron. Now see
what ensues.

Tho His Majesty as a dutiful Son, be obliged to honor the Memory of his Royal
Father, and to have in Estimation the Person of his Mother; yet does he desire
to be deeply humbled and afflicted in Spirit before God, because of his
Father's harkening to, and following Evil Counsels, and his Opposition to the
Work of Reformation, and to the solemn League and Covenant, by which so much of
the Blood of the Lord's People has been shed in these Kingdoms: And for the
Idolatry of his Mother, the Toleration whereof in the King's House, as it was
matter of great stumbling to all the Protestant Churches, so could it not but
be a high Provocation against him, who is a Jealous God, and visits the Sins of
the Fathers upon the Children. And although His Majesty might Extenuate his former
Carriages and Actions in following the Advice, and walking in the way of those
who are opposite to the Covenant, and the Work of God, and might excuse his
delaying to give Satisfaction to the just and necessary Desires of the Church
and Kingdom of Scotland, from his Education and Age, and from his Evil Counsel
and Company; yet knowing he has to do with God, he does ingenuously acknowledge
all his own Sins, and all the Sins of his Father's House, craving Pardon, and
hoping for Mercy and Reconciliation through the Blood of Jesus Christ.

And his Majesty having upon full Persuasion of the Justice and Equity of all
the Heads and Articles thereof, sworn and subscribed the National Covenant of
the Kingdom of Scotland, and the Solemn League and Covenant of the three
Kingdoms of Scotland, England, and Ireland, does declare, That he has not sworn
and subscribed these Covenants, and entered into the Oath of God, and his
People, upon any sinister Intention, or crooked Design for obtainings his own
Ends: but as far as humane Weakness will permit, in the Truth and Sincerity of
hie Heart. And that he is firmly resolved, in thd strength of the Lord, to
adhere thereto, ane to prosecute to the utmost of his Power all the Ends
thereof, in his Station and Calling, really, constantly, and sincerely, all the
days of his Life.


After such a solemn Stipulation between Heaven, and the Nation of Scotland, no
wonder, that he had recourse to the Church of Rome for Absolution. For seeing,
that he had such a Confidence of St. Peter's Power derived to the Pope, there
is no other Argument to be urged in his behalf, that either he thought there
was any Faith to be kept with Man, or that he believed in God. And how far the
Breach of this, when we reflect how much he was abandoned to Misfortune, and
the Reproach of Infidelity, both at Home and Abroad, pursued him to his Grave,
is worthy the serious Consideration of his Brother, and Lewis the 14 th. But
who could rationally hope that he should deal sincerely, and above-board with
the World, whose whole Course had been to deal thus deceitfully and
treacherously with God? He who made it his business to impose upon the
All-seeing Eye of the Heavenly Majesty, might easily bear with that Infirmity
of his, of not scrupling the deluding Nations, and abusing the Credit of
Mankind. 'Twas his Practice to be a Papist in his Closet, and a Protestant in
his Chapel; to be this hour at the Mass, bearing a Part in the Romish
Ceremonies upon Christmas-Eve at Sommerset-House, and the next day
communicating after the maning of the Church of England at White Hall. This the
Duchess of Cleveland, well knew, and therefore had been often heard to say,
That She did not embrace the Catholic Religion out of any esteem that she had
for it; but because that otherwise she could not continue the King's Mistress:
And consequently Miss of State.

Add to this his sending the D. of Monmouth into France, with an express
Command to reconcile himself there to the Church of Rome: So that his whole
Life may be said to be made up of Contradictions; and that to save others the
trouble of charging him with falsehood, he employed his own Tongue in all his
public Speeches and Declarations, to give his own Heart the Lie; and justly
merited the Character, which a certain Person gave him, to carry with him to
his Grave; That he was an irreconcilable Enemy of the Protestant-Religion, a
Parliament, and a Virtuous Woman. But what cared he, who being put in mind to
consider what Infamy the History of his Life and Reign would entail upon his
Memory, replied, That he cared not tho the World made a Whistle of his Tail,
when he was dead. Neither indeed was there any true Zeal for any Religion to be
believed in a Man, who coming into the Chamber of a certain Peron, and finding
a Bible there, reproached the owner for having less wit than he took him to
have, since he troubled himself with such a Book.

But tho he had long trifled with the Papists, his beloved Friends, and indeed
had so carried himself, that neither Papist nor Protestant could tell what to
make of him, yet the Papists resolved they would be no longer dallied with by
him: And therefore so soon as he had made all things ready for his Brother's
Exaltation; after he had prevented his Exclusion from the Throne, and put all
the power of his Dominions into his Hands, to give way for him that truly
Reigned while he but only wore the name of King, he was struck with an
Apoplexy, as it was given out (for let the true Cause be what it will, a Prince
always dies of some Disease or other in the Physicians Catalogue) but such were
the Circumstances of his Death, that Men began to discover their Suspicions
freely to the World, before he was cold. However it were, certain it is, that
he was Absolved from all his sins by his great Friend John Huddleston; and that
the Priests gave him extreme Unction: At what time, one of his Relations
forcing his way into the Room, and seeing them at it, could not forbear saying,
That now they had Oiled and Greased his Boots, they had made him fit for his
Journey. And this is yet more remarkable, That all the while he lay upon his
Deathbed, he never spoke to his Brother, to put him in mind of preserving the
Laws and Religion of his People; but only recommended to him the Charitable
care of his two Concubines, Portsmouth, and poor Nelly.

Nor was it a small aggravation of the general Suspicion, to find him hurried
to his Grave with such an ungrateful secrecy in the dead of the Night, as if
they had feared the Arresting of his Corpse for Debt; not so much as the mean
Pomp of the Blewcoat Boys to sing him to Heaven: Insomuch, that he was Buried,
by his Brother whom he had so highly obliged, with far less decency than was
permitted for the Funeral of his Father, by his capital Enemies that had
beheaded him. But that perhaps might be so ordered by Providence, to signify
that he was not worth the public Lamentation of the People, whose Religion and
Liberties he had been always designing to subvert.

To him succeeded James the II. not more perniciously designing, but more
eargerly bent in the Chase of National Ruin and Destruction. He came in to
England full freighted with his Mother's Religion, and her Malice to the People
of the Nation; but wore at ^^st the same Vizard Mask of Protestantism which his
Brother did. But tho he were fitter for the business they both designed, yet he
understood not how to manage it so well; so that had he been the elder Brother,
we may undoubtedly presume to say, he would have been much sooner thrown out of
the Saddle, greatly to the saving both the Honor and Treasure of the Nation,
and the Life of many a worthy Gentlemen, and true Lover of his Country.

It Is well known, and a thing confirmed by two Letters yet to be seen, wherein
one of the King's own Chaplains, then upon the spot when it was done, imparts
and laments it to a Bishop, That the Duke of York, while he was yet but very
young, made a solemn Renunciation of the Protestant Religion, and was
reconciled to the Church of Rome while he sojourned with his Mother in France,
in hopes by the assistance of the Papists to have defeated his elder Brother of
his Right of Inheritance, tho he had all the Indulgence imaginable to conceal
his Conversion, where it might be for his private Advantage, and the general
good of the Cause.

And so early was this Ambition of his to supplant his Elder Brother, That when
the Scots were treating with the Exiled King, to restore him to the Throne of
Scotland, That he was at that very time practicing with such as remained
faithful to the King's Title here, that they would renounce his elder Brother,
and choose him for their Sovereign. And for that Reason it was that the Duke
forsook him at Bruxels, and withdrew into Holland; so that the King was
necessitated, not only to command him upon his Allegiance to return, but was
constrained to send the Duke of Ormond, and some other Persons of Quality, as
well to threaten as persuade him, before he would go back.

And as he was an early Traitor to his Brother, so did he no less treacherously
attempt the disowning of his first Wife. For finding her extraordinary Chastity
to be such, that he could not be admitted to her Bed, but upon the lawful score
of Matrimony, he was at last Married to her, but so very privately, that only
the King was privy to it: After which, perceiving that his Brother's
Restoration was fully determined in England, under pretense that it would be
more for his own, and the Honor and Interest of his Brother, to Marry with
some great Princess that would both enrich and strengthen them by the largeness
of her Dowry, and the greatness of her Relations, he would have taken an
occasion from the privacy of the Nuptials, to deny her being his Wife, and to
disavow all Contracts and Ceremonies of Marriage between them: But the King
detesting so much baseness, as being himself a witness of the Marriage, would
not suffer the Lady to be so heinously abused; but constrained him, after great
reluctance, to declare it publicly to all the World. A happy Providence for
England, which by that Conjunction blessed us with two Protestant Princesses,
matchless in Virtue and Piety, and all those other Graces that adorn their Sex;
to the eldest of which we are beholden for our Deliverance from an Inundation
of Slavery and Popery, under the Auspicious Conduct of a Sovereign truly
meriting the Noble and Ancient Titles of King of Men, and Shepherd of the
People, and the yet more dignified Addition, of Defender of the Faith. And from
the youngest of which, we have already the earnest of a hopeful Issue to guard
us from the like Invasions. Such is the provision of Providence, that many
times it happens, the most venomous Creatures carry about them the particular
Antidote against their own Poisons.

Certain it is, that the D. of York would never have pulled off his Protestant
Vizour, nor have declared himself of the Roman Communion so soon, had he not
been thereto necessitated by a Stratagem of the King his Brother; for the
Papists having a long time waited for the Accomplishment of the King's Oaths
and Promises for restoring their Religion; and having annually contributed
large Sums of Money toward the effecting of it, at length grew impatiently
sullen, and would advance no more, unless the King or the Duke would openly
declare themselves for Popery: Which the King thinking no way seasonable for
him to do, and not being able by all his Arguments and Importunities to prevail
with his Brother to do it, he at length bethought himself of this Project,
which was, To get the Queen to write a Letter, intimating her Intention to
withdraw into a Monastry; which Letter was to be left upon her Closet Table,
that her Priests, as it was concerted beforehand, might there seize it, and
seeing the Contents of it, carry it forthwith to the Duke. Upon which the Duke,
being jealous lest the King, upon the Queen's relinquishing her Husband, might
be induced to marry again, and thereby deprive him of the hopes of succeeding,
than which there was nothing which he thirsted after more, upon obtaining a
previous Assurance, that in case he declared himself a Papist, she should not
withdraw, immediately pulled off his Mask, and renounced Communion with the
Church of England.

Being thus quit of his fears from the King, his next work was to rid himself
of all his Jealousies of the D. of Monmouth. To which purpose he lay day and
night at the King, to require him to turn Roman Catholic. Which the King out
of his Tenderness to the Romish Cause, as well as to gratify his Brother,
undertook to do, and accordingly sent him into France, with an express Command
to reconcile himself to the Church of Rome: however, the Duke of Monmouth, out
of an aversion to the Fopperies of that Religion, failed in his performance.
Which so incensed the D. of Y. that from that time forward he studied all the
ways imaginable to bring him to Destruction.

In the mean time, having by his publicly declaring himself a Papist, engaged
all those of the same Religion, to his Person and Interest, he resolved to
drive on, Iehu-like, and to promote the Catholic Cause, with all the vigor
and swiftness he was able, and to make the utmost use of his Brothers good
Intentions. And such was his Bigottry to the Romish Church, That according to
the Principles of that Religion, he stuck at nothing per fas and nefas, to
bring about his Popish Designs.

I shall not here dilate upon his secret Negotiations at Rome, his
Correspondencies with Foreign Priests and Jesuits, or his Private Intrigues
with the French King, which have been all sufficiently exposed already in
Print; as for that whatever has been already said of the King, is also to be
said of him in general, while he was Duke, in regard they both drew in the same
Yoke, for the Ruin of the Nation. For this is as certain as the rest, that he
had a most eager desire to Rule, and Rule Despotically, which was the Reason he
was frequently heard to say, He had rather Reign one Month as the King of
France, than Twenty Years as his Brother the King of England, did. And besides,
it was as plain, That he had a mortal Antipathy against the Protestant
Religion, and more particularly against the Professors of it in England; but
more especially the Dissenters, upon the score of Revenging his Father's Death.
An Embittered Hatred, which he derived from his Mother, who mortally malic'd
England upon the same Account, and which he acknowledged in his Bedchamber at
St. James's, where he openly declared; That he was resolved to be revenged upon
the English Nation for his Father's Death. Which if those unthinking People,
who are so eager to have him again, would but consider, they would not be so
forward for his return. For it is in vain for the Church of England-Men, of
what degree soever, to think that their refusing to Swear Allegiance to King
William and Queen Mary, would excuse them from that universal Revenge which he
would take upon the Nation, were it ever again in his Power.

Only here was the Difference between the two Brothers, That the King thought
to Ruin his Enemy by main Force, and the fair hand of Victory; but the Duke
hoping to kill two Birds with one Stone, made it his Business at the same time
to Ruin the Enemy by Force, and his own Country by Treachery. Thus when he had
engaged his Brother in the First Holy Dutch War of the Extirpation of
Heretics, he permits the English at first to exercise all the Bravery of their
Skill and Courage to a great Probability of Success; but then falls asleep in
the height of his Conduct, to the end the Dutch for want of Orders might have
an Opportunity to wrest the Victory out of the Hands of the English, on purpose
to keep the Balance of Destruction on both sides even. Thus he permitted
himself to be surprised at Soul-Bay, knowing there were enough to Maul the
Enemy, but not enough to preserve those that Fought on our side. So that the
Dutch may be said to be well Thrash'd, and the English to be well Sacrificed.
And as a farther Demonstration of his Perfidious Soul, when he found the
Contest would be too tedious between two Nations so well matched, it was the
Duke's Contrivance to Suborn and Bribe two Indigent and Desperate Villains, to
go over and Fire the Dutch Ships as they lay in their Harbors; and when he had
done that, it was the same Treachery, that with a sham Story lulled his Brother
asleep, and procured the Firing of our Ships at Chatham.

The Burning of London was such a matchless Piece, as could not have entered
into the Breast of any but a Bejesuited Herostratus, in hopes to purchase the
infamous immortality of a Popish Saintship, by reducing to Ashes, the greatest
Bulwark and Magazin of the Protestant Religion in Europe. Rome was set on Fire
by Nero, to have rebuilt it again more Glorious, and that he might have space
enough for one of the most sumptuous Palaces so designed, under the Sun;
thereby to have made the Mistress of the Earth, the wonder of the World: But
London was fired, not only to destroy the Wealth and Habitations of the City,
never to have risen more, but with an intention to extirpate the Inhabitants
themselves to boot, and to have turned the Venerable and Spacious Pile into a
depopulated Wilderness, by a general Massacre of the People, under the
Consternation of the spreading Flames. The standing Streets provided and
furnished with Incendiaries with fresh Materials to revive and restore the
weary Conflagration; and when taken in the Act, rescued out of the Hands of
those that seized them, and sent to St. James's, to be there secured from the
Rage of the Multitude, and then dismissed without Prosecution. An excellent way
to have made all sure, by mixing the Blood of the Inhabitants with the Ashes of
their Dwellings, the only Cement which the Papists believed would fastest bind
the Fabric of the Romish Church. And what greater piece of Perfidie could
there be, than while the D. was riding about the Streets under pretense of
assisting to quench the Fire, that his Guards were at the same time employed to
prevent the People from removing their Goods; and his Palace made the Refuge of
such as were taken in the very fact of cherishing and fomenting the Flames!
This the Committee of Parliament traced so far, that it cost the Life of the
poor Gentleman that gave the Information of these Things to the Chairman of the
Committee, to prevent any further Discovery, and secure the D. from the Danger
of his Life.

Coleman's crying out, There was no Faith in Man, was a most undeniable
Testimony of the Treachery of his Master, notwithstanding all the faithful
Service he had done him; and was it not a Magnanimous and Generous Act of a
Prince, to betray, as he did, to the Gallows, not only his most trusty Servant,
but his Fellow-Partner in the Conspiracy?

More inhumane still, was the Barbarous Murder actually contrived and brought
to perfection, by the encouraged Instruments of the Duke. For he it was that
sent word to Coleman, to bid him take no care, for that Sir Edmondbury Godfrey
should be removed out of the way; and at the same time took the like care that
his Servant Coleman should follow him. For it was Detection that he feared, and
the Duke well knew that the Dead could never tell Tales. The Particulars of the
Murder, and how far the Circumstances of it reached the Duke, are too fresh in
Memory to be here inserted; and Dispensation for Deeds of the blackest hew were
so easily obtained, that it was no wonder the Duke so little boggled at a
single Murder, to conceal the designs of general Massacres, wherein he was
engaged.

In pursuance of which, he was no less industrious to bring the Presbyterians
and all the Dissenting Protestants, within the Snare of his Sham-plot, in order
to the Destruction of thousands of Innocent Persons.

This Dangerfield discovered to the World, and his Informations taken upon
Oath, before Sir William Roberts, and Sir William Poultney, are extant, wherein
he gives an Account of his being introduced several times into the Duke of
York's Presence. Particularly, that being, once among the rest, admitted to the
Duke of York's Closet at White Hall, he kissed his Hand upon his Knees: And
then being taken up by the Duke, he gave him a little Book, containing the
whole Scheme of the Presbyterian Plot, for which the Duke thanked him, as also
for his diligence in the Catholic Cause, and wishing good Success to his
Undertakings; Added these words; That the Presbyterian Plot was a thing of most
mighty Consequence, and I do not question, but the Effects of it will answer
our Expectation; especially, in the Northern Parts, where I am well assured,
the major Part of the Gentry are my Friends, and have given sufficient
Demonstrations to me, as also of their Intentions to prosecute this
Presbyterian Plot, for they are no strangers to the Design.

At the same time, he ordered Dangerfield to be very careful of what he
communicated to the Persons who were to be the Witnesses in that new Plot, lest
he should be caught in the Subornation, and so bring a terrible Odium upon the
Catholics, and make himself incapable of any further Service.

Then for Encouragement in the prosecution of the Sham-Plot, the Duke promised,
that he would take care that Money should not be wanting, and ordered him, with
all the Expedition the Thing would allow, to make a Discovery of it to the
King. At the same time, the Duke also made diverse Vows, and bitter Execrations,
to stand by him in the Thing, and engaged upon his Honor, to be his Rewarder;
and, in Earnest, gave him Twenty Guinies with his own Hand; and telling him
withal, what a great Reputation he had gained among the Catholics; and that in
a short time he should see the Catholic Religion flourish in these Kingdoms;
with a great deal more to the same purpose.

Of the truth of which, among many others, there could not be a more convincing
Proof, than the bitter Enmity which the Duke bore to Dangerfield after his
Discovery; and the severe Usage which he received from Iefferies, the Duke's
Creature, and the Rhadamantine Dispenser of his Revenges.

In Scotland he Ruled, or rather Reigned, tho in his Brother's Lifetime, with
a more Arbitrary and Lawless Control. And there it was that he breathed forth
his Venom against the Protestants, uttered his Tyrannous Maxims with more
freedom, and exercised his Tyranny with a more boundless and exorbitant
Extravagance. For there it was, that he first undertook to exercise the power
of Sovereign Rule, refusing to take the Oath of High Commissioner, which the
Law of the Country required, as here he had denied to take the Test; and to
show how he intended to govern England, when it came to his turn, there it was,
that in the hearing of Persons of great Credit, he had this worthy Apothegm,
That tho in England the Lawyers ruled the Court, yet in Scotland he would rule
the Lawyers. There it was, that he positively denied to give the Parliament any
security for the Preservation of their Religion, in case he succeeded to the
Crown. And being told of the Terms that the King had offered to the Parliament
of England, tho much harder and more dishonorable than any which they
required, he replied, That the King never intended any such Limitations should
pass; nor did he offer them, but when he knew they would not be accepted. And
farther, to demonstrate his embittered hatred of the Protestants, and with what
Rage and Fury he intended to prosecute them, he told several Members of the
Parliament, when they were endeavoring to get some Bills to pass for the
Security of their Religion, in case of a Popish Successor, That whatever they
intended or prepared against the Papists, should light upon others. Which tho
it stopped him from taking the Advantage of any new Bills, yet he was so just to
his Word in behalf of the Papists, that he poured all the Rigor of the Penal
Laws against the Papists, upon the Protestants in that Kingdom, under the name
of Dissenters, whom he persecuted with that infatiable violence, as if
according to his own Expression, he had fully concluded, That it would never be
well with Scotland, till all the South Side of Ferth were made a Hunting Field.
For indeed that was the true in tent and drift of all his envenomed
Prosecutions of those People, as well in England as in Scotland, in hopes by so
severe an Exasperation, they would have broken out into open Rebellion, and so
have given him a fair opportunity to have rooted them from the Earth by the
Sword. Which was evident from another Saying of his; for that having one day
given his Opinion of sober Dissenters, and setting them forth, as he thought in
their Colors; he concluded, That if he might have his Wish, he would have them
all turn Rebels, and betake themselves to Arms. Which tho it showed his good
Will, yet whether it were so prudently spoken by a Person that had so little
either of Courage or Conduct as himself, is a question, unless he thought he
could subdue them with the Spiritual Weapons of the Pope's Excommunications and
Curses: Nor did he at the same time remember, that the heavy oppressions of the
Spanish Inquisition tore from the Dominions of the Spaniard all the seven
United Provinces, notwithstanding all that D'Alva, Parma, and Spinola could do;
tho their Military Fame far exceeded his.

Thus we have seen the extent of his Christianity; which we find cooped up
within the narrow bounds of Popery. Now for his Morality, which if it signalize
it self in any Virtue that celebrates a Great and Glorious Prince, it must be
in those two, of Justice and Mercy, which God appropriates most nearly to
himself, as the brightest Ornaments of his Divinity: But whether the Duke were
either Just or Merciful to the E. of Argyle will be the Question. This
Gentleman was one of the most Ancient, and one of the most eminent Noblemen in
Scotland, and a Person of extraordinary endowments, and, as such a one, had
^erv'd the King with his Parts, his Person and Estate, beyond what most Men of
any Degree in the Nation, either had done or were able to perform; but because
he would not so far comply with, and oblige the Duke, as to fall in with his
Counsels, for the Establishment of Popery, and yield himself an Instrument to
carry on his Designs of Popery and Arbitrary Power, his Head must be-brought to
the Block, the Ancient Honor of his Family must be attainted, and his ample
Fortunes be confiscated. To which purpose, a certain Test being framed for all
the Nobility and Gentry of Scotland to take, not excepting all others who were
capable of any Office or Employment in the Kingdom, easy enough for the Papists
to Swallow, as being Calculated for their peculiar Advantage; but difficult for
the Protestants, as being that which strangely confused and entangled their
Consciences. However the Earl was not so scrupulous neither, to avoid all
Occasions possible of incurring his Highnesses displeasure, but offered to take
it, with this Proviso, That he might declare in what sense he was willing to be
sworn. Accordingly he did draw up an Explanation of his own meaning; and tho he
were allowed to take the Oath according to that Explanation, which was also
con^ormable to an Explanation which themselves were forced to make for the
satisfaction of the greatest part of the Kingdom, that was dissatisfied in the
Oath as well as the Earl; Nay, tho his Lordship did take it according to his
own allowed Interpretation, which was so far accepted, that he was admitted to
take his place in the Council; yet upon a Capricio of the Duke's Justice, the
matter was called in question again; but then such horrid Treasons were picked
out of the Earl's Interpretation, that he was Arraigned and Condemned to lose
his Head; and Execution had been certainly done, had he not made his escape.
Nevertheless his whole Estate was seized, he was divested of all his Titles and
Dignities; and contrary to the Custom of the Kingdom, his Coat of Arms was
despitefully torn at the Public Market-Cross of Edinburgh, and his Person
hunted after in all places, whither they thought he might be withdrawn, even as
far as Hamburgh. And yet after all the scrutinies which sober Men have made,
the chiefest of the Scots Lawyers, that were of unbiassed Principles, could
never find any thing in the Earl's Interpretation, but what his indispensible
Duty obliged him to, both as a Christian, a Subject of Scotland, and a
Privy-Councellor to the King. But the D. was resolved to destroy him right or
wrong: And therefore being told there was nothing in what the E, of Argyle had
said or done, which could be* made a Crime by the Law of the Land; His
Highness, out of the great Affection which he ^bore to so true a Protestant
Peer, was pleased to reply, But may it not be wrested to Treason? Which was
such an Encouragement, that when his Mind was once understood, he wanted not
Instruments that labored day and night to make that Question subservient to
the D's impatient Thirst of Revenge, and their own Advancement* or else it
might be to signalize his Resolution to overruled the Lawyers in Scotland, had
they denied their Submission to his Good Will and Pleasure.

By the same Justice it was that Blackwood was Condemned, upon a Pretense of
having entertained upon his Ground certain Persons, who were reported, and said
to have been at Bothwel-Bridg. And this, although there had been no notice
given of their being Criminals, or any ways Offenders; nor any Proclamations
were issued out against them, by which Blackwood could be obliged to take
Cognizance of the Circumstances they lay under; And that which aggravated the
Injustice was this, That the Gentleman suffered after a General Act of
Indemnity granted; and that it was after the Council themselves had for four
Years passed them by, that either the Persons whom he had relieved came to be
accused, or he to be prosecuted upon this account.

And by the same Justice it was, that Mr. Robert Bailzie of Ierismond, was
Hanged and Quartered for a Crime of which he had been Impeached and Tried
before the Council, and fined six Thousand Pounds Sterling. And all this his
Highness did by overruling the Lawyers of Scotland; by which means he had made
the Judges and Jury ^as malicious against the Protestants, and as revengeful
against the Asserters of the Liberties of Scotland, as himself. Such
Exorbitancies of Injustice and Arbitrary Power, that his Brother could never
have endured in a Subject, had they not been acted all along with his knowledge,
and consent, Otherwise, had not the King been strangely infatuated, to believe
that whatever his Brother did, was for the advancement of that Cause to which
he was so well affected himself, he could never have been so unapprehensive of
the Danger he was in, from a Brother so actually in a Conspiracy against his
Life: For which Reason he was, by the E. of Shaftsbury, said, to be a Prince
not to be paralleled in History. For certainly, besides the early trial which
the King had of his Ambition beyond sea, he had a fair warning of the hasty
Advances which he made to his Throne in a short time after his Marriage to the
Queen: For no sooner was it discovered the Queen was unlikely to have any Issue
by the King, but he and his Party make Proclamation of it to the World, and
that he was the certain Heir.

He takes his Seat in Parliament as Prince of Wales, with his Guards about him:
He assumes the Princes Lodgings at White Hall, his Guards upon the same place,
without any interposition between him and the King; so that the King was in his
Hands and Power every night. All Offices and Preferments are bestowed upon him,
and at his disposition; Not a Bishop made without him. After this he changes
his Religion to make a Party, and such a Party, that his Brother must be sure
to Dye, and be made away, to make room for him. And for the undeniable proof of
all this, at length the Plot breaks out, headed by the Duke, his Interest and
Design.

Plain it was, that where ever he came, he endeavored to remove all Obstacles
to his intended Designs out of the Way. And therefore some there are who
attribute the extremity of the Duke's rigor toward the E. of Argyle, to the
great Authority which the Earl had in the High-lands, and the Awe which he had
over the Papists, as being Lord Justiciary in those Parts, and his being able
upon any Occasion to check and bridle the Marq. of Huntly from attempting the
Disturbance of the Public Peace, or the Prejudice of the Protestants. However
this is observable, That notwithstanding the height of Severity which was
extended to him, there was as much Favor shown the Lord Macdonald; whose
invading the Shire of Argyle with an Armed Force, merely because he was
required by the said Earl, as being a Papist, to deliver up his Arms, was never
so much as questioned, nor so much as a Reprimand given him for what he did;
tho when the Council sent an Herald to him, to require him to disband his
Forces, he caused his Coat to be torn from his Back, and sent him back to
Edinburgh with all the Marks both of Contempt of themselves, and Disgrace to
the Public Officer. But his Religion was sufficient to atone at that time for
his Treason.

And now the Duke having a standing-Army of Five Thousand Foot, and Five
Hundred Horse in Scotland, at his Devotion, as well as in England, and the
Parliament, the main Object of his Hatred and his Fear, being dissov'd, back he
returns into England; where under the Shelter of his Brother's Authority, he
began in a short time to exert his tyrannous Disposition, and play the same
Unjust and Arbitrary Pranks, as he had done in Scotland; and because it was not
seasonable yet to make use of armed Forces, he set his Westminster Hall
Redcoats, like Pioneers before a marching Army, to level the way for Popery and
Arbitrary Control, to march in over the ruined Estates, and murdered* Bodies
of their Opposers. The Judges were his Slaves, the Juries at his Beck; nothing
could withstand him; the Law it self grows Lawless, and Iefferies-ridden, plays
the Debaushee like himself. Justice, or something in her likeness, Swaggers,
Hectors, Whips, Imprisons, Fines, Hangs, Draws and Quarters, and Beheads all
that come near her, under the Duke's displeasure. Alderman Pilkington, for
standing up for the Rights and Liberties of the City, and for refusing to pack
a Jury to take away the Earl of Shaftsbury's Life, is prosecuted upon a
Scandalum Magnatum, at the Suit of the Duke, Convicted and Condemned in a
Verdict of an Hundred Thousand Pounds. And Sir Patience Ward, for offering to
confront the suborned Witnesses, is Indicted of Perjury, for which he was
forced to fly to avoid the Infamy of the Pillory; though in all his Dealings so
well known to be a Person of that Justice and Integrity, that for all the hopes
of the Duke, he would not have told an untruth. Sir Samuel Barnardiston, for
two or three treacherously intercepted Letters to his Friends in the Country,
fined Ten thousand Pounds; which he was not suffered to discharge by Quarterly
Paiments, but the Estate seized by the Duke's Sollicitors, to the End they
might have an Opportunity to be more prodigal in the waste of it.

But his hunting after the Lives, as well as the Estates of other, was more
intolerable, and that by the prostituted Testimony of Suborned Irish Rogues and
Vagabonds; and when that would not take the desired Effect* by the forced
Evidence of persons ensnared and shackl'd under the Terrors of Death, till
their drudgery of Swearing was over. Men so fond of Life, that they bought the
uncertain Prolongation of a wicked Mortality, at the unhallowed price of
certain and Immortal Infamy. And therefore not knowing how to Die, when they
knew not how to Live, accounted it a more gainful Happiness to quit the Pardon
of Heaven's Tribunal, for the Broad Seal of England.

By this means fell the Virtuous Lord Russel, a Sacrifice to the Bill of
Exclusion, and the Duke's Revenge; and yet of that integrity to his Country,
and untainted course of Life, of whom never any spoke evil, but those that knew
no Evil in him; only because he was one of those that sought to exclude the
Duke from the hopes of Tyranny and Oppression, the Duke was resolved to exclude
him from the Earth.

But then comes the Murder of the Earl of Essex; for that it was a most
Barbarous and inhuman Murder, committed by Bravo's and Bloody Ruffians, set
on, hired and encouraged by Potent Malice and Cruelty, the pregnant
Circumstances no less corroborated by Testimonies, wanting only the
confirmation of Legal Judicature, has been already so clearly made out, that
there is no place left for a hesitating belief. A Truth so conspicuous, as
stands in defiance of the Ridiculing Pen of R. L'Estrange to sham it over with
the Buffoonry of his Bantring Acquirements. It cannot be imagined, but that so
black a Deed of Darkness was carried on by the Contrivers with all the secrecy
that could be studied by humane Wit. But never yet was humane Wit so
circumspective, but that the most concealed of Villainies have been detected by
strange and little Accidents, which all the Foresight of humane Sagacity could
never prevent. More especially, after such a curious Inquisition, and so much
Labor and Industry, pursuing the Cry of this Innocent Nobleman's Blood. Both
the Circumstances and Depositions, besides the Declarations of others ready to
depose, are made public at large to the World. And therefore to omit the
long-since sifted and winnoed Contradictions of the Witnesses, that were made
use of, to prove the Earl a Felo de se; there are three things since
discovered, that carry a strong Conviction with them, of another sort of
Murder, in the new Deposition of Dorothy Smith, detecting the Motives, the
Author and Contriver, the Resolution taken to murder a Noble Protestant Earl,
the Manner concluded, and the Joy of those Infatuated Bigots, when the Deed was
perpetrated; and all this overheard by the Maid, at a Meeting of one Lover,
and several other Persons, privy to the Plot, in the House of one Holmes, whom
she then served, a trusty Papist, seated in a by-Corner of the Town, and where
they thought themselves, for that Reason, in the greatest Safety in the World.

This Meeting was nine Days before the Earl's Death, where after they had
vomited out their Malice against the Earl, in the opprobrious Terms of Villain
and Dog, and laden him with Curses, it was said, That he knew so much of their
Designs, and was so very averse to their Interest, that unless he were taken
off, they should never carry them on. Inducements, which as they had carried
off Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey before, might be as easily admitted for the
Destruction of a more considerable Obstacle; more especially harbored in the
Breasts of Men, that make it peculiar to propagate their Religion by Blood and
Massacre.

Therefore to remove this great Obstruction out of the way, their great Oracle,
the Duke of York, was consulted; who, after some Meditation, was for Poisoning
the Earl: but his Highness being told, that manner of Death would not look
well: there was another, who proposed to his Highness, that he might stabbed;
but that not being approved of neither, at length his Highness concluded, and
ordered his Throat should be cut, and promised to be there when it was done.

To all which, there needs no other Comment, but that the Earl's Throat was cut
soon after, and that the Duke was in the Tower, separated from the King, and
close by the Earl's Lodging, when the Murder was committed.

After this, the Maid goes on and deposes, That three days after the same
Persons met in the same House, and declared, That the Cutting the Earl's Throat
was concluded on, but that it was to be given out, that he had done it himself,
and that if any should deny it, they would take them up, and punish them for
it. All which being spoken as a thing contrived before the Fact was done, and
verified in every Particular after it was committed, are Circumstances that
would hardly be wrestled with before Impartial Judges, at an Old-Bayly Session;
where it would be also considered, that the terrible Prosecution of Braddon,
for making Enquiry into the Murder, came all from White Hall, under the
management of Court-Injustice and Corruption.

But lastly, The Maid swears, That the same day the Earl died, the same Persons
met again, at her Masters House, and fell a capering about the Room for Joy; at
which time, one of them striking her Master upon the back, cried, The feat was
done; upon which Holmes demanding, whether the Earls Throat was Cut; the other
answered, Yes, and added withal, That he could not but laugh to think how like
a Fool the Earl looked, when they came to cut his Throat: whereupon Holmes
asking whether his Highness was there? The other replied, Yes. With which
agreed the Informations of several Soldiers, that about a quarter of an hour
before the Earl's Death was discovered, observed the Duke to separate from the
King; at what time be beckned to two Persons, who coming to him, he sent them
to the Earl's Lodging, from whence they returned smiling, in less than a
quarter of an hour, and told him the business was done, as one of them more
particularly declared; for which particular knowledge of his, he was aterwards
sent out of the World.

Nor was the Information of the Woman less to be heeded, who informs, That as
she was walking, a little before the Earl's death, before his Chamber-window,
she heard a very great trampling and bustling in the Earl's chamber, saw three
or four heads move close to gether, and heard a loud and doleful cry of Murder.
And whereas Floyd the Sentinel denied at Braddon's Trial, the letting of any
Men into the Earl's Lodgings before his Death, yet afterward with great
remorse of Conscience he confessed that he did let in Two of Three Men by the
Special Order of Hawley the Warder.

It will be an unaccountable thing to Posterity, that the E. of S. should so
readily part with his Money of Holland, suspected to be one of the Bloody
Ruffians, whenever he went or sent fot it, tho a Profligate, at the same time
convicted in Newgate for Robbery upon the Highway.

It will also seem as strange, that Webster, an Under-Bailiff of St.
Katherines, and an Indigent Ale-draper, should of a sudden be Master of Five
hundred Pounds, at such an unlucky nick of Time, as immediately after the
Earl's Murder.

But I forbear to enlarge any farther upon a Theme already so laboriously
discussed, and public to the World. Only this is to be added, That it might
seem strange, that after the Murder was done, such care should be taken, and
such strict command given for conveying the News to the Old Bailey, till we hear
to what End it was done, by the King's Counsel snapping so quickly at it, as if
they had had their Lesson before, and Improving it with all their Eloquence, to
the Destruction of the Lord Russel. Nor is it unlikely, that Iefferies might be
either privy to the Design in some measure at that time, or else be more fully
acquainted with it in order to Braddon's Trial. More especially if it be true,
which is confidently reported, That his Lordship being at some Public Place,
where he took an occasion to speak largely in the Praise of the Deceased King;
when he had done, However, said he, whispering a Gentleman on the Ear, Had he
lived six Months longer, we had been all hanged notwithstanding my Encomiums.

The Discovery of which Alteration of the King, by a severe Expression which
dropped from his Lips upon reading a Letter from a Lord, who eat his last Meal
with the Duke, and wrote the same on his Deathbed, as it seems to be confirmed
by this Saying of Iefferies, so was it by many concluded to be the occasion of
hastening the King's Death. Concerning which, the Opinions of the World are
various, and some severe, and bearing hard enough upon his Successor: But in
regard it is a Mystery, as yet the Embrio of Conjecture, which is only to be
matur'd in the Womb of Time, and to be midwiv'd into the World by future
Discovery, we leave it to a higher Scrutiny. The Justice of Heaven perhaps not
minding a present Revenge of his Death, who had not only prevented the
Presecution of Noble and Innocent Essex's Blood, but so severely punished the
Industrious Enquiry after it. Only this is further to be remarked, that the
Irish Papists could for some time before, fix upon the utmost Period of his
Reign, and the D. was sent for in haste out of Scotland, without any apparent
Reason for it; besides that the King's Permission was obtained with some
Difficulty.

However, by the violent and tremendous Death of his Brother, he at length
arrived at the long-long wished for Haven of his Ambitious Desires; and beholds
himself mounted upon the Pinnacle of Royalty, only that his Fall might be the
more conspicuous.

He was no sooner Proclaimed, but he declared his Religion openly to his Privy
Council; however, he began with a mild and caressing Declaration, which he
afterward broke in every Line of it: A mere Trap baited with Indulgence to
Tender Consciences, on purpose to catch the Dissenting Mice, to deliver them,
when caught, into the Paws of his ravenous Popish Cats; but no sooner was he
Crowned, but as if his Coronation Oath, and all his Promises so lately made,
had been no more than so many Pills of Opium, and believing himself environed
with Power sufficient to maintain his Tyranny and Oppression, he invades
Property, by Expulsion of the right Owners; tramples upon the Laws by his
pretended Prerogative of Suspending Power, and goes about to pull down the
Stately Structure of the Protestant Religion, by the Suspension of one, and
imprisoning and Arraigning at his Criminal Bar, no less than Seven of the most
Eminent Fathers of the English Church. And by a strange Alteration of the Face
of Government, Treason overrules the Law, and Traitors impeached, are fetched
out of Jail to sit Triumphantly dominering at the Helm of State; and Iefferies,
the Daniel that in some measure might be said to be taken out of the Lions Den,
for the Cruelty of his Nature, is advanced in open Hostility to Justice, to
wage War with the Fundamental Constitutions of the Kingdom: A mean Spirit,
insulting over his Inferiors, but a Spaniel to his Superiors; who tho he knew
himself no more than a Tool in the hand of the Popish Artificers; the Shadow of
Grandeur, lofty under Contempt, and domineering only in public; yet having
pawned his Soul for the hopes of an Embroidered Purse, rather than recoil to
Goodness, carreers on in Mischief, and as if his Robes had not been Scarlet
enough, dies them more deep in Innocent Blood, and becomes his Master's Vassal,
to enslave the Nation. Such Counselors as these hurried on the New Crowned
King with such a Rapidness, to accomplish the great Work of introducing Tyranny
and Popery, to which his own Fears of leaving the Papists worse than he found
them, as furiously carried him, that he threw his Brother into his Grave as if
he had not had leisure to bury him; or as if he had deemed him not worth a
Funeral, whom he thought not worth a longer Life: Unless perhaps he thought the
Hypocrisy of Pompous Obsequies, would have but the more provoked his Brother's
Injured Manes, with which, as common Fame had spread it, he was already too
much pestred. I will not here dispute the Truth of Apparitions, nor insist upon
the vulgar censures about the Town upon the Priests, for not detaining him in
the half-way-Prison, but singing him out of Purgatory to make his Brother
melancholy, by facing him several times, and giving him an astonishing stroke
upon the back, as he was going down a pair of Stairs in Whitehal; yet this may
be asserted, That Guilt accompanied with Terror, forms those Apparitions in in
the Mind, which work the same Effect, and obtain the same belief, when once
divulged among the Credulous, as if they were real: However it were, it showed
he thought himself but little beholding to him for living so long, and
consequently no way obliged to retaliate a Succession so late in the Year, with
so much Loss of Time.

And now the first influences of his Tyranny and Fury against the Protestants,
flew into Scotland, where whatever Indulgence he showed in England, he issued
forth a Dreadful Proclamation against the Dissenters, under the Notion of
Enemies to the King and Government, and Destroyers of the British Monarchy;
sufficient to have given a more early Alarm to the Dissenters in England, had
they not been lulled asleep by the Softness of a present Repose, and the Charms
of their Decoy-Duke, Penn; the effect rather of their Simplicity than their
Policy.

But the first Act of his Revenge in England, brake forth upon Dr. Oats* He
could not forget the Doctor's detection of his Conspiracies against the
Kingdom: And because he could not find out a way to hang him; his Chief Justice
Iefferies found out a Punishment to gratify his Royal Fury, worse than Death it
self, and till then unknown among Christians, in Imitation of the Roman
Fustuarium, by which the Roman Soldiers were often drub'd to Death, or if they
escaped, sent into perpetual Banishment: as the Doctor was first of all Scourged
by the Common Executioner beyond all Precedent, and then Condemned to perpetual
Imprisonment. A Sentence so void of all Christian Compassion, that only
Iefferies could have invented, and such a Beast as Withens could have
pronounced. A goodly sight to see Protestant Judges condemning a Protestant,
and the Detector of a most Horrid Popish Plot, upon the Evidence of known
Papists, and some of them nearly Related to the Executed Traitors, and this for
Perjury too, upon the Testimony of Witnesses already falsifi'd. As if Justice
were a thing that never had been Naturalized in Heaven, but only depended upon
the Will of the Prince, a Kind of Tool to be used by his Bene-placito Slaves,
at his or their Discretion, or the grand Poppet of the World, to be showed in
various Dre^ses and Disguises, as the force of Judicature required. But as for
Dangerfield, he had been once his Darling, frequently admitted to kiss his
Hand, while he was in Conspiracy with him to Suck the Blood of the Innocent.
But there was no Atonement for his revolting, and revealing the Hidden Mystery
of Iniquity. Therefore he must dance the same Dance that Oats had done; only
the King did him this small Piece of Justice, to throw away an Inconsiderable
Roman Catholic, to Satisfy the general Discontent upon his being Murdered.

In the next place he calls a Parliament, and renews his Assurances and
Promises to preserve the Government both in Church and State, as by Law
Established; and Vows to hazard his own Person, as he had formerly done, in
defense of the just Liberties and Properties of the Nation. But still the
Burden of his song was, More money. Which the Parliament, willing to Engage him,
if possible, by all the Testimonies of their Duty and Loyalty, or at least to
show that nothing should be wanting on their part, readily granted. And in
regard that Argyle was said to be Landed, under the Notion of a Rebel in
Scotland, they declared their Resolutions to stand by and assist him, with
their Lives and Fortunes, against all his Enemies whatever. No less quick to
gratify, than he to make those Promises which he never intended to perform. And
indeed, under the Consternation the King was then in, upon the Landing of
Argyle in Scotland, and the D. of Monmouth in England, both at the same time,
perhaps the Parliament might have bound him up to what Conditions they pleased;
had they not slipped their Opportunity. But those two Storms being fortunately
blown over, the one by ill Conduct, the other by the Treachery of Pretended
Friendship, and both Argyle and the D. of Monmouth safe in their Graves, the
King was so puffed up with a Petty Victory overy a few Clubmen, and so wrapped up
with a Conceit, That he had now Conquered the whole Nation, that after he had
got as much as he thought he could in modesty desire, or they part withal,
unless they saw greater Occasions than they did; which nevertheless were no
small Sums, in the heat of their obliging Generosity at the Commencement of a
Reign, he turned him off, after he had sold them two or three inconsiderable
Acts for all their Money.

And now being freed from any farther thoughts of Parliaments, believing
himself Impregnable; he resolves to be Revenged upon the Western People for
siding with his Capital Enemy Monmouth; and to that purpose, sends down his
Executioner in Ordinary, Iefferies, not to decimate, according to the Heathen
way of Mercy, but with the Besome of his Cruelties, to sweep the Country before
him, and to depopulate, instead of Punishment. At what time, Acquaintance, or
Relation of any that fell in the Field, with a slender Circumstance tacked to
either, was a Crime sufficient for the Extirpation of the Family. And Young and
Old were hanged in Clusters, as if the C. Justice had designed to raise the
Price of Halters; besides the great Number of those that upon bare Suspicion
were transported beyond Sea, and there sold for Slaves, and the Purchase-Mony
given away to satisfy the Hunger of needy Papists. After-Ages will read with
Astonishment, the barbarous Usage of those poor People, of which among many
Instances, this one may seem sufficient whereby to take the Dimensions of all
the rest: That when the Sister of the two Hewlands hung upon the Chief Justices
Coach, Imploring Mercy on the behalf of her Brothers; the Merciless Judge, to
make her let go, caused his Coachman to cut her Hands and Fingers with the lash
of his Whip: Nor would he allow the Respit of the Execution but for two days,
tho the Sister with Tears in her Eyes, offered a Hundred Pound for so small a
Favor. And whoever sheltr'd any of those forlorn Creatures, were hurried to
the Slaughterhouse with the same inexorable outrage, without any Consideration
either of Age or Sex; Witness the Execution of the Lady Lisle at Winchester. As
for Argyle and the Duke, tho they might die pitied, yet could they not be said
to be unjustly put to Death, in regard they had declared Open Hostility, and
therefore it was no more than they were to expect, upon ill Success. However,
since they were betrayed into the Victor's Hands, before any great harm was
done, the Crime was not so great that nothing but a Massacre could atone for
it; more especially considering what great Advantages the King made of these
Rebellions. For it gave him a fair Opportunity to increase the Number of his
Standing-Forces, under pretense, That the Militia was not to be depended upon,
and of the Reputation he had lost of being so Miserably unprovided against so
wretched an Attempt as Monmouth's was. For which Reason, he was resolved to be
better provided henceforward for the Security of the Nation; and to crowd in
his Popish Officers into Commands, under the Notion of Persons of approved
Loyalty, and therefore such whose Persons he was neither to expose to disgrace
by a Removal, nor himself to suffer the want of: Cautious and wary of Removing
his Popish Commanders, but minding not at all to remove the Fears and
Jealousies of the Nation.

However his Plausible Promises, and this Important Necessity of augmenting his
Standing Forces, were urged upon the Parliament, as undeniable Reasons for More
Money. So great a Confidence the King had either in the Awe which he had upon
the Parliament, or that they were so Blind that they could not see through his
Cobweb Pretenses. But he soon found that he was deceived in his Expectations,
and therefore perceiving his Gilded Hooks could not take, they were decently
Dismissed, after ten Days Sitting, with a Prorogation from October till the
F^bruary ensuing.

But it seems King James was so confidently assured, That the Bands of
Friendship and Alliance between him and the French King were so Indissoluble,
That whatever Assistance the Parliament denied him in England, he should not
fail of from his Dear Friend and Confederate in France; That the Parliament
being called for no other Intent or Purpose than to Betray the Nation, by
Furnishing the King to accomplish his Designs of Popery and Arbitrary
Government; when they refused to be subservient to those Wicked Designs, and
thought it more Honorable to be true to the Nation whom they Represented, than
Serviceable to the Encroachment of his Tyranny, he laid them aside, as things
no longer useful for him.

And therefore like a man cha^ed with their just denial of his Demands, he
resolves the utter Subversion of English Parliaments, the only Remora's of his
ungodly Projects, by completing the Disfranchising of all the, Cities and
Corporations throughout the Nation, so fairly begun in his Brother's Reign, to
make way for the Introduction of a French Parliament, That should at once have
surrendered all the Ancient Liberty of the Kingdom, and the whole Power of the
Government into his Hands. And to Terrify men into this slavish Compliance,
with his Tyrannical Will and Pleasure, the Names of all such Persons, as out of
Honor and Conscience, refused to Cooperate with his Popish Ministers toward
the Public Ruin of Liberty and Religion, and prostitute their own and the
Freedoms of their Posterity to his Arbitrary subjection, were Threatened to be
returned up to the Attorney General, to the end their Persons and Estates might
be undone by Illegal Prosecutions.

In the next place, to set himself Paramount above all the Control of Law, out
of a vain Opinion that Kings are accountable to none but God; A set of Judges
are picked out to overturn the very Fundamentals of Humane Society, and
Annihilate the very ends of Government. This the King knew must be done by
Judges that had abandoned all High Opinion of God and Nature, and had quitted
all sense of Conscience and True Honor; and had wholly given up their
Judgments to the foolish Enticements of Ambition and Flattery: And when he had
found out such, it was easy for him to say, with his Grandfather of the same
Name, Let me make what Judges I please, and I will easily have what I please to
be Law. No wonder then these Judges having Instruments drawn up by Brent, which
passed the Great Seal to Indemnifie them for whatever they did or said
Illegally, affirmed it to the King for Law, That the King was an Independent
Prince.

That the Laws of the Kingdom, were the Kings Laws.

That the Kings of England might Dispense with all Laws, that regarded
Penalties and Punishments, as often as necessity required.

That they were Judges and Arbitrators who have Power to Judge of the Necessity
which may induce them to make use of these Dispensations.

And Lastly, That the King of England could not Renounce a Prerogative annexed
to the Crown.

By Virtue of which Concessions and Opinions of the Judges, all the Laws in
England made in the Reigns of four several Princes for the security of the
Nation against Popery and Arbitrary Government, were rendered of no Effect.

By Virtue of these Concessions, Arundel of Warder, was made Lord Privy Seal,
Alibone a Judge, and Castlemain was sent with great Pomp an Ambassador to Rome,
to be there contemned and despised by his Holiness, for the bad name which his
Master had among all the Princes of Europe, and the ill Opinion the Pope
himself had of him.

By Virtue of these Concessions it was, that the greatest part of the Kingdom's
Military Safety and Defense, was put into the hands of persons incapable to be
entrusted with them by the Express Laws of the Kingdom; and that the Execution
of the Ancient Laws and Statutes of the Realm, against diverse sorts of Treasons
and other heinous Crimes was stopped.

By Virtue of these Concessions, Sir E. Hales was made Lieutenant of the Tower,
to Terrify the City with his Mortar-pieces, and level his Great Guns to the
Destruction of the Metropolis of the Kingdom, when the Word should be given him.

By Virtue of these Concessions it was, that Peter's was made a Privy
Councellor, to outbrave the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Bishop of London:
that he had his four Provincial Bishops, and that the Priests and Jesuits
swarmed in all parts of the Kingdom, Built themselves Convents, hired Mass
Houses, made open Profession of their Foppish Religion in the Chief City of the
Nation, and in several of the Great Cities and Towns of the Kingdom, and
publicly Ridiculed the Scripture in their Pulpits. All which Transgressions of
all the Laws of the Land both Civil and Ecclesia^tick, are so fully Represented
in the Memorial of the Protestants, to their Highnesses the Prince and Princess
of Orange, That they cannot be more fully, no^ more sensibly repeated.

But the Inundation stopped not here, it was to be a general Deluge, or nothing
at all. To which purpose, all Obstructions that opposed the ^orrent, were to be
levelled or removed out of the way; for effecting of which, there could be no
Engine thought sufficient, but that of the Ecclesiastical Commission, so
arbitrary in its Orig^nal* that it had nothing but the Pillars of the
Prerogative to support it; and managed with that Arbitrary Fury by Iefferies,
That he looked like a Monstrous Titan Warring against the Heaven of Law and
Justice. For he had no way to carry Illegality with a high hand, but by
arrogant Domineering, and surly Incivility, while he had nothing to offer to
any Person, that offered Law to him, but Sic Volo, Sic Iubeo. To tell a Peer of
England and the Bishop of London, so much his Superior, only that he Sat upon
the Throne of his Commission, he that was not to be mentioned with the Bishop
in the same day, was such a foul piece of Exeuberance of his Guildhall
Eloquence, which only could have dropped from the lips of Insulting Barbarism.
All that can be said for him is this, That as many men commit Absurdities when
laden with Wine, this was one of his Extravagancies in his Drink of Honor. And
indeed, after he had tasted of that potent Charm, the whole Course of his
Behavior seemed to be a mere Intoxication, which made him afterward make use
of the same Receipt to drown both his Life and his Dishonor together.

However, the Suspending this Noble Peer and Bishop, contrary to all pretense
of Law, for refusing to obey the Kings unjust and illegal Command, was no such
Advantage to the King's Cause, that he had so much reason to thank the
Chancellor, or Peter's either, for putting him upon committing a greater Act of
Injustice, to justify a less. The Bishop was too well, and too generally
beloved among all the professors of Protestantism, for the Papists to put such
an Affront upon so Eminent a Father of the Protestant Church, for them not to
resent it; even, the more prudent Papists thought it a Proceeding too harsh and
unreasonable, and the more moderate looked upon it as too base and unworthy; so
that the Hotspurs of the King's Council were losers on every side. And besides,
it was such a stabbing contradiction to the King's Speech in Council upon his
Brother's Death, That since it had pleased God he should succeed so good and
gracious a Prince as his dear Brother, he was resolved to follow his Example,
more especially in that of Clemency and Tenderness to his People. That the
barbarous suspending this Bishop was one of the main things which destroyed the
solemn verity of Royal Word. Which though he had falsified already in his
severity to Otes and Dangerfield, yet the Person of a Peer and Bishop, and a
Star of the first Magnitude in the Church of England rendered much more
conspicuous. But the King was under a necessity; he had declared one thing to
the Protestants, but he had bound himself to do another for the Papists. If he
falsified with the Protestants, the Papists could absolve him; If he proved
unfaithful to the Papists, they would never forgive him. And in this Dilemma he
resolved to follow the Maxim of his Profession, Not to keep Faith with
Heretics. Neither were the steps he made, the steps of State-convenience, now
and then upon an exigency; but all in a huddle, out of his Zeal, to make large
steps, for fear he should dye and leave the Papists worse than he found them.

These severe Proceedings against the Bishop of London, were the Violation of
that part of his Declaration, wherein he promised the Preservation of the
Ecclesiastical Government as Established by Law. But the Barbarous usage of the
Gentlemen of both Maudlin Colleges, was an unsanctified breach of another part
of his Declaration, wherein he no less solemnly engaged to maintain the
Protestants in all their Properties and Possessions as well of Church as
Abby-Lands, as of all other their Properties whatsoever. Notwithstand all
which, how he turned those Gentlemen out of their Legal Freeholds by the
Arbitrary Power of his High Commission, how he violated the Constitutions of
the deceased Founders, and with what an embitter'd rage and fury he rated them
like Dogs, when they lay prostrate at his feet, more like a Pagan Tyrant, than
a Christian King, is notoriously known; and all this to make a Popish Seminary
of one of the most noble and best endowed Colleges in the University. And this
Peter's looked upon as one of his great Masterpieces, as appears by a Letter of
his written to the French King's Confessor, Father La Chese, wherein he had
this vaunting expression, I have gained a great point, in persuading the King
to place our Fathers in Magdalen-Colledge in Oxford, where they will be able to
tutor the young Scholars in the Catholic Religion.

Nor was it thought sufficient to turn the Proprietors out of their Freeholds,
but under pretense of disobedience to the King's Commands, they were also made
incapable of any Ecclesiastical Preferment, or of the Exercise of Holy Orders,
and deprived of all those other ways and means of Livelihood, for which their
Education had qualified them. Which as it was a piece of Inhumanity without
parallel, so it was a plain demonstration of the main drift and design of the
King and his Popish Furies, first to draw the Protestant Clergy into the snare
of Disobedience, and then under the pretense of Obstinacy and Stubborness,
totally to suppress and silence them.

And yet after all this, for the King so publicly to give himself the Lie, by
proclaiming to all the World, as he did, such a notorious untruth, as That he
had never invaded the Property of any Man since his coming to the Crown, was
such a piece of Dissimulation, that Oliver Cromwell himself, with all the
Irreligion laid to his Charge, was never guilty of. Unless his Father Confessor
designed it for a Miracle to be Recorded among Popish Wonders, That he who had
done nothing else from the beginning of his Reign, but invaded the Liberties
and Prop^rties of his Subjects, should be so confident as to deny it. But
whatever, through the frailty of his memory, he had till then forgot, he was
resolved, it seems, for the future, to make amends for his omission. To which
purpose he was now provided with such a Gunpowder-Plot, that had it taken
effect, would, ere a few Months had gone about, have blown up all the
Properties of the whole Clergy of England, without exception of any person that
had either Honor or Conscience; and the greatest part of the Bishoprics and
Livings of England would have been pronounced void, to make way for Sandals and
shaved Crowns.

This was that cunning Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, whereby he
undertook to dispense with the Laws by the sole virtue of his Prerogative. An
attempt wherein his Brother had miscarried, being forced to surrender up, and
Cancel the Illegal Contrivance he had prepared for a Trial. But King James
puffed up with the great Exploits he had in person performed upon
Honslow-Heath, and the Glorious show his Army made there, Rendezvouz'd at the
same time in the same place, to add terror to his Commands, resolved to make
all Opposition bow the Knee to Baal.

In pursuance of those Resolutions, he Orders his Declaration to be printed,
requires the Bishops to cause it to be distributed through all their Diocesses,
and to take care that it should be read in all the Churches and Chapels
throughout the Nation.

Upon this the Bishops Petition the King, setting forth the Illegality, and the
ill Consequences of it to the whole Nation both in Church and State; and beg
the King not to insist upon the Reading it. This so incensed Peter's and the
rest of the furious Hotspurs, and consequently provoked the King to that
degree, That the Court-Lawyers are presently consulted, who adjudge the
Petition Tumultuary and Libellous; and thereupon the Archbishop of Canterbury,
together with the Bishops of Asaph, Ely, Chichester, Bath and Wells,
Peterborough, and Bristol, are first sent to the Tower, and then Arraigned and
Tried for Mutineers against the King's Popish Government, being Charged with an
Information for Publishing a Seditious, Pernicious, and Scandalous Libel. But
notwithstanding all that the King's Council, and the C. J. Wright, and Alibone
the Papist could do, Judge H^lloway, and Judge Powel, to their Eternal praise,
stuck so close to their Protestant Principles, and so strongly opposed the
King's Dispensing Power, for which they were turned out the next day, that the
Bishops were acquitted, to the general Joy and Satisfaction of the whole
Nation; and particularly of the Soldiers upon Honslow-Heath, whose Shouts and
Acclamations upon the News of their Acquittal, were so harsh and unpleasant in
the King's ear, that from thence forward he began to wish he had more Irish,
and fewer English in his Army.

But notwithstanding this Fatal Blow, the most undaunted High Commissioners
drove on furiously, sending forth their Mandates to the Chancellors,
Archdeacons, etc. of the several Diocesses, to send them an exact account of
all such Ministers as had refused to Read the Declaration. And there is no
question to be made, but that the severity of that Imperious Court would in a
short time have swept the Kingdom clear of all the Protestant Clergy, had not
indulgent Heaven put a stop to their impetuous Career.

That which follows, is so Romantic, that it looks more like a Novel, than a
Story fit to gain Credit, hardly carrying so much Probability with it, as the
Fable of Bacchus, cut out of Jupiter's Thigh; and which looks more Romantic
than all the rest; That the King himself should believe, and urge it for an
Argument to delude the World, That he who had suffered so much for Conscience
sake, could not be capable of so great a Villainy to the prejudice of his
Children; and enforcing the same Argument yet further, by saying, That it was
his Principle, to do as he would be done by* and therefore would rather dye a
thousand Deaths, than do the least Wrong to his Children. When the World was
convinced, that he could not have suffered such an Affront to have been put
upon him, but for the very Reason he alleged; and that, as for his doing as he
would be done by, it was apparent by all his Actions, that he could not speak
those Words from his Heart, without some Mental Expositions reserved to himself.

Certainly therefore, since it was for the Preservation of the Roman Catholic
Religion, that the Contrivance was set on foot, it argues, that his Conscience
was under the most dreadful Subjection to his Popish Confessors, or that his
Zeal was no less strangely governed by an imperious Woman, that for the sake of
Popery, he should consent to a Conspiracy against his own Flesh and Blood. He
would not endure to be Excluded from the Succession, but he would Exclude his
own Daughters from the Succession, and yet tell us, it is his Principle, To do
as he would be done by; as if he thought the way to make us credit a Story of
his Son, were to tell an untruth of himself.

The World that grows Wiser every day than other, will never be made believe,
that a Person debilitated by the unfortunate Effects of the exasperated Revenge
of an injured Bed, and meeting with a Consort no less infirm, by whom he never
had before any Child, but what dropped into the Grave, as soon as Born, not
having any substantial Rafters for Life to build upon, should so seasonably
nick it, to be both the Parents of a sound Offspring for the preservation of
Popery.

She, who ought to have taken all advantages to have had public and undeniable
Testimonies of her Glory, to be the Mother of a Prince, so providentially sent
from Heaven, to Support and Establish the Roman Catholic Faith, in a Revolted
Kingdom, would never have been so reserved, and shy of exposing the Symptoms
of her pregnance, but only to a few that were privy to the Imposture.

Add to this, the Flight of the Midwife, in whom it never could be a Crime to
bring a Queen to Bed. But omitting the manifold Circumstances, sufficiently
already canvassed, to detect the Pious Fraud; and the Chyrum of Affidavits to
cover the Cheat, all brought upon the public Stage, by dire constraint on the
one side, and immodest Bigottry on the other; the unhappy occasion of revealing
the Arcana of Generation to every Turnspit, and serving only to inflame the
desires of wanton Youth; Omitting, I say, these Circumstances, there are
others, no less remarkable of another Nature; as the sending Castlemain to
Rome, among other things, to impart this Affair to his Holiness, and to know
whether the Apostolic See would stand by the pretended Prince, in case the
People should dispute his Title. And this seems to be confirmed by the coming
over of Count Dada, in the Quality of the Pope's Nuntio, just as the Farce was
contriving, and the Popes being afterward Godfather to the Child.

In the next place, about the time that the Conception was pretended, Father
Peter's was taken into the Privy Council; to give the Report all the Favor
imaginable at the Board, to prevent the being of it Contested, or if it were,
to satisfy all manner of Doubts, and so incite the Lords to make such Orders,
as the Case required; which had no^ been so proper for the King, or the rest of
the Popish Lords, who knew not so well what to insist upon. Another thing was,
that the Child was no sooner Born, but it was translated to Richmond, lest the
pretended Mother should have been put to the Trouble of a forced Fondness,
which had the Child continued with her, would have proved a part so irksome,
and so ^ll for her to act, that notice would have been taken of it.

Nor was it less observable, that at the same time the Bishops were locked up
safe, that they might be out of the way of being called for Witnesses, whose
Impartiality otherwise would have been desiring more satisfaction to their
Consciences, than the depth of the Mystery required.

To which may be added, That at first, the King himself, who had most Reason to
know, did not seem to give Credit to the thing, or at least, was very doubtful
of it; and therefore, when the News was first brought him, as one that rather
wished it true, than thought it to be real; he made answer to the Messenger, If
it were so, 'twas very odd; till finding that the Lady of Loretto would take
Bribes, and had espoused the blessed Design, he was bound to believe, that his
Mother-in-Law's Prayers, and the Diamond Bodkin had prevailed; and that his
Royal Consort had been impregnated by an Apparition, like the Mother of
Damaratus, King of Sparta.

However, it was looked upon all over Europe, as a very low and mean
Condescension of a Sovereign Prince, Hedge-Sparrow like, to hatch the Cuckoo's
Egg, and own the supposititious Issue of another Man; which they, who pretend
to make the best Excuse for, seem willing to believe proceeded more from Fear
than Conscience; in regard, that being privy to the many Conspiracies of the
Priests and Jesuits against his Brother's Life, it possessed him with such a
dread of their Popish Mercy, that he yielded to whatever they desired, for his
own Preservation. On the other side, the Priests and Jesuits were so terribly
afraid of a Revolution after his Death; that by the Power of his imperious
Queen, and their own Importunities, they hurried him on to all those Impolitick
Exorbitances, that hastened both their own and his Ruin.

For now the Nation, no longer able to brook such a deluge of illegal
Oppressions, and the whole Body of the Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom,
observing such a general Desolation impending upon their Religion, Lives, and
Fortunes, apply themselves to their Hignesses the Princess and Prince of
Orange, as the only Cherubims on Earth, under whose Wings they could retire for
Safety and Protection. Who no sooner, with a Generosity becoming a true
Defender of the Protestant Faith, appeared in their Defense, but Consternation
seized King James and all his Raving Counselors.

Upon the first News of the Heroic Prince's Preparations, he takes off the
Bishop of London's Suspension, restores the City-Charter, with all those other
Franchises which had been so tempestuously ravished from other Corporations,
and returns the Ejected Gentlemen of both Universities to the Freeholds which
he had wrested out of their hands. But yet to show how firm he was in his
Resolutions to resume the same Despotic Power again, had his Success once
answered his Expectations; after he had ordered the Bishop of Winchester to put
in the Fellows of Maudlin College, he no sooner heard of the Prince's being put
back by storm, with some small Loss, which was heightened out of Policy in
Holland, but he recalled his Orders to the Bishop, sent for him to London, and
stopped the Readmission of the Fellows, till he heard the Prince was again
Embarked and prosperously bending his Course for England.

So soon as he heard the Prince was Landed, he summons his Affidavit Lords and
Ladies about him, in hopes to have sworn his pretended Son into the Succession,
in case of any Miscarriage of his own Person, which he never intended to
endanger. After that he flew to Salisbury, believing the Terror of his Name
would have gained him present Victory. But not meeting the good Fortune he
expected, all he did there, was to discourage his Soldiers with his
Pusillanimous Fears and Frights upon every little Allarm of a Post-Boy. So that
although he had good Counsel given him, To Horse all his Foot, and fall upon the
Enemy while they were yet laboring under the inconveniences of the Sea, and
before their Numbers increased, he rejected it* unless he might keep his
Teagues about him, and expose the English to the usual dangers of Road beaters.
Which together with their unwillingness to engage the Deliverers of their
Country, so alienated their hearts from him, that they deserted him by Troops
and Regiments. Desponding at this and more terrified with a little bleeding at
the Nose, than he had been with all the Innocent Blood which he had caused to
be spilt, he returns back to London, and having sent his Queen and her Babe
before, which was sufficient Warning for Dada, Peter's, and the rest to provide
for themselves, he withdrew from the City; but being taken, rifled, and seized
by the Country People near Feversham before they knew him, he was brought back
to Whitehall, where having his Choice given him to stay in England, or go
beyond Sea, he rather chose by a voluntary departure, to abdicate the Realm. To
which he was advised by his Council, that assured him, The Distractions of the
Kingdom would make way for his Return in a little time; Which God forbid!

And thus, to the surprise of all men, came to pass a Revolution so Sudden, so
Great, and Unexpected, that History cannot parallel. It seemed a Labyrinth of
Providence, to which the Beloved of Heaven WILLIAM HENRY only had the Clue;
while Prudence and Fortitude were the Ariadnes that gave him their Assistance
to subdue the Minotaur that devoured our Religion and Liberties. Two
conspicuous Examples at once of Heaven's Indignation, and the Almighty's
Favor; the one pursuing to his downfall an Apostate from God, and an Oppressor
of his People, and exposing him among unbelieving Bog-trotters upon the
lingering deathbed of his gasping Glory, the fettered Vassal of his once fawning
Confederate. The other prospering with Miracles of Success, the Generous
Redeemer of the True Reformed Religion, from the devouring Jaws of that
double-headed Monster, Popery and Slavery; By whose Auspicious Conduct two late
languishing Kingdoms, groaning under the heavy weight of Misery and Tyranny,
enjoy a Jubilee of Peace and Tranquillity, and freed from the daily fears of
Massacre and Destruction, in the fair way to recover their Pristin Glory, have
now no more to do, but to repay their Praises to Heaven, and their due
Acknowledgments to Them that have approved themselves the truly Indulging
Father and Mother of their Country: A Prince, the Wonder of His Age; a
Princess, the Miracle of Her Sex; in whom all Virtues, as in their proper
Center meet; rendering the Nation happy in Two in One, as the whole World is
blessed in Three in One; and upon whom, next under Heaven, depend the hopes of
all that cordially desire the Welfare and Prosperity of Christendom.

FINIS.

