GOD, THE KING, AND THE Church.

(TO WIT) Government both Civil and Sacred together Instituted;

Public Solemnities in Consecrated Places, from the beginning Celebrated;

True Zeal in opposition, to Lukewarmness, consistent with Moderation, Stated;

And throughout all, the Church of England in the Strictness of its Uniformity,
against both false Accusers, and false Brethren, Vindicated.

Being the Subject of Eight Sermons, Preached in several places, and now
published by George Seignior, Fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge, and
Domestic Chaplain to the Right Honorable the Earl of Burlington

Obsequium amicos, Veritas odium parit;

Terent. We can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth;

2 Cor. 13.8. LONDON, Printed for Christopher Wilkinson at the Black Boy,
against St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet. 1670.

To the Right Honorable RICHARD BOIL, Baron of Clifford, Youghall and Bandon;
Viscount of Kynalmeakie and Dungarvan; Earl of Burlington and Cork; Lord High
Treasurer, and a Privy Counselor of his Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland.
My Lord,
THe utmost of my Ambition in this Dedication is with an humble request of its
acceptance, a grateful acknowledgment of your Lordships many undeserved
favors, of which I am every day sensible; being confident, that however weak
these my endeavors are now made public, they shall not want both
encouragement and protection from One, whose constant piety it has been to
receive a Prophet, and a Prophet's Message, though there might be no other
reaeson, yet for this, that it came in the name of a Prophet.

Some of these Discourses have already had the honor of your Lordships Ear,
but I must confess more seasonable to the times we live in, then suitable to
that Auditory, amongst whom God is praised in the Beauties of his Holiness, and
it is a joy as well as Comeliness to behold our Order; the August Solemnities
of an Holy Worship, there celebrated, are of themselves a Continued
Praedication of the Subject Matter here treated on, should I be silent, and
were these lines with their Author buried in Obscurity: However, amidst the the
daily violences offered to God and his Service from wicked and unreasonable
Men, it may seem requisite that there be these more open Attestations unto
Truth, that so a froward and peevish Generation may hence be rendered the more
inexcusable, in that they do not perish without warning.

Whatever was the Motive to this Publication from a private person in my
circumstances, God knows; and your Lordship may safely honor me with this
Defense, that I seek no great things for my self; and I humbly conceive that
the Discourses themselves, if heartily perused, will intimate as much; all that
is here performed or designed is only a Mite or two out of a small stock, a
mean and an unworthy, but an hearty addition to what others have very happily
cast in out of their abundance into the Treasuries of God toward the building
and maintaining of our Church in its wonted Strength and Beauty.

And as I am not, nor need be much sollicitous what entertainment these
writings meet with abroad, being conscious to my self of my own integrity; so,
I hope it is far from flattery, since a real truth, in that I have no other
Apology to make, then to crave your Lordships pardon, whilst I must acknowledge
these Discourses to be but a ruae and unpolished Comment on your own daily more
pious and severer Practices; so that there may be this satisfaction at lest to
your Honor in the perusal, if for the Author little, for your Self more, at the
same time a favorable coustruction for him, but a comfortable and more just
reflection upon your self, in the consideration of that reward, which is
consequential to well ordered conversation. And here, though it be some
trespass upon modesty, yet to provoke the imitation of others in this
licentious Age, I must bear witness to the world of a most excellently well
Go^erned Family, the constant returns of Holy Offices, the great care which
both by your Lordships example and command is taken that the Meaneft Person in
it be instructed in those wholesome Principles of our Church Catechism, (a
piece of Discipline upon Youth so sadly neglected!) in the management of all
which, if I am an unworthy instrument, I must own the success of all my
undertakings of this Nature more to your Lordships favor and countenance, then
to any thing of skill or ability in my own performances.

And now, having put Your Honor to this unexpected trouble, I most humbly crave
leave for one Short Intimation, which will save the tedium of a Preface; and it
is this, That Some of the ensuing Discourses are presented to your Lordship,
with relation to the occasion of their first composure in the Discharge of my
Duty in a small Cure which I once had in the University, where it was my
custom as often as I could to give the Lesson provided to my hands out of the
Churches service, not at all regarding that coffing imputation of being styled
a Postillar, ^ut rather endeavoring to inculcate upon the People that they
should consider how suitable many times and seasonable, even in contingent
circumstances, is the Message delivered to them from God in the Voice of his
Church; and for this reason I have industriously published, what was at first
so occasionally Penned and Preached, being sorry that by reason of our
continued Factions and Divisions, notwithstanding an Act for Uniformity, it
still is so much every day, a word in season.

No more; but, what is my daily Duty shall be here an hearty and sincere
acknowledgment, (to wit) my uncessant Prayers for your Lordships health and
happiness, and for the most Religious and Virtuous Lady your Honorable Consort;
God of his infinite Mercy every day more and more Remember You and Yours
concerning this for Good; and He forget not, but may the blessing be on You and
Your Family, the many Kindnesses You have done for the House of Our God, and
the Offices thereof. I make bold with submission, craving your Honorable
Protection both of the Author and his Work, to subscribe my self

Your Lordships most Obedient and Faithful Servant and Chaplain Geo Seignior.

MOSES and AARON: A SERMON Preached before the KING at Saxham in the County of
Suffolk, April 17. 1670.
Exodus 4.16. And he shall by thy Spokesman to the people: and he shall be,
even he shall be to thee instead of a Mouth; and thou shall be to him instead
of God.


UPon the first view of the Text and context we find Moses the Servant of the
Lord, and Aaron the man of God joined together in one and the same commission;
both set over a Captived people, to deliver them unto a more glorious liberty;
and both sent unto an oppressing hard-hearted Tyrant to demand a speedy
restitution from slavery, and to require satisfaction for injuries done unto
the Son of God: ver. 22. Israel is my Son, even my Firstborn; he is now also
to be called, the Redeemed of the Lord, Let my Son go that he may serve me; and
if thou refuse to let him go, behold I will slay thy Son, even thy firstborn.

Moses. the meekest man in all the earth, does mistrust his own ability, who is
sufficient for these things? It is indeed the good will of him who dwells in
the Bush to send unto, and to work a deliverance for his people; But, who am I,
that I should go in unto Pharaoh, or bring forth the children of Israel out of
Egypt? I am a man of slow speech, and of a slow tongue; Surely Moses does not
consider the great sight before him, the Bush burning, and not consumed; a
lively representation to him in the very figure of it, that the more the people
were afflicted, the more they did multiply and grow; notwithstanding the
Egyptians made their lives bitter to them with hard bondage in Mortar and in
Brick; all their service wherein they made them to serve was with rigor; yet
cap. 1.20. the people multiplied, and waxed very mighty. and the Egyptians were
grieved because of the children of Israel. And does Moses know, and see all
this? the green tree before him encompassed with flames, and still alive? the
people laboring as it were in the fire, in the furnace of affliction, growing
out of weakness, and so from strength to strength under the weights of all
their pressures! and yet is he diffident and distrustful, because of some
personal infirmities, as if that God could not make his strength perfect in
weakness? Moses had best be careful lest his humility and meekness degenerate
into pusillanimity and fear, and so the Lord be provoked unto anger; for, God
will send by the hand of him, whom he will send, and that is, by the hand of
Moses; yea, though he be a man of a slow speech, and of a stammering tongue,
even hence has God ordained, and perfected his praise, that he may still the
enemy and avenger: what though his lips are not touched with a coal from, yet
one that waits at the Altar shall be his Mouth? Is not Aaron the Levite, thy
Brother? I know that he can speak well, ver. 14. and cap. 7.1. I have made thee
a God to Pharaoh; and Aaron thy brother shall be thy Prophet: So long as you
two keep together, so I am with, you Both, and that, to supply all manner of
defects in either of you; my word is a sure word of promise, if so be that you
two are as one; ye put your selves out of my protection, if in the least you
sever; but whilst Union is promoted, neither of you shall fail; and as a most
certain indication, that you are like to stand and fall tog there, so this is my
everlasting ordinance betwixt you Both; v. praeced. Thou shall put words into
his mouth; which shall no longer be his Mouth, but thine; who has made it so?
have not I the Lord? And, lest his message should be despised; his person
hated, because of the truth which he is to speak; Lo, thou art to defend him,
to be on his side to withstand Pharaoh; see thou to that, have not I said it?
nay, I have set thee so, Thou art unto them both instead of God: Thou art as
God, to Aaron, to protect him; thou art as God to Pharaoh, to execute wrath and
vengeance upon him; and therefore upon this double account shall Aaron be thy
Spokesman to the people; his office is again renewed upon, and confirmed unto
Him; He shall be, even He shall be unto Thee instead of a Mouth; because that
Thou, on all accounts and upon every occasion shall be to him instead of God.

The words, as you hear, having this relation to the Context, are in
themselves, an account given us of the two standing Ordinances of Magistracy
and Ministry; a King as Supreme, and an High Priest both constituted by God
himself to live, to love and to rule together; and this institution confirmed
and settled by way of supply to something that was wanting, an amends made for
a personal insufficiency; whilst Moses out of a principle of self-denial would
not ambire Magistratum, be too hasty in taking upon him (...) the burden of
this honor, since he was conscious to himself of his own inability, ver. 10. O
Lord my God, I am not eloquent, neither heretofore, nor since thou have spoken
to thy servant: This humility, and modesty in Moses at the first was
commendable; but honor follows those who shun it, especially where so
exemplary a meekness goes before it; God therefore renews his command, with a
promise of assistance in the work drawn from his own Omnipotence, ver. 11. who
has made man's Mouth? have not I the Lord? now therefore go, and I will be with
thy Mouth, and teach thee what thou shall say. Yet, this would not do; the
meekness of Moses has betrayed him to diffidence and distrust; fain would he
be rid of the employment, fearful he is that he shall not go through with it,
but sink under the weight of it, ver. 13. O my Lord, send I pray thee by the
hand of him whom thou will send: In which words, whether Moses requested, that
his brother Aaron might be joined as a fit companion with him; or, whether he
had an eye to the promised Messiah; -- Him whom thou will send, -- Christ in
the fullness of time to be sent to work a great Redemption, of which this
present Deliverance was to be but a Type; and therefore, none like Him, to
accomplish Type and Antitype at once; I say whether it were one, or other, is
not much to our purpose, further then the just naming of it to inquire: This we
are sure of, that Moses's unbeleif was reproveable, his sin of distrust
aggravated, because he could not take heart from Gods express Promise;
Notwithstanding the wonderful fight which he saw, the gracious words which he
heard, still he was faithless and not believing; hence, verse 14. the anger of
the Lord was kindled against Moses: However, to make way for an all-sufficient
supply, both the Humility of Moses, and his Diffidence, was not unfitly urged;
his Humility which God encourages, with a gracious Promise of a ready help
from himself; his Diffidence, which God convinces against all Objections, by
promising an assistance most effectual, even from his own experience of it,
ver. 14. Is not Aaron the Levite thy Brother? I know and so do thou, that he
can speak well; He will be glad to meet thee; and, thou must rejoice to go with
him; This is the supplement of all defects from you two, one with another; and
here is the Completion of your Commission, My assistance to you both. So that
the verse before the Text is a supply to both from God, which denotes to us the
Divine Ordinance and Institution, and that First Verbal, Thou shall speak unto
him, and put words in his Mouth; and I will be with thy Mouth, and with his
Mouth; Secondly, Real, I will teach you what you shall do. The Text is the
mutual supply as consequential upon the Divine Institution, that one must make
for the other; This being the scope and sum of the whole Paragraph; -- That,
Government both Civil and Ecclesiastical, was at first instituted and
established by God himself, over such a People, whom he would take and choose
to himself for his own inheritance; and these two instituted not only at one
Time; but, both in an Union, in a mutual relation and dependence one upon the
other: whether the Phrase in the Text, as spoken by God himself, He shall be,
and, Thou thalt be, -- be by way of precept; then it denotes the necessity of
this mutual Union; or, whether it be by way of Promise, referring to the
foregoing verse, then it denotes the Vtility, and advantage of this Relation;
since there is no assurance of Gods Blessing, on which side soever the Division
or Separation be made.

It Is pity to divide the Text, when the words speak nothing but Union; I shall
endeavor to keep my self close to the scope of them, whilst I confine my
Discourse unto these Three Particulars.
First, Here is the Promulgation of two great Authorities, and that made to
those who are Subjects unto Both: the Promulgation is to be made by the High
Priest; who, while he speaks for his Prince unto the People, does at the same
time declare his own appointment to be of a Divine Right: He shall be thy
Spokesman to the People; -- He shall be, even He shall be to thee instead of a
Mouth.

Secondly, Here is the due Execution, firm Establishment and sure
Administration of both these Authorities; whilst the Prince does defend the
Priest; he does so stand by himself; the Throne is thus established to him in
Righteousness, the Kingdom is confirmed in the hands of Moses, whilst he is
unto Aaron instead of God.

Thirdly, Here is a Promise of success to Both; an assurance that God will not
be wanting, where this Union is continued; and that taken from the Phrase, or
manner of expression in the Text, relating to the last words of the foregoing
verse, spoken by God himself by way of Promise, -- He shall be; and, -- Thou
shall be; and then, -- I will be with thy Mouth, and with his Mouth, and will
teach you what ye shall do: This is the sum of the Text, and the Design of
what further I have to say from it.

" Of which that I may so speak and you so Hear, Can. Eccl. Angl. 55.
that we may all of us profit, Let us pray, etc. First, The Promulgation of two
great Authorities, and that made to those who are Subjects unto Both, the
Promulgation is from the High Priest, who while he speaks for his Prince unto
the People, does at the same time declare his own appointment to be of a Divine
Right: -- He shall be thy Spokesman unto the People; He shall be, even He shall
be to thee instead of a Mouth.

He shall be thy Spokesman;
Et lequetur ipse pro te cum populo;
He shall speak for thee to the people; Targ Onk.
that so they may be taught to obey, not for wrath, but for conscience sake:
and accidet ut sit ipse Tibi in interpretem, Targ. Jonath.
and he shall speak from thee to whomsoever thou thy self shall go, or send
him; He is to be no other then a Voice crying, whether it be in Egypt, or in a
Wilderness, to prepare thy way before thee, and to make thy paths strait;
quicquid Moses mandasset tanquam intellectus concipiens; Tostat. Abul in loc.
hoc Aaron loquetur, tanquainos exsequens. Whatsoever Moses, who reigned as
King in Jeshurun did dictate out of the abundance of his heart: whose wisdom
was as the wisdom of an Angel of God, to know all things to be done; that Aaron
the High Priest was to declare and publish and to speak it (...) as the Oracles
of God. Thus the Priests lips are to preserve and to proclaim knowledge; the
people are to seek the laws of God, and of the King at his Mouth; that is, so
far the laws of Both, as their salvation may be concerned in the cheerfulness
of their obedience; and to tell them, that if they do in the least resist, they
shall receive unto themselves damnation; For as the Priest is the messenger of
the Lord of Hosts; so, not unfitly is he also the messenger of the Lords
Anointed.

And this may not improperly be the reason of the present Institution in the
Text; if the Prophet be the Mouth of God; well may he be so unto his Prince,
who is instead of God, Jer. 15.19. Thou shall be as my Mouth; (says God unto
his Prophet) even as the Mouth of God: The Law of God is dumb, it is as a dead
letter without a lively Voice to publish it; how shall they believe, except
they hear? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? -- The Law of Man is
dumb too; Promulgatio est de essentia legis; Promulgation is of the very
essence of a law in order to its being observed; and great security there is
unto the Subject, that the laws of God and Man do not thwart and contradict
each other, when the Trumpet is blown in Sion, and the Voice is from the
Sanctuary that bespeaks Obedience unto Both: It is not then absurd, that the
Keeper of the Kings Conscience should be His Confessor; he to tell, when
commanded, unto the people what are the thoughts of his heart; the practice is
as ancient, as the present Institution in the Text; and perhaps as an
intimation, how fit it is that it should be still continued in those polities
that are called Christian, the Office is again confirmed upon Aaron, by this
Repetition of it, He shall be; even, He shall be to thee instead of a Mouth.

From all which I might raise and prosecute this Observation;
That the Ministerial Function is the most proper, certain, effectual and
perpetual Mouth of the Commonwealth; and that from the Chief Magistrate to the
People; and therefore is by no means to be excluded Senates: Aaron is to be the
Mouth of Moses, in every thing in which Moses ought to be his God, and that is,
reciprocally, and Universally upon all accounts, and at all adventures. They
are the words of him who was both a King and a Preacher, Eccles. 12.9. The
Preacher must be wise to teach the people knowledge; how can he find out
acceptable words, such words as may be as goads or nails fastened in a sure
place, unless he be permitted to converse with those that are the Masters of
Assemblies, and so may he speak such words, as are given forth from one
Shepherd? But, I need not magnify the Priest's Office in this particular; the
happy temperament of the Constitution under which we live is an abundant
demonstration to us, that the laws by which we are governed were instituted in
the fear of God, and consequently the Obligation is greater upon the Subject to
obey them, since the Authority that confirms them is both Spiritual and
Temporal.

I pass by this double honor (possibly some think it too much for those that
labor in the Word and Doctrine) and I follow that which is the great design
of the Text, the Union that is here fixed, and everlastingly to be promoted;
and therefore, the Word is singular, Regis and Sacerdotis unum est Os; there is
but one Mouth assigned both to King and Priest; the one is to think, the other
to speak the same thing, Moses and Aaron to go hand in hand together: Hence it
is observable, that they were Both of the Tribe of Levi, verse 14. Is not Aaron
the Levite thy Brother? -- The Levite, and thy Brother; and his Mouth to be thy
Mouth; to speak the words which thou shall put into it; Why then should there
be any difference betwixt Moses and Aaron, since they are Brethren? They are
Both of the same Tribe, which the Lord had chosen out of all the Tribes of
Israel to come and Minister before him; the One was to deliver, the Other to
teach and instruct, Both together to establish and confirm in a perpetual and
never ceasing Economy what are the judgments and the statutes of God and Man.

And, all this not to Jacob and Israel only; but, to Pharaoh and the Egyptians
also:
1. Aaron is the Mouth of Moses to the People; that is, to Israel; to tell them
that they are the Visited and Beloved of the Lord; to proclaim to them the
Royal Law of liberty out of the house of bondage from their slavery; to wish
them to follow the directions of their Lawgiver Moses, who will rule them
according to the integrity of his heart, and guide them with the skilfulness of
his hand: -- with the skilfulness of his hand; with great and wonderful
Dexterity, will he extricate them out of all their miseries, remove their
shoulders from the burdens, and their hands from making the pots.

2. And so Aaron to be the Mouth of Moses to Pharaoh and his fervants; to
denounce and execute as many Plagues on him and his people as are the Tribes of
Israel, (if you reckon the plagues and signs together from first to last) a
Plague for each Tribe; because of the hard and cruel bondage wherein he made
each of them to serve; neither would he permit them to depart in peace from
amongst them, that they might worship the Lord their God.

And here by the way we may take notice, how necessary is this Union betwixt
King and Priest; how comfortable is their mutual assistance then especially,
when there is danger of a common enemy both to Church and State; when there are
a Generation of Men like Pharaoh, who will not permit the people to be at
quiet, only because Moses and Aaron would have them to serve the Lord; how
should Moses at such a time stand at the door of the Tabernacle with the Rod of
God in his hand for the defense of Aaron? and, how should Aaron lift up his
voice in the behalf of Moses, hold up his hands, lest that Amalech prevail? In
a word, The Commandment is to go forth from Both, to restore and to build the
Temple; the One must stand like stout Nehemiah with his Sword in his hand, that
so the work be not hindered; the Other, not unlike holy Ezra, a Prophet of the
Lord, with the Sword or the Keys of the Kingdom in his Mouth, that so it may
be perfected in righteousness; great is the care which Both together must take
for, many are the kindnesses which Both together must do unto the House of God,
and the Offices thereof.

O then! may Aarons Bells never ring backward! if ever, let it be to call the
people as One man, to the quenching of a common flame; let it be to stand
between the living and the dead, when a Plague is begun, that it may be staid;
pro Te loquetur, He shall speak for Thee to the people; surely then he is not
so to speak, as to inveigh against him to aggravate his failings, to exasperate
and calumniate his Person before the people; he may lift up his Voice like a
Trumpet, but it must not be the Trumpet of sedition, the Alarm of War sounding
to battle from the Pulpit; let him cry aloud, yea and he may not spare to tell
Judah and Israel of their sins, but it is not fitting to say to a Prince that
he is wicked; Such language as this does least of all become the Mouth of
Aaron; Much more unseemly is it for him to say before the People, (be they
Israel, it will increase their murmurings, be they Egyptians it will add to
their hard-heartedness) that Moses is ungodly. God does hear the blasphemy of
those who do in the least, though it be but in a thought, slander the footsteps
of his Anointed: Aaron himself was too sad an instance of this, when he
murmured against Moses, saying, Numb. 12.2. Has the Lord indeed spoken only
by Moses? has he not also spoken by us? Yes, he has spoken by you Both; and
yet the Leprosy upon Miriam's forehead, may be an intimation unto Aaron that
he do cover his Mouth, and shut his lips, such language as this has defiled
them, Unclean, unclean. But the meekness of Moses was soon entreated, and the
God of mercy did accept of his intercession, so that immediately there was a
healing of this breath, and Aaron is still continued to be the Mouth of Moses
to the People.

To the People: if to Moses, surely much more to them; and the People are to
attend to him with reverence upon this treble account, because that he is the
Mouth of God, of the King, and also of the People; Heb. 5.1. Every High Priest
is ordained for men (that is) is set over men in things pertaining to God; the
manner of expression in the Original is the same with the Septuagint in my
Text, (...) Every High Priest is set over men, as concerning those things which
are to Godward, that is, (the interpretation may fairly be admitted without
any great stress upon the words) set over the ordinary sort of men to tell them
with Authority and with power what is their duty either to God or his
Vicegerent, to the Lord of Lords, or to those who are instead of God; and they
who do resist or despise either One or the Other, do not despise or resist the
Man in either of them, but the God that is in them, Both. And this brings me to
the

Second thing I observed from the Text, which is the due Execution, firm
Establishment and sure Administration of both these Authorities together, and
that no otherwise then by a Divine Dispensation; Whilst the Prince does defend
the Priests of the most High God, he does so stand by himself; the Throne is
thus established to him in Righteousness, the Kingdom confirmed in the hands
of Moses, whilst he is unto Aaron, and to his sons instead of God.

Instead of God; -- in his quae ad Deum, that is in the Letter of the Text,
Vulg.
in those things which pertain to God; Tu eris illi in Principem quaerentem
Doctrinam a facie Domini. Targ. Jonath.
Thou shall be a Prince to him, a Prophet as well as he, yea and something more
then a Prophet, he shall seek the word, which he is to speak, from thee; and
that as it were from the face of God, Numb. 12.6, 9. If there be a Prophet
among you, I the Lord will make my self known to him in a Vision, or I will
speak to him in a dream: but my servant Moses is not so; this is the difference
betwixt him and Aaron; with him will I speak Mouth to Mouth, even apparently,
not in dark speeches, and the Similitude of the Lord (that is of God man to
come in the flesh, this Similitude of the Lord, as praelusory to the reality of
his Incarnation) shall he behold. So that what was Jethro's counsel betwixt
Moses and the People, seems here to be Gods institution betwixt him and Aaron,
cap. 18.19. Moses was to be to Aaron to God ward, to bring the causes unto, and
to receive the Law from God; and Aaron being to be his Orator or his Herald
was to make Proclamation of the Divine Law unto the People, and upon all
occasions to consult the Face of Moses, the Face which did shine because of the
Divine Glory on it, and was therefore to be consulted as an Oracle: This
Paraphrase, though it may be true in the Letter of the Text; yet to take in the
scope of the whole Paragraph, which is, a Union fixed by God himself betwixt
these two, we must as to this expression further improve our search:

Instead of God: -- that is, to defend him, that so he may speak boldly for
thee, as he ought to speak; that his Mouth, which is no longer his, but Thine,
may be opened for Thee in confidence. We find in this book of Exodus, that
Princes, and the chief Ministers of Justice amongst men are first called Gods,
cap. 21.6. the servant that had a mind to continue with his Master for ever,
was to come unto the Judges; that is, unto the Gods (...) in the Original, and
before them was the perpetual service to be ratified; and again cap. 22.8. The
thief was to be brought to the Judges, that is to the Gods (the same word in
the Original) to see whether he had put his hands to his neighbor's goods: and
verse. 28. such Magistrates are secured from all manner of slander that may be
cast upon them by malice of evil speaking, Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor
speak evil of the Ruler of thy people.

They are called Gods upon several accounts; I briefly instance but in two; the
Vbiquity of their Presence, the Omniscience of their Knowledge.
1. The Vbiquity of their Presence, they are every where; their influence is
unlimited: the fancy is not new (antienter then a modern Poet, and I hope may
now be better applied) that Kings and Princes do in this resemble the Deity,
being like a Circle whose center is every where, and whose circumference is no
where. God and the King can do no harm, (says our Law) the reason is, that
Diffusive influence that is from Both directing, manageing, swaying and
conveying all the good, and all the happiness that is felt or enjoyed by the
lower world, or the inferior sort of mankind; all which is purely the product
of Providence from the One, and Government from the Other; and if the Sun
shining upon a Dunghill does exhale vapors that are offensive, it is not
because there are spots in the Sun in Heaven, but there is corruption in the
Dunghill upon earth.

2. The Omniscience of their knowledge; they do as it were know every thing,
Prove. 16 10. A Divine sentence is in the lips of the King, His Mouth erreth not
in judgment. Who could have thought, that the way to find out the bowels of a
Mother, was to make the Child a sacrifice, till King Solomon, as the first
effort of his Princely Spirit, tried the experiment? but, says the Text, 1
King. 3 28. The wisdom of God was in the King to do judgment: And this kind of
Omniscience is a gift bestowed upon Judges and other Ministers of Justice when
they execute the Laws of God and the King upon Capital offenders, the
indictment against whom is, that they have not the fear of God before their
eyes, our Law taking special notice of the malice of the heart, and proving
that by some Overt Act; whilst many times the Judge upon the Bench, to the
admiration of the standers by, through a little, very little glimpse of a most
improbable circumstance does unravel a whole mystery of iniquity, so that on a
sudden the Prisoner stands self-condemned at the Bar; he might spare both Judge
and Jury the trouble of bringing in, and pronouncing their Verdict, since the
sentence of Death is to be read in his countenance, and his face gathers
blackness; what can all this be, but an immediate assistance, a special
illumination from God himself in the moment of judgments? Psalm. 82. God
stands in the Congregation of the Mighty, he judges among the Gods; ver. 6.
I have said, ye are Gods.

Grotius, upon these and the like expressions in Scripture tells us, that
wherever the name of God is given unto men, significat judiciariam potestatem,
and jus vitae and necis, it implies a judiciary power, and that no less, than
of life and death: Our blessed Saviors Comment upon the compellation (which
certainly is the best) runs thus, Saint John 10.35. he called them Gods, D. Ham.
unto whom the Word of God came: It is observed by a learned Paraphrast of our
own, that the coming of the Word of the Lord; signifies, Gods appointing a Man
to some particular Office, and giving him power and ability for the performance
of that Office to which he is appointed; and so it is constantly used in the
writings of the Prophets, who do most of them begin their Prophecies with this
solemn form of Words, The Word of the Lord came unto me, saying, which is no
more, then as it were, the Opening of their Commission, the Reading of their
Patent, the first showing and vouching of that Authority by which they act: all
which is an intimation unto us, that the Supreme Magistrate, and other
subordinate Rulers and Governors sent by Him for the punishment of wickedness
and vice, and the praise of those that do well, have (...) something of
Divinity stamped both on their Persons and their Office, and consequently that
Both are Sacred.

This account you have of the Compellation, as it may be applicable either to
King, Priest, or any Ministerial Dispensour of Public Justice: whence by the
way it is again observable, That the Priest had all along from the beginning
his share in Civil Government; if the Word of God came to Moses, in that he was
instead of God; yet it was to be spoken or published from the Mouth of Aaron:
and therefore St. Paul, when he had spoken less warily to the High Priest, begs
pardon, with an acknowledgment of his fault as a transgression of that
inhibition before cited, Number. 22.28. Thou shall not revile the Gods: -- I wist
not brethren that he was the High Priest, for it is written, Thou shall not
speak evil of the Ruler of thy People; Act. 23.5.

So then; if they Both act by one and the same Commission; He of the two that
has the Pre-eminence, (for a Supremacy and Subordination must be admitted,
else there could be no Government,) does no more than vindicate to himself his
own Royal Prerogative; whilst he secures, as firm and inviolable to the other,
his Priestly privileges and immunities: and in this sense most properly, and
to best purpose is Moses to be unto Aaron instead of God.

Instead of God; -- yea, and that in as many respects, as Aaron was to be to
him instead of a Mouth, the Relation being all along mutual and reciprocal.

Instead of God to Aaron; -- whether it be before the Israelites or the
Egyptians;

1. Before the Israelites; -- yea, though they be the two hundred and fifty
Princes of the Assembly, Number. 16.1. Men of renown, famous in the Congregation,
gathered together in a grand conspiracy to invade the Priesthood; Moses must
then speak as from God himself, and declare who it is that is Holy amongst
them, whom the Lord has chosen to come nigh unto himself: v. 11. What is
Aaron, that ye murmur against him?

Before the Egyptians, -- Pharaoh, his servants, and his People: cap. 7.1. I
have set thee as a God to Pharaoh, and Aaron thy Brother shall be thy Prophet:
-- Thou shall speak what I command as from me to Aaron; and He shall speak what
Thou shall suggest, as from me to Pharaoh; and thus, -- Thou shall be as God to
them Both; Mine Oracle to the One, to reveal all my mind; my Rod and Scourge
upon the Other to execute all my wrath; though he will not as a man of wisdom
should, hear the Rod, and him that has appointed it; yet thou shall multiply
my signs and wonders in the land of Egypt; Jannes and Jambres, though they may
withstand, shall not altogether prevail; when they see the duft from under
them, to crawl up in Vermin on them, they shall lay their hands upon their
Mouths, and abhor themselves in that Dust, acknowledge this to be the Finger of
God; and throughout all, they shall confess, that the Rod in the hand of Moses
was guided by the Arm of the Almighty.

Thus God has fenced against a common enemy, both King and Priest in a mutual
dependence: the One with a power sufficient, that he may uphold; the Other with
a sure defense that he may be sustained; and the interests of Both these are so
interwoven together, that wherever the Breach is made, the injury is alike
damage to Both. It is the same God, who has given commandment concerning
Princes, that they should not be touched by the hands of violence, Touch not
mine Anointed; as they are Anointed, they are Mine, they are as my self; who
has likewise in the very next words given it in charge, whether it be to
Prince or People, to Magistrate or Peasant concerning those who have a more
immediate attendance upon him, Do my Prophets no harm.

As therefore Aaron's Divine Mouth must be opened for, not against Moses, he
must not traduce, speak evil of him before the People; So Moses's God-like
power must be exercised, and exerted for, not against Aaron, he must not suffer
him to be exposed to the scorn and reproach of a froward, and an untoward
generation.

In order to which Defense, that their persons may be Venerable whose office is
so sacred, the maintenance of whom in honor is so great a security unto
Majesty, to be sure Moses will be careful that Aaron and his sons have an
inheritance allotted to them in the Promised Land; and that, not apart, or
distinct by themselves, but as a blessing to whole Israel, dispersed amidst and
throughout all their Tribes: This was Moses's last Benediction upon the House
of Levi not long before his death Deuteronomy. 33.11. Bless, Lord, his substance, and
accept the work of his hands; smite through the loins of them that rise against
him, and that hate him, that they rise not again. It is not to be imagined,
that Moses will take less care of Aaron, and the Levites, than did Pharaoh of
his Egyptian Priests, who in the days of famine had enough, their portion of
meat assigned to them from Pharaoh's Table; insomuch that when all the land of
Egypt was bought into the Crown, Genesis 47.22. Only the lands of the Priests
were not sold. In this sense also is Moses to be to Aaron in the stead of God,
to secure unto him the Lord 's inheritance, since dreadful are like to be the
effects of Sacrilege upon that Nation or People, amongst whom it is an
iniquity, though endeavored to be established by a Law; May the King, and his
Throne be guiltless, the Kingdom established unto him in Righteousness, for He
only is as God, who does preserve in the hollow of his hand the Churches
portion from the violence of such, who pant after nothing but the Dust of the
Earth, upon the Head of the Poor:

One inference more.
The words of the Text are spoken Universally, and at large, without the least
limitation and restriction; which may be an intimation to us, That this labor
of love here required from one to the other must be reciprocal, the Union
preserved inviolable, whatsoever personal provocations may unhappily intervene
on either side. We do humbly crave pardon, whilst we do suppose that which we
need not fear, since we are assured that Moses was the most true hearted man in
all the earth, faithful in all the House of God; yet, should he refuse to be a
God to Aaron, withold his protection from him; so put a veil over his face,
that he should not in the least behold his countenance; and then throw it off
again, only to terrify him with his frowns; for all this the Obligation does
not cease on Aaron's side, he must still be the Mouth of Moses to the people.
-- Again, should Aaron shut his own Mouth, not speak for Moses, when the sons
of Belial are against him; more out of policy then good honesty, keep silence
at such a time, because it is an evil time; for all this, Moses must still be
unto Aaron instead of God; -- instead of God, that is, as Supreme and far above
him, he may visit upon, and punish him for his personal miscarriage;
nevertheless at the same time he is obliged to maintain and defend as Sacred
the whole Order. Does Aaron make a calf in the absence of Moses? hearken to the
voice of an unruly people in their despite of Moses? As for this Moses, we wot
not what is become of him; (though they knew him to be in the Mount with God;)
and in the mean time, does Aaron make the people naked to their shame? upon
this Msoes was not so well advised when he brake the two Tables, of both which
he should have been the Keeper; and it was some aggravation of his Passion, in
that he brake them at no other place but the Mount of God; notwithstanding this
sore Provocation, he must be ready to defend Aaron against the Sedition of
Corah, and the Rebellion of the Congregation of Abiram.

We do not read that Moses did ever personally offend Aaron, we have heard
sufficiently both of his meekness and faithfulness; but alas! Aaron once and
again unhappily miscarried, both in the business of the Golden Calf, and in the
matter of Miriam; and, notwithstanding both these, the sin being justly
reproved, and in some sort punished, the Union in my Text was preserved: Aaron,
though the Saint of God, did not in one or two instances, as he should (Oh that
he had been careful!) rule his tongue; yet Moses must be cautious that he do
not shut his Mouth; he is still the Ordinance of God, and therefore not to be
infringed, the Order is to be secured setting aside all personal offenses; the
error was no sooner acknowledged, then forgiven and passed by, and all, that
God's Institution between Both might be observed inviolable; Aaron is still to
Moses instead of a Mouth before the People; and Moses in this, like unto God
that had appointed him, Merciful and Gracious, nor easily provoked, nor long
angry; he is yet to Aaron instead of God: Si non errassent, fecissent minus;
upon a miscarriage humbly acknowledged, and the penalty obediently submitted to
on the one hand; and the same as frankly pardoned, as generously remitted on
the other, the Obligation is hence the stronger between Both; even thus much
good, out of what might have been so great an evil; a firmer reconciliation, a
surer establishment from a little shaking; whilst all animosities being laid
aside, the Vnum necessarium, that One thing necessary, Union is preserved,
because in that Union is involved and wrapped up the security and safety of
Both. And so I pass to the

Third, and last observable in the Text, the utmost bounds of your Patience;
which is A Promise of Success and Prosperity unto Both; an assurance that God
will not be wanting, where this Union is continued; and that taken from the
manner of expressing the Phrase in the Text, as it relates to the last words of
the foregoing verse, the words are spoken by God himself as a Precept, and a
Promise; -- the Precept, He shall be; and, Thou shall be; -- the Promise, I
will be with thy Mouth, and with his Mouth, and will teach you Both what you
shall do: Blessed of the Lord is that People; yea, Happy is the Nation which is
in such a Case; where Aaron is Spokesman for Moses, no other then his Mouth;
and Moses is to Aaron instead of God.

Aaron's Mouth, -- that implies all manner of gifts and graces by which he is
of God duly furnished, and rightly qualified for his Office: Moses being as
God; that denotes the Highness of his Calling, the excellency of his Majesty,
and the Certainty of his Defense, he being thus the Signet upon the Arm, set
there to be a Protection to the Stars that are in the right hand of God, and
through the tender mercy of the Most Highest they shall none of them be
removed, cap. 7.1. (to which I cannot too often recurr, it being the Parrallel
to my Text) the Promise which is here made, is there endowed; the Office which
is here designed, is there conferred; The Lord said unto Moses, See, I have
made thee to be as God; -- and Aaron thy Brother shall be thy Prophet; Nothing
is in the Text promised, or there performed; or, (if it be more agreeable to
the scope in both places,) nothing is commanded or required either in one, or
in the other, but reciprocally, and with a mutual respect; that so the
supplement of all defects in either Government, might be one of another in love
and good will; and the complement of all from God himself, the merciful Maker
and Appointer of them Both, might be a Blessing of Peace, Plenty, and
Prosperity; I will teach you, and so be with you in whatsoever ye shall do. The
word in the Septuagint, v. 12.15. is very Emphatical, (...). I will go along
with you in every thing that you shall speak, I will tread an even pace with
you in every thing you shall do; (...) Symach. I will be a Light, and so a sure
Direction to you, that you do not in the least miscarry. This is the sum of the
whole; That the Priest's mouth shall be opened in Righteousness, because his
words are given forth from the King; The Mouth is but One and the same unto
Both, because so is the Ordinance of God; thereupon, this is the Blessing of
Heaven for Both, that the Word shall not return in vain, until it accomplish
the Work, for which it was sent; God will prosper the words of his Mouth to the
One, the Work of his Hands to the Other, he will establish the Work and the
Word to them Both in Righteousness.

The Mouth: that may imply Eloquence, as we may gather from the want of it,
verse 10. Lord, I am not Eloquent: -- Being as God; that signifies Power and
Dominion; -- Te illi Praeficiam ut sis Princeps, and Judex, Fagius.
and Magistratus ejus. I have set thee above him as his Prince, whom he must
honor before all the people; as his Judge, and an upright Magistrate, for whom
thou must do Justice, be sure to do him right in the sight of that People,
whose honor he is to bespeak for Thee: -- Now, what is Eloquence without
Authority to back it? it is not a Word with Power! -- What is all Power and
Dominion, without a Voice to proclaim the Majesty as most excellent? it is at
the best but a Dumb-shew! Both these being upheld together as the Ordinance of
God, no question that God will secure a Blessing unto that which is his own
appointment: He will be with the Priest, because his Mouth is no other than the
Mouth of God; He will be with the Prince, because he has made him to be as
himself, instead of God; but still, his Presence with Both is the result of
Union, because the God of Israel, which as a Commonwealth, is to be in
subjection unto Both, has declared himself, that he is but One God. How can
Moses be the Fear and the Dread of Pharaoh, unless he be the Love, the Choice
and the Desire of Aaron? How can Aaron be (as he proved afterward, cap. 10.7.)
a Snare unto Pharaoh and his servants, at the opening of whose Mouth Egypt was
to be destroyed, unless he hang upon the lips, the words which he speaks be a
faithful and distinct Echo to the Voice of Moses? without Aaron's Mouth, the
meekness of Moses will be soon despised; and without the Arm of Moses stretched
out in defense, the Voice of Aaron will be but beating of, or speaking to the
air: Unless that Aaron be the Mouth of Moses, what though his face shine? the
people will but the sooner turn away from him; cum Jove Caesar; God and the
King as to Government have alike prerogatives; Thunder from above bespeaks the
Deity as terrible; thus the Highest does give forth his Voice: -- Boanerges, a
son of Thunder here below declares earthly Majesty to be also dreadful! But
unless Moses put words into the mouth of Aaron, stands by him, and stands up to
him while he speaks, stretches out his Rod, whilst he lifts up his Voice; the
Mouth of Aaron without this, will be Vox and praeterea nihil; a Voice indeed,
but nothing else, the noise no sooner heard, but no where to be found: Whose
Mouth is fittest to preserve knowledge, and to proclaim Obedience, but his who
is the Messenger of God, and of the King; of the Lord of Hosts, and of him who
like unto God himself is mighty in the battle? and whose Arm should be made
bare in strength, but theirs who are the Anointed of the Lord; Anointed in a
great measure for this very thing that they should be a Guard and a Protection
to all Gods Holy Ones, since they are themselves not unfitly called Gods, being
all of them children of the Most Highest?

Shall I with all humility and due Reverence, speak the words of truth and
soberness? it is in the Cause of God, of the King, and also of his Priests!
As the happiness is great to that People where this Union is most religiously
observed, no other then as the result of the Divine Institution; so, sad is the
misery, deplorable is the calamity both to King, Priest, and People upon the
breach of it! I need go no further for an instance then the story that is
before us.

Would Moses and Aaron bring the people from Egypt through a wilderness into
Canaan? This must be their March, Regular and solemn, Number. 2.3. compared with
Number. 3.38. Judah, the Princely Tribe must set up his Standard Eastward; Moses
and Aaron, Prince and Priest must keep the charge of the Sanctuary Eastward;
(and hence not improbably the ancient Ceremony of worshipping with their faces
thither-ward;) Judah sets up his Standard for the Laity: Moses and Aaron,
theirs for the Clergy; and yet the latter to go along with Judah the Prince,
who was to protect them, when settled in the Land of Promise; and upon the
whole, whosoever he was, the stranger that came nigh to either of them, was to
be put to death: This was their March unto that Rest which God had prepared for
them: And yet notwithstanding their Station and Procession thus fixed by the
Almighty, do Moses and Aaron speak unadvisedly with their lips either one to
another, one of another, or one against another, at the waters of Massah and
Meribah, places that bore their names from those strivings and contentions? the
anger of the Lord is immediately kindled against them all; and it was so
enraged, that it was by no means to be appeased; Moses and Aaron must only see
that Land of Promise into which they are never like to come; it shall be their
punishment to behold, what they never shall enjoy; in the view of, but their
foot shall not tread upon the goodly Mountain, nor Lebanon; and then as for the
People, their Carcases must fall in the wilderness, this is a froward
Generation, it shall no^ enter into the Rest of God!

When once there be Divisions, many are the thoughts, many are the searchings
of heart! I would not be mistaken as an evil-speaker, or a fore-boder of evil
tidings, while I do thus mournfully, and with all lowly submission crave leave
to make out the Parallel:
Does the Civil Magistrate either needlessly contend with, or wilfully draw
back the secular Arm from the Defense of the Ministry? and does he think thus
to still the murmurings of the people? as the raging of the Sea, so is their
madness casting forth nothing but mire and dirt, foaming out their own shame;
and is there no way to lay the storm, but by mixing the waters with blood? has
the Pilot no means to secure the Ship, but by throwing the Prophet into the
waters, especially such a Prophet as does not fly from, but is steadfastly bent
on his Course, to deliver and execute the Message of his Master that sent him?
-- Again is the Spiritual Mouth, either silent in the behalf of, or clamourous
and obstreperous against? does it either not speak at all, as it should in the
defense? or is it froward, malapert and peevish against the Secular Arm? do
they, who should consult the stars of Heaven for direction in the voyage,
either withhold their advice from, or unseasonably quarrel with him that sits
Steers-man at the Helm! This may be the dreadful consequence of such ill will
between Both, in Portu naufragium! certain ruin, and destruction to the Ship,
and all that are in it; yea, and that in the Ken of the desired Haven; as an
aggravation to their misery, in the very sight of Land; Virtutem videant,
intabescantque relicta! This is the sore calamity upon such lad animosities and
dissatisfactions on either hand; a strange kind of infatuation upon all marner
of counsels and designs, be they never so just and honorable! they may see
what is good, and yet it does escape them; a price put into their hand, and it
falls away from them, for want of a pious heart united to each other in Love
and Duty, and to God the maker of Both, in fear and Reverence mutually to be
exercised in the using of it!

And here, by the way, let it be seriously considered, that the first Rejection
of Saul from being King over Israel was, because he invaded the Priesthood;
(let our new Leviathan suggest what he pleases, Hobb's Lev. part. 3. chap. 42
page 95. 300.
that the Civil Magistrate may reserve the exercise of the Ministerial Function
to himself) yea, though there might be some reasonable excuse for it; as, his
Enemies growing, Vid Ecc. Ang. Articl. 37.
and coming on upon him; and, he was not willing to engage them, till he had
made his supplication before the Lord, 1 Samuel 13.11, 15. But, God had commanded
the entrary, he was not of himself to make a Virtue of that Necessity without
an express permission; therefore says Samuel, Thou have done foolishly; and thy
Kingdom shall not continue: whereupon, God chose to himself a man after his own
heart, one who (to avoid such future presumption) should be a Prophet as well
as a Prince; and therefore the eating of the Shewbread upon an extreme
necessity, was not in him so notorious a violation of Sacred, and Ecclesiastic
Order.

This was that David; who called for his Sword, which hung behind the Ephod, 1 Samuel 21.9. Give it me, says he, for, there is none like that; he goes forth
with the Prayers, and the Blessing of the Priests to battle, 1 Samuel 23.9.
[still I will urge a Testimony from Scripture, though it may be sadly observed,
a new way of spinning out discourses, without any the least regard had to the
Law and the Prophets:] Bring me hither the Ephed, says David; that Ephod from
behind which he took his Sword, and so it was consecrated for the Lord's
battles; thus does he enquire of the Lord upon every enterprise, and that in no
other way, then according to the Divine Institution, with a linen Ephod: The
answer from God to him was, either a speedy return of Peace and safety; or
else, a sure caution certainly to prevent and escape the Danger: Upon this does
Doog that wicked Edomite, put forth his hand to fall upon the Priests of the
Lord? kills them only to take possession of their inheritance? and is Abiathar
escaped unto David with the Ephod in his hand? there was a strange Providence
in the escape, and a wonderful security unto Both in that flight: 1 Samuel 22.23.
Abide with me, says the King unto the Priest, and fear not; for he that seeks
my Life, seeks thy Life, but with me thou shall be in safeguard: -- Both
these for a while may be hunted after upon the mountains by the sons of
violence; and yet they, traveling together in, yea and persecuted through a
wilderness, shall even there find a Sanctuary at the Mount of God; and in God's
due time, which is the best for Both, these Two keeping still close together;
the Consecrated Sword in the hand of the One, the l^nnen Ephod upon the breast
of the Other; the Kingdom shall be established in the hand of the One; the
Priesthood shall be confirmed to the house of the Other; these are the
suremercies of David, and of the Son of David, to them Both. -- But let not
David in his prosperity forget the House of Abiathar which was afflicted with
him in all his affliction; nor let Abiathar in his eminency and prelacy be
unmindful of the servants of David; so oversee them, as to overlook them who
were formerly a security to him when he fled from the face of Tyranny and
Oppression; let Both together live in that mutual Dependence in which God has
set them, carrying on the same design so advantageous to Both; keeping as
sacred this Union, which I must still reinforce to be the Divine Institution,
lest the last error prove worse then the first; and again, some rebellious
Sheba do blow the Trumpet, (God in his mercy prevent such doleful Alarms, that
they never more be heard amongst us! To your Tents O Israel; we have no part in
David, nor inheritance in the son of Jess; Now see to thine own House David:
And would David look well to his own House, it must be by having a due regard
unto, and a tender care of the House of God: Thus Psalm. 132.1. God remembers
David and all his trouble; in that, this was his Oath unto the Lord; this was
his Vow unto the mighty God of Jacob; that he would not come within the
Tabernacle of his house, nor climb up unto his Bed; until he found out a Place
for the Lord; and, (with this most pathetick repetition of the words of his
vow) an Habitation for the mighty God of Jacob.

The instance in the Text is the conclusion of the whole matter. v. 27. Aaron
met Moses in the Mount of God, and kissed him: Oh happy interview! Moses and
Aaron mutually embracing! locus honestat; the very Place bespeaks both Love and
Honor; it was at the Mount of God; and then the Ceremony denotes both
Veneration and endearment; Osculum dignitatis; he kissed him as a Token of
subjection to him, thus acknowledging his Majesty and Supremacy; deosculatus
est ex amore; he rejoiced in his heart when he saw him, and because he loved
him, he gave the seal of his affections with his lips; an intimation at this
first greeting, that his Mouth joined unto those lips; quasi coalescebant in
Vnum Os, was now become but One Mouth, with which he was resolved to proclaim
Liberty to the Captives; and after that, enjoin obedience to those ransomed
ones; This was Aaron's promise unto Moses, and that, because of the Divine
appointment, (the Brethren being doubly dear to each other both in the flesh
and in the Lord,) that, he would be Moses's Spokesman unto the People; he would
be, even he would be unto him instead of a Mouth. -- Moses embraces Aaron in
the Arms of Love and of Protection; the Rod in his hand is a Scepter of favor
held out, as a token of good will and kind acceptance to him; This is the Rod
which shall be stretched out, working wonders in the defense of the Priesthood:
Moses, embracing him in his Arms, assures him from his very heart to the heart
of his Brother, that they Two thus clasping together coalescebant in Vnum
Hominem, became now but One Man; this being the Promise of Moses that he would
never be unmindful of the Word of the Lord, as an everlasting command upon him,
That he should be unto Aaron instead of God.

Appl. Let it be known this day that there is a God in Israel; that this God is
to be worshipped; and that in the Administration of this worship, the
Priesthood is to be secured from Contempt, to be had in honor for the works
sake about which it does converse: I dare not in the least venture to give
directions here; he must not presume who is the meanest and unworthiest of all
the sons of Aaron, who has not been Eloquent neither heretofore, nor since the
Word of the Lord came unto him; but humbly beg we may, and heartily in all Duty
and Submission invoke we must the Assistance of the Secular Arm, lest both our
Message and our Persons be altogether despised! Did I say, our Message, or our
Persons? alas! we can easily venture both these through a bad, or through a
good report, and be unconcerned; But, sad it is to behold, that amongst those
that are baptized Christians, Atheism and Profaneness should so strangely
overspread it self; yea, and that notwithstanding so many popular Discourses
every where made about the Reasonableness of Religion: hence it is that the
Offerings of the Lord have been abhorred amongst us; whilst irreligion, and a
licentious Libertinisme does exalt it self above all that is called God, or
Good in the midst of us! what means else the bleating of the Oxen, of the
Beasts of Bashan in our ears? the continued murmurings and gainsayings of Core?
strange fire every where offered up, whilst the Lamp burning bright in the
Sanctuary is neglected! and all this mischief from some of the sons of Levi,
pretended ones at least, fomented by the dissentions of false Brethren, men
that cannot be contented with their present station, but they lead aside the
simple and the ignorant into Houses. -- Oh! may our new Laws (for which we
bless God, and have more and more cause to honor and obey Authority;) may
these be executed; and may our old Ones not quite antiquated, be seasonably
reinforced; and shall I humbly make one request, laying that, and my self at
the feet of Majesty, in the behalf of the place from whence I came, and for
which I now serve; Let not us the little children of the Prophets, in the very
Schools of the Prophets, be exposed to the obstinate perverseness of ignorance
and sedition. Aaron's Mouth is opened for Moses to the People, to declare his
Authority as from God to be Sacred and Inviolable; that he is not subject to
Man, nor the sons of men for any of his actions; but to his own Master he must
stand or fall, even to God alone who has appointed him; it is yet open for
Moses at the Mercy-seat, before the holy Altar, that he may be filled with
Grace, Wisdom and Understanding in the execution of Justice, and the
maintenance of Truth: And what may Aaron humbly expect in return from Moses?
nay, what does the Lord God require of him, but that Moses should be as God, to
secure unto God his Oblation, the Morning and the Evening Sacrifice never to
cease? -- And is not all this for the Lord's sake? for the Lord who has
preserved the Rod of Moses in strength and honor; who has confirmed his
Blessing upon Aaron, in that his Rod also has budded, and bloomed Blossoms,
and brought forth Almonds: the fruits of Joy and Peace: God has, as we do
every day thankfully Commemorate it, made the Horn of David, though once cut
down, to flourish and sprout forth again; he has ordained a Lamp and a Light
for his Anointed, a Lamp from out of the Sanctuary to guide him in the ways of
Peace and Truth: that so he dash not his foot against any stone of stumbling
which Schism and Rebellion may lay in his way; he has restored Majesty, the
Excellency of Majesty to his Prince; He has renewed Beauty, the Beauties of
Holiness to his Priests; and we hope and pray, that he has given, and will
continue security, the Certainty of Defense unto Both: Oh that the people
therefore would in the fear of God, Honor the King, and Reverence his Priests!
that so there may be a further lengthning of our tranquillity, neither shall
our iniquity, our froward peevish iniquity be our utter ruin: in vain shall we
pretend Loyalty to Moses the Servant of the Lord, if we vex Aaron the Saint of
God: What? shall we quarrel at those who bring, and at that Administration
which does dispense the Gospel of everlasting Peace? How can we thus expect to
be at peace amongst our selves? May then the Throne be established in
Righteousness, even upon the Mount of God; and may the Mount of God be guarded
by the glorious and sure defense of Angels, because of the Throne of him who is
as God which is upon it; thus as upon a Rock, the Rock of Ages, shall Church
and Kingdom be built; * nec Portae Gehennae nec Genevae, (as once by a happy
mistake out of the vulgar that Text was read) neither the Gates of Hell, nor
the Dark close designs of Schism and Sedition shall ever be able to prevail
against them.

-- * In Gebennico lacu,
(Mendum Typographi esi) in Gehennico lacu;
Namque a Gehenna quid Gebenna dissidet?
Pia Hilaria Angel. Gaz. impres. Land. page 68. I conclude all, with those
Pathetical Petitions which our holy Church has put into our Mouths; (for
better I cannot use) and God accept them from the bottom of all our hearts; O
Lord Save the King;

And mercifully hear us when we call upon thee.

Endue thy Ministers, whether of Justice in the State or Holiness in the
Church, with Righteousness;

And so shall thou make thy chosen people joyful. Da pacem in diebus nostris;
-- Give Peace in our time O Lord;

For, whether it be against open violence and force offered from abroad, or
against secret Treachery and privy Conspiracy fomented at home; whether against
professed Enemies, or merely pretending Friends the worst of Enemies, there is
no other fights for us, but only Thou O God.



To this only wise God who is alone able to make us understand our own
happiness, by keeping us in the strict and solemn observance of Uniformity, at
Unity amongst our selves; that so to Prince, Priests and People there may be
but One heart and One mind in the Fear of him, in Love and Duty to one another,
To the Author of our Peace, and of every good and perfect gift amongst us; To
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, Three Persons, and One God, be ascribed of us, of
all Angels, and all men, The Kingdom, the Power and the Glory; Dominion and
Adoration, World without end, Amen.

SOLOMON'S PORCH frequented by the APOSTLES;
Act. 5. part of the 12, 13, 14. verses; being a part of the Epistle for St.
Bortholomew's day. 12. And by the hands of the Apostles were many signs and
wonders wrought among the people; (and they were all with one accord in
Solomon's Porch;

13. And of the rest durst no man join himself to them; but the people
magnified them;

14. And Believers were the more added to the Lord, multitudes both of men, and
women.)


OF St. Bartholomew, the Apostle at this ^ime to be commemorated, St. Mat.
10.3. St. Mar. 3.18. St. Luke 6.14.
we read but little in holy Scripture, only his name three or four times
mentioned, to wit, that he was numbered with the twelve Apostles, and so
ordained by Christ himself to preach the Gospel of the Kingdom, even Repentance
and Remission of sins in the name of Jesus unto all nations, beginning at
Jerusalem: Accordingly we find Him with the rest Act. 1.13. taking his part of
that Ministry and Apostleship from which Judas by transgression fell,
concontinuing with them in prayer and supplication, and with them also waiting
for the Promise of the Father, till they should be endued with farther power
from on high; and so upon the whole, it is on all hands believed that this
Apostle was unto the last a faithful witness of Jesus, and of his Resurrection.

Upon the consideration of all which our Holy Mother the Church of England, in
this Festival, has little, or no regard to Legendary Fictions; what might be
guessed either of this Apostles person, or of his conversation from his Name?
Whither he were not of noble extraction, the Son of Ptolemy? or as some will
have it, like Moses of old a Prophet; so he an Apostle, (Filius aquae ductus,
sive aquae suspensae) taken up, and drawn out of the waters, into which being
cast, the stream retired and gave back, nec potuit extingui, quin amnem
repressit, (as the Historian Lucius Florus writes of Romulus;) he could not be
drowned, for he did, as it were, force the waters from him; nec adiri usque ad
justi cursum poterat amnis, neither at this time could the flowing stream reach
unto its wonted height? Also, what might be said of his success in his
Ministry; where? and, unto whom he preached the Gospel? quae regio in terris?
For what nation under heaven, was he reserved to be from heaven the Blessed of
the Lord? even amongst Indians and Armenians, those that sat in darkness and
the shadow of death, unto them by this Apostle was preached the word of life,
and that life was the Light of God: and last of all, how he sealed the Doctrine
which he delivered with his Blood? his skin flayed off, and so he was exposed
like his Master, a man of sorrows; neither was he in his death unlike unto him,
being nailed to a cross, he committed himself and his cause to God that judges
righteously: All this, it may be piously received and entertained from a
literal and oral Tradition, but ignorantly enough, God knows; how true? fides
penes sit Authors, let those who have a more easy faith believe, whose main
business it is to gain credit to such things, of which they are not themselves
overmuch persuaded.

Our Church therefore, having little or no regard to all these, has rather
chose to celebrate this Apostle, as one of the Twelve, without any particular
specifications concerning him, save only, that he was Brother and Companion
with the rest in Tribulation, and in the Kingdom and Patience of our Lord Jesus
Christ: Accordingly the Gospel for the Day, St. Luke 22.24, is our Saviors
Determination of that perplexing Question, which so much troubled the Disciples
at first among themselves, and has since been no small cause of Division in the
Christian Church, Which of them should be the Greatest? not St. Bartholomew
himself, should we grant him right Noble by his Birth, yet he must not pretend
here to a Priority; therefore in the Gospel, the words run thus, The Kings of
the Gentiles exercise Lordship, and they that exercise authority are called
Patrons and Benefactors; But, ye shall not be so; -- not so, until that Kings
be your Nursing fathers, and Queens your Nursing Mothers, in the mean while,
let no one vindicate to himself Power and Prerogative amongst you over the rest
of his brethren; But he that is greatest among you, let him be as the Younger;
and he that is chief, as he that does serve: -- And the Epistle for this Day,
(part of which is the Text) was the happy effect and result upon this
Determination; The Apostles agreeing together amongst themselves, the Gospel of
Jesus did run and was glorified, their Unity was causal of respect from those
who were without; whilst they kept together with one accord, even the place
where they met was an an indication both of their piety and their prudence; in,
or about the Temple, in Solomon's Porch; and as an ancient Gloss upon the Text,
fuerunt simul sapientes, in domo sapientis, The wisdom of God was here
justified, by the children of Wisdom, and that in no other place then in an
House of Wisdom whilst (...) of the rest, whither they were Friends or enemies,
seeing and observing their Unity (ecce ut seinvicem deligant;) they could not
but keep their distance no man durst to join himself to them; -- and yet,
notwithstanding this awe upon their spirits, the Apostles wanted neither Praise
nor Admiration; But the People magnified them; and, upon the whole the word of
God grew and was multiplied, Believers were the more added to the Lord,
multitudes both of men and women. Well therefore has our Church, in her Divine
Service, furnished us at this time with a Prayer for the continuance of that
Unity and Uniformity, which bears its later date from this Festival; (to wit)
that it would please Almighty God, to grant unto his Church to love that Word
which this Apostle, in the Communion of the rest, believed; that both, those
who Minister, may preach, and the people may receive the same in the fear of
God in the love of those truths and of one another, through Jesus Christ our
Lord; Amen.

The words of the Text, (having thus given you an account of our Churches
choice in the selection of them for the Epistle at this time, which I could not
well omit, partly out of a respect to the Festival, and chiefly out of a design
to speak a word in season, too much and sadly in season, even all the year
long, because of these days of error, schism and sedition in which we live;)
are in themselves a Parenthesis, and so an Historical observation, made in the
midst of a continued Narration; A Descant made, of what effect the judgment of
God had upon the sin of sacrilege in the verses before; (to wit) what
influence the punishment of this sin, in the sudden death of Ananias and
Sapphira, had upon the Church? as also, what was the effect, of Gods Providence
in the verses following? how that God was with his Apostles, to deliver them
from the expectation of those who sought their lives; he sent his Angel to open
the prison door; and out of prison they were sent to reign in the hearts of all
that heard them, and at length by the counsel of their enemies they were
acquitted, God overruling in those Determinations also; so, that this seems to
be the Historical, though Parenthetical observation of St. Luke writing the
whole story, That, the Apostles and new convert Disciples being altogether with
one accord in Solomon's Porch, of the rest durst no man join himself to them;
but the People magnified them; and Believers were the more added to the Lord,
multitudes of men and women. Observe with me in the whole Parenthesis, as the
limits to what may be Discoused from it these four things.

1. A Holy Convention; They were all with one accord in Solomon's Porch. 2. A
Due Distance observed in that Convention; Of the rest durst no man join himself
to them. 3. An awefull Reverence exhibited upon that Distance; But the People
magnified them. 4. A Great Benefit redounding to the whole Community upon that
Reverence; or rather, upon the whole present Dispensation; Believers were the
more added to the Lord, multitudes of men and women.
Of these in their order.
1 A Holy Convention; They were all with one accord in Solomon's Porch: in
which words we may observe, 1. The Persons convening; (...) all of them. 2. The
Place of their meeting; (...) in Solomon's Porch. 3. Their Behavior at their
meeting; (...) together with one accord.


These Three, the Subject of the first Discourse.

1. The Persons convening; (...) all of them: Whether with the Apostles, the
new Convert Disciples; or the multitudes called together, at the noise of the
wonders that were wrought; or it may be amongst so many, some out of curiosity,
to pry and observe; and others, out of evil will, to seek and occasion against
them, that so they might deliver up these Apostles to the Rulers; -- Thus might
these multitudes at this time have been divided.

The Apostles were there, laboring in the Word and Doctrine; the new Converts
were there, receiving as new born babes the sincere milk of the word, that they
might grow thereby; those who were curious and inquisitive came thither, having
heard of the signs and wonders only by the hearing of the ear, they came, and
when they saw, they both magnified and believed; even the Adversary himself
though he had malice enough, yet he wanted power; such durst not make too near
approaches to them.

I cannot but here take notice of the Courage of these Apostles, that in no
wise they were dismayed or terrified; even amidst the concourse of the people,
they were not affrighted; their business was to save, not to fear multitudes;
to convince mightily and with power, not to dread the powers of the most or the
mightiest of men; men whose power consisted only in their numbers; 29. We
ought to obey God rather than men. The judgment of God upon Ananias and
Sapphira might have been imputed as murder to these Apostles; might not the
people of the Jews here have cried out, as they did formerly against Moses upon
the destruction of Corah and his Accomplices for a sin of much the like nature
with this, neither was the punishment unlike unto it, they died not the common
death of all men, neither were they visited after the visitation of all men;
Numb. 16.41. and all the Congregation murmured, saying, Ye have killed the
People of the Lord? Why might it not have been so with this mixed Assembly?
However the Apostles could expect no other then what did afterward really
happen. 17. That, the High Priest, and those that were with him should he
filled with indignation; Why should they therefore thus expose themselves to
danger amidst the multitudes? The answer to all is, That they knew Jesus on
whom they believed, and whom they preached; and it was with their joy. 41. in
that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for the name of the Lord Jesus.

Courage and Resolution are virtues truly Apostolical; it is beneath the
dignity of a Priest to fear the People: some come in humility to receive the
Ingrafted word with a spirit of meekness, and these are a joy to those that are
set over them; Some expect Signs and Wonders, every day some new thing, they
are for the enticing words of man's Wisdom, and he must work a miracle upon them
that would persuade them, though they are themselves the greatest Prodigy, in
that, since the word of Salvation is come amongst them in the plainess of its
Demonstration, they will by no means submit the obedience of their faith to
those Truths which in a Visible outward Economy they cannot but profess,
neither dare take so much confidence to themselves as to deny them; and after
all these there are another sort who lie at the catch like the Pharisees and
the Herodians, St. Luke 11.54. Seeking something out of our Saviors Mouth to
accuse or mis report him; such, whose business it is to carp at what they will
not understand: such, who that they may bring an evil report upon the way of
Godliness, take every little or no occasion to traduce the Dispencers of it.
But whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, the Prophets of the
Lord are to come amongst them, through good report, and through bad report, by
honor and dishonor are we to approve our selves the Ministers of Christ and
of his Gospel; in much patience, yea, with the Apostles here in tumults and in
labors; as deceivers, and yet true; as unknown, and yet well known; and that
they might be the better known, frequenting those places where the greatest
gathering of the people is like to be, that so the word preached may have the
more universal influence; the very Place of their meeting was a Place of
general and known concourse, and so much the better, because it was a part of
the Temple; see where they are assembled, an intimation both of their Fortitude
and Devotion; even there, where the thickest of the thronged multitudes were
wont to gather, with these we find the Apostles and the Convert Disciples at
this Holy Convention, (...) in Solomon's Porch; which is the

Second thing I observed to you; The place of their meeting; in a place
consecrated and separated for the Service of God; in Solomon's Porch.
Solomon's Porch; The History of which place I shall not here spend to give
you; those that have opportunity and ability may consult Jos. Antiqu. lib. 7.
cap. 2. lib. 8. cap. 11. lib. 20. cap. 8. Where we have the description of it
at large in all its Dimensions, from which we conclude it capacious enough to
receive so great an Assembly as we suppose at this time to have been there:
that it was part of the Temple is evident enough to us all from our Saviors
presence in it, St. John. 10.23. Whilst he was celebrating the Feast of
Dedication (which, by the way, was an Apocryphal Feast, instituted 1 Mac. 4.59.
and our Savior honored such a Solemnity with his company) Jesus walked in the
Temple, in Solomon's Porch; which was also a place of public worship, 2 Cron.
8.12. Solomon offered burnt offerings unto the Lord, on the Altar of the Lord
which he had built before the Porch: from all which, and from the Text I gather
as a word in season.

"That our Lord and Blessed Savior; and from his example and precept the
Apostles with the Primitive Christians did not usually assemble for the Worship
and Service of God in private Houses, or in solitary places, if so be that any,
the outmost part of the Temple was allowed them to meet in. First, Our
Savior's Practice was most exemplary in this: -- Whilst a Child, he was the
Holy Child Jesus; early after his Birth, so soon as the days of Purification
according to Law were accomplished presented in, and by the yearly Devotion of
his Mother brought up unto the Temple, where he soon exercised and delighted
himself in the beauties of holiness: The Days for Public Worship were too soon
accomplished for him, St. Luc. 2.43. He must stay behind the rest of the
Company some time longer; and after three days sorrowful search, where could
they expect to find him, though a Child of twelve years age, but in the House
of God; and there, about his Fathers business? even in the midst of the
Doctors, hearing them, and asking them questions! -- in the midst of the
Doctors, and hearing them; as if, the Blessed Child would have been catechized
by them, and taught the way of God more perfectly; this was his humility: and
yet, asking them questions, and so putting them to silence; this was his
authority, whilst all that heard him were astonished at his understanding and
his answers; -- This was the first onset of our Savior in his Prophetic
office, and that in no other place then in the Temple.

True indeed, afterward in the Course of his life he consecrated every place by
his presence, and therefore wherever he found the Multitudes, still he taught
them; and yet we meet but with two notable instances of such an administration;
once, by the Lake of Gennesareth when he taught the people out of the Ship; and
the other, was the Sermon upon the Mount: But those seemed to be places not of
his seeking; whilst he went about doing good, he designed no separation from
the Jewish Church, but as once or twice occasion offered, and the people sought
him out, he could not but at the same time feed their Souls as well as their
bodies: -- But if you would observe him according to his custom, St. Luc.
4.15, 16. He taught in their Synagogues, and was glorified of all: he came to
Nazareth where he had been brought up, and as his Custom was, he went into the
Synagogue on the Sabbath Day; nay, he gave diligent attention to, and in some
sort assisted in the Offices, which were there performed, for (...) or, (...)
he stood up to read; and delivering the Book to the Minister, he expounded to
them the Lesson that was then read, in the course of the Jewish Service as I
may so say, the Gospel for the day, (for it was out of the Evangelical Prophet
Esaias) 21. This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears; was not all this
a Regular and a Solemn Administration? -- We find at another time St. Luc. 7.4.
that Elders of the Jews thought it a good argument to move his compassion to
restore the Centurion's Servant to health, when they could thus plead for him,
that he was worthy for whom he should do this, since he loved their Nation and
had built them a Synagogue: twice he whipped the Buyers and Sellers out of the
Temple, and overthrew the Tables of the Monychangers, that being a place to
receive sinners, not Publicans; nay, St. Mar. 11.16. He would not suffer that
any man should carry any Vessel through the Temple, even the Outmost part of
it, supposed to be the same in the Text, Solomon's Porch, and the reason of all
assigned is this, because the House of God is to be a House of Prayer, and that
not only to the people of the Jews, but likewise unto all Nations; why then
should that House, or any like it, by any Nation professing Christianity be
made a Den of Thieves! thus you see how the Zeal of God and of Gods House did
devour him.

Secondly, By the way, I cannot but observe, let this Atheistical age think
what they will of a Liberty that they may take of alienating and profaning
consecrated places (even the Ground may be Holy, it was the good will of God in
the Bush that pronounced it so) surely, That sin cannot but be exceeding
sinful, which the Judge of all the earth, while he was but in the form of a
Servant did twice so severely punish with his own hands.

But to proceed, let it be further said for our Savior; that he went always up
to Jerusalem according to the custom of the East, and in the midst of such a
solemnity did he choose to be offered up a Sacrifice for the Sins of the world;
and though once indeed he was tardy, and the Pharisees muttered amongst
themselves; what? will he not come up unto the Feast? St. Joh. 11.56. yet, his
presence immediately silenced all those Jealousies, telling them and all the
world, that his Principle was Conformity; nay, to the last thus he witnessed to
the High Priest (whom in this he seemed to own as his Visitor) a good
confession, St. Joh. 18.20. when he could plead in the same words both his
Piety and his Innocence -- I speak openly to the world; I ever taught in the
Synagogue, and in the Temple, whither the Jews always resort, and in secret
have I said nothing,

From our Savior's Practice, we proceed to consider what was his Precept; and
that was this, St. Mat. 23.2, 3. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses's seat;
all therefore, whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do: as if,
they were the rather to be heard, only because of a due Succession and
Administration continued amongst them; however perverse the Pharisees might be
in their lives; they say, and do not; yet hear, and observe them, for they do
not sit in the stool of wickedness, but in the chair of Moses.

Nay, however the circumstances of his life might occasion him once or twice to
teach those that followed him in solatary places (only because they followed,
not that he called them after him, for his intention was to go and pray by
himself alone at one of those times; nay, his compassion was moved, when he saw
the people as sheep not having a Shepherd, St. Mark 6.34. and therefore he
taught them many things; he did not design to lead them astray from their
proper Pastors;) I say notwithstanding this, not long before his death our
Savior forewarns his Disciples, and in them, all us, of false Christ's, and
false Prophets that should arise to deceive them St. Mat. 24.24, 25. Behold I
have told you before, how careful he is, lest they should be mistaken? and in
the parallel Text, St. Mar. 13.23. Take ye heed, behold I have foretold you
all things; if they shall say unto you, Behold here is Christ, or there is
Christ, believe them not, and go not after them; if they shall say unto you,
Behold he is in the Desert, go not forth: Behold he is in the secret Chamber,
believe it not: Christ is not to be found in the Desert, not in a wast and a
howling Wilderness, not in the confusions of Government, Discipline and Order;
not amidst the confusions of those who have once, and would yet again lead us
through a Red Sea of our own blood, but not to bring us into Canaan, all their
Promised Land is a dismal Wilderness, and in it nothing but fiery Serpents, a
Generation of Vipers to destroy us! No, neither is Christ to be found in the
secret Chamber, the God of truth himself has said so; surely then not amidst
the private Junctoet and Caballs of the Rebellious and Disobedient; though he
was crucified betwixt two, yet, the benefits of his death are not to be
dispensed in a Den of Theives: Oh Then! so long as Solomon's Porch is open, be
not deceived; it is not Truth, but error and sedition betakes it self unto
corners:

The Apostles were also mindful of what their Master did, and what he taught;
after the Resurrection they remembered his Solemn entrance into the Temple, and
how it had been written of him, that the zeal of Gods House should devour him,
they therefore from his example rejoice to appear with multitudes in the House
of God, They were altogether with one accord in Solomon's Porch:

And so from our Savior's, we descend to the Practice of the Apostles, and of
the Primitive Christians, how that they also did not usually assemble for the
Worship and service of God in private houses or in solitary places, so long as
any, but the outmost part of the Temple was allowed them to meet in.

True indeed, Act. 2.46. we find the Disciples breaking their bread from House
to House; but then, the Bread which was broken, was broken in no other public
place besides; and, Act. 28.30, St. Paul, when he was at Rome, preached in his
own hired house; but then it was, The Church in that House, whilst he was Paul
the Prisoner of Jesus Christ, begetting Sons unto the Christian Faith in his
bonds: But, notwithstanding this, consult we the whole story of the Apostolical
progress in the first plantation of the Gospel, and it is most apparently
evident that the Apostles and Apostolic Men from the very beginning avoided
all occasions of Conventicling; either some private houses of public spirited
Christians, (and those supposed to be purchased with the money that was laid at
the Apostles feet) were set apart for solemn worship, in which they had their
(...) Chambers for Holy Offices, and those publicly known that so all might
frequent them; or rather, wheresoever they had occasion to converse still they
betook themselves to the place, of public Worship, whether they lived amongst
Jews or Greeks.

Proferantur Tabulae; Let the Books be opened, and may the Separatists of our
age see, and be ashamed. Act. 3.1. Peter and John went up together into the
Temple at the hour of prayer, being the ninth hour: They did stay, as some of
our new Professors, till the public Prayers were done, but they went up to the
Temple the rather at the ninth hour, to the House of Prayer, at no other time
then at the hour of Prayer; and we find St. Paul with his company in another
place countenancing the Solemnities of the Jewish Synagogue with their
presence, Act. 13.15. After the reading the Law and the Prophets (which was
part of the Jewish service, Moses was read in the Synogogue every Sabbath day,
and that from of old time, Act. 15.21.) in due time and place according as the
Ruler of the Synagogue did appoint, he that had a Word of Exhortation to the
people, was commanded to say on. But, we return again to St. Peter, and those
that were with him, Act. 3.11. Where we find them instructing and teaching the
people in Solomon's Porch, the same Place where in the Text we find the
Apostles gathered together with the whole Company of Believers;

[They were all with one accord in Solomon's Porch] " This is said, to show
that none among them was Schismatical, to forsake their public Assemblies, or
in neglect thereof to hold private Conventicles: This Paraphrase is none of
mine, it is the Annotations of the later Assembly that sat at Westminster upon
my Text, some of whom are at this day alive, and promote an open Schism in
their Mother Church by leading aside the simple and the ignorant into houses,
notwithstanding this their own beloved Annotation to the contrary, little
thinking that ever it would be brought forth in judgment against them; stat
contra, dicitque tua pagina, we have it here under their own hands to show,
that whilst they ruled, a Conventicle was schismatical; their Annotation upon
Act. 5.12. in plain English running thus, " They were all with one accord] This
he says to show that none among them was schismatical, to forsake their
public assemblies, or in neglect thereof to hold private Conventicles:

Yea, and to the same purpose their infallible Doctor, Mr. Calvin upon this
very Text, whose words are these, [ "in Porticu Solomonis.] Significat certis
horis convenire solitos, non modo precum and doctrinae causa, sed ut alios
lucrifacerent Domino; Domi enim quisque suae agebatsed illic habebant suos
conventus, aut certe null, lum Ecclesiiae corpus aliter stare potest; nam si
quisque sibi privatim Doctor esse velit, ac Seorsim precari, nulli autem sint
publici coetus, quamlibet praeclare instituta fuerit Ecclesia, collabi and mox
pessum ire necesse est: They were in Solomon 's Porch, to denote that they were
wont to meet at certain hours to pray, and preach, and to get Disciples to the
Lord; every one kept quietly to his own business at home, but in such places as
these were their public meetings, or else the Church could never have
continued long in one Body; for should every one undertake to be a Teacher to
himself, and pray separate from the whole community, however gloriously at
first a Church may be instituted, it is impossible, but by such practices as
these it should come to naught: -- Nay, further yet, says the same Mr. Calvin
(from whom I conceive, our Assembly Annotators, borrowed the forecited
Paraphrase,) " Dicit fuisse Vnanimes; ut sciamus sponte omnes coaluisse in eum
ordinen, neminem fuisse refractarium, qui publico coetu neglecto, intra
privatos parietes se tenerent; in quo non modestiae tantum specimen exhibebant,
sed etiam constantiae; non enim hoc periculo carebant, cum locus esset tam
celebris, quo majori laud dignus fuit omnium consensus ad discrimen subeundum:
that is, they were with one accord, to show that they did all of them willingly
embrace that order, that none amongst them was refractory by neglecting the
public Assembly, to betake themselves to private houses; neither was this
their so doing, an argument only of their modesty and meekness, but also of
their courage and constancy; their so meeting together being the more
commendable, in that hence they were exposed to the greater danger. Thus we see
at once, not only the Practice of the Apostles and the Primitive Christians as
to public Worship in public places, but also the judgment of such, who (as we
have been told) were our first and our best Reformers; I doubt not, but Mr.
Calvin has been often quoted to a worse purpose; I could wish that he were
seriously considered in this: -- This only to vindicate the Discourse, that
what I do thus insist upon is within the Compass of my Text; fuerunt simul in
domo sancta, in porticu Solomonis; verse. 1. Aethique They were all together in
an Holy house, in Solomon 's Porch.

I proceed in what I propounded, the practice of the Apostles at the first
plantation of the Gospel, and that from the command of the spirit of God
himself; to clear out which, I go no farther then the Chapter that is before
us; The Apostles were shut up in prison for the greatness of their confidence
in preaching the faith of Christ, ver. 19.20. But the Angel of the Lord by
night opened the prison doors, and brought them forth, and said, Go, stand and
speak in the Temple to the people all the words of this life; and when they
heard that, they entered into the Temple, early in the morning and taught; This
was the Message brought unto the Rulers and Chief Priests, while they were
doubting with themselves, witherto this would grow; v. 25. Behold the men, whom
ye put in prison are standing in the Temple, and teaching the people; nay this
was their daily practice, ver. 24. If in every house, that is, wheresoever they
had occasion to converse, so likewise daily in the Temple they ceased not to
preach and to teach Jesus Christ.

Thus St. Paul; that great Apostle, who labored in the word and Doctrine more
then all the rest, being converted to the Faith, Act. 9.20. Straightway he
preached Christ in the Synagogues that he was the Son of God; He being the
Doctor of the Gentiles, and the Jews being gone out of the Synagogue, Act.
13.42. the Gentiles besought that this word might be spoke the next Sabbath Day
to them; accordingly they met at the Synagogue, even almost the whole City to
hear the word of God. The same Apostle at another time came to Thessalonica
where was a Synagogue of the Jews, Act. 17.1, 2. and (says the Text) as his
manner was, he went in unto them, and three sabbath days reasoned with them out
of the Scriptures; from Thessalonica we follow him to Corinth, Act. 18.2. where
he reasoned with and persuaded both Jews and Greeks, but still it was, in the
Synagogue on the Sabbath day; from Corinth we go along with him to Ephesus,
ver, 19. he entered into the Synagogue and reasoned with the Jews; and v. 28.
he mightily convinced the Jews, and that Publicly showing out of the
Scriptures that Jesus was the Christ; and in the same chapter, v. 21. he is
very sollicitous, in that he must by all means keep a feast that comes in
Jerusalem; and we find him in another place, Act. 24.11. going up to Jerusalem
for to worship; hastening at another time Act. 20.16. if it were possible for
him to be at Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost.

Nay, not only the Jewish Temple and Synagogues were frequented by the
Apostles upon all occasions, ne Judaicum Templum horruerunt, they did not
abstain from the Jewish rituals and service, though by the bringing in of a
better hope those things were already abolished; but amonst the Greeks also
they did still appear in the places of Public worship; Act. 16.13. St. Paul,
being warned in a Vision to come over, and help those of Macedonia, coming to
Philippi, which was a chief City of Macedonia and a Colony, he with the rest of
his company, went forth on the sabbath day out of the city by a river side
where prayer was wont to be made.

So far was this Apostle from neglecting the Public Assemblies, wheresoever he
came that it was once part of a mistaken accusation against him from his own
Country men, that he came to them so often, that he minded not what company he
brought with him thither, he had brought Greeks along with him into the Temple;
But, the respect which he had for the Temple, and for such Houses of solemn
Devotion was as public, as was his frequenting them; for, this was that
Apostle who was so exceedingly careful and sollicitous lest places of Religious
worship should be profaned; it was no small trouble to him when he heard that
at Corinth the (...) the Feasts of Love at the Holy Communion were made
occasions ministering unto riot and debauchery; 1 Cor. 11.18. when ye come
together in the Church; what does he mean there by the word Church? hear him
exclaim himself, v. 20. when ye come together in one place; the very place it
self may be, and was anciently in the Apostle's time styled the Church: well,
this was their meeting; the abuse crept in amongst them was this, ver. 21. This
is not to eat the Lords supper, when in eating every one takes before other
his own supper; and one is hungry, and another is drunken; upon all which the
Apostles argumentation with them runs thus, v. 22. What, have ye not houses to
eat and drink in? or, despise ye the Church of God? what shall I say to you?
shall I praise you in this? I praise you not! from all which we may conclude,
that houses are to eat and drink in; the Church of God, spoken in antethesi in
opposition to those houses, is by no means to be despised; and therefore, v.
34. If any man hunger let him eat at home, that ye come not together unto
condemnation.

'Twas this very same Apostle, who throughout the whole 14th Chapter of the
first Epistle to the Corinthians has given his directions for the due
management of external worship and scrvice; the sum of all which is there v.
40. Let all things be done decently, (...) So as becomes grandcur, and
solemnity; (...) and in order, it is a Military phrase, taken from the posture
the soldier is placed in, not to stir his foot, but to keep his ground,
according to the Orders which were given him from his superior Officers; in
order, that is no otherwise, then as it shall be appointed, by those whose
business it is, and have a full commission to command in things of this nature,
whose injunctions must be according to the forementioned institutions; that
there be in the first place Devotion, and Reverence toward God; v. 25. falling
down on the face and worshipping of God; and next, that there be respect
toward men, v. 32. the Spirits of the Prophets are to be subject to the
Prophets; yea, and that in places appointed and set apart for Religious
worship, v. 33. for God is not the Author of confusion, but of peace, as in all
Churches of the Saints; in which words, Saints are again distinguished from
Churches, and therefore Churches must needs be understood of the place, rather
then of the Masters of Assembly: all Churches of the Saints; whereupon our
Apostle gives a particular injunction as to Women, how they are to behave
themselves in such places, v. 34, 35. Let your women keep silence in the
Churches; if they will learn any thing, let them ask their husbands at home,
for it is a shame for a woman to speak in the Church; where yet once more, the
House at home, is put in opposition to the Church abroad.

And since we are come thus far in our Scripture allegations in the Defense of
Public assemblies, in separated places, and that even from the Apostles
practice; I close up this part of the Discourse upon such Apostolical
institutions, as I did that part of it insisted upon from our Saviors
practice; Christ himself has forewarned us, that he is not to be found in the
Wilderness or in the secret Chamber; and his Apostles also after him, have
foretold these days of schism and sedition which we have lived to see.

2 Timothy 3.1, 6. This know; yea though you will not know it, but do not ye
clearly see it? that in the last days perilous times shall come; For, Men shall
be lovers of their own selves, and of their own ways, disobedient to Parents
both natural, sacred, and civil; unthank full, no courtesies nor kindnesses
will engage them, and therefore unholy also; truce breakers, even their own
Covenants are no obligations upon them; false accusers, despisers of those that
are good, Traitors, heady, high minded, who think themselves wiser then either
Rulers or Teachers; of this sort are they that creep into houses, and lead
captive silly Women (but they are not Women, which be Devout and Honorable,)
Women laden with sins, and lead away with diverse lusts.

Epistle of St Jude; ver. 19. Those that separate themselves, let them pretend
never so much to holiness and piety, they are sensual, and they have not the
Spirit; such are they, who, ver. 3. (while the True Apostles do contend
earnestly for the Common salvation, and the Faith of it, once delivered to the
Saints) creep in unawares, turning the grace of God into lasciviousness; v. 8.
These are filthy Dreamers, or in the language of our time, Mad Diviners,
Ecstatical Enthusiasts, who despise Dominions and speak evil of Dignities; ver.
10. They speak evil of those things which they know not; -- inimicum praeter
ignorantem; -- Religion as well as Learning has no enemy but the Ignorant,
whilst wisdom and piety are justified by their Children; but otherwise, what
these gainsayers do know naturally we must own them, since they have the faces
of men, to be reasonable creatures, and yet, as brute beasts in those things
which they seem to know, they corrupt themselves; that is, they do as much
confound themselves, as they do amuse others with their brainsick
imaginations; Woe, woe unto them (says our Apostle) for they have gone in the way
of Cain; it is but of late sad remembrance, setting every man's sword against
his Brother, only because their sacrifices of sin were not accepted; they have
run greedily after the error of Balaam for a reward, whilst that gain was their
greatest Godliness; Oh! that they had perished in the very act of gainsaying
like Corah and his Company, when they exalted themselves above the Congregation
of the Lord: These are spots in your feasts, yea though they be Feasts of
charity, their Love feasts in the Family of Love, a private secret Conventicle,
feeding themselves without fear: Clouds they are without water, like their
Master, Prince of the air; and yet fire, if any, is the element predominant;
and these like Salamanders can live only in the fire; they are carried about
of winds, tossed too and fro with every blast of false and erroneous Doctrine;
Trees they are whose fruit withers; nay they have no fruit that is good;
twice dead; why do they any longer cumber the ground? they are raging waves of
the sea, foaming out their own shame, and that is nothing but mire and dirt, so
that because of the Tempest which they have raised there are no Halcyon days,
the Kings Fishers cannot build their nests in these troubled waters; They are
stars too, but not in the right hand of Jesus, wandering stars, oh, when shall
they be falling stars! usque quo Domine! how long, O Lord, just, holy and true!
when, shall it once be! unto whom is reserved the blackness of darkness, a
darkness like that of Egypt, which is to be felt, the blackness of darkness for
ever; v. 16. These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts,
running about City, Town and Country, and they grudge if they be not
satisfied; their mouths speak great swelling words of vanity, having men's
persons in admiration, because of some particular advantage; or as another
Apopostle has it. 2 Timothy 4.3. After their own lusts they heap up Teachers to
themselves having itching ears; and to sum up all with that which gave me
occasion to paraphrase so much upon this Epistle, These are they who separate
themselves, they are not moved, nor acted by the Holy ^host, the Devil has too
much power over them, if St. Jude's Epistle be Scripture, and I guess by this
time, since they find themselves so exactly described in it, they could wish it
out of our Bibles, since this is the best character that he can afford them,
that they are sensual, and they have not the Spirit.

These are they, and this is the manner of them who neglect the assembling of
themselves together, imitating the Primitive and the Apostolical times in
nothing but in the divisions and dissentions of false Brethren; who do not in
the least consider that they are baptized into a Christian Faith in which Faith
we have these two Articles, in which we believe a Holy, Catholic and
Apostolic Church; and the Communion of Saints; the Catholic Church is but
One; and the Communion of it, throughout the Christian World is Visible: and
the next Article to these is the Remission of sins, which we obtain and have a
right to by our being Baptized, and so made Members of the Body of Christ; and
therefore another Creed has it by way of explanation thus, that we are to
believe One Baptism for the Remission of sins; as if, out of the Visible
Communion of the Catholic Church, into which we are admitted by Baptism,
there is to be no Remission; and for this I urge our Saviors words, S. Mat.
18.17. Dic Ecclesiae, Tell it to the Church: but if he neglect to hear the
Church, let him be unto thee as a Heathen man, and a Publican; such a one, whom
the People of the Jews counted to be dead in their sins and trespasses: -- Not
without good reason therefore has our Church, in her most excellent
constitutions, made this one of her wholesome laws; Cannon 11th. "That whosoever
shall affirm, that there are within this Realm other Meetings, Assemblies, or
Congregations of the Kings born subjects, then such as by the Laws of this Land
are held and allowed, which may rightly challenge to themselves the name of a
true, and of a lawful Church, let him be excommunicated, and not restored but
by the Archbishop, after his repentance, and revocation of such his wicked
errors.

Surely there is something extraordinary in the matter, or else I should not be
thus earnest! I would ask the Separatists of our age, this one serious and
sober question, Have ye Souls to be saved, or no? little do they think into
what danger they put their own immortal souls by a schism and a separation;
they do as much as in them lies, forego the ordinary means appointed by God for
their salvation: Now God, in his wonderful Providence has made the
Administration of his Gospel to be glorious in the midst of us, the light to
shine bright in our Candlestick, Divine Services to be dispensed and Holy
Offices to be performed even in the outward Beauty of Holiness; Now for a
froward and a peevish generation to place the service of God in one of the most
damning sins that can be committed (for ought I know by that little Divinity I
have been acquainted with, if it be wilfully persisted in, and they add
Obstinacy to their Separation, it may in time come up to be the unpardonable
sin, the sin against the Holy Ghost) Schism and Division from the Churches
community; Oh! what shall we say unto these men? Oh more foolish then were
those Galatians! Who has bewitched them, that they should not obey the Truth?
Formerly, yea before our Saviors time, higher then yet hitherto I have brought
my proof, it was David's choice to be a door keeper in the House of God, rather
then to convene in the Tents of wickedness; and when Christ first appeared in
the flesh, it was the Character of a Devout and a Religious person St. Luc.
15.37. of Anna the Prophetess, a Widow of 84 years age, that she departed not
from the Temple, but served God with fasting and prayers night and day; and,
does old Simeon wait for the Consolation of Israel, to see Christ in the flesh?
by the Spirit he is led into the Temple, there to behold the salvation of his
God, and so to depart in peace; sed nobis non licet esse tam religiosis, now it
seems all Godliness consists in the most ungodly of separations, as if this
untoward Age of ours would invert the proverb, the farther from the Church, the
nearer in communion with God!

Well! whether they will hear; or whether they will forbear; and yet he that
has ears let him hear, says the Spirit unto the Churches: you see, whosoever
ye be that do Divide our Savior's Practice and his Precept, the Apostolical
Progress and their Institution are against you; from the beginning, even when
they wanted an outward Administration, a fixed and a settled Dispensation, then
it was not thus; -- Jesus Christ our Lord was obedient in all things, even in
their Apocryphal celebrations to the constitutions of that Church under which
he lived; The Apostles were men of open hearts, and of open lives, neither were
they ashamed of the Testimony of the Lord Jesus; they rejoiced upon all
occasions to go up, yea, though it were but to a Porch of the House of God;
though the Jewish Dispensation was still there administered, yet Type, and
Antitype together appearing, both were for that time glorious; we find them all
together in one place, and all of them there together with one heart; Unity and
Uniformity was that which gave credit to Christianity from the first Plantation
of it; They were all with one accord in Solomon's Porch which is the

Third thing I observed unto you in this holy Convention; and that is, their
Behavior at their meeting (...) with one accord.
When the Queen of Sheba came from far to behold the wisdom of Solomon, 1 Reg.
10.5. the Houses that he built to God, and for himself; the meat of his Table,
and the sitting of his servants; the attendance of his Ministers, and their
apparel, and his Cup-bearers; and after all, and above all the rest, the
Ascent by which he went up unto the House of the Lord (which as most
interpreters agree, was therefore called Solomon's Porch, after the captivity
rebuilt and restored to its former splendour and magnificence, as Josephus in
the forecited places gives us the account at large;) I say when she saw all
this, there was no more spirit in her! -- To consider with our selves, how that
even in the Apostles times, Solomon's Porch was a continued Ascent up unto the
House of God; the Procession though it was solemn and glorious; atrium populi,
and grandis Basi lica Vatabl. the Grandeur of it was Princely, and thither came
the people to serve the Lord; and upon the whole that the Apostles were there
with the new Convert Disciples to the Christian Faith, even multitudes of
Believers, both men and women; though the Tongues which sat upon the Apostles
were cloven, yet their hearts were not divided; they loved, and they lived, and
they witnessed unto Jesus, and they served their God together, and all as
Brethren; Methinks now our Spirits should be raised! nay our hearts may fail
within us, in admiration of them, and of their primitive uniforme celebrations;
and, in a sad reflection upon our selves to consider, that with our Uniformity,
charity has forsaken us; how sadly are we mangled and divided one amongst, and
one against another!

(...) With one accord; The word in Scripture seems to intimate not only an
inward sameness of affection, a mutual agreement of mind and disposition; but
also an outward Uniform Behavior, Act. 4.32. The multitudes of those who
believed were of one heart, and one soul, that was their internal affection;
ver. 24. With one accord they lifted up their voice to God, that was their
external communion. Act. 11.46. With one accord in the Temple, and in breaking
of Bread, the result of which concord in Religious performances, was peace and
amity in their civil conversations, they did eat their meat with gladness and
in singleness of hearts. So that we may hence gather, that the (...) in the
Text, their being together with one accord, is sufficiently expressive both of
the inward frame of their minds one to another, and the outward management of
their solemn Assemblies one amongst another; even what the Apostle gives in
advice, Rom 15.6. (...) that we should with one Mind, and with one Mouth
glorify God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

" Divine service being public (says a judicious writer of our own Church)
has this advantage in it, Mr. Thorndike. Rel. Assem. pa. 2, 3.
in as much as the honor which it pleases God to accept at our hands becomes
his greatness more, when, in a judgment of charity we have reason to believe
that such a worship proceeds from more agreement of mind: as the strength of
men's Bodies, joined to one purpose, removes that which one by one they could
not stir; so United Devotions, (the more public, the more numerous, the more
numerous the more United) prevail with God to such an effect, as severally they
cannot bring to pass. This was Gods promise of old, that it should be his
blessing upon his Church, even in Gospel times, Zeph. 3.9. I will turn to the
people of a pure language, or of a pure lip, that they may call upon the name
of the Lord with one consent.

It Is therefore requisite upon the whole, that as a demonstration, that we are
all of one mind, and of one soul, even in outward service our Behavior should
be one and the same, Reverent and Unity be known, unless it be by provoking one
another to love in our Uniformity: you have seen already, that the Apostolical
way of serving God, was falling down upon the face, and worshipping him, 1 Cor.
14.25. in those days it was good and wholesome counsel, Romans 12.1. I beseech you
Brethren by the mercies of God, that you present your Bodies a living
sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God; and this too, however some may now
count it superstition, a will worship and a voluntary humility, yet in the
Apostles time it was (...) a rational, a reasonable service. To see some at the
Church Prayers sitting, some lolling and leaning, here and there it may be some
vouchsafing to stand up; few or none upon their knees, (that posture, if any
one should think the fittest for Supplicants and Petitioners to the great God
of Heaven and Earth; Go behave thy self otherwise before thy Prince, and see
whether he will accept thee;) should the ignorant or unlearned, the stranger
that would be a Proselyte to our Religion, come in amongst us, would not he say
that we are all mad? so far from being together with one accord, that the
variety of our Behaviors is argument too notorious, that our minds are not
intent upon the same business; this is not the Beauty, it is the very Deformity
of Holiness.

Once more: (...) they were together, and because so they were with one accord.
-- An outward Visible Conformity is in the very nature of the thing it self
causal of internal Unity; Love and Charity is there increased, where external
Communion is promoted; wheresoever there is Order there is Peace; whereas
Mutinies and Discontents are both the Child and Parent of Confusion.

Well, therefore, has the Psalmist compared the comeliness and pleasantness of
Brotherly Love to the outward administrations and solemnities of the sanctuary;
Psalm. 133.1, 2. Behold how good, and how decent a thing it is for Brethren to
dwell together in Unity. It is like the precious ointment upon the head which
ran down upon the beard, even Aaron 's beard, that went down to the skirts of
his clothing; it is like the dew of Hermon, even as the dew that descended upon
the Mountains of Sion, where the Lord himself commanded the Blessing, even life
for evermore: -- Thus Love and Amity, Union and Communion amongst Brethren
professing the worship and service of One and the same God, looking for, and
hastening to One and the same Hope, is not only compared unto, but also a due
consequence of the sweet Odors upon Aarons head, having their delightful
refreshing influence upon the whole Assembly; this is the Blessing of God out
of Sion, to those that are the sons of Sion, Love and Peace, Joy and Good Will
for ever more. Hence not without good reason was Jerusalem styled, as the name
imports, a City of Peace, because the Temple of the God of Peace was there;
that Temple which was built by Solomon who was a Prince of Peace, after that
God had given him Rest from all his Enemies round about, neither was the noise
of Axe or Hammer heard in all the Holy Mountain while it was Building; This the
Temple, at Jerusalem, and therefore the City it self is Built and Compact
together, even a City at Unity in it self; for, thither the Tribes go up, the
Tribes of the Lord, to the Testimony of Israel, to give thanks to the Name of
the Lord.

Oh! that we would Recall to our Minds our former happiness under a well
ordered and a settled Uniformity; how did the people of this Land rejoice to go
up together to the House of God as Friends? how comely were our Solemnities,
when whole Families met together at Gods Table? the servant was thus far as
free as his Master, not as a Servant, but as a Brother; and yet when he came
home he did his service without grudging, not as unto man, but as to the Lord,
in singleness of heart, as knowing that he had a Master in Heaven; How was the
staff of Beauty in those days, no other then the staff of Bands, and whilst we
did in a general unanimous consent, serve our God with one heart, and with one
voice, the result of Glory to God in the Highest, was Peace on Earth, and
Goodwill amongst men? But woe! and alas for us! ever since we began to quarrel
at our Religion, to abhor the sacrifices of our God, how has every Man's Hand
been against his Brother! Father against Son, and the Son against his Father!
Maxima and debetur servis reverentia; a Man's Table has been made his Snare,
whilst the servants that attended upon him have been the Informers against him,
his worst Enemies those of his own House! nay, the Marriage Bed it self, as
Honorable as it is, has not been free from this shame, whilst there have been a
Generation of men that would not allow St. Paul's Doctrine to be Gospel, That
the Believing Wife sanctifies the unbelieving husband, and the Believing
Husband, sanctifies the unbelieving Wife; but our of a supercilious design to
pry into the secrets of Families, as if they only knew who were the chosen of
God according to the election of Grace, even at the Marriage-supper it self
they have separated and divided betwixt Man and Wife, put those asunder whom
God, Nature, and Christianity had joined together, this being the Religion of
our later Reformation, what Christ foretold should be a final destruction upon
the people of the Jews, Two in abed, the one taken, and the other left.

Oh! That at length we might recover our first works! and how shall we do that?
hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches, Repent and do your first works:
Betake we our selves now at last, to that from whence we are fallen, to our old
honest Principles of Piety and Devotion toward God, of Reverence and Obedience
toward our Superiors, of Love and Charity one toward another. Oh! that we
would but seriously think upon it; nay, for the childrens sake that yet are
unborn, that we would consider it! our Fathers before us have left us a
glorious Religion; and what shall we do for the Generations that are to come,
shall we leave nothing to Posterity but Schism and separation, disorder and
confusion; But in the words of Holy Church we direct our Prayers unto our God,
since there is no help in man, nor in the son of man, "O God we have heard with
our ears, and our Fathers have told us the noble works that thou did in their
days, and in the old time before them; O Lord, Arise, help us and deliver us
for thy name sake, and thy honor!

It Is not to be expected that ever God should bless that Nation or people where
the only fewds are about his service; and till our Uniformity in the strictness
of it be more countenanced than it has been, restored to its wonted exactness
and splendour, we must never expect to see an end of those fewds; Divisions are
always running upon the Multiplication (says our Royal Martyr!) and there is
no settlement, but in the point of Union.

Toleration then; you may give it a new name, and by an Universal Character
Style it Comprehension, but Babel in the original, both in name and story is
the most proper word to signify Confusion; this cannot be the way to peace,
because it is not like to be a service to the God of Peace, of altogether with
one accord: The Music of the Sanctuary is not made up of Discord, Unisons here
is the only harmony, the sweetest Melody both to Heaven and Earth; it is a
contradiction in the very terms of it, and it is impossible that both parts of
it should be true, that if there be Divisions, and those Tolerated, therefore
there would be no thoughts, no searchings of heart. -- Let us take our measures
by this one instance, Our Fathers worshipped in this Mountain, said the
Samaritan to the Jew; and the Jew said, that at Jerusalem men ought to worship;
and both these were satisfied, in that there was a Toleration of each Service*
and yet the Jew counted the Samaritan a Devil, and the Samaritan would not
entertain a Jew, no not a stranger, for no other reason, but because his face
might look as if he were going up to Jerusalem; the distance was so great, and
that because of their way of Worship, though both were Tolerated, yet they had
no dealings one with another, no not to eat and drink, hardly to speak or
discourse. Thus, Toleration is causal of that, which Excommunication it self
never pretended to in a well constituted Church, tollit officia domestica, it
will not suffer a man to engage himself in good offices of love and charity to
those of another persuasion, no though there be a Family-relation, all
Family-obligations are cancelled, where, falsely so called, a Family of Love is
set up; this is that which is destructive, etc. Destructive of all civil
society and commerce, nay, of Trade it self; the popular reason, why some would
have it promoted; for to be sure each party will enrich it self, make a
Monopoly of gain only to its own consistory; whilst fractions are promoted,
factions will increase; the Combination is the stronger, only to give the
greater blow with the fist of wickedness, and to be sure the weakest shall be
crushed against the Wall.

In the name of God therefore, and in the love of one another, let us Assemble
our selves together in the places of Public Worship with one accord: laying
aside all passion, evil speaking and slandering, let our outward behavior, an
uniform Communion in the service of God, be expressive of that inward affection
which we bear to one another, both as we are men, and as we are Christians: and
if there be a froward and peevish generation amongst us, that will contend both
against the Laws of God and of the King, all that we can reply is this, That we
have no such custom, no nor the Church of God. A holy Familiarity, that is, a
Conformity in Religion, is not in the least a cause of contempt, external
communion of all together with one accord, is not the way to Levelling; in the
Sanctuary there is Order, some go before, and some follow after, and in the
midst of all God is glorified: those lines which are drawn from the point of
Union, as their Center, (to improve the similitude which I but now borrowed
from a Royal Pen,) to the several parts of the Circumference round about, keep
their equal, and their due distance; they are called Parallels, the word speaks
a mutual congruity, not a promiscuous contiguity, they have a kind similitude
one unto, and a loving aspect one upon another, yet each line keeps its fixed
station, without any the least interfearing; Brotherly love does there
continue, where every man abides in that Calling in which he is called: This is
the happy result of (...) the Concord in the text, especially in the service of
One God, who has declared his Unity to be his Essence, there is but One Lord;
and as but One Lord, so in the confession of him, there is but One Faith; and,
for an admission into that Faith there is but One Baptism; and but One Church,
in which is to be the Outward, Visible, and Uniform Administration of all; the
result of which Unity and Uniformity is this, Phil. 2.2, 3. The joy of all is
full, when all are like minded and of one accord; hereupon nothing is done
through strife or vain glory, but in lowliness of mind each one does esteem of
others better than himself: which brings me to the next part of the Text: The
Convention we see is every way Holy; First, the Persons holy, the Apostles and
the convert Disciples. Secondly, the Place that was Holy; (...). Oecumenie in
loc. They left their own Houses, and frequented the Temple; we find them most
an end assembled, either at the Gate called Beautiful, the more Beautiful,
because they were there, whose feet were Beautiful, bringing the glad tidings
of Peace; or else, as in the Text, in Solomon's Porch. Thirdly, their Behavior
there, that was Holy, Solemn, and Devout, reverent even to outward appearance,
they were with one accord; and where there was so much love, so great a
concord, it could not be but there must be some respect, some honor too, which
is the Subject of our next Discourse.

The Second SERMON The Convention as it was Holy, so it was Regular: Brotherly
Love continued, and yet a promiscuous parity was avoided; there was a due
Distance kept in this Solemn Assembly; (...) of the rest; whither they were
friends, or whither they were enemies; whether they were within, or without the
pale of the Church; the Apostles having took their seats, no man durst to join
himself to them.
Of the rest durst no man join himself to them. In which words, Three things
are to be considered,

1. BY whom this distance was kept? (...) of the Rest. 2ly. What was the
present frame and temper of their minds? (...) No man durst. 3ly. What was the
Act which they did not dare to engage themselves upon; (...), To join
themselves unto them. I confess that this Division at the first may seem
somewhat nice, but upon a second search, we shall find it very useful for the
illustration of the matter in hand.


1. By whom this distance was kept? (...) Of the Rest. And these might be of
three sorts.
First, none of the convert Disciples; (...) Of the rest, as distinguished from
the Apostles; ver. 11. Great fear came upon all the Church.

Secondly, None of those that were with the mixed multitude, though they
themselves might be distinguished both from the Apostles and the People; ver.
11. Even as many as hear those things; ver. 12. By the hands of the Apostles
were signs and wonders wrought amongst the people, but (...) of the rest,
though amongst, yet to be distinguished from both, durst no man join himself
unto them.

Thirdly, No not the adversary himself; ver. 25. He doubts whitherto this might
grow; ver. 26. The Officers bring them without violence, fearing the People,
lest they should have been stoned; and the wisest man in the Council gives his
advice to discharge them. ver. 25. Gamaeliel was in this a Master of reason, as
well as a Doctor of the Law; this is some further addition to his reputation,
in that he wished them to beware, and to take heed what they did with those
men, lest they be found to fight against God, ver. 38.

Thus the (...) those that are the rest here, may be reckoned up as they are
distinguished from the Apostles in the fore going verse, from the People in the
latter end of this verse, and from the Adversary throughout the whole context;
the Adjective Masculine put absolute, in its due regiment without a
Substantive, (...) or some such word to be understood, (...) seems to warrant
me this or the like Division; Of the rest, No one, (or as we Translate it, No
Man) durst join hmself to them.

First, Not the new convert Disciples; though if any, surely they might take
the confidence; but ver. 11. Great fear came upon the whole Church. We read in
the foregoing Chapter, ver. 32. " That the multitude of those that believed
were of one heart, and of one soul, neither said any of them that ought of the
goods which he possessed was his own, but they had all things common; as many
as had possessions of lands sold them, and laid down the price of what was sold
at the Apostles feet. And in the beginning of this Chapter, we find some
retaining part of the accursed thing, of that which was devoted and dedicated
unto God. ver. 4. whilst it was whole it was in the power of him that possessed
it; and, after it was sa^d, still it was entirely in his power; but, being once
Consecrated, and separated from common use, the property and propriety is then
altered, God does vindicate the right of Possession to himself; the sin was
therefore the greater, the more immediate against him, in that there were some,
who gave indeed, as others did, for companies sake a certain curtailed portion
to God and to his Church, but not with a willing mind, not as cheerful givers,
keeping back part of the price, a wedg of Gold it may be, to buy a Babylonish
garment, and presenting the remainder to the Apostles as the result of the
whole sale; this is the instance of Sacrilege, even in the New Testament Satan
thus hiling the hearts of wicked persons, that they should lie against the holy
Ghost, not against Men, but against God. That therefore, the Church be not
troubled for this destructive sin of Sacrilege, these two must fall a
Sacrifice; as Joshua of old to Achan and his House; Thou have troubled Israel,
and God shall trouble thee this day: So the Apostles here to Ananias and
Sapphira for the same sin; since you have done wickedly, this your oblation is
abhorred, both sin and death lie at the door, Behold the feet of those who are
to carry you forth, are without, ready for to bury you: These two are to be cut
off from the land of the living; like Corah and his Company, they went almost
quick into hell.

Sacrilege, whither it be under a legal, or under an evangelical Dispensation,
is an invasion of that which God has claimed to himself for his own
inheritance; and it is a Sin which shall in no wise go unpunished; it brings
ruin and desolation wheresoever it is admitted; Write such a one childless;
his name no more to be remembered, unless for a terror unto others: Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram, their wives, their sons, and their little ones, and all
that appertained unto them, swallowed up alive in the pit, Numb. 16 33. Father,
Son and Daughter, yea the whole House of Achan; Oxen, and Asses, and Sheep,
first stoned with stones, and then burnt with fire; even in the Valley of
Achor, from this fore judgment, thus severely executed upon the sin of
Sacrilege, this was the only door of Hope Josh. 7.18. Husband and Wife, that
so there might not be a Generation of Vipers to inherit their parents curse,
are both at once cut off, in the instance before us, root and branch in one
day; ver. 10. the young men came in, and found her dead, and carrying her forth
buried her by her husband.

Alas! who can live when God does thus? well might the New Convert Disciples be
terrified and affrighted; lest that they also should not have been sincere in
their Oblations; lest that God should not accept the labor of their love, by
reason of some secret leaven of Hypocrisy that might lurk within them; though
they had sold their goods, yet they might want charity, and then they should be
nothing worth, wherein were they to be accounted of? To see how severe an
Avenger that God was, with whom they had to do, was cause enough of terror even
to the Church it self; every one of them smiting upon their breasts, not daring
to look up to Heaven, standing afar off, each one communing with his own heart,
and saying, Lord be merciful unto me, yea unto me a sinner! we are all of us
dead, we are all of us sinful men, O Lord!

Purior ex hoc tempore erat Ecclesiae coetus in quem multi dolose irrepserant;
Calv. From this time, every man prepared himself for the public Assemblies, as
near as he could according to the preparations of the Sanctuary; they set their
whole hearts to seek the Lord God of their Fathers with Reverence and with
fear; the terrors of the Lord in his Judgments did persuade them; and do they
go up unto the Temple to Solomon's Porch to pray and to hear? yet with the
Penitent, Devout Publican, they must stand afar off; and hence it was that they
did return each man to his own house justified.

Thus, when God is pleased to arise in the vindication of his service, by his
judgments upon the wicked and profane; to declare that he will be sanctified
in all those that draw nigh unto him, then should they who presume to tread his
Courts look unto their feet when they come unto the House of God lest they
offer the sacrifice of fools. Would David bring up the Ark of God to his own
City, and to his own House? and in the midway, is Vzzah smitten? Perez-Vzzah!
this Breach upon Vzzah, makes David to smite upon his thigh, lest that his way
also should be found perverse before the Lord, and God might find out some
secret iniquity in him, and so withhold good things from him; 1 Chronicles. 13.22.
David was afraid of the Lord that day, saying, How shall I bring the Ark of God
home unto me? Surely there is some iniquity or other that I do regard in my
heart, or it may be the sons of violence are too near about me, and therefore
at this time God will not not be entreated of, he will by no means accept me:
upon this occasion, it is thought, that he did pen the hundred and first Psalm,
in which he dedicates himself and his House to the service of his God.

Psalm. 101. Sing I must, yea and so I will, both of Mercy and Judgment; unto
thee, O Lord, will I sing: of judgment, because thy ways are terrible; of
Mercy, because all thy paths are Peace: first, for himself he begins, I will
behave my self wisely in a perfect way; Oh! when will thou come unto me? why
should the Ark of God now be carried aside from me? I will walk in my House
with a perfect heart. Neither was this proposition like Joshua's of old, Josh.
24.15. Choose you whom you will serve; but, as for me and my house we will
serve, the Lord: No, like a supreme Magistrate, he resolves not to bear the
sword in vain, he is steadfastly purposed to be the Minister of God for Good;
but an Avenger to execute wrath upon him that works evil; A froward heart
shall depart away from me, I will not know a wicked person, whose privily
slandereth his Neighbor, him will I cut off, him that has an high look and a
proud heart I will not suffer: Mine eyes shall be upon such as are faithful in
the land, that they may dwell with me; he that walks in a perfect way, he
shall serve me; I will early destroy all the wicked of the land: and why all
this through Reformation both within doors, and without? why? because the Ark of
God was not to have its habitation amidst the Tents of ungodliness; as if the
Princely Prophet should have said, All this will I do, that I may prepare a
place for it, That I may cut off all wicked doers from that City, which
henceforth, because of the Show bread there to be dispensed, is to be called
Bethlehem, the House of Bread, the City of the Lord; and that because of the
service of the God of Israel, between the Cherubims, which is there to be
aministred, the daily sacrifice which is never to cease, the Burnt offering for
Israel never to fail; I will early destroy all the wicked of the Land, that I
may cut off all wicked doers from this City of the Lord.

Thus the God whom we serve is a holy and a Jealous God; and therefore as
Joshuah to the people in that forementioned place, Josh. 24 9. Ye cannot serve
the Lord, lest he turn, and do you hurt, and consume you; his jealousy should
provoke us to sincerity, that we be careful in our nearer approaches to him at
the public solemnities of his holiness, there be not an evil heart in us, even
at such a time, and in those addresses to depart from the living, the great and
the dreadful God; in drawing nigh to him with our mouths, while our hearts are
far from him: God is in heaven, and we on earth; and from heaven it is that he
is ready to execute judgment upon the Hypocrite, and false hearted; therefore,
though in the Ministrations of the Sanctuary we are permitted to kiss the Son,
yet it is, lest that he should be angry, for should his wrath be kindled, yea,
but a little, how soon should we perish from the right way? Psalm. 2.11. Serve
the Lord with fear, and though that service be the fullness of our joy, yet we
must rejoice unto him with reverence and with trembling: Here in the context,
Fear came upon the whole Church, upon those very persons who for joy had in the
former Chapter, parted willingly with their substance; yet, because God had
made a Breach amongst them, the effects of his wrath were both sudden and
dreadful; and should they also have been found false in their services, what
could they expect, but that they should likewise perish! The Apostles therefore
being gathered together, every man had good reason to suspect and examine
himself; they could not forbear to assemble with them, to hear what the Lord
God would say unto them; and yet out of a pious reflection upon their own
unworthiness, and the purity of that God with whom they had to do, they dare
not be too hasty in their nearer approaches; Fear came upon the Church; (...),
of the rest, as distinguished from the Apostles, even from amongst the
Disciples, such who believed with joy in the assurance of their Faith, and yet
with trembling, as conscious to themselves of their own unbelief, of those New
Converts, durst no man join himself to them: Nay, the dread which was upon
their Spirits was not a little increased, when they saw the Consternation to be
Universal; fear, not only upon the Church, but upon such as were without, even
upon all those which heard those things; and they may be the

Second sort of Persons, who are said in the Text, to keep this distance: by
the hands of the Apostles were signs and wonders wrought among the people;
(...) and of the rest, as distinguished both from the Apostles and the People;
of those who were amongst, though not of the mixed multitude durst no man join
himself unto them.

And here, (...) opponuntur (...) the rest, are to be understood in a contra
distinction to, and from the multitude: quos vitae ordo, and authoritas in
signiores fecerat; such amongst them as were notable either for their quality
or authority; these were surprised, v. 11. Even as many as saw those things;
but they would not come too near, lest they should lose of their interest, or
of that power and authority with which at present they were invested: They were
sufficiently convinced by the Signs which they saw, and the Wonders which they
could not but acknowledge; from their very outward senses to their consciences,
they could not but lay their hands upon their mouths and say, of a truth mighty
works and terrible do show forth themselves in these Apostles; and yet they
would not venture to join themselves unto them, lest they might run the same
fate with them, ver. 18. Be cast into prison; or, be informed against to the
chief Priests and Pharisees; like those St. John 12.42. chief Rulers, who
believed on our Savior, but did not confess him because of the Pharisees; lest
they should be put out of the Synagogue; for they loved the praise of men, more
then the praise of God: These were acted by a principle of temporal politic
prudence, and not by that Wisdom which is pure as well as peaceable; who see
with their eyes, and yet interest does blind them: hear with their ears, and
yet because of some external inconveniences that may happen, they stop their
ears to these heavenly Charmers, Charm they never so wisely? who understand
with their heart, and yet are not converted, lest they should be healed.

There be some like St. Peter, who neither fly from, nor forsake their Savior;
but they follow afar off to see the end of the matter; and if prosecution wax
hot, their charity grows cold, in the time of temptation they fall away; they
see that bitterness is like to be in the end, and so they force themselves both
to deny and forswear their Master. Some wait only in a corner of Solomon's
Porch, lest they should be seen of men, I mean it of those who are too much in
subjection to their Ringleaders in mischief, and were it not for fear of being
cast out of favor, of losing such a ones good word, or his good will, they
could frequent the places of Assembly with more courage then they do. Alas!
what would you have us do, says the poor deluded Country man? we must wait upon
the Great man of the Town, be it to a Church or to a Barn; it is well, if now
and then we can steal in at a back door, where we may hear, and not be seen,
for should He come to know it, it will never be forgiven us! Nay, sad it is to
consider it, but too really true! there are those in the world who should
teach, as well as they know better things; who call those their Patrons which
exercise authority over, or have any influence upon them, transporting them to
act either lukewarmly in, or indirect opposition against that Religion to which
they have already given up their names so often, both by Obligatory Oaths, and
Promissory subscriptions: they are sufficiently enough convinced that this is,
and ought to be the worship of the God of our Fathers; but, alas! what need
they concern themselves for that which they shall never be able to help? must
they venture upon the bad, and lose the good report of such, who for the
present are kind unto them, and may hereafter (as things may come about) reward
their pert pragmatical zeal with ruin and destruction? like Naaman the Syrian,
they will worship no other God then the God of Israel; but as for bowing in the
House of Rimmon, when their Masters lean upon their shoulders; they shrink up
their shoulders, and as to this they have a Latitude, the Lord pardon them in
this! Well, let them go in peace; they are loath it seems to be put to any
trouble in the service of their God; alas! poor low-spirited wretches, they are
to be pitied, since they have not faith to trust that God whom they worship,
beyond their present enjoyments; who are for living at case in an earthly Sion,
and that they may keep their present station, turn their books upon the Temple.
But let it not be so with us, let it be known to the world, maugre men and
Devils, that we dare be honest: Oh! why should we be as those who turn aside,
only that we may go with such, who will have company that they may be froward
and perverse? whatsoever our dependancies upon greatness may be, we must be
careful, as in humility, so also with resolution, not in the least to let go
our integrity: in our patience we must possess our souls; and yet, we must be
so far watchful over our selves, that our hearts do not reproach us so long as
we live: Consider we that God is not a man, that he should lie, neither is he
as the Son of man, that he should repent; he has said it, and it was the Truth
himself that spoke it, concerning Eli and his sons, when they prevaricated in
his service. 1 Samuel 2.30 He that honors me, him will I honor; and he that
despises me shall be lightly esteemed.

Above all things, in our Religion, which is the only tie, or chain of
Communion betwixt a Man and his Maker, let us not be swayed by so timorous, so
sordid, so Hypocritical a principle, as is that of base, unworthy compliance,
sneakingly to gratify the humors of such who lie in wait either for to
deceive, or to be deceived; and that against the dictates of our own Minds, and
the principles of that visible Community, which in a settled Economy, we have
already professed heartily to embrace; and that, if for no other reason, let it
be for this, lest in time we grow to that height of wickedness, as to persecute
that way of worship to which once we did conform.

God forbid that we should ever live to see it! but so it may come to pass,
that none shall prove more rigid and severe against, then such as have been
timo^ous, lukewarm and unsettled under the strictness of discipline and order.
May we not set our countenances upon some men amongst us, steadfastly to behold
them, till both they and we are ashamed, and while we look upon them fall a
weeping, as the Prophet Elisha did upon Hazael, who was to be King of Syria, 2.
Reg. 12.8. I weep, says the Prophet, because I know of the evil which thou will do unto the children of Israel; their strong holds will thou set on fire,
their young men will thou slay with the Sword, and wilt dash their children,
and rip up their women with child! But, Hazael replied, what? is thy servant a
dog, that he should do this great thing? the Prophet was more then a Prophet in
this instance, the Lord had showed all this unto him: And though we do not
pretend now adays to New Revelations (it is well if we give credit to what has
been revealed of old!) God grant that this Prophecy may never be made again a
History; whilst we may sadly weep over some amongst us, who should they once
more have opportunity would destroy all our pleasant things, pull down all the
houses of God, break the carved work with Axes and hammers; tell them what are
our just fears, what? say they, Are we dogs, that we should make all this
havoc? but, we need not urge a Spirit of Prophecy; let us look a little
backward and our later days of misery and confusion will tell us, that such
things as these have been done by those, who did more than ever they intended
to do in the work of Deformation in the midst of us; God grant that we may
never have occasion to stand in need of their pity, even their mercies are
cruel; mere y pretending friends, when ever they have opportunity prove most
insolent enemies; especially if once it makes for their Interest to be
malicious, if they can but thus recover their credit, which by a former
neutrality they have hazarded, they will leave no stone unturned, yea, though
it be by laying of the Temple waste, Down with it, Down with it, will they say,
in the day of their fierce wrath, and who shall withstand them? But, is this
their kindness to their Friends? must it be to lay Sion waste! and to make
Jerusalem an heap of Stones?

It can hardly be otherwise imagined, but that these great Minions in the Text,
proved at length to be the worst Persecutors; who, though they might be
persuaded of what they heard, and of what they saw, yet for fear of the powers
which were set over them, did not dare to own that word which to them was
accompanied with power; These very men to show their readiness of Subjection,
or to take off all manner of suspicion, that they were never heartily of that
Persuasion, (no further than was consistent with their Self-preservation) might
be the first to lay hands upon the Apostles, to imprison them, to deliver them
up, had they not been overruled, unto death it self: But, this was Gods
never-ceasing care and providence over his Church, that should hand join in
hand, they should be able to do no violence; they even thus considered, as now
turned enemies, shall not approach to hurt them; upon second and better
thoughts, they do yet again give back; and these are the Third sort of Persons,
who are said in the Text, to keep this remoter Distance; even the Adversary
himself, though an open and professed enemy, yet he durst not draw near, for
mischief; God is terrible in his Judgments, Signs and wonders are wrought by
the Apostles, (...), and of the rest, Such as might have evil will against, and
an evil eye upon such Dispensations in Solomon's Porch, No man durst to join
himself to them.

That which wrought thus upon the Adversary, that he durst not stretch out his
hand to smite, was either the Judgment of God upon Ananias and Sapphira; or
else the Wonders that were wrought amongst the people.

(1) As for the judgment upon Ananias and Sapphira for their Sacrilegious
withholding part of the price of their Land. " Paena istius modi non parum
valabat terrendis impiis ne temere prorumperent in eorum coelum ubi Deus tam
severum vindicam se ostenderet, Calv. in loc. This sort of sudden and
unexpected punishment was caution enough to those who were froward and
disobedient; that they should not venture to disturb those Solemnities in which
God had manifested himself so severe in taking vengeance: If for such a small
thing, might they think as Sacrilege; only for purloyning a little money, God
would evert so great a Displeasure; of how much sorer punishment shall they be
thought worthy, who commit a Sacrilege upon, in offering to do violence unto
the Persons of such who are exercised in the Solemn Administration of a strict,
and a most holy Religion.

(2) The Wonders and Signs which were wrought among the people, these did work
upon, and steal away the hearts of all that saw them; So that v. 26. the enemy
durst not be too boistrous against them, lest the People, as one Man, should
rise up against them, and stone them; and at length, from their own
consultations, they were forced to dismiss them in peace, they begin to doubt
amongst themselves whitherto this would grow; They suspect their own
jurisdiction, lest it should be exercised without fear or wit; and in the end,
ver. 38. that they be found to be fighters against God; v. 35, 39. " Ye men of
Israel, take heed to your selves, (it is you that are in the greatest danger,)
what you intend to do as touching these men; Refrain from them, and let them
alone; for if this Work, or this Counsel be of Men, it will come to naught;
but, if it be of God, you cannot overthrough it: and this Work and Counsel was
not of men, but of God, and therefore the Enemy could by no means hinder it.

I might here observe to you the constant, the special care and providence
which God has for his Church; how that the fury of man does often turn to his
Praise in the deliverance of his People; he restrains the remainders of wrath
also; he brings to naught the designs of the Heathen, and makes the devices
of the Aliens to be of no Effect; should they rage, yea, and that furiously,
yet they would imagine but a vain thing; let them take counsel together, with
one accord, yet, he that sits in the Heavens shall laugh them to scorn, the
Lord shall have them in derision, Psalm. 2.6. I Know that Second Psalm is
literally spoken of our Saviors Person; and yet, it is also applied by the
Apostles to the propagation of his Gospel, in the Chapter before the Text, ver.
27. This was at that time the Churches Prayer, when they prayed with one heart,
and with one voice; " Of a Truth, Lord, against thy holy Child Jesus, whom thou
have anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and People of
Israel were gathered together; And now, Lord, behold their threatenings; and
grant unto thy servants, that with all boldness they may speak thy Word; Surely
the Sons of Thunder were amongst them, whilst the Word of God went forth from
them like Lightning; the place was shaken where they were Assembled; ver. 35.
With great power gave they witness of the Resurrection of the Lord Jesus; and
the result of all was, the wonderful effect in the Text, that of those that
were adversaries durst no one join himself unto them.

May I not apply the same Providence of Almighty God comfortably to our selves,
to this once afflicted and despised Church of ours; if she be not yet despised
and afflicted, made a byword and a reproach to her own Children; no wounds
like those which are given in the house of Friends: However, for our comfort,
Hell and Death have not yet prevailed; Not Rome, whose mouth was wide as Hell,
nor the more secret contrivances of Schism, which like the Grave never has
enough; our God has been a God both of the Hills and of the Valleys, and
through the power of his Might, over both we have been more than Conquerours;
Rome, upon its seven Hills, animated from an aspering conclave could not
over-see us; and the Consistory in a seeming self-denial making it self low as
the Valleys, could not overreach or Vnder-mine us; neither the Infallible
Chair nor the Stool of wickedness could awe us, or control us: Nay, though for
a while we might seem to be forsaken, yet God gave us beauty for our ashes; he
restored our Captivity, and put upon us the Garment of joy instead of a Spirit
of heaviness; So that to the one Adversary which in our heaviness asked us,
Where is now your Church? sing us one of the Songs of your Sion; We can now
return this answer, That the Tears which we shed at the Rivers of Babylon, have
caused Jordan it self to overflow its banks; Persecuted we were, but not
utterly cast off; our God has provided us still a Name in the earth; and when
the Succession of an Apostolical Ministry was almost cut off quite in the midst
of us, our extremity was Gods opportunity for mercy; See we yet once more the
fire of the Sanctuary, hid in its own embers, and almost extinct, during the
Captivity, again brought forth, restored to its wonted luster, the flame yet
again bright upon the Altar; so that our Miraculous Restoration is to them an
abundant Demonstration, that we were, and still are continued a Church,
according to ancient and Primitive Constitutions truly Apostolical: But, as for
that other Adversary, the Viper in our own bosom, who both contributed unto,
and then upbraided us with our afflictions; who because of the troubles which
they brought upon us, thence made an argument to reproach our Holy
Constitutions, as if they were in themselves unlawful, because of Gods
Displeasure against those who did not live up closely and severely to them;
thus, whilst they have been the Rod of Vengeance in the hand of God, they have
talked to the grief of such whom God has wounded: And, why will not these
persons now be as exact interpreters of Gods Providence against themselves? is
not the Scene again shifted, and are we not (I am sure if we understood either
Gods glory, or our own happiness, we should be) where we were before? and have
we not this to say for our Church, even according to their way of
argumentation, that God who restored it, was not against it? We are not at this
day without a Priest, or without an Ephod; And, yet still with our Apostles, we
are sent unto our Prayers, Behold, O Lord, the threatenings of the Sons of
Belial, who are still against thee; all the reflections they make upon these
latter Providence, is, they repent that they have done no more mischief; and
all the sin they acknowledge, in their blasphemous allusions, is, that they
were false to their Covenant, in that the Amalakites were not utterly
destroyed: let us betake our selves to better Devotions than these, that God
would abate their pride, assuage their malice, and confonnd their Devices; but
then as for their Persons; He brings into the way of truth all such as have
erred and are deceived; Put them in fear, O Lord, that they may seek thy name;
Forgive our enemies persecutors, and slanderers, and turn their hearts: Forgive
them, for they know not what they do: Oh! That even this might not be laid to
their charge; how that they still have recourse to their old designs of
Mischief, though hitherto in the course of the Divine Providence they have
proved so ineffectual; May the God of Heaven yet laugh them to scorn, and he
confirm his King upon the hill of Sion; Deliverance shall arise one way or
other; the God who is worshipped in, will take care of the service of the
Sanctuary; he who has, and who does, we trust that he will still deliver us;
they that hate us shall see it, and be ashamed, because the Lord has helped
us, and comforted us; But; as for them, (...) they are of the rest; they have
estranged themselves, and gone out from us, because they were not of us;
neither shall they dare, God will restrain their fury, they shall not presume
to approach and hurt us: which is the

Second thing observed in this second part of the Text, (to wit) what was the
present frame and temper of their minds, by whom this due distance was kept;
(...) No one durst.
That is, there was an unaccountable surprise and dread upon their Spirits,
which as to the persons affected might be diverse and various; they did not
dare, some kind of awe there was, which was a curb and a restraint upon them.

1. In the Disciples, it might be modesty and humility. 2. In those from amidst
the multitude, a timorous misgiving. 3. In the Adversary, Terror, Amazement,
and Astonishment:
Thus one way or other the Gospel of Jesus was glorified; it had diversely, but
surely, its desired effect upon all; this is that word which cannot return in
vain, but will accomplish the thing for which it is sent.

First, In the Disciples, who took heed how, where, and what they did here; who
frequented Solomon's Porch, that they might observe the outgoings of the Lord
in his Sanctuary; in them, their Modesty was exercised, and their Humility was
increased; with meekness they received the ingrafted word, and yet jealous
enough of themselves, that they did not grow, as they should, thereby; to them
the immortal seed was sown, in an honest and in a good heart, and yet the Fruit
which they did bear was with patience; their heart was raised, at the
contemplation of God and of his holiness; but at the same time broken, in a
sorrowful reflection upon themselves and their own unworthiness; though they
did believe, yet almost, with tears in their eyes, this was the Prayer of their
Faith, Lord, we believe, help our unbelief; in them an humble and a lowly
expectancy, as well as a fiducial recumbency, had its perfect work; they are
ready to give up themselves, and their substance to the service of God and of
his Sanctuary, and yet considering, that God expects both heart and hand
together, piously they examine their own integrity throughout all; they know
that their good things do not extend to God, therefore their delight is with
such as are excellent in the Earth, and when they have done all that they can,
they are far from vaunting a State of Perfection, they acknowledge themselves
to be unprofitable Servants, and Miserable Sinners; they make this their humble
and hearty recognition saying, We have done, or rather, Would we had done what
was our duty to do.

Secondly, In those from amidst the multitude, it was a Timorous Misgiving,
their hearts failed them for fear of what might become of them in another
world, and yet they were loath to let go their interest in this; upon what they
heard and saw, they made some heavy steps toward happiness; but, alas! they
looked back, and they gave back, the one returns to his honors, and the other
to his great Possessions. Oh, the deceitfulness of riches and of power! how
hard is it for those who trust in either, to enter into the Kingdom of God?
with the Disciples, upon the like occasion, we may cry out, Lord, increase our
Faith! yes, in the Text here is an argument to settle us in our Faith; in that
the wisdom of God was here justified in the hearts of the children of this
World; in the midst of all their wealth and their greatness, the convictions
that are within them, are a damp upon their Spirits. Thus, St. Paul cannot
reason of righteousness, of temperance, and of judgment to come, but Felix must
needs tremble: and, does Agrippa know the Scriptures? does he believe the
Prophets? and will he not resign the obedience of his Faith to what he does
know, and cannot but believe? however as stout and resolved a sinner as he is,
against God and his own Soul, laughed heartily and entirely to embrace this way,
least he lose something of his outward Pomp, (...) lest the retinue that is
about him should withdraw, and refuse any longer to be of his train; yet, to
hear St. Paul Preach, will he, will he, he cannot but confess to him and all
the World, however his misgiving thoughts perplex him, and he will not be
persuaded; yet he is almost persuaded to be a Christian: -- Virtutem videant,
-- how strangely is the self-condemning Worldling, or Voluptuary infatuated?
only that he may perish the more dreadfuly; under the clear apprehensions of
his approaching, and yet wilfully neglected happiness; Alas! poor silly wretch,
who against himself, and his own resentments prefers this World to a better, in
a moment he, and his thoughts perish, and in the end he proves a fool.

(3.) In the Adversary it was terror, amazement, and Astonishment: to observe
the courage and boldness of these Apostles, though they were ignorant and
unlearned men; the wonders which they wrought, and the judgments which were
inflicted, they could not but be surprised and fall backwards; like the
Officers which came to apprehend our Savior, so is it here with the Disciples,
as it was formerly with their Master, Never men surely spoke or did like these
men! what do we do? the finger of God is here! in vain do we strive, we shall
not prevail; like the Egyptian chariots in the Red Sea, all our designs go on
against them but heavily; in vain do we strive against them, and at the same
time fight against God!

And is the Arm of our God now shortened, that it cannot help? no surely, the
Dispensation of his Gospel is still accompanied with power, even in the hearts
of those that set themselves against it: to observe the constancy and
perseverance of those that labor in it, how they are neither afraid nor ashaed
of their Message, though they be counted enemies for the Truths sake which they
are to speak; Nay, (a sad complaint it is, that now there should be cause to
make it) amidst the contentions and divisions of false Brethren; still they
hold fast their integrity: yet again, to observe the judgments of our God, to
instance in no other, against this one wasting, destroying sin of Sacrilege,
ever since it has been an iniquity established by a law in the midst of us: how
it has been a Moth in the estates of the wealthiest and the mightiest, it has
eaten like a Canker, even unto corruption, and destroyed whole Families, great,
and noble: Nay, not only the estate, but them and their children too, Nec
gaudet tertius haeres, before the third Generation, the whole line cut off with
the entail of the estate; whilst the chief of the Family dies, leaving no
memorial behind him; all the propagation that is made in the earth, is the
transferring the Curse of Sacrilege from one house to another, that so it may
yet make sorer Desolations; the calamity by the complication of several
interests and proprieties the more dreadful, because like to be so universal
and diffusive! -- And yet once more shall I observe? The signs and wonders
that have been wrought! no other then the wonders of an Almighty Providence,
not so much in the restitution, as in the continued support of our Church, it
is little less then a miracle that we are still preserved! as if the Glory of
God were in the midst of Solomon's Porch, and about that Glory a most sure
defense: that God has hitherto wrought out our deliverance thence, whence we
could not expect it, when some of our old Friends have forgot, if not lift up
their heel against us! -- I say, were all these things seriously considered in
thankfulness to our God; in humility love and charity toward one another,
whilst we go hand in hand together to the house of God as Friends; surely our
God will be entreated still to continue his mercies to us, and preserve to us
his Memorial both as his own, and our Praise in the earth; Nay, how do we know,
but that such kind of secret intimations as these to the very souls and
consciences of such as are rebelliously and maliciously wicked, are as it were
a Bridle in their Mouths, to curb them in, that they shall not dare either to
cast a bank against, or shoot an arrow at us? God may thus put his hook into
the Nostrils of that old Leviathan the Devil and Satan, and of all those Devils
incarnate, who to keep him company take their pastime only in troubled waters,
in the Ocean that casts forth mire and dirt; and surely there have been some
Mourners in our Sion to spread the hard speeches, cruel mockings of any
blasphemous Rabshakeh before the Lord upon his holy Altar; yea, God himself has
heard all their blasphemy, and in his own due time he will repay it: with
terror and amazement shall the Sons of Belial turn away, and spend their
powder elsewhere; or, should they give fire, it will recoil upon themselves;
(...) the Church is beyond Gunshot; Isaiah 65.25. That comfortable evangelical
promise may without presumption, be here in faith and patience applied, They
shall not hurt nor destroy in my holy Mountain, says the Lord; they shall not
dare to come nigh, to join themselves unto, they shall not approach to offer
violence either to the Mountain, or to those that are the Servants of God upon
it; to Solomon's Porch, or those that bear witness to the Testimony of Jesus
within it. -- which is the

Third thing observed in this Second part of the Text; (to wit) the Distance
which was observed at this Convention; and that more specially and
particularly, what this Distance was? what was that Act which these three sorts
of persons did not dare, or venture to engage themselves upon, (...) to be too
familiar with, to join themselves unto them.
(1.) The New Convert Disciples could not but honor those whom they so much
loved; and therefore they would not reckon themselves to be of their number;
Nemo audebat se iis in serere, aut Apostolum profiteri no one durst to inroll
themselves amongst the Apostles, to pretend a joint mission or commission with
them; as if they were Apostles also, even the New Convert-Disciples as holy as
the best of them; yea, be they no less, then the whole Congregation, every one
of them: No; these Disciples though sanctified, elect and precious, yet they
were not thus called; they sat at the Apostles feet, where they had laid down
the price of their Goods; they did not presume to be, legati a latere, Colleague
Ambassadors with them; all things indeed were common amongst them, but not the
Apostolical function, nor the Ministerial office; they had received the
Christian Faith, but not to ambition or vain glory, much less to quarrelsome
Disputations; Erastus was in truth Junior, in comparison of these Primitive
times of innocent Simplicity, in which the Spirits of the New Convert Disciples
were subject to the Spirits of the Prophets and Apostles, they submiting
themselves to those who were set over them in the fear and love both of God and
them.

(2.) Those from amongst the Multitude would not be too hasty in consorting
with such, as were so of a sudden magnified by the very ordinary sort of
people; Nemo se familiariter pro eo tempore Apostolis reddere audebat; they
were indeed surprised at the sudden rumor and unexpected applause; but as yet,
they would be somewhat cautelous, not venture too near a conjunction to, or
convesation with them, not knowing whitherto this might grow; they were
resolved to await the conclusion and result of the whole matter; they were not
a little wary of their acquaintance, choosing a more convenient season to
commence it; at present, it might not be so safe, they did not care to be seen
with, nor join themselves unto them.

(3.) The Adversary withdrew, because he durst not interrupt them; Nemo ausus
est eos coercere; Ethiop. Verse. No one durst to put a restraint upon them, or
to say unto them, what do ye? Non ausi sunt hosts eos ut antea impetere; the
Enemy did not dare, as formerly, to be impetuous or violent against them;
Junius renders the word certare; no one durst contend with, or withstand them:
Nay, the word in the Greek (...) is not always to be understood of a nearness
of Familiarity or Friendship, implying intimacy of acquaintance in
conversation; but, sometimes it is used for such an Adherescency as is in order
to opposition; (...). Hesych. Pitch, the closer it sticks, the worse it
defiles; there are those who cleave to a man's company only to sit upon his
skirts, to be a snare and a greater disturbance to him; like the Pestilence,
Deuteronomy. 28.21. which cleaves that it may consume; (...) the originial word is
rendered by the Septuagint (...) a compound from that in the Text, and (...)
persecutus est, in the Hebrew signifies persecution; 1 Mac. 6.21. (...). Some
ungodly men joined to those which were escaped out of the Seige, that they
might betray them: -- But, it was not so in the instance before us; The
Adversary withdrew, wondering to see himself defeated, all his designs of Malice
blasted; wherefore, he gives back in a dumpish, melancholy admiration of that,
which he was not able in the least to hinder.

From all which, I might raise and prosecute this Observation: That the Gospel
of God is then glorified, and the word of it accompanied with power when it
creates reverence and respect to those that are the Dispensers of it, and that
from all sorts of persons, though of different persuasions and upon different
accounts, be they of what quality soever. Christ never intended that his
Priests should be themselves of, much less made a Scoff and Derision to the
meanest and lowest of the People; No, he will be honored in his servants, and
he has given it in special charge to his Disciples, that they should as it
were in scorn and indignation, or (which is worse) as a Priestly Malediction
shake off the dust from their feet, against that City or House which are not
worthy of their Peace, (that is, of a Priestly Benediction,) who know not how
to receive a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, of Christ that great Prophet who
appeared in the flesh a Minister of Righteousness; who say not, Blessed is he
that comes to us in the Name of the Lord.

This observation might the rather be insisted on, because of this Unmannerly,
Uncivil Age, in which we live, to say no worse of it; in which, as to this
particular, there is a notorious want of ordinary breeding and courteous
behavior, whilst persons who by their office are Sacred, are the Scoff and
Derision of almost every one they meet, to avoid which, some have been forced
to lay aside their habit; but, surely Elisha must not cast off his Mantle,
because the unruly, untaught and uncatechised children and servants make him
their pastime and sport, as he goes along the streets. But, what does he
amongst them? a private retirement is both his business and security; were the
Distance farther, and the Converse less, the respect would be more: A Priest
should not be overmuch amongst the Multitude, farther then the Ministerial acts
of Piety and Charity do oblige him; he must be careful that his conversation be
neither supercilious, nor precarious; that he neither be arrogant, nor
contemptible; neither haughty, nor despicable; he should neither proudly
overlook, nor timorously cringe to those that are about him; he must be affable
and courteous to all in a Spirit of Love, and yet keep that station to which
God and the Church has called him, in the Spirit of a Sound, Sober and of a
resolved Mind; in a word, let the Man of God in the diligent discharge of his
duty Magnify his own Office, so shall he have a good report of those that are
without, such as was the respect which was given here to the Apostles, the very
ordinary sort of people Magnified them. And this is the Subject of the next
Discourse.

The Third SERMON
IN which I shall have occasion to prosecute the Observation now started; where
a due Distance is kept betwixt Priests and People, there likewise an awful
reverence is exhibited, as the result of that Distance: notwithstanding the awe
and dread which was at this time upon the Spirits of those who were assembled
with the Apostles; the Humility and Modesty of some exercised, a timorous
misgiving raised in others, Fear and Astonishment surprising all; so that they
did not dare to join themselves unto them; yet the Apostles wanted neither
praise nor admiration from those that were round about them; some withdrew
themselves, and gave back; others would not come too near, nor press forward;
yet there was company enough, and all to very good purpose, they stood off,
that they might have the more room to admire; notwithstanding the remote
distance which was kept, the place was full and the applause was great, the
very common people magnified them; which is the third General in the Text; (to
wit) An awful Reverence exhibited upon the due Distance observed;

But the People magnified them.



Sufficit plebi Simpliciori integriorique eos laudibus attollere; sed iis
familiariter uti non ausi sunt; The People in whom at this time simplicity and
integrity were virtues highly commendable, might satisfy themselves in giving
due praise and honor unto those, from whom, because of the present
Dispensation, they could not but keep their distance, neither were they to be
over familiar with them: it was not Ignorance but Reverence which was the
Parent of the Devotion, and that Devotion was increased even to Admiration; so
that the Praise which was here perfected, was so perfected, as it was the
result of a due distance observed at a solemn and holy Convention, and that in
a due and consecrated place; where the service was celebrated after a due
manner, whilst they were all with one accord.

It is Mr. Calvin's note upon this part of the Text; " Est in Disciplina
sancta, and in sincero pietatis cultu arcanae quaedam (...); quae multos etiam
invitos distringat; sed qualis ea est hodie, nescimus, etc. There is in holy
Discipline, and the sincere administration of Gods worship, (he speaks there of
a Regular solemnity, and of a solemn Assembly of holy men altogether in one
place;) in such sacred Conventions, a kind of innate secret Majesty: All
solemnity is Majestical; and the Beauty of Holiness is both lovely and
Triumphant; it creates awe and reverence in the hearts of those that are
Assembled, their souls are discovered, they are seen of all, and convinced of
all, and falling down on their faces they worship God, and have a reverend
esteem for holy men, reporting God to be amongst them of a truth. But, where
there is no solemnity, no external Beauty, where order is banished, and a kind
of slubberly service is performed, as it were a Deformity unto holiness, there
they who are assembled neither fear God, nor regard Man; Gods sacrifice is many
times abhorred, and he that waits at the Altar despised: Veneration is the due
result of splendour in a visible dispensation; and we may safely pass this
judgment upon the that Church, she is all glorious within, when we see her
clothing to be of wrought gold; even outward pomp and magnificence, provided it
do not degenerate into superstition, has this advantage in it; that neither
God, his service, nor they who minister about it can so soon be lightly
esteemed. Psalm. 110.3. This was Gods promise to his Son after that he had drunk
of the brook by the way, that he should lift up his head; and because his head
should be lifted up, therefore thy people shall be a willing power in the day
of thy power; that is, in that Day when the word of the Gospel shall be
accompanied with power; and that, as it follows in the next words, no other
then in the Beauty of holiness; so that the Administration of the everlasting
Gospel, is a Day of Power, in it a willing People, and all because of the
Beauties of holiness, the outward solemnities of the sanctuary glorious and
magnificent; well therefore may the Psalmist go on, ver. 4. The Lord has
sworn, and he will not repent; the Administration is thus eternally fixed, Thou
art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech.

To be a little more close and particular
The People magnified them; where observe three things.

First, The Respect which was given; (...) Magnified. Second, The Persons by,
and to whom this praise was given; (...) from the People to the Apostles; this
was the honor of these Saints, their Persons to be in esteem amongst the
Multitudes. Third, The Occasion of this Reverence and Respect; (...) Many
signs and wonders wrought amongst the people; whither of justice, in the
judgment inflicted; of Mercy, in the Diseases cured; or of extraordinary
Providence in the Gospel propagated; because of all these, the People Magnified
them.
(1.) Consider we the Respect it self which was given; (...) Magnified. The
word is used both of that honor which God is pleased to vindicate to himself;
as also which he does vouchsafe sometimes to bestow upon his creature: again,
of that Glory which man is to ascribe unto God; and of that respect which one
man may give unto, or have for another: God vindicates his honor to himself,
in that he does Magnify his word above all his Name; when he does declare that
he will not give his honor to another, but that he will be sanctified in all
those that draw nigh unto him; in all acts of Worship and Divine Service, he
will have his Praises to be perfected, in that they be all directed unto him
alone; he is the Lord our God, to be Magnified and glorified for ever, but One
Lord, and besides him, there is no God. -- But, Praise and honor are his gift
sometimes to his creature; be Man what he is, God regards him; the son of man is
visited by him, and he exalts him on every side as it seems best to him;
when, and how he pleases, he brings unto great honor, raises up the poor
out of the dust, and the needy from the dunghill, to set him with the Princes
even with the Princes of his people; 1 Chronicles. 29.25. It was the Lord, who
magnified Solomon exceedingly in the sight of all Israel. Yet again; this is
that Glory which we ascribe unto our Maker, when we praise him who is higher
then the highest, give him that honor which he is pleased to require of us,
even the honor due unto his Name; Psa. 50.23. Whosoever offers me praise, he
Magnifieth me: This is our Te Deum every morning; wherein we praise our God,
and acknowledge him to be the Lord; we worship him who is the Father
everlasting; day by day we Magnify him, and so we worship his Name ever, world
without end; therefore as day unto day, so night unto night also shows forth
this praise, our Oblations being not only renewed every morning, but the
lifting up of our hands are an evening Sacrifice, when with the Blessed Virgin
Mary, every night we make her Magnificat our own; Our Soul to Magnify the
Lord, and our Spirit to rejoice in God our Savior. -- And yet, after all the
former acceptions of the word, this is that which God commands, that one
amongst another honor should be given where honor is due; Dignities are not
to be evil spoken of, nor dominions to be despised; we must have some in high
esteem for their works sake, and an Apostle must be Magnified, if for no other,
because he is an Apostle: 2 Cor. 10.15. This was that honor, which without
ambition or offense St. Paul did justly vindicate to himself, " Having hope
that we shall be enlarged by you, (...), Magnified amongst you, according to
our Rule abundantly; the more abundantly, because of that Rule of Righteousness
which from us has been delivered to you.

So then, the respect which was here given, was the esteem that was raised,
because of the present service in which they were engaged; what is in the Text,
Magnifying is in the foregoing Chapter, ver. 33. (...). That great Grace which
was upon them all; whilst the word of God grew, and was multiplied, the
Apostles were in favor with God, and also with men: (...). Is. Pelusiot. That
is, "Their Conversation, and their virtue, or rather, their powerful ministry,
was, as became Apostles; and this was part of their reward, in that they should
see of their travail, and be satisfied, whilst they should be had in honor of
all such, who were resolved to follow them, as they followed Christ: And this
honor was double both in heart and voice; out of the abundance of their
hearts, their lips praised them; with their tongues they blessed God, who had
given such power unto men; and therefore with their tongues also they blessed
and praised those men, who came to them in the power and demonstration of the
Spirit of God.

And, Was this the receptation of the Gospel in its first Plantation? did the
word of Salvation run, only whilst it was glorified? and glorified it was
indeed in the hearts and mouths of all that saw and heard it; hearing it, they
believed with joy, joy which was not altogether unspeakable, though it was full
of glory! What shall we say then, when amongst those that are called
Christians, the Word of Life is the derision of those that pass along the
streets? when the Servants of God are despised for their works sake? Nay, the
very Oracles of God have not escaped, whilst they have been made the subject of
Drollery! This is that which may be for a sad Lamentation in the midst of us,
whilst wit and ingenuity is debauched into rallery; and they are the greatest
Virtuosoes, have the quickest and ripest parts, who can most profanely make
their Religion ridiculous; who throw about their Libellous Pasquills, and their
Satirical Lampoons, not only against the civil and sacred orders of man that
are established amongst us, but even against Heaven it self; thus they do not
only Swear by, but wickedly they blaspheme the Throne that is on high, and him
that sits thereon; as if it were the greatest piece of gallantry in the
world, for a man to be so foolhardy as to imagine, that sometime for
Diversion, God himself may be mocked! No wonder that there is such looseness in
the lives of men, when there is no stronger a bridle upon their tongues; how
are the reins let loose to all impiety, to draw iniquity as it were with a
Cartrope, with all ones might, and all ones strength, even with the hand of
violence? Hell it self suffers violence, and the violent take it by force! Woe!
and Alas! how can it be otherwise, but that the heart must be a sink of
uncleanness, where the eyes are as so many casements to let in vanity, and the
mouth is so wide a door to let out folly? But, surely it was never intended
that the Word of Life should be thus magnified, only in the great swelling
words of vanity and impiety! would you be happy in the earth, live long, and
see good days? Psalm. 34.13. Keep your Tongues from evil; and your Lips that
they speak no guile: Whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of
good report, especially in the Dispensation of the Gospel, in the solemn
Administration of the Service of God, since there is so much virtue, let there
be some praise; think upon and follow these things: Let that which is our chief
happiness, be our greatest honor; what, shall we villifie that, which
according to the entertainment it meets with (I mean our Holy Religion) proves
where ever it comes either the ruin, or the exalting of a Nation? what! must
the Ark of God be set up in the House of Dagon? made to truckle under
Heatheanism and Atheism? how could it be otherwise, but that the Philistines
should be struck with Emerods? the Plague to follow them from one City to
another, until they be almost utterly consumed! But, at another time bring the
Ark aside to the House of Obed-Edom, who receives it, and the Salvation of his
God with joy; the House is blessed for the Guests sake, the Lord prospers him,
and all that he has, every thing that he puts his hand unto: Never any man
fared the worse for any respect or kindness unto Gods Service; it was
Nehemiah's prayer, and the prayer of Faith heard in an accepted time, in that
he had Magnified the worship of the God of his Fathers with all his heart, and
with all his soul, Nehemiah, 13.14. " Remember me, O my God, concerning this;
and wipe not out the good deeds which I have done for the House of my God, and
for the offices thereof: But, Alas! How has the Church cause to invert this
prayer against those that have evil will to Sion? that God would Remember them
concerning this, and forget not the bad deeds which they have done against the
House of their God, and the solemnities thereof; against Solomon's Porch, the
service, and those that Minister therein, they have returned evil for good; not
Blessing, but contrariwise railing; not suffering the Dispensation of holiness
and life to be as it ought, Magnified amongst them; yea, the very abjects have
gathered themselves together, making mows, and mockings at what they will not
learn to know and understand; quite contrary to what was done in the Text,
where the very ordinary sort of people had the persons of holy men in
admiration, only because of a Spiritual and holy advantage; and that is the

Second thing now to be considered in this Third part of the Text, the Persons
by, and to whom, this respect was given; from the People to the Apostles, (...)
this the honor of these Saints, their Persons to be had in esteem amongst the
Multitudes.
First, From the People, whose voice at this time was the voice of God; not
many wise, nor many noble; Excluditur Pontificia factio, they who sat in the
Chair of Moses would give no heed to those who Preached Jesus, that great
Prophet who was to come into the World, of whom Moses and all the Prophets did
write; ver. 17. The High Priests, and those that were with him, even the whole
Sect of the Sadduces were filled with indignation. Thus, as our Savior
formerly, so fared his Disciples here, St. John 7.48. Have any of the Pharisees
or Rulers believed on him? but this People who know not the Law are cursed; and
yet, fullfilling all Righteousness they are Blessed, having embraced the
everlasting Gospel: from the Multitudes where there was Love, there was Honor
also; they met in Solomon's Porch; the more company, the greater was the
welcome, and the more glorious the solemnity when there; the People, who did
here Magnify, were such as would not come too near, and yet they would not
stay away, that so the Public place for Divine Worship might be full.

Thronged Multitudes, when they betake themselves into corners, and separate
from the places of open Assemblies, are such who heap up Teachers to
themselves, and despise their lawful Guides; they make themselves judges of
those constitutions which they should not dispute, but obey; they speak evil of
those Dignities which they should respect, and despise those Dominions to which
they should submit themselves, and that, not for wrath only, but for Conscience
sake: But, when the People go up by their Tribes to the House of God, with the
voice of Joy and Praise; exercising themselves in a holy Religion, with one Arm
and one Shoulder, the Saints singing with joyfulness, and all the Priests
clothed with Righteousness, how is the value of things, and of Persons Sacred
enhanced even to a popular veneration?

Popularity, though it has its snares and temptations, yet, it is a joy and a
comfort to those who labor honestly in the discharge of their Duty, so long as
it be found in the way of truth; Applause from the vulgar, though it be not to
be sought by such as will approve themselves the Ministers of Christ Jesus,
through a bad, as well as through a good report; yet, neither is it altogether
to be despised, when a man can cheerfully reflect upon himself, and his own
labors, that he has rightly divided the word of Truth, and approved himself as
a Workman that need not be ashamed, herein always exercising himself to have a
Conscience void of offense toward God, and toward all men; Let the servant of
God spend and be spent in the sincerer and severer exercises of Religion; and
surely the very ordinary sort of People cannot be so disingenuous, as the more
he loves, and takes care for their Souls, the less he should be loved of them,
especially when he does thus heartily bespeake them, I seek not yours, but you;
certainly, when thus qualified, and thus resolved, without appearing all things
to all men, he may gain the more: Honesty, when all is done, will prove the
best Policy; it is that which will set a man right in the eyes of God, and of
the People; the result of integrity is peace both within and without; to stand
firm to the principles of order and solemnity without warping, not yiedling
either to the terrors of some; no nor being enticed because of advantage by
the allurements of others; and yet throughout all, manifesting a Spirit of
meekness; this man's Message shall be accompanied with honor: and with his
humility he shall win upon the people by degrees, for no other reason, but that
they shall be convinced at length of his integrity, in that he has not
performed his Duty by Degrees, comes not upon them with his after-claps, he has
not in the least dissembled either with God or them.

It is not, (whatsoever some may think in their worldly wisdom, which is not so
pure, as they prerend it peaceable) always advantageous to comply with, and
suit our selves to present necessities, to attemper our selves to the humors
of men, and the swing of the times; to be less sollicitous in such
circumstances which for a while will go against the grain, and a little popular
indifference, is not that which will induce the vulgar to Magnify Gods
service, neither will it contribute much to the keeping of all things for any
considerable time quiet: And, yet for all this the Servant of God must not be
pievish; he may be resolute, but not froward; and let him bear patiently this
reproach if for his constancy to that to which he has subscribed so often, he
is counted violent by some, pert and pragmatical by others, who have no other
plea to excuse their own Hypocritical luke-warmeness, then by traducing the
stedfastness of such, who according to that way which they once counted
Superstition, and at this day think not so expedient, (for it seems a
mechanical sanctity does not suit so well with a new mechanical Philosophy)
Worship the God of their Fathers: Notwithstanding, these corrupt Principles,
fomented amongst false Brethren, may the poor deluded People, whose immortal
souls are precious, be convinced; when they see their Priests clothed with
Righteousness in relation to God and his Church, and with humility in reference
to them, this should raise their veneration of them, and esteem for them.

It is not beneath the Dignity of an Apostle, (provided he does not build what
he once destroyed, or destroy that, which he would seemingly pretend to build,
and so either way make himself a Transgressor) nay, it makes much for the
Magnifying of his office in the sight of all the People, when in a constant
regular performance of his own Duty, he shows hmself gentle and courteous even
to the froward and perverse: Call it what you will, either Moderation, as it
respects the Subject, and is a personal qualification; or, Popularity, as it
has an influence upon others, and is some kind of aerie satisfaction upon the
performance of any thing that has been well taken; the true notion either of
one, or the other, or of Both, as one and the same, (I am sure in many persons
they are convertible, and one Definition will serve Both, in whom all their
Moderation is their popularity,) the true Notion, I say, of each, is not the
abatement of our own strictness; but to labor the supporting those that are
weak, to restore such as are gone aside to that stedfastness which they may see
us profess in a Spirit of love and charity; it is not an unworthy sneaking
compliance; (like Elie's sons in the Priests office, to do any thing for a
Morsel of Bread or a piece of Silver,) but, it is an affable, winning behavior
in converse, to allure those who are disaffected to embrace that order which
they may see us so severely practice. It were a strange way (we should think)
to heal the sick, and raise him up again, should the Physician feign himself,
to be in the same distemper with his Patient; it would surely be to better
purpose to apply gentle and healing Medicines, and not by an affected
indisposition, court both himself and his patient unto death: And shall the
Physicians of Israel lick up the sores of the people? Suit themselves to their
Maladies? be partakers of other men's sins? were it not both honester, and much
the safer course both for the Doctors credit, and the Peoples health, to pour
in Wine and Oil; Wine that may thoroughly search and cleanse, and Oil that may
kindly close up, that so the Wound of the Daughter of his People be not
slightly healed? is it not more becoming his profession thus to behave himself,
rather then that such a one as is engaged in the cure of souls, should by a
sordid imitation humor the Fancy of the Diseased, or Disaffected? and though
sometimes Corrosives are to be applied, and not always Cordials; whatsoever are
the hurts of the people, they are to be opened and touched to the quick; yet
the Spiritual Chyrurgion, as he is to have a Lions courageous heart, so he must
have a gentle, easy, and a skilful hand; even in holy and strict Discipline,
the Rod it self may be managed dexterously, and with a Spirit of meekness; The
blooming, budding Rod of Aaron, yielding Almonds, and those were the fruits of
Peace; that Peace which the very People, (when by the blessing of Aarons God
upon them, they do experience it) shall magnify; yea, and Magnify those that
bring it to them, saying, "Blessed are they that come to us in the Name of the
God of Peace, that so our Houses may no more be left unto us Desolate; Speciosi
pedes; Thus shall they look upon the Feet of an Evangelist, as beautiful, yea,
although the Terrors of the Lord may sometimes accompany his message even they
shall persuade, -- as here in the Text; the fruit of all which, in Gods due
time, shall be Peace unto those that seek Peace, in keeping their due Distance
from, in giving due Praise and Honor to those who are the Ambassadors of Peace
from Heaven to all; and yet their Embassy is to be managed with Power and
Authority, that so their Persons may be had in honor, for their employments
sake, considering whom they represent, and that is the next thing to be
considered under this second branch.

(2.) To the Apostles (...) this the honor of these Saints, their Persons to
be magnified amongst the multitudes. And here it is observable, that the
Admiration or Praise which was given to the Apostles was given to them all
indifferently; and that, in a whole community, as they were all assembled with
one accord, agreeing together as Brethren, in the Kingdom and Patience of our
Lord Jesus: it was not so a respect, as to set one above another, much less to
set them against each other; St. Peter was no more magnified then all the rest,
though the next words to the Text tells us, that there was healing to all such
as passed but under his shadow; and St. John though once a Beloved Disciple, in
the success of his Ministry does expect no more honor from the People, then
had others of his Brethren.

And here the People are to be advised, that although they ought to have the
persons of Apostolical men in honor and admiration, yet it must not be to the
disparagement of any of the same Order: Christ has promised a Prophets reward
to such as receive a Prophet, not as this, or that man, so, or so qualified;
but, merely in relation to his Office and his Calling, as he comes in the Name
of a Prophet: Honor should be the result of Love, not of a partial affection;
are they not all alike Ministers of Christ our Common Savior in order to a
Universal Redemption? It was an argument of schism and division in the Church
of Corinth, when some of them were for Paul, some for Apollos, some for Cephas:
some for Cephas; a Pillar of the Church, if not a corner stone, who delivered
the word with authority and power; who proposed his Message as Matter for
Faith, rather then dispute; and though he does admit, that a Reason may be
given for our Hope, yet it must be with Reverence and Fear; thus, the very
Dignity of the Messenger might seem to be credit enough for the Reception of
his Message: he having the Primacy over the rest, it was reason good enough
that he should be heard in the first place? Cephas, by whom you have believed:
others were for the rare notions, the sublime curious speculations of St. Paul,
such a one as was wrapped into the third heavens every time he spoke, whose
reach was within, and beyond the clouds, whilst he was manuring his
Corinthians, who were his Husbandry upon earth; Paul planteth: and yet a third
sort were for the eloquence and Rhetoric of Apollos, whose Doctrine distilled
as the rain, and his Speech was as the dew; Apolles waters: and all this
while the sweet influences of heaven were not considered, God was for gotten,
who gave the increase: what was all this, but a sign that their admiration
proceeded more from their humor, then their Love? it was not Spiritual, but
carnal; it was not a rejoicing in order and unity; but a breaking into factions
and parties against the established community; hence were the Divisions and
schisms amongst them. But, would we be with the multitude in that which is
good? we must go along with them into Solomon's Porch, and behold them there
magnifying the Apostles without the least respect of Persons; the Dispensation
which at this time was amongst the People, was various; and yet the
commendation was Uniform; here was severity from some of the Apostles, in the
rigorous execution of wrath; great utility from others, in the curing of
diseases; and yet virtue in all, that they should be all alike equally admired;
thus they at this time, as the servants of the most high God, and God in them,
as the God of Order and Union was praised and magnified amongst the multitudes;
so that their Praises were as solemn, as was their meeting; as regular, as was
their solemnity; though they were a multitude, they were not confused; there
was no uproar in this gratulatory Magnificat; not such as was at Ephesus, when
the people extolled their great Diana, and the most part knew not why they were
assembled; no, the Oracles of God were at this time magnifyed in a vulgar
shout, the voice of a King, of the King of heaven was amongst them, and we have
good reason to believe that the impetus upon the people was without tumult,
fince their admiration was the product of their Faith which is the

Third thing to be considered in this third part of the Text, (viz.) the
Occasion of this awful Reverence and Respect; at the beginning of the 12th
verse; (...). Signs and wonders were wrought by the hands of the Apostles
amongst the People; -- and the People magnified them.
Signs and Wonders might be necessary at the first plantation of the Gospel,
that so it might be received, as with amazement, so with honor also: but
since, an evil and an adulterous generation may seek after a Sign, and none
shall be given them; only they are themselves the greatest prodigy, in that
they wickedly dispute the truth of that, which for fear of humane laws, they
dare not in some sort or other, but profess: and yet there are Signs and
Wonders continued, like these in the Text, sufficient to create Reverence and
Respect to sacred Persons, were they not too much cherished and encouraged
amongst us, an evil heart of unbelief against all manner of Providence soever,
and so against God himself: however, let us urge what was commendable in the
People here receiving the Truths of the Gospel in the love and due esteem of
those that brought them, to the reproach of the Generations that have
succeeded, who make a mock of holiness and Piety: Signs and Wonders causal of
honor and admiration to the Apostles; and those in the

First Place, Signs of terror to the wicked, because of the judgment which was
inflicted. (...). Is. Pelusiot. Whatsoever punishment is inflicted upon
offenders, especially if it be sudden and dreadful, as it humbles those upon
whom it is inflicted, so it renders them in whose vindication it is exerted,
the more venerable; their persons are to be distinguished from the common sort
of men, for whose sakes God is pleased to manifest himself so severe in the
terrible executions of his wrath.

Elijah caused fire to come down from heaven, as he was a Man of God, to
destroy two Captains, and their two Fifties, 2 King. 1.13. and this made the
next Captain to dread and revere the Prophet, to cast his sword and himself at
his seet, saying, O Man of God, I pray thee let my life, and the life of these
fifty thy servants be precious in thy sight; Behold there came fire from
heaven, and burnt the two former Captains, and their fifties; therefore let my
life now be precious in thy sight. And shall we say, where is the Lord God of
Elijah now? does he not still take vengeance, if not for his servants, yet for
his Church, in fire, and that a fire from heaven, which the breath of the Lord
had kindled? Surely if not in fire, though the smoke is still in our nostrils,
yet in as dreadful and as fore calamities! I could, but that I had before
occasion to instance it, here again consider, how that God has Magnified the
Services of his Sanctuary, if not in the sight of this people, who will not
see, yet of the nations round about us, in the severer expressions of his anger
against this one sin of Sacrilege so dreadfully visited for in the Text; how
has this sin, ever since it was conceived brought forth nothing but death?
Restitution, had we but faith to believe it, were the onliest and readiest way
to settle us upon the right foundations of peace and prosperity; one would
think, to reflect a little backward upon the ruins which this Desolating Sin
has made amongst us within the compass of little more then One hundred years,
should be enough to affrighten those who have any love to their Country, if
they have but little regard to their Religion, that, for the next Generations
sake, which is to come, they would not further promote the establishing of this
iniquity by law; lest whilst they do gredily catch at the portion of meat which
is upon Gods Altar, they unawares bring a burning coal along with it, not to
cleanse their lips, but, which will burn their nests, and kill their young
ones, destroy their whole Family! Whosoever thinks to raise his House upon the
Churches ruins, (let it be in a literal or a metaphorical sense; both the
Ground is holy, and so is the portion likewise that is alloted for the
maintenance of the Building,) lays his Foundation, if not upon Sand, yet in
Fire; the Fire from Gods Altar, hid, as it were, in its own Embers at the
bottom, sometime or other will break out afresh, the ruin and destruction will
be inevitable, a sad Desolation not at all to be withstood: Not unlike this
were in a great measure the Signs and Wonders in the Text, which were causal
of a reverent esteem in the people of the administration of Gods service; (to
wit) Gods sore displeasure manifested against the sin of Sacrilege; and this
should have the same effect now, were there not a Generation of Vipers amongst
us, who delight in nothing but in Eating through the Bowels of their
Mother Church; who, notwithstanding the judgments of God so visibly terribly in
the earth, will not be persuaded to learn righteousness.

(2.) Signs and Wonders still, and those the occasions of a great Veneration,
being there were Wonders of Mercy to all those who stood in need of healing,
whilst the People took so great a delight under, and found so much benefit in
St. Peter's shadow, they could not but have respect for the substance; nay,
though Multitudes came out of the Cities round about, bringing sick folks, and
those that were vexed with unclean Spirits, they were all healed, every one.

Thus from the beginning, the fruit of the Tree of life was for the healing of
the Nations, that so the people might find a place of rest under, and at the
same time satisfy themselves in admiration of the Branches of it; The Gospel
of the Kingdom was ordained of God in the hands of Jesus, as a Mediator, in the
Mouths of the Apostles as the Dispencers of it, to be for health both unto Body
and Soul; forgiveness of sin to the one, taking away all manner of Distempers
from the other, and so a perfect salvation unto Both; whilst unto those who
fear and reverence the word of God which is to be magnified above all his name,
Christ as the Son of righteousness, his Apostles and their Successors as the
Stars in his right hand, they have their sweeter influences, and He Himself
arises, nothing less from all, but healing in their wings.

And although at this day these extraordinary benefits are withheld, there
being no need of such wonders now to confirm that word of life into which we
are no sooner born then baptized, and we all of us may, or should suck in the
sincere milk of the Word, with that which we draw from our Mothers breasts, our
parents according to the flesh being as Tutors and Governors to bring us to
God our Father, to Christ our elder Brother, and to the Church our best Mother;
yet methinks there are some Wonders of Providence like those ancient Miracles
of Mercy still continued: to consider that outward peace, plenty, and
prosperity, which God usually gives in as a Temporal advantage to that Nation
or people amongst whom his worship is celebrated in the Beauty and Glory of it;
when the Tribes of Israel go up to the Mountain of God, to serve the Lord in
that place, which out of all the Tribes he has chosen to himself; lo, in the
same City, where is the Temple of God, do they behold with admiration, and
count her Towers, mark well her Bulwarks, and reckon up the Fortresses thereof,
this the security and strength of the City; but then for its glory and
splendour, see there also Majesty as most excellent, there are the seats for
judgment, and the throne is there established for the House of David: But on
the contrary, whence come wars and tumults, intestine broils, or hostile
invasions? are they not most usually directed providentially as to the ultimate
end of them, in order to the removal of the Candlestick from those who do not
value it, who care not to rejoice in the Light that is fixed in it? hence the
Kingdom of God is taken away from those who lightly regard it, and given to
those who will reverence its Dispensation, bringing forth the fruits of
holiness in Patience and Sobriety; Where is the Church of Corinth now? or where
are the seven Churches of Asia? what is become of Antioch, where our Religion
was first Christened, the name of our Lord called upon his followers? I might
mention the rest, to whom St. Paul writes his Epistles; how were they once
exalted unto heaven in their glorious and great enjoyments? but, now they are
almost reduced to their former Gentilisme, for surely they did not continue
steadfast to the goodness of their God: -- Nay, closer yet, to make the case our
own; if the Administration of the Gospel of peace does not still keep along
with it, as its concomitant, the miraculous gift of healing all manner of
diseases and bodily infirmities; yet certainly it continues health, where it
does not restore it; or at least, the profanation of it, is that which kindles
Gods wrath against us, and provokes him to plague us with diverse Diseases, and
sundry kinds of death, (as our Liturgy, in the preparatory exhortation to the
Communion most piously observes;) to consider what ruins have been made by
Pestilence, Famine, and Sword, in Christian Common wealths; may we not say with
the Apostle, that for this cause many have been sick, many weak, and many have
fallen asleep? so that in some sense it is manifest, that the due and right
ministration of the Mystery of Godliness, has the continuance of this Life, as
well as the promise of that which is to come: would we have our days prolonged
in the Land which the Lord our God has given us? this is the Commandment, and
it is the first with a Promise; Remember we the performance of it, as of
children by our holy Church we have been taught, That we submit our selves to
all our Governors, Teachers, Spiritual Pastors and Masters; that we order our
selves lowly and reverently to all our betters; in a word, which is the sum of
all the rest, that we magnify that Religion, the due solemnities of which in
its wonted beauty is under God, (who to be sure will take care of his own
worship, either to vindicate or promote it) the only means to make us
externally happy; if the fence be well set about the Sanctuary, this will heal
all our other breaches, and restore us places to dwell in, to be sure, provide
for us everlasting habitations; God will upon this account only delight in us,
to build, and to plant, no more shall he watch over us to root out, and to
destroy; he will raise us up out of our ruins to be glorious at home, terrible
abroad, the wonder and the envy of the Nations round about us; let but our ways
please him while we tread his Courts, and our very enemies shall be at peace
with us; let us publicly and solemnly all of us as one man secure unto God the
honor of his Name, and this shall preserve us a name honorable in the earth:
which is the

Third thing observable, In what was the occasion of this popular applause, (to
wit) Signs and wonders, causal of a great Veneration, and those Miracles and
Wonders of Providence in the Propagation of the Gospel, and preservation of the
Apostles; -- Therefore the people magnified them.

Observe we in the context, the Deliverance of the Apostles from the hands of
those who hated them, and sought their lives; they were cast over night into
prison, ver. 18. and rescued at midnight by an Angel, v. 19. early in the
morning they were at their work again, standing in the Temple, and preaching to
the people, v. 21. upon all this, what could the people do less then magnify,
rise up as one man in their Defense, ver. 26. The Captains and Soldiers may
apprehend them, but in this the Disciples fared better then their Master, they
did not dare to come out to them with clubs and staves, as against thieves,
(though thieves they were in this, in that they stole away the hearts of all
the people;) no; the reason, which could not prevail upon the Jews in behalf of
our Savior, took place here, the Disciples and Apostles were daily in the
Temple, and in the Synagogues where the Jews always resort, in secret they said
nothing, and therefore the Officers bring them to the Council without violence,
for they feared the People lest they should have been stoned; the people
counted them as so many Prophets, mighty in word and in deed, and therefore
they magnified them.

And yet again; will not the Angel of the Covenant still contend in the defense
of that service in which the seals of the everlasting Covenant are dispensed?
are not Angels and Archangels all of them (...). Liturgical Spirits? [I hope
no offense in the expression, though a late carping Cynick has passed some of
his ungodly scoffing against it, not considering that Angels are assistant to
the solemnities of Religion, that in public worship with Angels and
Archangels we laud and magnify the glorious name of God our Savior, and in
imimation of Angelical Consorts in Heaven, the holy Church Militant upon earth
has borrowed her Psalmody, that so with the Triumphant there might be but One
entire Chorus to praise him who is the Lord of Hosts; this only by the way to
vindicate an innocent allusion, whoever was the Author of it, there was no heed
to quarrel it;] Angels so far, are Liturgical Spirits, as to Minister to those
who are Heirs of this great Salvation; which, amongst true Believers, in a holy
Community, in a visible Oeconmy, is dispensed:

To recount a little with thankfulness, the Providence of Almighty God, as it
was hinted in the former Discourse, and cannot too much be celebrated, nor too
often commemorated; were we not, as it were, cast into prison, in that dismal
night, that dark night of affliction, that night of trouble and of sore rebuke?
did not the Iron enter into our very souls? I am sure it was no small addition
to our misery, in that our Teachers were, if not confined, yet removed far away
into corners; the Tabernacle of God, at the best, was within curtains; and our
Priests were hid, if not in Caves and Dens, yet in the remoter parts of the
earth, of whom the World was not worthy! What good Angel was our Deliverer?
when God restored our Captivity, were we not like unto those who Dream at
midnight? But, God be praised, our heaviness endured but for a Night, though
the Night was long! joy after all came in the Morning; even in the Morning of
that Day which the Lord himself made for us, to rejoice and be glad in it; when
with our Prince, he restored us our Religion; not only our Judges, as at the
first, but our Priests as well as our Counselors; or rather our Counselors
that were Priests, happier we that they were so, even as it was in the
beginning: Methinks at length, to reflect upon the whole Series of Divine
Providence, from first to last, in the Defense of this Church of England,
should make it in the eyes of the very People, as it is Beautiful, so to them
Venerable: God has been pleased to allot the Blessing of Joseph, as the portion
of his sanctuary amongst us, and that no other then the Blessing of
Persecution, and yet the Church over all has been more then Conqueror; A little
to make out the Parallel: Genesis 49.22. Was not our Church as a fruitful bough by
a Well? and that Well, a Well of Life, from thence the Waters of Salvation? did
not the branches of this bough run over the Wall? and sad it is to think on it!
because it did so, therefore the Wall it self, the Wall of Discipline was to be
pulled down! all enclosures were laid open, that so the Boar out of the Wood,
the Beasts of the field, nay, the little Foxes too, might be let in to wast,
devour and root up every thing that was pleasant or desirable in the Churches
garden! thus the Boar of our Wood made havoc, he ranged from as far as Rome,
to snuff up the wind amongst us, and make us a desert land; the Beasts of the
Field devoured, even the Beasts of Bashan, from Geneva, round about the
farthest part of our British Isles, were they drove in upon us, terrae pars
est ultima Thule, these were they that over ran us; and the little foxes also
at home, the nibling pert Atheists joined like Foxes together, with firebrands
in their tails, have ran about, and burnt the corn in its full ear, the seed of
the word which was sown amongst us, ready for the Harvest, to yield a plentiful
increase! Tell me, have not the Archers sorely grieved this fruitful bough?
have they not shot at it? and hated it? Oh! when will their anger be mortal in
a good sense? will it never have an end? And yet after all this, the Churches
bough abode in strength; the arms of her hands were made strong, by the hands
of the Mighty God of Jacob, from hence is the Shepherd, the stone of Israel;
that stone, which though the builders of Babel in their late confusions did
reject, is once again become the Head of the Corner: And ought we not to
Magnify that, for which God has declared so much love, and so much care; that
if it be lawful to believe what he will do, by what he has done, in the
assurance of our Faith, we may comfortably hope that he will never leave us,
nor forsake us.

And yet there is one reason more to raise our esteem for such Solemn
Conventions as were at this time in Solomon's Porch; we are to Magnify that
which is administered, and those who do officiate in it, because in doing so, we
may turn away many sinners from the errors of their ways, save their souls from
death, and hide a multitude of sins; we may save our selves, and those with
whom we do converse, when they shall behold our meek Conversation, as to God
and his service, coupled with Reverence and Fear: This was the truest Respect,
the choicest Reverence, that was here given, not barely an Ecstatical,
Enthusiastical, rapid admiration; but, such a one as had an influence on the
course of this life, in the hopes of a Better, all was in order to salvation:
Which is the Fourth part of the Text; and the subject of the last Discourse;

The Fourth SERMON The great Benefit which did accrue to the whole Community
from the Reverence which was here exhibited, or rather from the whole
Dispensation at this present!
BEcause of the judgment from God inflicted, which was grievous; because of the
Signs and Wonders wrought, which were terrible; because of the public
Convention, the place of their meeting, their behavior there, all which were
holy; because of the due distance observed, which was solemn; because of the
awful Reverence exhibited which was beautiful and glorious; because of the
Providence of God exerted, which was miraculous, but yet Constant; all these
things did work together for good to those who should be saved; (...) --
Believers were the more added to the Lord, Multitudes of men and women:

So that, already you may percieve, that this last Discourse is to be confined
to these two particulars.
1. To consider what was the occasion of this great Benefit, employed in the
words (...) the rather; or, the more; and so referring to all those
circumstances, but now enumerated, all contributing to the increase of their
Number, who were the general Assembly of the firstborn.

Secondly, What this great Benefit it self was, more particularly, and closely
to be examined; and that in these following Particulars, all within the compass
of the words themselves.

First, A Conversion, or an Effectual Calling; (...). Some that were added, and
that in an External Communion; because they were added, therefore the increase
of their number was visible; added to the Lord; but so as to be known in, and
acknowledged by the Church.

Secondly, a due qualification; and that internal, in the heart; but, still in
order to an outward profession; (...). They were Believers in the Lord; added
to the Churches Communion, and there holding the Faith which was once delivered
to them.

Thirdly, For their Number; the Benefit great, because it was diffusive; the
Redemption was the more precious, because intimated that it might be Universal
(...). They were Multitudes.

Fourthly, No respect of Persons, in relation unto Sex; in Christ Jesus, it is
not Male, nor Female, but a New Creature; the weaker Vessel has here its equal
honor, and proportionable too, in its number, (...). There were Multitudes, as
of Men, so of Women; of honorable and virtuous Women, and of holy Men not a
few.

Fifthly, (...), all this the rather, which is again to be considered in
relation to the Subject, capable of this great benefit; the rather, because of
what they saw, and what they heard; and so it may denote in these Multitudes,
an Act of free choice, and mature deliberation; they saw what was done, and
they heard what was spoke, and were convinced of all; so that it was an Act of
their judgment, and of their reason, in that they delivered themselves up to
the obedience of their Faith. Believers were the more added to the Lord,
multitudes of Men and Women.

First, To begin with that which is in the Text both first and last, (...) The
rather did this great Benefit accrue; or the more was it enhanced, occasion
being given for this increase, because of those various circumstances
ennumerated, all which wrought together for the good of those who should be
saved, by all which God was pleased to add unto the number of those who were to
be blessed in glory everlasting. I shall only touch upon each of the
forementioned circumstances conducing to this happy increase, and so apply the
main scope of the former Discourses, to the intent that holiness may be
promoted, Diffusive love, and universal Charity may be increased, and that the
God of Order may be glorified, in the hearts of all men.

First, Because of the judgment from God inflicted upon the sin of Sacrilege,
which was grievous; hence Believers were the more added to the Lord, and those
Multitudes, ver. 11. Fear came upon the whole Church; Ob recentem adhuc ex
prodigioso Ananiae interitu metum; id tamen progressui Evangelii non obfuit;
the surprise was sudden, and yet still conuinued; timor fecit Deum, the Gospel
of God was glorified, from the fears of those who were affrightned; the
terrors of the Lord did work kindly in order to a through and a pure
persuasion: Psalm. 110.2. This was the rod of strength out of Sion, in that
Christ and his word should rule in medio inimicorum, in the midst, round about,
and over all his enemies, in the day of so dreadful a power, the People were a
willing People: Fear is properly the coarctation of the Spirits upon any
surprise, summoning them from the more distant parts of the body, to the relief
of the nobler parts, of the heart chiefly, which is the principle seat of life;
and so it might seem here in the Union of the Body of the Church assembled;
they sought God in the way of his judgments, at the dreadful effects of which
they could not but be affrightned as men; and yet as Christians, they did hence
take occasion to pluck up their Spirits, the more earnestly to attend upon the
service of their God, securing in the first place the integrity of their Souls
toward him, in so much, that should God kill them all the day long, exhibiting
himself in nothing but the sad expressions of his wrath that he is a jealous
God, and a Consuming fire, yet, they did all of them humbly resolve, as one
man, to put their trust in him. Not unlike to this, was that glorious and
Beneficial effect of the Divine Displeasure, against those Exorcists, who
Sacrilegiously arrogated to themselves the Apostolical gift, presuming to cast
out Devils in the Name of Jesus, saying, We adjure thee by Jesus whom Paul
Preaches; the evil Spirit knew both the Master and his Servant; Jesus I know,
and Paul I know, but who are ye? and leaping upon them, he prevailed against
them, so that they fled away naked and wounded; The result of all which, Act.
19.17. was, that when this came to be known to the Jews, and the Greeks,
dwelling at Ephesus, fear came on them all, and the Name of the Lord Jesus was
Magnified; many of them that believed came, and confessed and showed their
deeds, they were not ashamed to declare their sin, by an open acknowledgment in
Confession, in order to a Ministerial, and so more than a Declarative
Absolution; they would no longer have to do either with the work, or with the
wages of iniquity; those that used curious Arts, brought their Books and burnt
them, whereof the price valued, came to Fifty thousand pieces of Silver; may
all this wealth perish, so they may but save themselves; and then ver. 20. as
the consequence upon so remarkable a judgment, The Word of God grew mightily,
and prevailed. One instance more; The eyes of Sergius Paulus were not opened,
until that upon St. Paul's invocation, Elymas the Sorcerer was struck with
blindness, for that he sought to turn away the Deputy from the Faith; the hand
of the Lord was upon him, that he should not see the Sun for a season, in that
he so wickedly stood both in his own, and in others light, not ceasing to
pervert the right ways of the Lord, Act. 13.12. Then the Deputy when he saw
what was done, Believed; lying as it were in a Trance, his eyes were open,
being astonished at the Doctrine of the Lord. The Doctrine of the Lord,
accompanied with Astonishment, Wrath being executed in its just vindication,
does thereby engage to it self Proselyts of all sorts, first soberly to admire,
and then most heartily to embrace it; but on the contrary, when judgment
against the evil works, or the evil speeches of wicked men, is not executed
speedily, then a general remissness invades the most, it is set in the hearts
of the Sons of men to do mischief: however, God is not slack in the Defense of
his Church, as some may count it slackness, but is long-suffering, not willing
that any should perish, but that all should come unto repentance, especially,
such who are within the compass of an Evangelical Dispensation, who have given
up their names to Christ in a solemn profession; It might be requisite amongst
Heathens and Infidels at the first, to be swift in avenging all manner of
despites or affronts done to the way of Godliness; but since that Christianity
is our badge and livery, and the Cross is the banner we do fight under, its
universal Administration should render it Sacred and Venerable to all its
Professors, that they do not despise Gods Service amongst them, which has so
long been, to say no more, the Religion of their Country; and if no other,
this reason may prevail a little, that they do not abhor that Worship, which is
the Worship of the God of their Fathers; however, these Mockers and Scoffers
may please to behave themselves, whether they will hear, or whether they will
forbear, they must be told, that because God is silent, he is not therefore
consenting to their impieties; Epistle of St. Jude ver. 14.15. The Lord comes
with Ten thousand of his Saints; the affronts done to those holy ones, he
reckons as done to himself; he comes to execute judgment upon all, to convince
all that are ungodly amongst them of all their ungodly deeds, which they have
ungodlily committed, and of all their hard speeches; those words of bitterness
and hatred, which ungodly sinners have spoken against him; in the mean time
Gods judgments are round about them, and they do not regard; they die daily in
their sins, and those that survive do not lay it to heart; nay, their
Posterity, a wicked offspring, praise their sayings; should one arise to them
from the dead, they will not believe; yet, they have Moses and the Prophets,
those that sit in the Chair of Moses, those who declare unto them, how, and in
whom, the Prophecies are fulfilled, let them hear these: Oh! that they would at
length see, and be ashamed, considering the Solemnities of holiness, in spite
of men and Devils, still appearing glorious, whilst the Dispensation of life is
in any measure Beautiful, even this has its due influence on the lives of men,
be they many and numerous, in order to a great Salvation; especially when the
word of Life thus delivered, is confirmed by Miracles, be they of what sort
soever; and that is the

Second thing occasional of this great benefit here bestowed upon the Church;
because of the Signs and Wonders wrought, which were terrible; Therefore
Believers were the more added to the Lord, multitudes of men and women. Though
Faith be the evidence of things not seen, as it is an inhaerent Theological
grace; yet, in the first reception of the Gospel, God was pleased so to order
it, that seeing should be the occasion of Believing; had not Christ and his
Apostles wrought those Works, never such before, and never to be the like
again, the question might have been peremptorily answered in the negative, When
the Son of man comes, shall he find Faith in the earth? So true it is, that
the report of God himself is not readily believed, unless the Arm of the Lord
be also revealed in works of Wonder: And still, unto this day, the first reason
which we do properly give of our Christian Faith, and of the hope that is in
us, is the firm belief that the Gospel at the first was delivered by Miracles
and Signs following it; and those Miracles, all, and each of them,
Demonstrative of a Deity; God thus Redeeming the World with a stretched out
Arm, and with great and mighty judgments; judgments which if we consider with
all their circumstances attending them, we needs must confess to have been
remote from all manner of Imposture, not in the least to be compared or
mentioned with Legendary Fictions, they do not at all conclude absurdly, but
evidence an Omnipotent Power, and so are not unfit arguments for Faith. Thus,
as it was with Israel of old, in that Deliverance, of which this great
Redemption was the Antitype, they could not persuade themselves that God would
visit them, without a Miracle; Exodus 4.8, 9. It shall come to pass if they will
not hearken to the voice of the first Sign, that they will beeieve the voice of
the latter Sign; and if they will not believe those two Signs, yet a third
shall convince them; and the third Sign was typical of a more desirable
happiness; it was Water turned into Blood, an intimation, that Blood it self in
order to Redemption, should have a cleansing virtue; So that in the mouth of
two or three Witnesses, the Word of Salvation, whether in the Type, or in
Antitype was established, God Almighty all along providing for the satisfaction
of common sense, that men might receive the Truths published upon the credit of
their eyes, and of their ears, as well as they do of other things, which are
conveyed to them by the help of their outward senses; and hence a through
Conviction is wrought upon the very Conscience: which works of Wonder, though
done so long since, may still have an influence upon us, in that we have as
good reason to believe them, as we have to give our assent to any thing that
has been performed in former Ages; Our Fathers have told us the mighty works,
and the noble acts which God did in their days, and in the old time before
them; hence from the Psalmist, our Church has taught us to make this our humble
and hearty request, That God still arise in the Defense of his Gospel, to help
and Deliver the Professors and Dispensors of it, for his names sake, and for
his honor: He that shall call into question, or suspend his belief to the
History of Redemption, as from an Universal Tradition it has been delivered
down faithfully by the Church, in the Oracles of God; and yet at the same time
does not in the least boggle at many things more fabulous in the Annals of his
own Country; or it may be, in the descent of his own pedigree; such a person
may think himself wise in his own Generation; and yet a very fool, in that upon
the mere account of an uncontrollable Tradition, he will give credence to that,
which because of the manner of its conveyance is of it self questionable,
rather then to the Gospel of Peace, confirmed by Miracles, and in the nature of
the thing thus delivered to posterity from one age to another, that from the
beginning, they were wrought by an Almighty Power, that so from the Father to
the Child, in the Generations to come, there might not be wanting an infallible
convincing argument to raise, and as it were, to propagate and preserve a most
firm belief; And after all this, we have a more sure word of Prophecy, to
which we shall do well if we take heed with Reverence, and that is the outward
and more Visible administration of this Gospel, thus confirmed, which is the

Third thing causal of the Great Benefit bestowed here upon the Church, and is
to continue to the end of the World; (viz.) because of the public Convention,
the place of their meeting; and their Behavior there, all which were holy,
therefore Believers were added to the Lord, and those Multitudes. Gods
institution, and the Primitive practice of the Apostles, is to be embraced in
order to Salvation. It was Gods command to his people Israel, though they were
in the Wilderness, that they should make him a Sanctuary, Exodus 25.8. even the
Tabernacle it self was so called; and the reason added is this, That I may
dwell among them; nay, even at this time, God Almighty did in some sort
declare, that he would restrain his acceptance only to such solemnities, Exodus
20.24. immediately after the Law was given, this was Gods promise upon the
observance of it, in all places where I record my name, will I come unto thee,
and bless thee: And with the Apostle, we may argue in a literal sense, 2 Cor.
3.7. " If the Ministration of death written and engraven in stones were
glorious; how shall not the Ministration of the Spirit be rather glorious? if
the Ministration of Condemnation be glory, much more does the Ministration of
Righteousness exceed in glory; if that which was to be done away was glorious,
much more that which remains is still glorious. To be short and plain; for I
have already instanced upon this at large; Neglecting the Assembling of our
selves together, turning our backs upon the places of public Worship, and an
irreverent behavior at such solemnities, is all one, as if we should deny our
selves the means of our Salvation; how can you expect in faith, that God should
go out of his way to meet you; when you turn aside from those paths which he
has declared do lead to him? What reason is there that we should now have a
recourse to, and make a virtue of that, which only under Persecution was a
Necessity! is it not absurd, as well as impious, in the nature of the thing it
self, to imagine, that when the Churches are open, the Truth must betake it
self into corners? it is something surely to be in the way, in the ready road
to happiness; that which has been for so many hundred years successful in order
to Conversion, we have good reason to believe that it will be so still; and it
is frowardness and pievishness against a Community, Presumption, and that in a
high degree of Providence, for those who are but men, to venture upon an
extraordinary success, and that in opposition to, and against those ordinary
usual means, which ever since our Christianity, have been certainly and surely
established: that which is Gods honor, is our Benefit, and so we may safely
apply that of the Apostle; Ephesians. 3.20, 21. It is God alone who is able to do
exceedingly, above all that we ask or think, even according to the effectual
power which he works in us; and yet, notwithstanding this most effectual
power, working in us, above and beyond all our thoughts and requests; To him,
says the Apostle, We do ascribe Glory in the Church, by Christ Jesus,
throughout all ages, World without end.

Fourth, and Fifth Things causal of this great Benefit bestowed upon the
Church; both these joined together for brevities sake, and indeed they cannot
well be separated, being so jointly productive of this Benefit in the Text
(viz.) because of the Distance here kept, which was Solemn; because of the
awful Reverence exhibited, which was beautiful, and glorious, therefore
Believers were the more added to the Lord, and those Multitudes. Familiarity is
causual of contempt; but the farther from parity, the nearer to, and the closer
the Communion; so consequential (as formerly instanced,) are these Three
Articles of our Creed upon each other, The Catholic Apostolic Church, The
Communion of Saints, and the Forgiveness of Sins: Faith, as it comes by hearing
in a public Solemnity; so it, with Love is increased, by that due reverence
which is given to such who Minister in that Solemnity; the Message can not
choose but be received, which is accompanied with honor: An equality either
amongst Sacred Persons themselves, or between them and the People, does not in
the least tend to edification; there is neither order nor peace in levelling;
and when once the murmuring complaint arrives to this much, That the whole
Congregation are as holy, every one of them, as Moses or Aaron, no wonder if
the fire offered upon the Altar prove to be a strange fire, not a fire to
baptize and purify, but to burn and consume the whole Assembly in a moment. It
is the Apostles advice, that we give unto all their dues, Romans 13.7. Fear to
whom fear, honor to whom honor, so shall we not be wanting in our love to
any, and that love will be the fulfilling of the whole Law. 1 Cor. 7.24. (...).
Let every man wherein he is called, therein abide; and abiding therein, this is
to be with God. No wonder therefore, if one reason assigned for the decay of
Christian Piety, be Disputes in general, and those most an end in Opposition to
Authority; when in such things that either they need not, or to be sure they
ought not, Men will be Judges for themselves: I might here survey the mischiefs
arising hence in reference both to religious, and civil peace; when outward
Order and Unity, which are the effect of a regular subjection is disturbed,
then Christianity it self in its very Constitution, as it is a Religion
established in the World, is wounded; but I cannot write after an exquisite
pen; neither have I time to improve what is suggested to me in the 12th. chap.
of that excellent Book, the Decay of Christian Piety; only this one remark,
suitable to the matter in hand, both in reference to the Author, and his most
Pious Work: and it is this; For want of Order and due Respect promoted in love
betwixt one man and another, The whole Duty of Man has been forgotten, both in
Relation to God, and to our selves; by giving our selves too much freedom in
despising Men, made after the Image of God; We have learnt to Blaspheme God
himself; inimicus homo, fecit hoc; The enemy has sown his Tares to choke, and
supplant that which was good, and this might move that holy, incomparable
Person, (whoever he be, his reward is with him) to divert his thoughts sadly
upon the transgressions of those rules of Duty which he had so exactly
described; I name this Book the rather, with this honorable, but sad remark
upon it, recommending it to every ones serious perusal; The not practicing of
the whole Duty of Man has been the woeful Decay of Christian Piety, and an
occasion given to Survey the lamentable ruins of Religion amongst us. -- Yet,
once more; -- Notwithstanding the love of many is waxen cold, and that in a
great measure, Honor and due respect has been laid in the dust; yet, God in
his wonderful Providence is all-sufficient; which is the

Sixth Thing causal to this great Benefit bestowed upon the Church; (to wit)
the Providence of God exerted, which was, though miraculous, yet constant;
surpassing wonderful, and yet sure; Therefore Believers were the more added to
the Lord, and those Multitudes. And this was Gamaliel's reflection upon the
present affair; the wisdom of God was justified at this time, even from the
wisdom of this World. ver. 35. " Take heed what you intend to do as touching
these men; ver. 38. Refrain from them, and let them alone: for if this work, or
this counsel be of man, it will come to naught; but if it be of God, ye cannot
overthrow it, lest happily ye be found to fight against God.

There is something more in that Promise made by our Savior to the Disciples,
in reference to them, and an Apostolical Succession, then some of our Modern
Erastians are willing to believe, St. Mat. 28.20. Behold I am with you always,
to the end of the World: God, who from the beginning made the Blood of Martyrs
to be the Seed of the Church; can also, how, and when he pleases, and has
hitherto done it in all ages, make the strivings of a froward and unruly
People, turn unto his Praise: see ye not, said the Pharisees of our Savior,
how that we prevail nothing; Behold, the whole World is gone out after him! And
so for the Church, the Defense of it is sure, and that Defense everlasting
about the glory of it, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it;
that which has been, will be, and throughout all ages will it continue, yea,
though the Heathen, and men of Heathenish Principles do rage, should they, as
they do daily, by their strange, unheard of suggestions, such as should not be
named amongst Christians, professing godliness, endeavor to undermine
foundations, yet the Word of Life will prevail; The Seed of the Woman does
every day break the Serpents head, and at the worst it shall but bruise his
heal; and at length, through by a bruised heel, the Devil and all his Devices
shall be trampled upon; so mighty is the Word of God, so certain his
Providential Care, so Successful and Prosperous is our Savior in his
Government, as it was promised to him, that a bruised Reed should not be
broken, a smoking Flax should not be quenched, until that he brings all manner
of judgment unto Victory, whereupon we do believe, the Churches constant Prayer
to be efficacious, that because of all this danger on every side, God would be
pleased to strengthen those that stand, to comfort and help the weak hearted,
to raise up them that fall, and finally to beat down Satan under our feet. The
wrath and the Wiles (...). The Methods and contrivances of deceit shall
contribute to Gods glory, and the Churches, because Militant, therefore the
more Triumphant happiness; whilst they that have embraced her Faith, from these
shakings, shall be the better established; they shall be the more firm and
resolute to a peremptory, fixed, and a settled Belief: Be the judgments of God
upon the wicked slighted, though grievous; be the Signs and Wonders disputed
and cavilled at, though terrible; be the Conventions and Solemnities for
Religion dis regarded, though every way Holy; be the honor of sacred Persons
buried, quite extinct, and they counted (...). The dung and the filth of the
Earth; yet, a sure Providence will make amends for all; God will one way or
other secure to himself his own appointment; all things shall work, if not
separately and distinctly, in their more direct and immediate consequences; yet
jointly and together, for good to those who shall be saved; and day by day,
amidst all manner of discouragements, Believers are the more added to the Lord,
Multitudes of men and women: which Great inestimable Benefit, since it is so
certainly founded upon Gods Promise, maintained and supported by his
Providence, it is now high time that we consider it more closely, what it is?
which is the

Second Part of this Discourse; in which I promise all possible Brevity; (to
wit) what this Benefit redounding so upon every account to the Church in a
settled Community, is? as it may be examined by these Particulars!
(1.) A Conversion, or an effectual Calling; (...) Some that were added to the
Lord; and this a great Benefit, because it was in an external Communion; they
being added, therefore the increase of their number was visible; the Syriack
Version renders it, accrescebant, they were added to the Lord, that is, so as
to be known in, and acknowledged by the Church; thus they which were added, are
reckoned up by a certain number, for an uncertain to be about five thousand,
Chap. 4.4. and still their number increases, till it surpass Arithmetic, by a
strange and liberal addition, they were Multitudes. The same thing our Divine
Historian, the Apostolical Amanuensis, St. Luke takes notice of, what was the
effect of St. Peter's first Sermon, not only the Faith of those which were
converted, but likewise their Baptism, by which they were admitted to the
further profession of that word, which at the first hearing they had recieved
with gladness, Act. 2.41. The same day, the General reception of the word was
already past, and in the same day the Seal of the Covenant was conferred, in
that there were added to them, as they were an Apostolic Church, about three
thousand souls: and to warrant me this remark upon the Addition here in the
Text, and those other places, we have it expressly, Chap. 2.47. The Lord added
to the Church daily such as should be saved: from all which this inference is
obvious,

That, out of the Church, we are not to presume for Salvation; or to give it
you in as modest terms as may be, and those naturally deduced from the Text;
They that shall be saved with the Lord, are first of all supposed to be added
by the Lord to the Church.

Faith, though it be the gift of God in the Heart unto Salvation; yet he gives
unto every man a certain measure, no otherwise than by an Ecclesiastical
Dispensation; For to make a summary rehearsal of that Creed, into which we are
Baptized; this is the compendium of the whole, The Creed, which, with good
reason, we call the Apostles Creed, or at least, Apostolical, is in our
Church-Catechisme distinguished, and divided into the Belief of the Father, our
Creator; of the Son, our Redemer; and of the Holy Ghost, the Comforter; ruling
in all our hearts, in order to a through Sanctification: now, in the assurance
of this Holy Ghost, as he is a Spirit of Prophecy, we do believe a Catholic
and Apostolic Church; in that Church, as it is Apostolic and Catholic, we
must acknowledge a Communion of Saints, the result of which Communion, in this
Church, from the Holy Ghost, is the forgiveness of our Sins; whatsoever is
loosed on Earth, is loosed also in Heaven, whence we do further believe and
hope for the Resurrection of our flesh, and the Life in the World to come: And,
therefore to the Doctrine of the Trinity, the Father Creating, the Son
Redeeming, and the Holy Ghost Purifying; as also to those Articles of the
Church, Administering in a visible, holy Communion, the Remission of Sins, unto
all such as look for the Resurrection to eternal Life, we, in the assurance of
our Faith, are to say, Amen. -- I would at length, fain put it to the question,
what people generally have in their thoughts, when they stand up at their
Creed, and say, that they Believe a holy Catholic and Apostolic Church? in
effect, it should be thus much, that they do confess, there is a Congregation
and Corporation of Christian people, though dispersed throughout the whole
world; that this society is united in a holy Communion, under Christ the
supreme, and only Head; that it is assisted, moved, and directed by the Holy
Ghost; that it is Matriculated, as it were, into one holy Congregation and
fraternity by Baptism; sustained by the word of Catechizing, which is milk for
babes; nourished by the Lords Supper, which is meat for stronger men; that it
is continued by an holy Apostolical Succession, by which the Keys of the
Kingdom are faithfully administered, whatsoever is bound on earth, is ratified
in heaven; and after all this, does the promise of Christ signify nothing,
that he will be with his Church, so universally, and every way holy, that so
whither he, as the Head, is gone, the Members may follow after, every one in
his own order, Christ the first, afterward, those that are Christ's, both
before, and at his coming? And if this be the meaning of the Article, as, had I
time, might soon be proved from several Scriptures; and our Separatists
themselves do not deny, but that this Summary Compendium of Faith is both
ancient, and a sound Confession, (we thank them that at the same time, when
they thrust it out of our Churches, they were pleased to annex it to the close
of their Calvinistical Catechism) I would demand of them, and put it to the
Conscience of those who are deluded by them, how they can expect salvation in
another world, when they avoid the communion of the Saints in this? and that
against their vow in Baptism, against their solemn Profession of Faith, I
might, I persuade my self urge it, against their own inward sentiments,
whenever they do seriously think upon it, what this Article of their Creed does
mean, or else they must be notoriously hypocritical before God, against their
own reason? something or other they must believe, when they do confess that
there is such a thing as a holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church; and what can
they believe to their souls good, but that in the Communion of this Church,
they do expect salvation? Let them, if they are so foolhardy, excommunicate
themselves, and so put themselves into the condition of Heathens, to be saved
without a law, and beside the Gospel, if God so please; to be sure there is
great safety in the Christian institution, as the Church is a holy society; if
with our hearts we believe, and with our mouths we make confession of that
Faith which was once delivered to the Saints, (to wit) that there is a Holy,
Catholic Church, and in that Church, a Holy Communion of Saints, and the
result of both these, is the forgiveness of sins; and that, because of the
Churches Catholic Faith, that there shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, (for
unless it be so, we are still in our sins) when both soul and body are to be
united together, in order to be made partakers of everlasting life, undoubtedly
we shall be saved; I know there are some who quarrel at the Athanasian Creed,
though they have subscribed to it, for these words in it, however, I am not
afraid to cite them to our present purpose whosoever will be saved, (that is in
the unity of the Church) before all things, he must be careful that he hold the
Catholic Faith; (for the Church is Catholic) which faith, except he keep
whole, and undefiled, without doubt he shall perish everlastingly: And so I
pass to the

Second instance of this great Benefit, here accruing from the present
Dispensation; and that is, a due qualification internal in the heart; but,
still in order to an outward profession, (...). they were Believers in the
Lord, which were now added to the Churches Communion, holding the Faith, as
from the Apostles at this time it was delivered.

By Faith here, not to spend time in the ordinary Definitions of it, we may
securely understand, the pious and fiducial application of all the
circumstances of this outward administration, to each man's particular and
private concerns; whatsoever was publicly dispensed, was in the heart of those
that were assembled, digested, in an humble assurance of salvation therefrom.
So that, upon this account, Schism, from a Visible Communion, is the result of
Infidelity; it is an evil heart of Unbelief, that departs from God our Father,
or the Church our Mother, in that, whosoever he be that separates, he cannot,
or he will not, make due and sober reflections upon outward services, in order
to his own private satisfaction and Benefit: Yea, and this does intimate unto
us, the great advantage of solemn, and regular institutions in the Church, in
that the meannest, and the plainest persons, may join in its communion; each
man particularly reflecting upon his own circumstances, may beforehand resolve,
and apply such and such particular passages in Divine Services, to the like
particular emergency in himself, and so, literally prepare himself for the
worship of his God, according to the preparations of his Sanctuary; such
Petitions as these, are the Prayers of Faith; the Church does thus receive a
liberal addition, but the Belief is in the Lord; we may with the more
confidence expect acceptance, when we make our humble requests in the voice of
the Church, Prayers, which were certainly composed by the assistance of the
Holy Ghost, (for these two Articles in our Creed, follow one on the other, the
Holy Ghost, and the Holy Church;) this is the best, and most effectual Praying
by the Spirit, when Public Prayers are in Faith and Piety, referred to private
necessities; he that has Faith, has it to himself, and therefore for himself,
each one says, I Believe; but when we pray, it is to be with a Public Spirit,
in regard to a whole Community, and therefore Christ has taught us to say, Our
Father; Vis unita fortior, both the Solemnity, as of God, and the whole
assembly, as before him, do contribute much to the intensness, and vehemence of
the Devotion; it is thus an effectual fervent Prayer, because in, and by the
Church, and so the greater are the praises ascribed unto God amongst the
Multitudes; Which is the

Third instance, of this Great Benefit at this present Ecclesiastical
Dispensation; the Benefit Great, because diffusive; the Redemption precious
because intimated, that it might be Universal, (...) the Believers added to the
Lord in the Community of the Church, were Multitudes.

Multitudes, and those in a Communion, together with one accord, how were the
Solemnities in Solomon's Porch both glorious and efficacious? this was the
Gospels great energy at the first, in that it gained Proselytes unto its
profession, by Multitudes; But alas! this has of later years been the
Epidemical Degeneracy in the Christian world, in that our Religion looses of
its followers, even to a Popular Backsliding! Is it not sad to reflect upon it?
that the Church should be almost reduced to a necessity of humouring the
Multitude, against its own Communion! whereas external unity was wont to be
effectual in the hearts of all, how many soever they were that saw it, that
they should seek after it: And yet, this is Visible, beit in reality, or in
strife, their number is great who by Faith in the Lord, are added to the
Church; and therefore, though we cannot suppose the Multitudes here, to be so
distinguished, yet the usual account given us of the Outward Church is, that
the Multitudes in its Communion are of two sorts; either formal Professors; or
sincere, true Believers; and both these do belong to Christ's Visible Body; the
Tares will multiply together with the good Corn, until the harvest, one and
the same Field incloseth both, they are not separated, till that which proves
best is fit for the Granary; in the mean time it is not for man to presume to
make a difference; so the Church increase by Multitudes, we are therein to
rejoice, and in our joy to hide even a Multitude of Sins; let every one examine
his own heart, whether he experience to a spiritual and a holy advantage, the
comfortable effect of that Communion under which he lives? and so, as to the
Multitudes, a judgment of Charity will, in the best sense, and to very good
purpose, comprehend them all; whatsoever may be the Election of grace, this is
sure, we are not to be censorious in reference to the present, or future state
of any, since the seal of that Election is, that God only knows, who are his;
however, for our comfort, with him there is no respect of persons; of every
Age, and of every sex, whosoever works righteousness is accepted with him;
the Multitudes seem to imply all the Young and Old, high and low, One with
another; but more particularly this General Division of Mankind is specified,
to show that the whole race is included; Which is the

Fourth Instance, of a great Benefit in this present Dispensation; there was no
difference in relation unto Sex; in Christ Jesus, it is neither Male, nor
Female, but a New Creature; even the weaker Vessel, has here its equal honor,
and proportionable too in its number, (...) there were Multitudes, as of Men,
so of Women; of honorable and virtuous Women, and of holy Men, not a few.
Vtriusque sexus fit mentio, quia in utroque judicium sacrilegii; Mention is
here made of both sexes, because that Gods judgment against the sin of
Sacrilege, was exerted upon both; Ananias and his Wife, were alike consenting
to the sin, and they share alike in the dreadful punishment; that hence, both
Men and Women be forewarned, that they should be as the Apostle directs, Gal.
3.28. As Male, and Female all one in, not against Christ Jesus.

Considering in the Text, both Sexes met together in a holy Communion, their
faith increased with the increase of God; I might observe, how that schism and
separation, like the Devil of old, begins with a Division, even upon this
account; first, surprising and shattering the weaker Vessel; Women, who because
of their tender apprehensions, and their weaker judgments, do quickly embrace
any thing that is offered them, in reference to a future state, are many times
seduced into a mistake; Act. 13.50. even the Devotion of honorable Women, was
abused by the Jews unto error, they raising a persecution against St. Paul by
this means, whom, they could easily persuade, that in so doing they did God
good service; I would not here speak without a witness; what I urge is from the
Scripture, 2 Timothy 3.6. Of this sort are they, who creep into houses, and lead
captive silly women, who are ever learning, and because thus deceived, they
never come to the knowledge of the Truth; But, this is not as Men and Women
professing Godliness; God, from the beginning, intended that they should be meet
helps to each other, not only in the circumstances of humane life, but also of
Divine and Religious worship; and shall they act the Devils part one against
another? what, must they seduce and betray, and that of all things in Gods
service? What? is the Wife in the Bosom, a Serpent there? or, is the Man at
her right hand, a Lion in the way to devour? No, may they live together as
becomes holiness, the one in love, honor and prudence, the other in silence
and obedience, both together in godliness and sobriety, which have the Blessing
of this life, and of that which is to come; let us all therefore, both Men and
Women, without designs upon each other, as One in the Lord, choose those things
which are good and profitable, and which tend to peace; Which is the

Fifth and last Instance, of the great Benefit here in the Text, unto the whole
Community, from the present Dispensation; and that, once again, yet another
reflection upon the (...), the more; or, the rather was this great addition
made to the Church; all this, because of what they saw, and what they heard,
which denotes, even in the Multitudes, in the Women, as well as in the Men, an
act of their free choice, upon a most sober and mature deliberation: Here was
no violence at all offered upon their faculties; though it was the terror of
the Lord in a most dreadful judgment, yet it kindly persuades them; the Signs
and Wonders were both Miraculous and Convincing; the solemn and holy
Convention, because Beautiful, therefore of it self desirable; the Miracles of
Providence, though they were surpassing, yet they were clear and manifest; so
that at this time, as at all others, God drew the People unto himself, with the
cords of a Man, that so, whilst he drew, they might of themselves run after
him; they were a willing People, though it was a day of power; they saw what
was done, they heard what was spoken, and throughout they were convinced of
all; so that it was here an act both of their judgment, and their reason, in
that they did deliver themselves up unto the obedience of Faith; Believers were
the more, or the rather added to the Lord, Multitudes of men and women.

I need not, (neither have I time to prosecute it as I should) here urge, that
God works with us, and within us, in order to salvation; as we are men, and
reasonable creatures; he proposes everlasting happiness to us in his Word, or
by his Church, as to our free voluntary choice; and whilst he does kindly
allure us, he does at the same time leave us in the hand of our own counsel;
See, I have set before you Fire and Water, Blessing and a Curse, Life and
Death; choose you whether you will, says God by his Prophet, Deu. 30.19. But I
am confined both by the time, and the Text, that I cannot descant so closely as
I might upon this Problem, which is indeed too much controverted; At present,
I take it for granted, that which I suppose, every one experienceth upon
consulting his own thoughts, that we are all of us, as men, endued with reason,
free sreatures, and voluntary Agents; and that we would do good, but evil is
present with us, because we are not in our judgments, or to our senses,
sufficiently convinced, as we might, of what is best:

And therefore, since the Design of all that hitherto is inferred from this
Text, is to promote Unity and Uniformity amongst Brethren, professing
Godliness, which is here the Holy solemnity, The Apostles, with the Primitive
Christians, all with one accord, in a holy Place; and upon this, their persons
reverenced, the Word of Life was magnified, it did not return in vain, but
accomplished the work for which it was sent, for the Benefit was great, and
exceeding prosperous; for a parting now to this subject, so much insisted on,
in one word, fain I would persuade; shall we suffer the word of exhortation? Be
entreated to frequent Solomon's Porch, the Author, because of that August
solemnity, and Ministration that is in it; we should, with David, be glad to go
up unto the House; choose to be a Doorkeeper in the Porch, to wait at the Gates
of Wisdom, rather than assemble amidst the Congregations of the wicked. Tell
me, says the Spouse to Christ, Cant. 1.7. where thou feedest? where thou make
thy flocks to rest at noon? and this was her kind expostulation, Why should I
be as one that turns aside from the flocks of thy Companions? our Savior
there feeds, where he is himself fed upon; the flocks are there together;
yea, and at rest, and that, at noon; Separation is a work of Darkness, chooses
to it self the night; To turn aside, is to be, as one, Vae soli! alone, and woe
to him that is alone! this the greatest, both sin and misery, to forsake those
flocks, which in love and Unity, are companions.

Behold then; may the Separatists of our Age see, that I have set before them,
Fire and Water, Blessing and a Curse, Life and Death; Choose they whether they
will: -- Fire, not a strange fire, but that of the Sanctuary, a pure, and
bright flame of Love, upon Gods Altar: Water; alas! the waters are troubled;
schism and sedition, is a tempestuous sea, casting forth mire and dirt;
Blessing, even that which is out of Sion, good luck and Prosperity, out of the
House of the Lord: A Curse, none more bitter, to be cut off from the
Congregation; what? will our Schismatics, thus invade the Priests Office? will
they excommunicate themselves? and deliver themselves up to Satan? shall God by
his Prophet call unto them, and say, stand ye in the ways and see, and ask for
the old paths, where is the old way? the good way, because the old way, and
amidst all our tumblings and tossings from one post to another, we cannot find
a better! Shall God command peremptorily, that we walk in these ways, with a
promise, of rest unto our souls? for out of such paths, there is nothing but
disorder and disquietude! and shall we return that answer which the Jews did?
Jer. 6.16. But, they said, we will not walk therein. Thus the Rebels, against
their settled and fixed administration of old, Korah, and his Accomplices,
Numb. 14.2. Moses called them to the Congregation, and they said, We will not
come up; they turned their backs to the Tabernacle, Satan therefore claimed
them for his Synagogue, and soon took possession of them, Hell from beneath was
moved to meet them at their coming, The Earth opened her Mouth, and they went
down alive into the Pit! and therefore, yet once more, may the Sons of Belial,
who cast off every yoke, see this day, set before them, Life and Death, and
that, in the utmost extremity, in the eternity of both; Life, a Life of of
Grace here, in order to glory hereafter; and still out of Sion, goes forth this
Blessing, the Promise of Life for evermore; Christ, with whom are the words of
eternal Life, is not to be found, (as I must again and again inculcate) in the
Wilderness, or in the secret Chamber; but in Solomon's Porch; by the Chair of
Moses, not in the Stool of Wickedness, or in the Seat of the Scornful; he is
head of all things to his Church, in the Communion of which alone we expect
salvation; without, there is nothing but sin, sin that excludes from pardon,
the wages of which is Death; Solomon has in a Proverb told us, the misery of
those who turn aside from his Porch; The Man that wandreth out of the way, out
of the beaten path of understanding, shall fall into the Congregation of the
Dead. And now let our Schismatics choose for themselves; I have in this, though
a private Person, yet with a public spirit, as public as is their sedition,
in some sort delivered my own soul; and they shall not perish without warning,
and that repeated, with as much vehemence, as are their Divisions; God in mercy
give a Blessing! And so, may they see yet again how I do set before them fire
and water; and will they choose the water? alas! the waters of Separation are
waters of bitterness; Massah and Meribah be their name, and Marah is their
taste; they are themselves as it were baptized, strife and contention; and so
noisome, loathsome, and every way unsavory is their relish: But, the Fire is
from the Lord, in the Sanctuary it is a Refiners fire, and a coal from the
Altar, that so all iniquity may be done away: -- Blessing, and a Curse; and
will they choose the curse? it is Anathema Maranatha, A curse until Christ
come, against all those who love not the appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ,
in the Communion of his Saints; But, this, the Blessing, when the Spirit shall
say, come; and the Bride shall say, come; and the Church shall say, come; and
every one that has set heart to seek the Lord, the Lord God of his Fathers
shall also come, that so God may translate his Church, which is here terribly
Militant, as an Army with banners, in good order, and in due array, unto
Trophies and Triumphs in that glory which shall be everlasting: And so, look
they once more, and behold, and choose they whether they will, Life and Death:
and will they choose Death? Death which shall never have an end, the reward of
those who do wilfully reject the means and the passage unto Life; Oh! that at
length they would believe schism and separation to be a damning Sin; that they
would not place the worship of God in the ways, and amidst the sons of
perdition! I Will leave a Text or two for them, to urge upon themselves, and can
there be plainer words than these? Romans 13.2. They that resist that power which
is the Ordinance of God, or, (which is all one) that Power, which commands
Obedience unto Gods Ordinance, shall receive unto themselves Damnation. 2 Pet.
3.1, -- 3. False Prophets, and false Teachers, bring upon themselves swift
Destruction; whose judgment of a long time lingreth not, and their Damnation
slumbereth not. Epist. of St. Jude. v. 13. These are wandering stars, not
keeping within their proper and appointed Orbs, in order to a regular, and an
equal revolution, Unto whom is reserved the Blackness of Darkness for ever:
But, after all this, Life, and Peace, to those that seek, and keep peace in the
fear and love of God, and of those that are set over them.

To conclude; Let us be persuaded, as we are men and Christians, to keep the
Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace; considering, that God is terrible in
his judgments, against the Rebellious and Sacrilegious, he is wonderful in his
providence for the defense of those that wait and call upon him; his wrath is
dreadful unto Death; his loving kindness is surpassing, and in his favor is
Life; The Assembling together of his Saints, is Venerable and Awful; God is
honored in the midst, whilst due Reverence is paid to those that are round
about him; considering all these things, what manner of persons ought we to be,
in all holy Conversation and Godliness? we should be no longer faithless, but
believing; may we the more, and the rather, be added to the Church, as
Believers in the Lord, and may this number increase to Multitudes of every age,
and of every Sex, both Men and Women: our Churches Prayer, shall with little
alteration, be the close of all,

We Pray thee, O Lord, Help thy Servants whom thou have red^emed with thy most
Precious Blood;

Make them to be numbered with thy Saints, here in a holy Communion, and
hereafter in glory everlasting: -- To which God of his infinite Mercy bring us
all, to whom be ascribed, Honor, Praise and Adoration, to Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, One God and three Persons; and that of all Ages in the Church, by Christ
Jesus, world without end. Amen.

Lord, Mercifully receive the Prayers of thy Church, that all troubles, and
errors being quenched, it may serve thee in quietness; and grant us peace in
our days. Amen.
A BAD AND A Good Zeal DESCRIBED and LIMITED.
Gal. 4.17, 18. 17. They zealously affect you, but not well; yea, they would
exclude you, that you might affect them: (or us.)

18. But it is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing; and not
only when I am present with you.


IT was even in our Saviors time, the Hypocritical Devotion of the Pharisees,
and is at this day, the Pharisaical Hypocrisy, both of the Conclave, and the
Consistory, to compass Sea and Land to make one Proselyte, and when he is
gained, they make him twofold more the child of Hell then themselves, so that
the last estate of the poor man is worse than his beginning; But, as for us,
Woe unto us, unless that our Religion do exceed the Righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees: their industry was both commendable and imitable, if we
could abstract their Labor of Love, as they call it, from the malice of their
intention; we may hear them both, while they sit in the Chair of Moses; but
not, when their design is to tumble Moses out of his Chair; not, when they
rebel against Moses the Servant of the Lord, and vex Aaron the Saint of God:
their long Prayers were not amiss; no, though they were in the Markets, and the
corners of every street, when they made their great, solemn, and pompous
Processions, that they might be seen of men, and so give an example of Devotion
unto the World; but we must beware of them, when we find, that upon this
pretense, they devour Widows Houses, when they commit a rapine upon the
portion of the Widow, and of the Fatherless; their long Robes were no such
heinous crime, nor their Phylacteries upon their Garments, in which are
supposed to have been written in Capital Letters, the Ten Commandments of God,
to put the People in mind of their Duty; but this was their fault, when they
proposed the Law, as a Precept of obedience, unto others, and most shamefully
and wickedly broke it in every Precept themselves: in a word, it is an.
Evangelical Precept, the command of Christ himself, with which Holy Church
begins and exhorts to her offertory, " That we let our Light shine before men,
even the Light of our Profession; in the public attestations of our Religion,
we may be both burning, and shining Lights, but we must be careful, that there
be the oil of good works, to feed the flame, lest men rejoice in our Light,
only for a season, and because they cannot behold a pious and a holy
conversation, directed by the fear of God, therefore they do not glorify our
Father which is in Heaven; we are to be watchful then, that we try the hot
Spirits of zeal that are abroad inthe world, whether they be of God or no?
whether the fire that works in them, and sparkles from them, descend from
Heaven, and is a flame of Love? or, be fetched from Hell, and is a world of
iniquity? both may be, though in different respects, to consume our Sacrifices;
by their works you shall know them: see, and observe therefore, with our
Apostle in this Text, are they not more solicitous to make a prey upon your
Persons, then to manifest their own, and so improve your graces; thus, they
zealously affect you, but not well; are they not more desirous for a
separation, then to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace? This is
all out of love unto themselves, that you might have their Persons in
admiration, and they get the advantage; yea, they would exclude you, that is,
by a roaring Bull, and a thundering Excommunication; or, they would exclude us,
by sequestration, had they Power, by cunning seduction, withdrawing themselves,
though they are both invited, and entreated to Communicate, no Anathema is
pronounced against them, only they excommunicate themselves, and they lead the
simple and ignorant into Houses, both Adversaries agree in this, in that they
would have the World to follow after them, and thereout get no small profit to
themselves, they do thus exclude, that the people might affect them. And may
not the Watchmen of Israel now stand upon their Guard, and be as industrious
in their business, to know both, what of the night? and what of the day? when
there lie to such potent enemies at the catch, seeking night and day whom they
may devour; whom they may snatch out of the fold, and lead like Sheep unto the
slaughter? surely, it is good for them always to be zealously affected, in so
good a thing, as is the converting of those, who have erred from the Truth, to
restore the wandering sinners from the error of their ways, and so to save the
Souls that are committed to their charge, from Death, and to prevent in others,
a multitude of sins: yea, and to the People also this caution may not be
unfitly given, that they be steadfast to that Faith which is delivered to them,
that should their chief Apostle, because of his care of the other Churches, or
of the Church in general, have occasion to withdraw from them, (I mean such a
one as an Apostle, not those that are left behind to be Teachers in every City;
for, unless they abide upon their charge, the enemy will take advantage of
their absence as well as of their sleeping to sow his Tares) should he be away,
upon the discharge of his duty in another place, such a One, who has a Rod in
his hand, wherewith to restrain them, a certain power and jurisdiction over
them; nay, not a Rod only, but a Sword also, when he can call in the saecular
Arm to his assistance, to execute wrath upon them; when such an Apostle as this
is absent, the People must be careful that they follow the directions of their
Spiritual Guides, which are set over them, as knowing that it is good for them
likewise to be zealously affected in so good a thing, as is, holding fast to
the Doctrine and Discipline of Faith and godliness, which from the Church they
have received, keeping to a form of found and wholesome words, which in the
Church they have used; and this their zeal and stedfastness, they are to make
manifest, not only, when such a one as St. Paul, their chief Apostle, is
present with them; and all because of the Churches enemies on every side, as if
the Apostle directed his Epistle to us, who it seems are bewitched as sadly, as
were his Galatians from obeying the Truth delivered to us, There are false
Brethren, and false Accusers, such as zealously affect you, but not well; yea,
they would exclude you, or us, that you might affect them: But it is good to be
zealously affected always in a good thing; and the rather, because I am absent
from you.

It is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing. These words were
the first occasion of pitching my thoughts upon this Subject: Observing the
variety of heats that are in the World, about Religion, certainly, some
distinction and difference must be admitted; that whilst there be such
strivings, and contendings about the way of Godliness; surely, as all cannot be
imagined to tread the un-erring Path, so neither must we be so sottish, as to
imagine, that every one is out of the way: By considering these words, as they
do relate unto the Galatians in their Circumstances, at the time of the writing
of this Epistle, we may, I hope, make a clew of thread to extricate our selves
out of the like Labyrinths; that notwithstanding, the various pretensions that
are made to Truth and Piety, we be not as children tossed to and fro, with
every wind of Doctrine. -- That then, which was first in my thoughts, I found
upon a second search, to be the sum of the whole Text, and therefore was
forced to take in both verses; It is good to be zealously affected, etc. The
words are brought in with a Conjunction exceptive or discretive (...). But, it
is good to be zealous; and so they do refer, as they are something
discriminated, or distinguished from the foregoing verse; in which the Apostle
gives the Galatians an account of what might be the temper of their Seducers,
supposed to be the impure Gnostics, who did so early disturb the peace of the
Church; by obtruding upon the Disciples, Judaizing Observances, though they
themselves were not Circumcised; neither did they always walk, as did the
Jews; but out of a pretense they were zealous for the way of their Fathers,
laying heavy burdens upon the People, which they would not touch themselves,
no, not with one of their fingers: This was such an Hypocrysie that Chap.
11.14. St. Peter, seemed more out of prudence, than Piety, to comply with it,
and St. Paul was so zealous, that he withstood him to the face, for he was to
be blamed; and Barnabas also, being of too easy and facile a temper, a Son of
Consolation, was not a little, to his own grief carried away with, this
Dissimulation: But, whatever rules of prudence, some, who at that time were set
over the affairs of the Church, might walk by, thinking thereby, that they did
consult the Public Peace, and so kept all quiet; no Peace, says our stout
Apostle St. Paul, with the wicked; for, hence an occasion was given, that the
way of God was evil spoke of, and those who keep themselves up close to the
rules of their Duty, could not avoid the unkind surmises and hard speeches of
the People; whilst, in the mean time, the cunning Adversary took this
opportunity, upon the hopes of an Accommodation to work out his own designs
upon those who were of a more easy persuasion; and therefore they were
zealous, and industrious to gain more and more to their party; to get ground,
because of some concessions, or rather, back slidings, that had been made; Oh,
say they, The People must be regarded, and one way or other, we will please
them: But, what says our well-resolved Apostle, These insinuating Zealots, have
a kind affection; but it is not well; let them talk never so much of
Comprehension, the result of all must needs be Exclusion; either they will
Exclude you, or us; for the whole and sole Design is, that you might affect
them: Let no man blame me therefore, that I will not in the least give way, but
still I will keep the right hand of fellowship, for I have labored more then
all the rest; that I am so exceedingly zealous for the Gospel, which I have
preached unto you, that you should stand in it, because I have delivered no
more then what I received, and that according to the Scriptures; and is there
not a Cause that I should be thus earnest? especially is not the cause good?
Yes surely, it is good to be always zealously affected, affected provided it be
in a good thing; why not we, as well as they in that which is bad? I could wish
even you, my Galatians, in the same circumstances with my self, and that not
only out of Fear, because of my Authority, when I am present with you; but out
of love to the thing it self, when I am absent from you.

This is the Scope and Coherence of the words; in which an account is given us
both of a good, and a bad Zeal, as they are contradistinguished from, and to
each other; the one is condemned, and the other is commended, and that in
general, because of these two qualifications in each of them;

(1.) That which is bad, is commonly of Persons; either to make a party, they
affect you, to be added to their Number; or, to Magnify themselves, they would
that you should affect only them.

(2.) That which is good and commendable is always (...) in a good thing; that
is, it is guided by a good Rule, managed upon a good matter, and directed by a
good intention.

To be a little more close and particular; The two Verses will be the Subject
of two Discourses: for the first, which is a Description of a bad or a wicked
zeal; it is described to us to be, not as it should be in these particulars.
First, In relation to the Object; Zeal is reprehensible when it is of Persons,
not of Things (...) of Men, and not their Graces; (...) they zealously affect
you, you your very selves; not any thing that is good in you, nor any good that
is toward you.

Secondly, In relation to the Subject; when the Affectators of this kind, are
not rightly qualified, either as to affection, or intention; (...) Adverbs
either crown, or debase our Actions; -- They Zealously affect you; but not well.

Thirdly, In relation to the Zeal it self; when it is such a kind of Zeal, as
does directly in its consequence tend to Separation, (...), -- (...) they would
either exclude you, or us; that is separate us from you, and you from us.

Fourthly, Yet once more, Zeal is Bad, in relation to the Zealots themselves;
(...) when they would fain set the Church on Fire, to warm themselves by the
flameof it; by thus gaining Disciples, not so much to their Cause, as to their
Party; yea, chiefly in this, every Zealot plays a private game by himself
alone, from the rest of his Company; whilst they thus many times supplant one
another, in gaining Proselytes, each man to himself; wishing that the people
might affect them.

And, is not all this exceeding wicked? in such a Maze of Ungodliness, a
Mystery of iniquity as this, how shall they that are approved, be made
manifest? we had need to look about us seriously, and to bethink our selves,
who may be in the company conversing with us; such as may have a Zealous
affection for us, but not well, since their Design may be altogether Exclusion;
only that they themselves might be affected: But notwithstanding this, let us
hearken to our Blessed Apostle, see him here watching for the souls of these
Galatians, even in their own way counter-working the Designs of the enemy; far
he is from approving a Laodicean temper, of being neither hot, nor cold, the
temper of such whom God shall one day spue out of his mouth, and whilst they
live, they are a loathing to all good men; he would not have us be like
Ephraim, a Cake that is dough baked; but, he takes Occasion from the industry
of the Adversary, to recommend to them, and to us all, the like Diligence, and
that with as great an earnestness, assuring them, that it is good to be always
zealously affected in a good thing; and so much the better, and the more
commendable, if it be, not only when their Apostle is present with them: In
which words, in order to the commendation of a pious and a holy zeal, we have
Two parts,
1. Approbatio ipsa; The Approbation it self; (...). It is good to be zealous.
2ly. Ratio Approbandi; The reason of that Approbation; and that taken.
First, Ab Objecto; From the Object. (...). it must be in a good thing;
Secondly, Ab Habitu; The Habit must be as unlimited, as the Object is
universally good; (...) it must be always. Thirdly, Ab Occasion; From the
Occasion of expressing; (...) to show, that it is a fixed habit unalterable; it
will chiefly take that occasion to express it; when there is most need of it;
when the Spiritual Apostle, or great Pastor is out of the way; it is nor an eye
Service before men; but, it is pleasing God: as our Apostle here to his
Galatians; -- Not only when I am present with you.


This is the sum of the Text, and of what I have to Discourse from it.

First, Let us stand a while, and as it were, from the Pinnacle of the Temple
behold our danger; let us be careful that we do not in the least miscarry in
slipping aside, or in falling away from our own steadfastness: zeal at the
best, is but the excrescency of Love, when it may either be true or false, and
therefore we find it no where commanded as a Duty; but, if it be rightly
qualified it is praise worthy, as being Good; it is a pure flame, kept alive
and bright in the Ocean; it is that fire of Love which many waters cannot
quench: And yet, sometimes it is the overflowing of the Gall, and the result of
bitter, cruel hatred; it is as it were fire under the pot, when the Stomach
boils, and the mouth foams; out of the abundance of the heart the mouth does
speak; and whilst wicked, envious and malicious thoughts do blow the coals,
both tongue and face are on a flame, the hands are ready to smite with the fist
of violence, and the feet are swift to run the ways of Mischief, whilst the
passionate zeal which drives, is like the Driving of Jehu, somewhat too
furious, though the cause of God be pretended for it; we may examine it by
these particulars.

1. Consider we the Object of such a Zeal; certainly it is then reprehensible,
when it is of persons, not of things; of Men, and not their Graces; (...). They
do zealously affect you; you, your very selves; not any good that is in you, or
any good that is toward you,

A zeal of Persons; and those may be of these three sorts; The Clergy; The
Laity; or, Persons in a more mixed and refined Relation; neither one, nor the
other particular so considered; but a certain juncto, or a knot of acquaintance.
First, A Zeal of Persons; that is of the Clergy; of Ministers and Pastors:
just as it was in the Church of Corinth, notwithstanding their so many
Religious heats, too certain a sign of Divisions and Schisms amongst them;
when some of them were for Paul, some for Apollos, and some for Cephas; without
any regard to God that gave the increase; This was an argument that they were
not Spiritual, but Carnal. It is a certain (...) the mark by which we may know
those that will not endure sound Doctrine, when 2 Timothy 4.3. after their own
lusts they heap up Teachers to themselves, having itching ears.

Here a giddy-headed Generation of men were to be reproved, who look so much
upon the Preachers countenance, that they have no regard unto his message; who
cannot be contented with what whole some food is provided for them at home, but
they seek out delicacies abroad; Nay, many a Pastor has been prejudged, before
he has been heard to speak, to see his first behavior and reverential address
is enough to scare a wicked sort of People out of the Congregation; and then
they wander after whom, they tell you, they can profit most by; Oh! This is a
formal, heavy, and a superstitious fellow; but such a one is a precious,
Soul-searching Preacher; as if they were the proper judges of what is best, and
fittest to be spoke to them; and though it may be the same word of Truth which
is delivered by both, yet the word of God must be restrained, as if it hung
only at such, or such a persons Lips. It is an avouched Maxim in the Practice
of Medice's, that if we do but Fancy the Physician, the Physic will work
kindly; but this proceeds, rather from the Patients Distemper and
misapprehension of things, than either want of skill in the Physician, or of
approved virtue in the Medicine prescribed: They, who are able to make so exact
a judgment upon the abilities of their Teachers, would do well, if out of a
Principle of humility and self-denial, they would look more at home, and
examine their own hearts, and not so unreasonable accuse either the Word of
God, or his Messengers lawfully sent unto them, because they cannot, as they
phrase it, profit under the means; when the ears do itch, more than they
tingle, it is a sign the brains are not settled, and the heart is not sound;
there may be a zeal to heap up Teachers, but such a zealous Affection, in
having men's persons in admiration, to the Disparagement of others of the same
order, is not well; -- They zealously affect you, you the Clergy; but not well.

Secondly, A zeal of Persons, that is, of the People; and that is chiefly
blamed in this Text; They who would have the Precepts of Moses observed, to the
subverting of the Christian Institution, They zealously affect you, you the
People; but, not well.

Here we may take cognizance, of the perfect humor and Design, of all
hotheaded Schism and Sedition; it is that they may be with the Multitude, and
that the Multitude may follow them to do evil; hence some are neither afraid,
not ashamed to court and complement the vices, and the Factions of the People;
and secretly, they insinuate unto them, that their zeal for the purity of
Religion is commendable; that they do not tie themselves up too closely to
humane observances is but the just vindication of their Christian Liberty, and
they are to stand fast to that Liberty in which Christ has made them free;
forgetting all this while, that our Saviors Discipline is a Yoke, although it
be light; and though it be easy, yet still it is a burden, and we are to be
meek and lowly, and learn of him to take this yoke, and this burden upon us, in
the sustaining of which yoke, in the cheerful bearing of which burden, we shall
find rest to our Souls. It was one and the chief moral cause of the Gospel
thriving so much in the World at first, that the Professors of it, though of
different Persuasions, were subject to their Heathen Emperors and Governors
in the love of them, and in the fear of God: But, a lass now the Design is
quite another thing lean we but bring the People into a dislike of the Rulers,
that are set over them in Church or State, by pretending a love and an
affection for them, a tender regard forsooth to the Liberty of the Subject,
pitying them, because they are held in durance, we shall soon find, (though
not sinking under our weights and pressures) that we have strength enough, to
break off the Yoke, and cast away the Burden, nay, to spurn at those who would
lay it upon us. But, let us not be deceived, such evil words, and unworthy
practices do corrupt good manners; this is not a love to the Souls of the
People, but a designed drawing them into temptation and a snare;
notwithstanding, the kindness such persons may pretend; their great zeal for
the People of the Lord, I appeal to our own late sad experience, whether the
chief aim be not, that they may get up themselves and ride, and then most
cruelly and disdainfully they trample all under foot? Rohoboam's little Finger,
was heavier than the Loins of Solomon; we might possibly once have been
chastned with Rods, but they vexed us with Scorpions; while they broke our
easy Yokes of Wood, they made for us heavy Yokes of Iron, and the Iron entered
into our very souls; " No Men (they are the words of out late Martyred
Sovereign) are prone to be greater Tyrants, and more rigorous exacters upon
others to conform to their illegal Novelties; then such whose pride was
formerly lest disposed to submit to the obedience of lawful constitutions,
when their licentious humor most pretended a Conscientious Liberty: It is not
therefore, for any good that is in you, or to you, that they are so kind, they
zealously affect you, you the People, but not well.

(3.) A Zeal of Persons may be reprehensible, when it is of Persons in a more
mixed and refined relation; neither Clergy, nor Laity particularly so
considered; but a certain Junctoe, or a Knot of acquaintance; whose name may be
the very same with those who are blamed in the Text, Gnostics, that is,
Sciolists, great pretenders to, and proficients in knowledge, though it be that
which puffs up; these are the only Vertuosoes, not in Arts and Sciences, but
in Religion it self; to that purpose, like Simon Magus of old, they give out
themselves to be some Great Ones, the only Power from God, and the only
Reason of Men amongst us; and so they have ingenuously resolved not to approve
of any thing which is not done from amidst their Consistory or Rota, be the
performance, of it self, never so excellent and pious: These are they who have
called into question the Fundamental Articles of our Religion, (or would have
them laid aside, since they are not sollicitous that a Catalogue should be
known of Fundamental Truths) as if a Reason could never have been given of our
Faith and Hope, till within their time; and because their new thin-spun
speculations do startle some of a more wary belief, presently they talk big,
insignificant words of passion, prejudice, education, (its wonder they do not
upbraid us with our Catechism,) and too blind a zeal for antiquity, as if all
Religion and Learning were born with them, and the Sun did first shine at their
Nativity. Such a sort of smothering Zealots as these, who have raised a Smoke,
and yet suppress the Fire, are more dangerous then any of the former, since we
know not where to find, or which way to go about to quench the flame, till we
are almost throat led and choked: (...) the Devil has his name from science,
and from him the darkness is borrowed, such a one as may be felt, whilst a
thick mist has been cast upon known, received and fundamental truths, and we
are entertained with nothing but cloudy speculations, and all out of a fond
pretense to restore the mind of men to their pristine liberty: Thought they
tell us is free, and so free, that we find nothing, but vain imaginations, the
immediate consequence upon the first fall, God made man upright, and he sought
out many inventions: These, while they differ from themselves many times in
their apprehensions of things being alone, yet carrying on one common design
for a liberty in speculation, if not to the subversion, certainly very much to
the ecclypsing of truth, and the seducing of unstable minds, they lay aside
their private opinion of things which they had when they were alone, and are
all of them in public, lovingly of one and the same persuasion: These are the
Men, who prescribe to us Rules of Universal Charity and good nature; and forget
their own prescriptions, they have not the manners, to forbear censuring and
carping at the integrity of a well ordered Conversation; in so much, that when
any one appears in the Discharge of his Duty, to tread the beaten path of Truth
and Piety, the old way, because the good way; and as yet amongst all their new
inventions, they have not found out a better, such a Ones Devotion is
Mechanical, to be sure he shall have the censure, of being concerned for what
he has nothing to do with, though obliged both by Oaths and reiterated
Subscriptions, it is much if they do not spend some of their Satirical wit and
ungodly laughter upon him. -- God forbid, that I should intend an invective,
farther then becomes a just and a pious reproof; and they of whom I speak,
being the only sophies of the world, I am secure that they will not impute
this zealous frenzy unto too much Learning; if I am besides my self in this; --
I will be more; it is for Gods sake, and this poor Church as the strictness of
whose Discipline and Order, amidst all their Comprehensions, is excluded; sorry
I am with all my heart, that what I have farther to suggest are so much the
words of Truth and Soberness: Whilst we do seriously consider the present
growing Atheism, how that every thing both in the Doctrine and Practice of our
Religion has been reduced to a mere notion and opinion, though we may
charitably persuade our selves, that it was neither the Design or Intention of
some men to promote so much wickedness; yet in the nature of the thing it self,
no cause can so properly be assigned for that general looseness in the lives of
men, as the too great Latitude and Scope that has been given them in their
notions and speculations: when once it shall be publicly maintained, that
humane nature was not impaired by the fall of Adam, but rather improved, and so
in a state of Perfection; and that ever since our first Parents did eat of the
Tree of Knowledge, every man as he is Rational Creature, has power given him
both by God and Nature, or by Nature, which with some is God, to call every
thing, nay the Articles of his Religion into question, we may justly fear that
we have thus argued our selves not only into a doubt of our Faith, whether
there be such a Theological grace, or no? (for they have affirmed our Creed,
not to have in all respects, an influence on Morality,) but likewise out of the
Practice of our Piety; since for ought we know it may be thus pleaded and
retorted upon us, by the young blustering Bravadoes, of our times, from the
principles above specified, that we are put into the world to live like other
Creatures, so that the Precepts of Mortification signify but little, whilst
Nature intended that we should be swayed by the impulse of our humors, and the
impetuosity of our Constitutions. Oh that this might give occasion to some to
lay their hands upon their Mouths, and their Months in the Dust! To take off
this scandal too sadly given, and very justly taken, it would much become the
zeal of the late Restorers of our humane freedom, if they would in their lives
give an example of strictness and of Order; that they would confine themselves
a little to the rules of Duty, and not show themselves so indifferent, by a
Partial Obedience, whether it be to Divine or Humane Constitutions; And
likewise that they would be pleased to be a little more Diffusive of their
Charity, their (...) Let see a little more of that sweet Disposition, which,
from the Platonic Theory, we hear so much talk of, that modest kind of humble
Doubting, which renders men affable and courteous in converse, willing, and
ready to hear, and receive the truth from any one; and that they would not be
so eager upon the product of their own fancy, in proposing their private
hypothesis for the standard of public Truth; but withal, that they would
consider themselves to be in the body, as well as they say so of others, yea,
and some have found out gross Vehicles for their souls; possibly they may have
something of passion or prejudice, or at least too much kindness for those of a
like education and acquaintance; it were to be wished, that they would be
careful, lest the affection they have for one another persons, do not Canonize
each others mistakes against and above all Canon whatsoever; a partial zeal
engaged for a particular sort of men, be they who they will, it cannot be good,
it may be a zealous affection, or affectation rather; But, it is not well, And
so I pass to the second thing

In which Zeal is reprehensible; and that is in relation to the Subject, when
the affectators of this kind are not rightly qualified as to affection, or
intention; (...) They zealously affect; but, not well.
The question was cautelously put by Jehu, however, he was afterward mistaken
in the management of his zeal, when Jehonadab the son of Rechab came forth to
meet him and salute him, 2 Kings 10.15. Is thy heart right, as my heart is
right? and he answered, it is; then was it a fit opportunity to call him up to
him into his Chariot, that he might see his zeal for the Lord of Hosts: unless
the heart be right, zeal degenerates into hypocrisy, and he that strains
himself to act a passion upon the Stage, for that while is as great a zealot as
such a one, who would fain make the world believe, that he is transported upon
the account of his Religion, when neither his affection is real, nor his
intention sincere.

(1.) (...) they are Zealously affected, but not well, whose affection is not
real; such whose Zeal is rather Jealousy than love: and this seems to be the
proper import of the Phrase in the Text; sumpta Metaphora a Procis Zelotypis;
Zelotypiae causa Paulum rivalem pseudo-apostoli non patiebantur: Beza in loc.
The false Apostles who disturbed these Galatians in their Faith, were jealous
of St. Paul as their Rival, lest he should too much win and gain upon the
affections of the People; and therefore they must needs be Zealous too, and
preach Christ out of strife and envy, supposing so to add affliction to the
other persecutions of this Blessed Apostle. We find in Ezekiels Vision, chap.
8.3. That in the same place where was the Image of Jealousy, that prevoketh
unto Jealousy; behold the glory of the God of Israel was likewise there: Sad
it is that there should be cause to invert the Prophets Vision thus, The Glory
of the God of Israel is too much pretended, where there are nothing but Images
of jealousy erected, and by uncharitable surmises and suspicions, strange
provocations unto Jealousy are fomented; Thus, in the words of a late
excellent pen, Zeal is many times both a Fire and Fan unto it self, being blown
by the ambient airy desire of applause out of a fond conceit of some selfish
excellence, and an evil eye upon the gifts and happy endowments of another.
True indeed, we may covet earnestly the best gifts, yea, and especially that of
Prophecy; but then our emulations in reference to these (...) the ordinary
gifts of the holy Ghost, bestowed by virtue of their Mission upon such as are
diligent in the work of the Ministry, ought not to be with a sour and a
supercilious eye upon the better parts, or more happy success of our Brethren;
covet we may, and that earnestly the best gifts, but yet says the Apostle show
I unto you a more excellent way, 2 Cor. 12.31. and that is Love and Charity
which is the Bond of all perfection; Should we have the tongues of Men and
Angels, and yet want charity, we are like a sounding brass, and a tinckling
Cymbal; what is the gift of Prophecy, the understanding of all mystery, and of
all knowledge? without charity it is nothing; charity envyeth not, vaunteth not
it self, is not puffed up, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked,
thinks no evil, bears all things, believes all things, hops all things,
endures all things: since then there are some whose Zeal has burnt up their
Love; they are so suspicious lest others should go before them, that they
overshoot themselves; we may pity them, because they are in a distemper, and
wish that they will return to a right and a sober mind; but we cannot at all
approve of such jealous ardors as these, which spend themselves only that they
may make a greater braze then is at their neighbors fire, in such a case the
Affection is not Real, and therefore the Zeal is to be suspected; (...) it is
not well.

(2.) Men are Zealously affected (...) but, not well, when the Intention is not
sincere; and this is the result of the former; where the heart is not right,
void of a true affection, there the main drift and scope of any action must
needs be amiss: A Man may show a Zeal to himself in his earnestness for his
Religion, when it is more out of love to himself then to the thing which he
professes, as in the Text, being willing that you should affect them: Nay,
though it be a sad aggravation of the sin, yet there is just cause to fear it,
that many are Zealous out of a Design to Subvert and Supplant Religion, when
it is not established according to their humor, and to bring an evil report
upon the way of Godliness. Such are they who decry Profaneness and Debauchery
so much, that they forget Rebellion and Disobedience to be a sin; who attribute
the immoralities that are in men's lives, to a certain Discipline restored in
the Church and Government in the State, and not to the general corruption of
humane nature, unhappily worse depraved amongst us from the Principles of
Libertenisme in the late days of Rebellion first raised, and since too much
fomented; So that these zealots have no reason to reproach us, that the former
days were better than these, as if it were possible that God and his glory
could be then more regarded, when Tyranny and Usurpation was in the Throne,
Sacrilege and profane invasion in the Church, Robbery and Oppression in every
Street, Sequestration and unjust Possession almost in every Estate; And yet,
now we are Governed by a Law of Love, every man sits under his own Vine and
Figtree with great delight, and our God is, or may be worshipped in his Temple,
and there in the Beauties of his holiness, now there is a King in Israel every
man does that which seems good in his own eyes: -- Pudet haec opprobria! Sad
it is, I confess, that there should be any in the strength of such restored and
renewed Mercies, who provoke a Gracious God to anger, and give occasion to the
adversary to blaspheme: but, this does not excuse their malice, who upon this
account are ready to seek opportunity to themselves of showing their
Disaffection to the Government both Civil and Ecclesiastical, rather then their
Zeal for Piety and Holiness: To these, I have only this to say, notwithstanding
their pretended sanctity, they cannot bragg over much of their honesty; even to
this day we observe it, that they are a subtle, crafty, and a supplanting
Generation; And to all the world, I do here profess it, that upon through search
and examination amongst all the divisions and separations that are in the midst
of us, could I but any where find a way of Worship and Religion, that does in
the principles and prescriptions of it more promote Holiness of Life, and that
according to the great precepts of Living, (to wit) Piety, a constant never
ceasing Devotion to God; Honesty and Charity to men, though to our Enemies, and
to our own Disadvantage (a thing which our cunning adversarys do not so much
mind, for when their interest comes in the way, they can make bold with the
eighth Commandment; nay, there have been some who have told us, that it is
almost a note of Reprobation, to be a mere Moral Man,) and Temperance and
Sobriety to our selves, then the Religion of the Church of England as now in
its Discipline it is established, does promote, I should presently be of
another persuasion; but till this can be made out, we must suffer the word of
exhortation; that we take heed of the enticing words of such whose zeal for a
holy life, is a Design to draw us into Disobedience and Rebellion; no one can
complain, that we are hindered now in our Religion; in our Schisms we are,
because they are damning sins; but we have as great and solemn opportunities of
serving God now as ever, not with the neglect of Sacraments, as it was in those
former days they tell us of, for above Sixteen years together; and it will be
an aggravation of our sin, if under these glorious enjoyments we are both
unthankful, and unholy; but in the mean time we must be careful, that our zeal
be not froward, and peevish; we may mourn in secret for any Abominations that
are committed, amongst which, this is none of the smallest, in that there are a
wicked sort of People in the midst of us, who have an invidious eye upon the
Vices of the Age, surely Cham's Curse will one time or other fall upon them,
whilst with so much Discontent they do maliciously declame against the sins of
the times; nay, Proclaiming some of our Virtues to be Sins; Woe unto them, for
they have called Good, Evil, only out of a wicked design to reproach our
restored and established Religion; such as these may be zealously affected, but
not well; for all that they aim at, is to promote Shisme, Faction, and
Separation, which is the

Third Thing in which zeal is reprehensible; and that in relation to the Zeal
it self, when it does in its direct consequence tend to a separation, and
disunion (...). They would exclude either you, or us; that is, they would
separate you from us, and us from you.
Coarctare vos volunt; Ver. Sir. They would put a restraint upon you, as to
what they do themselves desire; and yet they give you too much Liberty there,
where indeed you are really bound; impedire nos aut vos volunt; they would put
rubbs in your way, hinder you in the obedience of your Faith; and they would
hinder us, that we might not go on cheerfully in the work of our Ministry, we
cannot fulfill our course with joy. This is that ungodly Zeal, which is here to
be reproved that tends to a separation betwixt Teachers and their Hearers;
There are a wicked Generation in the World, who think they do God good service
in alienating the affections of the People from their lawful Guides; as if it
were the only course to make the Flock to thrive, to induce the Sheep to be
froward and peevish against their Shepherd, so that they should not know their
Pastors voice: and it is the same Generation too, who are both double tongued,
and double minded, that do as occasion offers, detracts the Hearers to their
Teachers, as if the Pastor were only then to be diligent in the discharge of
his Office, when he is fretting of his Flock; such as these have no other
Design, than that the Sheep should leap over hedge and ditch, break through all
enclosures, and wander out of their way: These pry into, and observe the Lives
either of Priests or People, for no other intent, then to find occasion against
either; not so much to imitate their Graces, as to observe their Manners; not
to have any regard to their good Works, but to find a flaw, and aggravate their
failings: and to diminish from their virtues, whilst with an evil will it is
their Practice so to detract from them, that the very Good that is in them, may
be evil spoke of: These know that Unity betwixt Priests and People, is the
promotion of Uniformity; whilst they go hand in hand together, they do provoke
one another to love, and to good works; and it is a joy to those that are set
over them, to behold their order: But the Sons of Belial delight in nothing but
Confusion; and there is no practice so odious betwixt one man and another, but
they will cast themselves upon it, if they may but promote that way of
Godliness, which they would have set up, and deny the Power of it, to be any
Form but their own: it is their zeal to the fear of God, they tell us, though
it has no regard to Love and Unity amongst men; and of this sort are they, who
would have us neglect the Assembling of our selves together, who creep into
Houses, and lead Captive the simple and the ignorant, laden with sins, and led
away with diverse lusts; and yet, they do converse amongst us, as Friends,
giving smooth words, whilst War is in their hearts; and they will give leave to
their younger favorites coldly, and by halves, to comply with that mode of
Worship which is uppermost, to which they are themselves too stiff to bend; as
knowing, that such as these by their indifferent slubberly behavior in Divine
Offices, will gain more Proselytes to their Synagogues, though Satan be in the
midst of them; and thus a Division and Separation is made, either to exclude
the People from the Communion of Saints, that they should be carried away, by
an impetuous Melancholy humor, even to excommunicate themselves; or to exclude
the Priests of God; that they shall have no comfort in the discharge of their
Duty, while they find, that by such Wiles and Artifices as these, the hearts of
the People are alienated from them: This is a most desperate Stratagem, it is
the fire of zeal, hid and raked together, in the dust and ashes of a hellish
Policy; this zeal cannot be good, proceeding from so bad a Principle; it is not
lawful to propagate the Gospel of Truth it self by such unworthy Practices as
these, how much less, that which is so false and pernicious, destructive of all
Discipline and Order, nay, to civil Society, and mutual Love, and
Correspondence amongst men: if there be any, as too too many there be, who do
thus zealously affect (...) it is not well, for they would exclude either
Priests or People; nay, so they may have their design, they care not what
becomes of either.

One Observation more upon this Third thing.
(...). They would exclude: some Coppies have it, as from Erasmus I learn,
(...). and Tremellius renders it, includere; they would include, they would
comprehend both you, and us; and yet, their zealous affection upon this account
is not well.

And here zeal is reprehensible in those, who care not much what a medly there
is in Religious Observances, so they and their party be included, who are for
meeting us half way in hopes to pull us after them; a Generation who will never
be contented with whatsoever Concessions are made them till they have again
extirpated both root and branch; Vt iis placeat quibus satis nihil est, that
they may be satisfied, who will never have enough, as the Orator: These can be
contented that there should be a halting betwixt God and Baal ( Baal-Berith,
that is in the signification of the Word, a Seditious Covenant,) so long as
they may be permitted a fire, be it never so strange, to consume their
Sacrifice; who are so indifferent in the Service of God, that, if they may be
but Tolerated, they care not how many Religions, or ways of worship there are
besides: These are such who tell us, that their Moderation must be known unto
all men, but, like the Devil, they quote but half the Text, it is not the Lord
at hand; For, in God, his Unity is his Essence, and as there is but One Lord,
so but One Faith, One Church, One Baptism. Speak they of an Accommodation?
what fellowship has light with darkness? the Light of our Religion shining in
the Candlestick of the Church, by a glorious, open, and public Profession of
it; With Darkness, the hidden Mysteries of iniquity, the cunning close
contrivances of Schism and Sedition? is there any Communion betwixt Christ, and
Belial? that is, as the words in their Etymology do import, between Christ, the
Anointed of the Lord, and Belial, the Sons of violence and Disobedience? It was
an undeniable argument unto Solomon, (who had a most quick sagacious and
discerning Spirit, for the wisdom of God was in the Determination) that the
woman who was for Deviding the Child, so that both might be sharers of it,
could not be the true Mother of it: The Church of England, like a pious and a
holy Mother, shows the truth of her affection, whilst her bowels yern upon her
Children, in that she would by no means have them divided; they prostitute both
their Religion and Devotion, neither have they the Bowels of a Mother, who are
so willing and sollicious that a Comprehensive Bill, like a decisive Sword
should sever their Profession, in order to make an equal separation; and so in
any ways to part stakes with those that are of another Persuasion: True
indeed, difference in opinion, should not breed difference in affection;
neither does it in the Constitutions of our Church, whilst we have a Brotherly
Compassion for those that are seduced; and do heartily pray, that God would
bring into the way of truth all such as have erred, and are deceived: But, when
Schism and Sedition once begin to pretend friendship with us, and offers to
shake hands, without giving the Church any satisfaction for those sad Divisions
which it has already made; so far from confessing, or acknowledging what is
past, that it begins to plead its Merits, that it has been so long quiet, and
has done no more mischief, like that wicked Villain, who when he had set a
Temple on fire, had the impudence to plead for himself, that his Judges would
be pleased to consider, how many Temples he had left standing; I say, when once
it comes to this, that Faction must go hand in hand with, nay, demand the right
hand of fellowship of Discipline, Order, and Uniformity, farewell then the face
of a Church in he midst of us; and I pray God that be not the consequence, upon
such wicked Designs; should our Candlestick be removed, though our misery would
be exceeding great, yet our sin not so heinous; as that now while it is fixed
amongst us, the Taper burning in it, should be mangled, and divided: In the
mean while, let us not deceive our selves, neither God, nor his Church, is to
be mocked; they who would divide the seamless coat of Christ, are for a
linsey-woolsey, party-colored Service amongst us, what ever zeal they may
pretend to Comprchension, that they would take in all parties, and make us so
at Unity amongst our selves; certainly, their Design is nothing, but, that
approaching so near, they might with the greater violence justle others down,
and so get up themselves, and ride; it is not so much a zeal for God, and for
his glory, nor for the purity of the Reformed Religion, as they would have us
to believe; but it is, that they might ingross all respect, and applause to
themselves, as if they only were left alone in the Kingdom, who do sincerely
serve the Lord; they zealously affect, but not well; they would for a while
include that so at an opportunity, they might altogether exclude you, or us,
that is, separate you from us, and us from you; for in truth the whole
Conspiracy is, that you might affect them; which is the

Fourth and Last Observable, wherein zeal is reprehensible; and that again, in
relation to the zealots themselves, when they would set the Church on fire, to
warm themselves by the flames of it, by gaining Disciples, not so much to their
Cause, as to their Party; yea, chiefly in this, every private zealot may play a
Game by himself alone, distinct from the rest of his Company; while they do
many times supplant one another in gaining Proselytes to themselves, being
exceeding zealous, that the People might affect them.
And this is the most remarkable Criterion, as well as the truest impulsive
cause of a bad zeal: selflove, and desire of applause, together with an eager
affectation of having many followers, will transport a man that is Popular, to
many things that are not convenient; and this is a Temptation, to which the
best of us all may be incident, without a great measure of humility and
self-denial: But, when this Spiritual Pride does puff up a particular sort of
men, or in the same rank, one man against another, so that Simon Magus-like
Act. 8.13. There should be here and there one, and another, whose business it
must be to bewitch the people with their Sorceries, whilst each one gives
himself out to be the only Power of God, what is this? but an overweaning Zeal
that the people might affect, and follow after them, from the least of them to
the greatest. Nay, as I have already hinted, it is observable, that seditious
persons do many times supplant one another, while some have a more winning,
that is, whining way, to out act the rest, and are more crafty in stealing away
the hearts of the unsettled and unstable multitude, more out of a love to their
persons, than their own espoused Cause: and this is chiefly then visible, when
the gap is made so wide by Division, that the entrance is open; though all
hands were united in strength, to pull down the enclosure, yet every man's hand
shall be against his Brother, who shall first go in, and take possession of the
Field: It was the pious animadversions of our late glorious Martyred King, upon
the mutual dissentions that happened amongst his enemies, when both himself and
the Ark, was taken Captive, " That those contentions were but the struggling of
Twins which before One Womb had enclosed; the younger striving to prevail
against the elder; what one sort hunted after, the other sought to catch for
themselves; and hence the same Royal Pen gives us this remark; what a benefit
their accrues from Unity and Uniformity, " So impossible it is, that the Lines
should be drawn from the Center, and not to divide from each other so much the
wider, by how much the farther they go from the point of Union: Brethren in
iniquity are not long friends; Herod and Pontius are only reconciled against
Christ, when their interests come once to be different, they will again divide,
and be insolent enemies; there being nothing harder then to keep ill men long
in one Mind; they are loath to be eclipsed, or outdone in one common design; he
that gets most of popular applause, is looked upon with an evil eye by the
rest; whilst on the other side, they, who are the most expert in framing snares
and gins to hold the Vulgar Credulity, by seemingly pious stratagems, do hug
themselves in the conceit of their own ingenuity, above their fellows, and
still they pretend nothing but zeal and affection to those with whom they
converse, and all that they may keep the Populacy fast to themselves; They
would that the people should affect none but them.

And thus I have done with the first part of the Text, which is the account
given us of a bad and a wicked zeal, described to us from the object of it,
when it is of Persons, not of things, of men and not their graces; and those
either Clergy, Laity, or persons in a more mixed Relation, a certain Juncto, or
Knot of acquaintance, they zealously affect you: from the Subject of it, when
the affectators are not rightly quallified as to affection or intention, (...).
not well: from the nature of the zeal it self, when in its direct consequence
it tends to a Shisme, or Separation and Disunion; nay, though the pretense be
Comprehension, yet the design is to exclude you or us, separate us from you,
and you from us: And lastly, from the zealots themselves, when their design is
to warm themselves by the Church, when it is one fire, to gain Proselytes to
their Party, rather then to their Cause; they would that you should affect them.

Application.
That we be careful lest we be drawn into temptation and a snare; that we be
not deceived (...) by the slight of men, as if the Dice were to be set upon us,
and we were to be hectored out of our Religion, as too too many are out of
their estates, as it were by the cogging of a Dye; (...). that we beware of the
subtilty of the old Scrpent; and the craft of a new Generation of Vipers, who
lie in wait to deceive; (...) that we take heed of the cunning wiles, the
curious arts and Methods, the industrious contrivances, the ingenious sophisms
of error and sedition: By these two hints, we may both examine our selves, and
be circumspect, as to others; know a false Zeal, should either we be carried
away with it; or we may discover it in any one else, should they seduce us by
it; And they are these: Is not the Zeal pretended, the product of Passion more
than Piety, the result of the Bodies Gonstitution, more then a virtuous habit
and frame of Mind? and again, is not the Thing for which there is so much Zeal,
more the Zealots interest, then his Devotion? Is he not a more laborious slave
to his worldly profit, than a diligent servant to his Gracious God?

First, Is not the Zeal the product of Passion more then Piety, the result
chiefly of the Bodies Constitution, rather then of a Virtuous habit and frame
of Mind? that Zeal which is the consequence of man's temper is to be suspect for
choler; as is moderation for lukewarmness, which proceeds from an easy facil
Disposition; we are not to ascribe that to Piety (says a late excellent pen)
which a man owes to his Complexion, and think Religion makes him zealous, when
it is his Constitution: Not, by the way, but that a Man's Natural Disposition
may be Sanctified, and God may, and does make use of our tempers and
inclinations in order to his service; yet, there is cause enough of suspicion,
when the passions are not regulated, or (in the language of the Apostle, rather
then the Philosopher) when we have not crucified the affections and the lusts:
that zeal is not kindled by a coal from the Altar, in which iniquity is not
done away; the lips are still unclean, when in other circumstances of life,
there are the same heats, nothing but choler and anger, and that violent, and
long continued, upon every little, or no occasion: They, whose hearts are a
sacrifice of holy incense, a pure flame, a burnt-offering, a sweet smelling
savor, acceptable unto God, cannot spare any of their heat upon outward
provocations; they can pass by injuries unconcerned and be quiet; so God may
have his honor entire, they value not their own; they have not given up their
understanding to their spleen; love and charity is the Rule they walk by
amongst men, and though many times they show themselves concerned in the cause
of God, yet it is not so much a fretful humor, running in their blood, as the
overflowing and circulation of Grace from the heart: in a word, it is a zeal
for Gods House, that it may stand, not a design to promote their own house,
that it may be exalted higher which does thus Consume them; and that is the

Second Note of distinction, whereby we may know, and beware of a false Zeal;
Is not the thing, for which there is so much zeal, more the Zealots interest,
then his Devotion? is he not more a laborious slave to his worldly Mammon, then
a diligent servant to his gracious God? And this is that which renders zeal,
though for a good thing, it self to be bad: The Devil thought it a sufficient
Plea against Job, that he did not serve God for naught; none was like Job for
prosperity, which he knew to be the result of his Piety, God hedged him in on
every side; no wonder, if none were like him in all the earth, for his
integrity, one that feared God an eschewed evil: Had not they reason, think
you, those who made Silver shrines for Diana, to set the whole City in an
uproar, in the defense of their great Goddess, in so much that nothing else
could be heard for two hours together, but this Outcry, Great is the Diana of
the Ephesians, whom not only Ephesus, but the whole world worshippeth? Many men
have their Religion tied at their Purse-strings; and, be the thing good or bad,
for which they contend, if it once comes to make for their profit, they are
soon induced to espouse the quarrel, and they shall manage it with too much
eagerness: But, true Zeal for God, and for his Glory is not of so low, and so
sordid a principle, it does not run in the veins of the earth, but it is a fire
fetched from heaven, a beam, or a ray from the Sun of Righteousness.

To conclude; As we are to be watchful of others, that their ignes fatui, their
new lights and strange fires, do not deceive us, and carry us out of our way,
for they will lead us downward to the Chambers of Death; so we are to examine
our selves, that we be not hurried away with our own impulse, that passion do
not overmuch sway us, and interest blind us: Let us but make sure of these two,
that the thing for which we are earnest, be in it self just and good; and that
our own intensions and designs be holy and pious; that we have no sinister and
by-respects, either to get a name in the world, or to make a trade of our
Religion; more to serve our selves upon it, then our God by it; secure we but
this, that the thing in it self, and the heart be right; and then, let our
Light shine before men, that they may see it; yea, Let us thus be a spectacle
to Angels and to men, whilst the one frowning, and the other rejoicing do
behold our zeal for the Lord of Hosts; For, It is good to be zealously affected
always in a good thing: which is the second General of the Text; the subject of
the next Discourse, (to wit) the account given us of that zeal which is good.

The Second SERMON
Verse 18. It is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing; and not
only when I am present with you.
THe Prophet Elijah, who was exceeding zealous for the glory of the God of
Israel, upbraiding the people with their luke-warmness and indifference in
religion, how they feared the Lord, but withal served other Gods, not
altogether forsakeing the worship of their Fathers, and yet admitting the
abominations of the Heathen, amongst whom they lived, which were a snare unto
them, resolved at last to put the whole business to an issue, 1 Kings 18.21,
24. He came unto all the people, and said, how long halt ye between two
opinions? if the LORD be God, follow him; but if Baal, follow him: I, even I
only remain a Prophet of the LORD: but the Prophets of Baal are four hundred
and fifty Men: And, as if he should have said, Let us institute a Sacrifice to
our unknown God; let us see what Deity it is, which will have a regard unto his
own oblation; Call ye upon the name of your God; and I will call upon the Name
of the LORD; and the God that answers by fire, let him be God: At which
Determination, it is to be observed, that the Prophet, though upon this
extraordinary occasion, would neither by an overhasty anticipation prevent, nor
by a tedious delay let slip the Public, solemn opportunity for, daily and
ordinary Devotion; But, Verse 36. At the time of the offering of the evening
Sacrifice, Elijah the Prophet came near, and said, O Lord God of Abraham, of
Isaac, and of Jacob, Let it be known this day, that thou art God in Israel.
Farther, it is remarkable, that the Fire, which at this time came from heaven,
was not a sudden Flash of Lightning, which, for the present, struck terror and
amazement into the Spectators, and instantly disappeared; no, neither was it a
Fire that did Consume the Sacrifice, and no more; but the effect of it was a
whole burnt-offering, not the wood only, but the very Stones, and the Dust
were consumed, and it licked up all the water that was in the Trench; And the
result of all was, that when all the People saw it, in most humble acts of
adoration, they fell on there faces and Worshipped, and the Voice of the People
at that time, was the Voice of God, and they said, The LORD he is God, the LORD
he is God.

Blessed be our God, that the Prophet Elijah is not left alone; a double
portion of his Spirit, though it be a Spirit of Burning, does rest upon the
Prorhets, and the Sons of Prophets, even to this day; let the Sons of Belial be
Four hundred and fifty men twice told, and all resolved into a grand Committee
about Religion, we need not fear; with Elisha's Servant, let us lift up our
eyes to the Hills whence comes our help, and we shall see, that those who are
with us, are more than those that are with them, even the Mount of God full of
Horses, of fire, and Chariots of fire, round about the Priests of the most High
God; It is the glory of the God of Israel, in the midst of us, and about that
Glory, an everlasting Defense; like the Prophet Elijah we put the cause of God,
and of his service to this issue; why should we halt between two opinions? it
is a broken, not a divided heart, which God accepts; The God that answers by
Fire, let him be God; yet such a Fire, as spends it self upon a proper
Sacrifice, neither the Fire strange, nor the Oblation unusual; but a Fire upon
such a sacrifice, in which, all the Tribes of Israel are concerned, and that
is, the daily Ministration which is to be solemnized at the set and appointed
times of the Morning, and of the Evening Oblation: Such a Fire too, as is not
of a sudden appearance, or a short continuance, which spends it self in a
Blaze, and goes out in a smoke; but a Fire to consume both the Sacrifice and
the Altar too, yea, though it be of stone; I mean, those heavenly, seraphical
Devotions, and the Pious heart, though once an heart of stone, from whence they
ascend; a Fire to consume the Dust, and to lick up the Water; the dust of the
Earth is in this regard, worse than stubble, not to be seen, buried in its own
embers; neither can the water any longer find a place, all filthy humors, and
noisome Corruptions are done away, and there is nothing but a pure bright flame
of love which many waters cannot quench: Such as these are the Zealous Ardours
for a settled Religion, and the kind fervors in the due Celebrations of a solemn
Devotion; which, while the ignorant and unlearned, many unstable People have
more diligently observed, they have been convinced of all, judged of all, the
very secrets of their hearts have been made manifest, and falling upon their
Faces, they have Worshipped God, reporting God to be in those solemnities, of a
Truth: surely such a zeal as this, which does thus contend for the way of
Godliness, is not like the mad frenzey of the Priests of Baal, which shows it
self only in up-roars and in tumults, whilst in the fray, they fall foul one
upon another, cutting themselves with Knives and Lances, till the blood gush
out upon them; these are the heats of Brethren in iniquity, a friendship,
turned to the worst of hatred, till amongst them many times blood touch blood;
whereas that zeal which conerns it self for God, and for his Glory, is the
peaceable fruit of Righteousness: it is a coal brought by the Ministration of
Cherubims, and Seraphins, those Spirits that are a flame of Fire, with which,
both mouth and lips being touched, all sin is purged away; and the zeal,
because Permanent and Constant, is therefore Good: -- Good, a word that speaks
all perfection, as much as finite Beings are capable of; it is what the B.
Apostle recommends to the Galatians in the Text, after he had given them an
account, in the verse preceding, of the Temper of their Seducers, a description
of their wicked Zeal, to pervert them from the Faith; he would not have the
Galatians in the last to abate any thing of their Christian Fervours for God,
and for his Truth; It is God that answers by fire, in them, against their
opposers and Gainsayers; and therefore let him be God, this fire, let it be
preserved alive, yea though St. Paul be absent from them; For it is good to be
zealously affected always in a good thing; and not only when I, who have
authority and a jurisdiction over you am present with you; but out of love to
the thing it self, when in my care of the other Churches, I have occasion to
withdraw, and to be absent from you.

In the words, which are the commendation of a Pious and a holy Zeal, we have
these two Parts; as I have before mentioned.
1. Approbatio ipsa; The Approbation it self; (...). It is good to be zealous.
2ly. Ratio Approbandi; The reason of this Approbation; which is Threefold.
First, Ab Objecto; From the Object of it; (...). it must be in a good thing.
Secondly, Ab Habitu; From the Habit, which must be as unlimited, as the Object
is universally good; (...) it must be always. Thirdly, Ab Occasion; From the
Occasion of expressing it; (...). Not only when I, your Apostle, am present
with you.
First, The scope of the Text, being such a Zeal commended to us, as is it self
a Moderation, that is, a Medium between lukewarm indifference, and hotheaded
Phrenzey; in the general it is laid down, as the Foundation of all, That it is
good to be Zealous. -- Zeal is many times the Product of a true Repentance, 2
Cor. 7.11. In that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what carefulness it wrought
in you? yea, what Zeal? certainly then, it is not always it self to be
repented of; nay, it was the Command of him, who sat in the midst of the Seven
Golden Candlesticks, whose eyes were as a flame of Fire, and his feet like unto
fine Brass, as if they burned in a furnace, unto the Church of Laodicea, that
Church which was neither hot nor cold Rev. 3.19. (...) be thou zealous, and
Repent. Zeal is like the Element to which it is often compared, a good Servant,
though a bad Master, a Good Servant, when in subjection to, and in
subordination with, that obedience, which we are to pay unto our God, (...).
When we are fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord; but a Bad Master, when it
rules, not only in us, but over us, transporting us so much, that we forget,
either our Duty to God, or our Charity to our Brother.

As bad as some may esteem of Zeal, who, care not to put themselves to
overmuch trouble for God, and for his service, who consult their own ease, and
quiet so much, that they are not sollicitous what becomes of the outward
Professions, the public attestations of Holiness and Piety; who, are for doing
their own business, but nothing else; let the World go how it will, they are
not concerned, so they may be permitted a lazy retiredness, and unusefull
privacy; yet, zeal is Good, when it walks abroad to be seen of men; when it is
not a candle under a bushel, but on the house top, or set upon a hill, the holy
hill of Sion, that all the Passengers may behold it, and be directed by it; it
is transcendently Good, and that in the three common acceptions of Goodness; --
jucundum, honestum, and utile: it is a pleasant Good; it is honest, and of good
report; it is every way profitable.

First, Zeal is Good, that is, it is bonum jucundum it is a pleasant good;
though it be the exerting of our passions, there is great complacency and
satisfaction in it; whilst we are musing, the Fire burns, and we have no rest,
till at last we speak with our tongues, the result of it is great peace to a
man's Conscience, when at any time he supposes that he has disburdened his Soul
in the cause of God; it is a comfortable reflection upon a spiritual and a holy
magnanimity, when a man is satisfied with himself, that he is not afraid or
ashamed to speak and write his mind, and to act according to an honest
Principle, maugre all opposition and discouragement; when it is rightly
qualified, it is an excellent pre-requisite, disposing a man to be a resolute
Confessor, or a joyful Martyr, it fits a man to suffer with great joy and
gladness the spoiling of his goods, the loss of his life, any thing rather then
make shipwreck of his faith, and of a good Conscience: It is not requisite
therefore, that a true zealot should be an ill-natured person, one that is
contented with any thing rather then his present state and condition of life;
it is not like the peevishness of Jobs wife, upbraiding its self with its own
integrity, as if we had served our God for naught, and washed our hands in
innocence to no purpose, therefore upon every little and light affliction we
must presently curse God and die; neither is it like the fretting and fuming of
Jonas, displeased because God is gracious, because the sentence of judgment
against the evil works of the sons of men is not executed speedily, therefore
Jonas thinks that he does well to be angry, even unto death; No, there are the
comforts of life in the heats of a holy zeal, and that life is the light of
God. Nay, further yet, This Supererogating grace (I want a name for it, it is
something more then Love, the surplusage of it, not by it self a distinct
virtue; for once therefore allow me the expression) I say, this Supererogating
grace is not only a pleasant good, that is, warmth and refreshment, Peace that
passes all understanding to the pious soul where it is seated; but it is
likewise comfort and encouragement unto others how many have taken fire at such
heats as these? to see a Martyr die with courage and resolution, was the great
inducement for others cheerfully to embrace the same flames; the Phoenix
providing for its succession, whilst it burns it self at the rays of the Sun,
is but one single emblem of this, if any such instance can be given; whilst in
the Primitive Persecutions the Piles of Wood were made high, and the flames
reached up to heaven, by the sweet influences of the Sun of Righteousness upon
the sacred dust of Martyrdom, there was a strange unaccountable prolifick
virtue, Sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae, Christianity did receive as it were a
new birth, sent forth into the world a numerous offspring, too great to be
incountred with; in the mean time the slaughtered witnesses for the Faith of
Christ, did as it were anticipate their own Resurrection, living again in the
pious conversation of such, who taking advantage of their stout behavior unto
Death did embrace the Faith of him who is the Lord of Life. And after all this,
true zeal is not only upon such extraordinary occasions, an encouragement unto
others; but, even in the ordinary Occurrencies of humane life, it has many
times the like influence upon such as have the least overtures after holiness
and piety; as the backsliding of many eminent professors, from the paths of
Truth and holiness, has been the sad occasion that others have totally fallen
away; so, the observance of those who have passed through a fiery trial of
affliction, who daily are acquainted with little else but unkind surmises and
hard speeches, who are the mark, that every one shoots at, because they are
more righteous then their neighbors, they are indeed the lights of the world,
held forth at noon day, exposed to the blast of every foul mouth, to the scoff
and derision of all that are round about them; yet, I say, closely to observe
such persons as these, how piously they walk with God, how humbly they converse
with men; not being froward against others, only keeping themselves close up
to the rules of their Duty, and the strictness of a holy life; it cannot but
inkindle some good wishes in the worst of those that hate and revile them,
insomuch, that the most Atheistical persons, when they are serious, will
reflect upon themselves, and say, Oh! That we were in such a man's condition!
Religion shall never want Proselytes, for such men's sakes as these, for strange
is the influence which a Holy Zeal has upon the Lives of men; it being not only
bonum jucundum, a pleasant good, that is, contentation and satisfaction to a
man's self; but comfort and encouragement unto others; for in the

Second Place, Zeal is good, -- Bonum est Honestum; it is honest in the sight
of all men, it is lovely and of good report, it is the usual Character that we
give of a zealous person, Poor man he is concerned for that which he can never
help, the world will be bad, do what he can; yet doubtless he himself is a very
honest, and a well meaning person: and truly so he is, as he is not
over-sollicitous of being counted singular, or, as the profane phrase it,
over-righteous, more nice then wise, so neither is he in the least censorious
of others: the faith which he has, he keeps it to himself; neither will he
disturb another man's liberty, by his own conscience; he is contented with this
private satisfaction, that he does not in the least condemn himself in that
which he allows, and since he has tied himself up to the strict performance
of some certain rules of duty, he desires to be excused, that he cannot
dispense with himself; he makes himself no Judge of another man's liberty; Only,
you must bear with him, if you find him not a little concerned, when he cannot
have the same liberty which others take, in that which is worse, and be
permitted an undisturbed Piety; when they, who either have not the leisure, or
the will, to be religious, want ordinary civility, and will not forbear their
taunting reproaches and their ungodly scoffing at the strictness of a
well-ordered Conversation: when he finds his Devotion nicknamed for
superstition, and the periodical revolution of his Canonical hours, to be
branded with the title of a Mechanical Sanctity: It is not absurd surely, but
acceptable in the sight of God, and commendable before all good men, to reckon
upon Months, Weeks, Days and Hours, wherein to serve our good more strictly and
closely than at other times; and to be as well acquainted with these seasons,
for religious performances, to know these stations for a holy Devotion, as well
as the Sun it self knows his own going down; for, since acts of Religion must
be done at some time or other, or in one posture or other, so long as we are in
the body, why not rather in such a posture, and at such a time; which Holy
Church has consecrated and commanded? at such a time, in which we may hope
there are other Christian people putting up the same petitions, and so the
Devotion being united, is the more prevalent? (I refer to the Canonical hours
of prayer every day:) and yet since all have not leisure, and in some cases God
will have mercy rather then sacrifice, he that is piously and Devoutly zealous,
as he has no evil thoughts upon the Omissions of his Brother; so he could wish
that his Brother would forbear evil speaking, and slandering his strict
perfomances; since surely he walks by a rule, the Churches practice at least is
his prescription, without censuring therefore he blesses God, for the
opportunities he has of Dedicating himself unto his service, that God has put
into his hand a price, and given him a heart to use it. -- I speak this the
rather, because of late, Devotion has been obliquely accused, as if it rendered
men crabbed and censorious: -- " Men of Devotion (says one amongst us,) when
they have once formed in themselves a perfect model of the will of God, and
have long confirmed their mind, by a continual thinking upon it, are apt to
condemn all others, that agree not with them in some particulars: This
accusation is cunningly and closely laid; First, as if the model for devotion
were of private conception; [after they have formed to themselves a perfect
model of the will of God] No such matter, it is well known, that the Devotion
thus struck at, is of more universal practice, it is the Devotion of such, who,
according to that way which some count superstition, and a mechanical Religion,
worship the God of their Fathers: and then, they who addict themselves to such
a Devotion, are apt to condemn those that agree not with them in some
particulars; no such matter neither, it is not upon every little piccadilloe
that the stomach ^iseth, it is not here or there a particular thing which
causes these eager grudgings; but, holy Zeal thinks it self concerned, when
things in their direct consequences, all together tend to the exploding of
Primitive and of pure Religion; when the strictness of all Discipline and Order
is become a byword and a Proverb, the reproach of such who watch their
opportunity totally to cast off the Yoke, who care not much to be contained
within the limits of their Duty, the Boundaries that are set them for a holy
life, in an exact obedience to government, both sacred and civil; however, that
zeal, which is not only for, but according unto Godliness, is no enemy unto
Charity, it bears all things, and it believes all things; till it find it
self to be miserably deceived; and then, zeal being provoked to show it self,
is honest still, just and upright in the sight of God and Man; it rejoices not
in iniquity, but persisteth in the truth, exhibiting it self chiefly in
virtuous and holy Actions, spending it self upon the ingenuous arts and
contrivances of love, that so it may be Profitable unto all; which is the

Third Thing, In which Zeal manifests its self as Good; it is Bonum Vtile, a
most profitable good; it is profitable for example and imitation; like the Holy
Scriptures, the Rule by which it acts, it is profitable for correction and
reproof, and for instruction in righteousness. who will ever take that man for
his pattern, who is unconstant to himself, he is shrewdly to be suspected for a
double-minded man, who is unstable in his ways: But he that sets himself
against all opposition to persevere in the way of truth, who has made his face
like a flint (in the Prophets phrase) neither, will he be ashamed, one that
will not give himself the least ease or relaxation from the performance of that
which he has learnt to be his Duty, one that has no Latitude, as to those
things in which, both Law and Conscience do oblige him, such a one is a
successful example of courage and constancy unto others, that they do not fall
away from their own stedfastness: whilst Daniel prays in Babylon, with his
window open to Jerusalem, notwithstanding the danger he was in for so doing,
though the Children of the Captivity were in a strange Land, yet having so good
a president, they could not but think of the songs of Sion. Some are like the
Fish Polipus of the color of the Rock, unto which they cleave, and because so,
they are in the common Proverb, neither good fish nor flesh; they tell us, that
we must comply with present circumstances, it is disputable, whether God does,
and it is certain, Man does not, know future contingencies, and whatsoever they
be, by a fatal necessity we must yield to them; the God of Nature does not
command, that we should make our lives a snare to our selves, a prudential
un-vexatious obedience, is all that he requires, and this is to be perfect, as
our Father which is in Heaven is perfect: This indeed were good Divinity, were
a Politician the Dr. of the Chair; but, how it will consist with the plain and
simple Dictates of Christianity, we want a Machiavel, or his soul, by an
unheard of Metempsychosis actuating a Leviathan, one who resolves all anorality
either into positive Laws, or into present local, though contingent
circumstances, to determine the controversy; But, a resolved generous Soul, is
not of so temporary a Spirit, his zeal is profitable unto others, because good
in it self; every way, and at all times good; -- good, because it is pleasant,
even the peace of God unto the pious soul; and good, because it is honest, it
thinks no evil, but rejoices in the truth; and good, because it is a steady
example of holiness, of purity, and constancy unto others, without being puffed
up in prosperity, terrified in adversity; It remains therefore that this
Apostolical Approbation have both an honorable mention, and an hearty
entertainment, (...). It is good to be zealous. And so I proceed to the

Second part of the Text, Ratio Approbandi; The Reason of this Approbation: and
that,
First, Taken from the Object: (...) It must be in a good thing.
In qualifying and distinguishing the Passions, by their Objects, some are good
when their Objects are bad, such is anger and hatred, which are only then good,
when they are vented against Sin, Be ye angry and sin not; some are Bad, when
their Objects are but semingly good, such is Love and Desire, for it is
possible, and we find it often, by sad experience, that we do affect that,
which is in it self really evil, only, because it presents it self to us sub
specie Boni jucundi, under the specious pretense of a pleasurable Good: But,
after all this, zeal is a kind of more mixed Passion, in reference to its
Object; take it for envy, when it is bad, when the Object is Good, it is like
the unhappy Locusts, that cannot endure to see a green Leaf on the Trees; take
it for imitation, or emulation, only when the Object is Good, is that Good
also, bonum est ut invideamini in bonis rebus semper; Vars. Sir. It is Good,
either that you should be envied at by others, or that you should have some
kind strivings amongst your selves concerning things that are Good; there is a
pious kind of envy, a holy zeal and emulation, when we do strive, and provoke
one another in love unto Good Works, To be a little more close and particular;
Zeal is good in relation unto a good Object, upon these three accounts:
1. Because it is there directed by a good rule, the Word of God: 2ly. Managed
upon a good Matter, which bears a due proportion to that Rule: 3ly. Guided by a
good intention; not being over-byassed, or over-ballanced by any sinister, and
by-respects: -- A word or two of each of these.


First, Zeal is good in relation to the Object, if it be directed by a good
Rule, the Word of God. The truly pious Zealiot in all his heats and ardors for
the cause of God, is to be very careful, lest he should in any wise, transgress
that Rule of Righteousness which is prescribed to him, as the revealed Will of
that Master, to whom he serves: though Jehu drove furiously, yet, he was not to
be blamed, when he had this fixed resolution, That there should fall unto the
earth nothing of the word of the Lord, which the Lord had spoken: There is a
thing which is called, a sure Word of Prophecy, to which, we shall do well that
we take heed in meekness and in fear, that we do not in the least prevent the
impulse of the Holy Ghost within us, moving us to do that which is contrary to
the dictates of the Spirit, either speaking in his Word, ruling in the
sanctions and determinations of the Church; They then, who talk big words of an
illumination, or a Light within them, and yet regard not the Law of God, which
should be a Light unto their feet, and a Lanthern unto their paths, whilst they
offer up strange fire to the Lord, they, and their Sacrifices are abhorred, and
God seems, thus to speak to them in the Language of his Prophet, Isaiah 50.11.
All you that kindle a fire, that compass your selves about with sparks, walk
you in the light of your fire, and in the sparks which you have kindled; this
shall you have of my hand, you shall lie down in sorrow. Would we examine and
try our own, or the spirits of others, whether they be of God, or no? the Word
of the Lord is sharp, and piercing, it divides betwixt the marrow and the
bones, it searches out the depths, and secrets of the heart: That fire cannot
be a flame of holy incense to consume the Sacrifice, and to render it
acceptable, which has no regard to the Holy Oracle of God.

Here that zeal is reproveable, which spends it self, either in decrying the
sacred Scriptures, as useless; or, in preverting the Scriptures, making them,
of private interpretation, to speak what they never intended, such who wrest
them to their own destruction.

First, They that decry the Scriptures as useless, since we are now not to be
directed by a line, or by precept, but we are all to be taught of God; of this
sort are they who think themselves above Ordinances, waiting only for some
secret instincts, some impetuous raptures, to carry them they know not whither,
to do they know not what; such, who have laid aside the first Principles of
Godliness, they are not to be dealt with; you shall never argue them into a
better temper, so long as this melancholy dumpish humor does transport them,
they have this still for a refuge, that they are not free to hear, or to answer
you: But, as for our selves, that we be not led away by the error of these
wicked men, it may be urged, (and I cannot urge it too often, the Articles of
our Creed into which we were baptized) that as in our Profession, we do believe
the Holy Ghost, to be the Lord and giver of Life, and so a spirit of
illumination unto the Sons of Men; so we do believe, that he, the same Spirit,
spoke by the Prophets, He, the same Spirit, does assist in the Communion of
Saints, and therefore we are not to neglect the assembling of our selves
together, as the manner of some is.

Secondly, As for that other sort, who have made themselves the only perpetual
Dictators in Religion, whose humor is the only Light they have for the
interpretation of the Scripture, who make the Scripture to be of a private
interpretation, speaking what it never intended, who have, against the
continued practices of Christianity in all ages, found out a new clew of thread
to extricate themselves and others out of some Labyrinths of controversy of
their own devising, and do thus betray the simple and ignorant into not only
foolish, but dangerous errors, these men act as if they had forgot those
Scriptures which they pretend for to interpret, those that tell us, that the
Spirits of the Prophets must be subject to the Prophets, especially when they
are met together in a holy Communion: They who would take heed to a sure word
of Prophecy, must know this first of all; 2 Pet. 1.20. That no Prophesies of
Scripture are of private interpretation; (...) that is of a man's conceited,
enthusiastical, and sudden explication; (...). St. Mar. 4.34. It was the only
prerogative of Christ himself, when he was alone, for to interpret; but as to
us, the word of Prophecy is not thus, (...) by the will of man, we must take
in along with us, (...). the Analogy of our Common Faith, and the sacred
authority of the Catholic Church, as knowing that whatsoever seemed good unto
the Holy Ghost, as it is revealed in the word, seemed good likewise to the same
Spirit, as it is explained by the Church, and proposed to those who will
receive the truth in the love of it, to be matter for their Faith: wherefore
the Scripture has said, I mean St. Paul, in whose writings there are (...).
Some things hard to be understood, which the Pride and Tyranny of the Church of
Rome, on the one hand, and the unstable peevishness of our Classical Brethren
from their Consistory on the other, have wrested two contrary ways, yet between
them both, the word of God abides sure, to wit, that Scripture, which refers
us to an Interpreter for all the rest, 1 Timothy 3.15. The Church of the Living
God (in all things necessary to salvation, as the words following do imply) is
the only pillar and ground of truth; and then he adds the fundamental articles
of our Christian faith, without controversy great is the mystery of Godliness,
God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, etc.
That zeal then is truly commendable, just, holy and good, which is a Zeal
according to the Scriptures, a contention for the Faith of God, in them
revealed, as they are by the Church delivered to the Saints, which, whilst it
does coufess the Holy Ghost to rule in the hearts of all Believers, does not
too hastily pass over the two next Articles of our Christian Faith, in which we
also do believe a Holy Catholic Church, and in the Unity of that Church, do
join with the Communion of Saints; such a Zeal as this is good, that is, guided
by a good rule, by the word of God, as it is proposed and said open by the
Church to be a perfect Canon, an exact prescription to tell us what ought to be
our Faith, and to guide us in our manners, in all holy Conversation and
Godliness.

Secondly, Zeal is good, in Relation to the Object of it, if it be managed upon
a good matter, (...) upon a good thing, which bears its due proportion to that
rule: This is that which St. Paul tells us, is the result of the Grace of God,
bringing salvation, and appearing unto all, Tit. 2.14. In that, our Savior
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify
unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works; The people are then
peculiar, and the zeal is singular, when, by the blood of Christ, we are
cleansed from all iniquity, so that our works are good. Having once submitted
our selves to the obedience of Faith, and publicly owned it, in the Unity of
the Church, every man has so far a Judgment of private Discretion (and possibly
not in many cases besides) as to examine his own Actions by that Rule of
Righteousness which he has received, and the rectitude of which he must not in
the least dispute. Saul forgot himself and God also, when, in his zeal for the
children of Israel and Judah, he slew the Gibeonites, 2 Samuel 21.2. These
Gibeonites, though but hewers of wood and drawers of water in the sanctuary,
were to be preserved because of the Oath of God, Joshuah 9.3, 17. They, who
were for exterpating, root and branch amongst us, though they had formerly
given up their names to God, and to his Church, in their Promissory
Subscriptions, that they would conform to, and not endeavor the alteration of
the Religion established; and yet after all this, in their zeal unto the
people, did lift up their hands to the most high God, in a most wicked and
seditious Covenant (though by Oath they were obliged to a Canonical Obedience,)
that they would not only destroy the hewers of wood, and the drawers of water
from amongst us, but sacrilegiously take away both wood and water from the
sanctuary, leaving us nothing, but a strange fire that would have consumed
every thing that was sacred from the midst of us; These men were like Saul of
old, of a most bloody house; O my soul, come not thou into their secret, unto
their Assembly let me not be united! Cursed be their anger for it was fierce,
and their wrath for it was cruel; in their anger they flew a Man, a Man that
was worth ten thousands of men! nay two Men, unto which the Ages before did
never show the like, Moses and Aaron fell both under the same stroke; in their
self-will they dug down a wall, broke through all enclosures to lay our Sion
waste, and for these sins unrepented of, and still persisted in, has not our
Jerusalem been made a heap of Stones? But blessed be our God, who raised up
Jacob when he was small, and have we not seen with our eyes, the reward of
rebellious sinners? God has scattered them in Jacob, they are at this day
divided in Israel; thus their sin of Division and Separation is the worst of
judgments, from Gods permission, upon them, whilst their hearts are hardened
through their Disobedience and Unbelief; These are not like David, men after
Gods own heart, the Zeal of Gods house devoured him, yea. and the Son of David,
when he twice whipped the the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple; but their
Zeal has been to consume the house of God, either to brake down the carved work
thereof, with Axes and Hammers, to destroy all the Synagogues of God in the
Land; or to profane those, they leave standing, some evil Angel or other
appointed to hover over the Mercies Seat, the Houses of Prayer, made so many
Dens of Thieves; in a word, these are like Saul in the New Testament, before
his conversion, Philip. 3. As concerning zeal, persecuting the Church; not like
St. Paul having embraced the Faith of Christ, Zealous toward God, in that which
is good, herein always exercising himself to have a conscience void of offense
toward God, and toward all men: -- That in this Digression, whither our
unreasonable Zealots, as evil workers, have carried me, I may not loose the
scope of my Text, These seditious Gnostics who disturbed the Peace of the
Church, by obtruding upon the Disciples Mosaical rigours, and so bewitching
these foolish Galatians from the stedfastness of their obedience, (both Schism
and Rebellion are as the sin of witchcraft) had a Zeal for God, St. Paul bears
them witness, but it was not according to knowledge; or if they had, (as their
very compellation signifies nothing less then Science, yet it was falsely so
called) the understanding of all mysteries, and of all knowledge, neither was
their Zeal mistaken or blind; so much the worse, for it was not according to
Godliness; since they were not careful to square their actions by that Rule of
obedience, which they did profess; They were zealously affected, but not well:
Bu^ on the contrary, while St. Paul fights, it is the good fight of Faith, does
he contend earnestly? It is for the word of truth which he had received for and
delivered to them according to the Scriptures; while he does withstand the
adversaries to the face, it is not his forward zeal, or his pious eagerness,
but their backsliding, their frowardness and peevishness, their Dissimulation
and Hypocrisy was to be blamed; for this he had secured in the first place,
that the thing for which he contended was just and good; and this he was
assured of to the last, that having no sinister, or by designs, it was good to
be always zealously affected; which is the

Third, and last Thing, In which zeal is good in relation to the Object, when
it is rightly qualified and stated, directed to a good end; because where there
is such a pious care that the thing contended for be good, there likewise we do
charitably believe that the zeal is guided by a good intention, not being
over-byassed or over-ballanced, by any sinister or by-respects. The Pious
Zealot is many times counted singular; this may be a more charitable reason for
the compellation, then is usually urged, He is indeed singular, that is, he is
neither double-tongued, nor double-minded, the preparations of his heart are
from the Lord. Some men's Zeal is not from an inward principle of Conscience,
but some outward reason or motive to incite them, (as was hinted in the close
of the former Discourse) either the thing for which they are so zealous, makes
for their interest, or else they will make it so, while their design is to get
a name, and to appear Somebody in the world; or as bad, nay worse then both
these, because it comprehends them both, a sordid and an unworthy compliance,
for there is a kind of zeal in luke-warmness it self, a Complemental congenial
Religion, in suiting our selves to the company with whom we converse, changing
faces with every one we meet, is an hypocritical principle by which too too
many act and walk amongst us: These are they who would fain have every ones
good word, care not much to venture their credit, to be evil spoken of in the
cause of Piety, they are altogether for a good, they cannot go through a bad
report: and it is observable, that such persons who do thus ambire famam, court
every ones applause, seldom speak well of any, but those with whom at present
they are conversing, their Detraction is as notorious as their flattery, and be
it for their advantage to steal into the heart, to win upon the affections of
some leading men, of whatsoever Persuasion, they are as good at their Satyricks
as at Panegyricks, they are furnished at all adventures, and can as smartly
declaim against, as possibly not long before to another company they did
ingeniously commend the same thing: And sad it is, but too notoriously
apparent, that such a humor as this does transport many men in Religion it
self, who, because of advantage, can have Schism and Faction; in admiration,
Men who have as different Behaviors, as they have Habits, suting themselves to
the untowardness of those with whom they have to do, rather then to the
strictness of that profession to which they are obliged by all the ties
imaginable; these can urge the severity and Letter of a Law, though it be for
Uniformity, strain it contrary to its meaning, against any that will not comply
with them in their luke-warmness, that so they may have the less disturbance in
the promotion and strengthening of schism and sedition; This is their keeping
wind-ward of the Law; It is but their moderation to deviate from an established
Rule, pro hic and nunc, according to time and place to suit themselves to the
humors of their people, for without a little Dissimulation, their could be
neither Living nor Livelinood. But certainly, God has no need of such men's
Hypocrisy to Manifest his Glory, nor the Church of their Dissimulation to
preserve its peace: He that is a Friend to all Religions, or to all persuasions
in Religion, so far, that according to the circumstances of his life, he can
engage in, or defend any of them, is in truth of no Religion at all; he is
ready to Apostatize with Julian, and should there arise an eleventh Persecution
against Christianity, he is never like to be either a Resolute Confessor for
the truth he has owned, or a Faithful Martyr for the Faith into which he was
baptized; but this will be his sad Conversion, quite contrary to the blessed
alteration which was in St. Paul, Is not this he that preached Christ? but now
he destroys all those who call upon that name, delivering them up to bonds and
imprisonment, even to death it self: God grant that we may never know such
times, as will put these men to their trial; and he preserve and continue his
Church in Unity and Uniformity amongst us, that it never stand in need of them
to be Champions for its Faith or Discipline; But whither such an eager
industrious solicitude of being indifferent, of appearing all things to all
men, wresting St. Paul's practice, as bad as they have done his writings, out of
a desire not to gain Proselytes, but credit and profit to themselves; I say,
whether such a zealous, studious luke-warmness in things sacred and holy, is
not in the direct consequence of it a pre-requisite disposing a man to turn Jew
Turk Pagan, Infidel, any thing? does not in the formal notion of it promote
Atheism, both in practice and speculation? I leave this to the Disputers of
this World, to the curious speculative heads of our times, seriously and
soberly to consider. But as for us, let us be careful of a Temporary Faith; of
a Religion, ours in the profession of it, only because suited to the Climate we
live in, and the air we breath in, to the popular breath we daily suck, to the
soil of the Country, to the humors of Multitude: Let us be steadfast in our
holy Profession, persevere in the way of Godliness, as knowing, that Pure
Religion is to keep our selves unspotted from the World; it is Heaven-born, God
on high is Worshipped, and man upon Earth is saved, in the celebration of it;
this being our Assurance, that we are accepted, and a comfortable satisfaction
to us, that our zeal is rightly qualified, when in the integrity of our hearts
and the uprightness of our soul, it is as permanent, as it is passionate; it is
the same continued flame, bright and pure to the last, bending it self one way,
tending upwards; though it be fire, it is not seated beneath the concave of the
Moon, I mean, spent upon sublunary, changing, perishing Designs; but it is
cherished by, influenced upon, and clothed with the Sun of Righteousness, and
the reward of its Constancy, shall be Everlasting Felicity, for him who is thus
piously zealous unto Death, there is laid up a Crown of Life: And so I pass to
the

2. Reason of this Apostolical approbation; and that Taken from the habit;
(...). It must be always.
And here, (as in the Application of the first Discourse was mentioned) we must
be careful, that we distinguish the habit of zeal from the constitution of the
Body, whether it be not the overflowing of the Gall, rather than the result of
Grace from the heart? True indeed, being called unto Grace and Holiness,
whatsoever were our passions before, they are Crucified now with Christ in
mortification, and with him they are risen again, and sanctified unto his
service, and so our zeal may at the same time, be in some sort the natural
temper of our Bodies, and the pious frame of our Minds; but then, in other
circumstances of life, our zeal for Charity must always take place of Passion,
neither must the Sun at any time set, somnum nec rixa facit; nor are the
shadows of the night to be spread over our wrath, So then, be our Constitution
what it will, if in the personal occurrences of our lives, our Moderation be
known unto all men, our zeal for God, and Religion, because perpetually the
same, is therefore Good.

(...) it must be Always. Thunder does root up Foundations, the effects of it
are as dreadful, as the noise is terrible; but then the Lightning which does
accompany it, is momentany, it is but a sudden flash, and we see it again no
more: There is a Madzeal, or a Phrenzy rather; like Thunder, it pretends, that
it will clear the air, when it makes the earth to tremble, nothing but
Desolation, and overturning wherever the Bolt lights, it makes havoc of all
before it, be it never so pleasant or desirable; but the Lightning transcient,
the promising overtures are but some sudden glances, which have more of terror
and amazement, than of comfort and refreshment; we see them indeed, or hear of
them, no sooner are they seen or heard, but no where are they to be found:
whereas a Holy zeal is like the Sun breaking through a cloud, though
intercepted with the mists and foggs of error and seduction, yet, it will make
its way, and spread the day where e're it comes, it arises in its strength,
and in its beauty, and rejoices to run its course; its going forth is from
Heaven, and its Circuit to the end of it again, and there is nothing hid from
the heat thereof; such a thing is a pious zeal, like unto the Ordinances of
Heaven, abiding the same for ever; day after day, tells the World its Piety,
and night after night, in a satisfactory contemplation upon its own constancy,
shows unto the Devout Soul, that such a zeal, thus fixed and unalterable, is
according unto Godliness. True zeal, is not like Herod's Devotion, who sometimes
heard John Baptist gladly, and for his sake, when the humor took him, did many
things that were good; it is not like Agrippa's half Persuasion, and yet not
persuaded to be a Christian, very near, and so the farther from the Kingdom of
Heaven; it is not like Felix his pannick fit of trembling, while he hears St.
Paul reasoning of Temperance, of Righteousness, and of Judgment to come, soon
shaked off in a colder Dismission, go thy way, for this time, when I have a
more convenient season, I will send for thee; it is not a sudden motion, an
ecstatical rapture, an impetus that may cast Saul himself amongst the Prophets;
it is not a hot burning fit which comes and goes as some unhealthy humors
ferment more or less in the Body, or wild fancys work disturbedly, and
confusedly in the brain; such a zeal as this, which is not constant to it self,
is not unlike to Saul's evil Spirit, when the Lord was departed from him, it
wants David's Harp, the sweet Singer of Israel, the Music of the Sanctuary, and
the Songs of Sion to lay it; nay, and as the fit may take him, the Javelin may
be cast at David himself, because of his Music though a watchful eye, and a
speedy flight may prevent the danger, whilst the hole out of the Wall, is
indication sufficient of the madness of the thrower. This is the unaccountable
Phrenzy of some, whose zeal for they know not what, would knock a man's brains
out, only for a wen in his forehead; who drive furiously like Iehu, not at all
considering what they trample upon, or Desolations they leave behind them; and
then, when it is too late they bethink themselves, and look backwards; they
tell us, they never thought it would have come to this, they confess, that they
have done a great deal more then ever they intended; and at length, after all
this mischief, they will now sit down and be quiet, never thinking of asking
God forgiveness, or giveing the Church satisfaction for the Schisms they have
made; now, they are in the other extreme, as indifferent, as before they were
violent, lukewarm indeed; the heat, if any is spent the wrong way: But on the
contrary, that zeal which is Good, is, with Reverence be it spoke, like unto
Jesus, the Author of its Faith, it is the same Yesterday, to day, and for ever;
the same yesterday, when it was cherished and countenanced in prosperity; and
the same yesterday too, when it was threatened and frowned upon in adversity:
the same to day, being restored to honor, and to favor; and the same to day
too, should it be laid aside as useless or troublesome, whilst Schism and
Rebellion is to be cajoled, if not rewarded: the same for ever, owning the
Axiom to be true, though the deduction somewhat hard and disingenuous, that
They, who have already been approved in Affliction and Tribulation, so
manifesting their Piety to God, their Allegiance to their Prince, and their
Devotion to the Church, act by one and the same Principle still, and this
Principle will keep them honest, must therefore the constant performance of
their Duty, be the only reward of their zeal? and that zeal, is yet again, the
same for ever, ready to encounter all manner of difficulties, as if it had
never been disobliged; such a zeal is good, which is thus permanent, it is like
the fire upon the Altar, a constant flame of love, before its kept alive,
whilst hid in the Embers of its own loyalty and fidelity under, it breaks forth
to its wonted brightness and luster, after Captivity; though it consumes the
Zealot, yet it changes not; and after all that has been said, the word in the
Text is emphatical, (...). It is Always one and the same; and though sometime
reflecting upon it self with comfort, it may innocently and justly have an eye
to the recompense of reward, whether temporal, or eternal; yet it is not an eye
service, as before Men, it is a holy zeal, out of singleness of heart, as
pleasing God; which is the

Third and Last Reason of this Apostollical approbation, taken from the
occasion of expressing it; not only when I, your Apostle, am present with you.
That zeal which is Good, though its habit be as constant, as is the Object of
it, universally good, it is always the same temper and frame of mind; yet
withal, it is discreet, as well as vehement; it will then chiefly take occasion
to show it self, when there is most need of it, when the Spiritual Apostle or
Pastor is out of the way; (...) Not only out of fear, because of my Authority
and jurisdiction when I am present; but out of love to the thing it self,
should I be absent from you. This is that, which our chief Apostle, as having
the care over all the Churches, the great Doctor of the Gentiles did give in
charge, in most of his Epistles to the several Churches which he had planted,
That they should be careful to manifest unto all the World, that they had
received the Truth of the Gospel, in the love of it, in that their stedfastness
to the Faith, be one and the same, though he should not be locally present with
them, shaking the Rod of his jurisdiction over them: thus were the Churches
Centures to be managed at Corinth, upon the incestuous person, 1 Cor. 53. I,
verily, as absent in body, but present in spirit, have judged already, as
though I were present, concerning him that has so done this deed; in the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ, when you are gathered together, and my spirit, with
the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such a one to Satan: and to the
same Corinthians, who took it for granted, that the Apostle had a coercive
power over them, he gives them their option, that according to their Behavior,
during his absence, so should his Presence with them be, 1 Cor. 4.21. What will
ye? it is in your own power, to make me welcome at my coming; shall I come unto
you with a Rod? that is, in the severity of Discipline over you? or, in the
spirit of Meekness? in the affability, and courteousness of conversation with
you? and what was wanting in the Corinthians, this same Apostle commends as
praise worthy, in his Colossians, Chap. 11.5. Though I be absent in the flesh,
yet I am with you in the spirit, joying, and beholding your Order, and the
stedfastness of your Faith in Christ: It was the same Caution which he gave to
the Philippians, Chap. 1.27. Let your Conversation be as becomes the Gospel of
Christ; that whether I come and see you, or else be absent, I may hear of your
affairs, that ye stand fast in one spirit, striving together, (...) that is,
contending with eagerness and zeal, for the faith of the Gospel, and to these
Philippians also, with this caution he gives them witness, bearing Testimony
for them, that they had been constant, thereby to encourage their future
perseverance, Chap. 2.12. Wherefore my beloved, as ye have always obeyed, not
in my presence only, but now much more in my absence, work out your own
salvation with fear and trembling: By all which it is evident, that that zeal
is to be suspected for Hypocrysie, which is only suited to time, place, and
person; which is then exerted, when such persons are present, who, either have
a power over, or an influence upon us; but these being withdrawn, immediately
we grow as cold, and as indifferent as ever: the Ruler having turned his back,
the Servant presently alters the Copy of his Countenance. It was an Heathens
advice, that we should imagine our selves in the presence of Socrates, or some
other rigid exemplar of virtue, which may be a restraint upon us, that we do
not at any time transgress the Rule of our duty; but that Philosopher came
nearer the Dictates of Christianity, who gave us this in Counsel, (...) Pythag.
Aur. Carm. That above all things we have a Reverence for our selves alone; that
we do not at any time commit the least action, at the performance of which, as
thoughts may trouble us, our hearts misgive us, and consciences may presently
fly in our faces; that we do not that in our most close, private retirement,
which we may be afraid, or ashamed to own, should we be made a spectacle to
Angels and to Men; It is not he that commends himself in the sight of men
that is approved, but whom the Lord commends, 2 Cor. 10.18. However then, we
may, and ought, in some doutful things, which are not much material for us to
inquire into, resign up our judgments to our Superiors in the Church; yet, we
must be careful that we do not give up our zeal to the inspection of those that
are set over us; in this we must study to approve our selves in the sight of
God; and not of Man.

Here, They are to be reproved, who can suite themselves to as many ways of
worship, as they have Masters in Religion; like slavish Minions, altogether at
other men's beck; they serve as it were an apprentiship in their Devotion; only
before men; not in singleness of heart, as in the sight of God, who tries the
reins, and searches out the Deep of the heart, These are they who urge the
spirit of meekness in an Apostle, to be a sufficient plea for them in their
luke-warmness; and because some whose business it is to Govern, do walk by
certain rules of prudence, of which they are the best and only Judges, (let
them look to it, for none but they shall answer for it, if the wisdom of the
Serpent devour the innocence of the Dove, if their Policy get the start of
their Piety,) therefore every one who is in sworn subjection, must take liberty
to deviate from an established Rule; and yet these very men take it ill to be
esteemed but half faced professors of Conformity; no, when there is need of
it, or the Audience requires it, persons so and so qualified being in presence
to countenance it, they can be as hearty, and as zealous for an exact solemnity
as the best of us, and who dares mistrust them for other then most genuine, and
dutiful Sons of the Church? -- Such as these who are thus carried away with a
Dissimulation, they are to be withstood to the very face, for indeed they are
to be blamed; however men may be deceived by them; yet let them know, that God
is not to be mocked; They may insinuate themselves into favor and into power
for a while, as being fit instruments for any Design; Men who can venture upon
any thing to please those whom they call Patrons and Benefactors; -- Vivant and
in senatum veniant, let them live, and enjoy their reward here, whilst the Man,
whose principle is integrity, this the root of the matter to be found in him,
awaits for his in another world; it is the Lord our God who sees in secret,
and without great repentance shall reward the Hypocrite, of which none so bad
as the Dissembler in Gods services, with shame and everlasting contempt: Nay,
these pitiful, threadbare policies, a man may see through into the Mystery of
iniquity, they are like Cobwebs, though in the Palaces of Princes, on a sudden
swept away; whereas the honest and the upright heart, which in all the
Occurencies of Life looks upon God as its guide, has a regard to him as its
Judge, and from him expects an eternal reward, this is that principle at the
bottom which will carry a man through all extremity, and keep his head above
water, though the billows roar about him: Do we not even in this life many
times see Confusion sit upon the face of base servile Spirits? the Devil owes
them a shame, and e're they go hence many times he pays them part of their
wages; But, behold the perfect man, and mark the upright, the beginning, the
continuance, to be sure the end of that man is peace.

To Conclude; Let your your zeal as well as your Moderation be known unto all
men; and the same argument to enforce both; The Lord is at hand; all things are
naked and bare before the eyes of that God with whom we have to do; he is at
hand, near us, within us, and round about us, there is no hiding from his
presence, who understands all our thoughts long before they are; Cease we
from man, whose breath is in his nostrils, for wherein is he to be accounted
of; why should our concerns for the eternal Gospel, or the Administration of
it, be subordinate to the interests of a temporary momentany service; as if God
were either unwilling or unable to be a Rewarder of those who diligently seek
him? no, the Promise of God to Abraham, is still a sure word of Prophecy, to
all those that are the Children of faithful Abraham; Genesis 17.1. I am the
Almighty God, walk before me, and be thou perfect; fear not, I am thy shield,
and thy exceeding great reward: As for all tergeversating transgressors, the
end of them is, that they shall perish together, the ungodly shall be rooted
out at the last; But, Psalm. 97.11. there is sprung up a Light for the
Righteous, and joyful gladness for such as are true-hearted: Behold then, yet
once again, the Perfect man, and mark the upright; Or, as our Church in her
Liturgy renders that versicle, Psalm. 37.38. Keep innocence and do the thing
which is right; that shall bring a man peace at the last: -- Let us keep
innocence, maugre men and Devils, let us walk uprightly in our integrity; and
let us do the thing which is right; be sure that our emulations and strivings
be for a good thing; this shall bring a man peace at the last; -- Peace at the
last, even the last end of our life, when we shall find heaviness in our flesh,
upon our deathbed an undisturbed and a quiet Conscience, when we shall lay our
selves down in peace to sleep our last, with this comfortable reflection, that
we have done nothing to contribute to the troubles of our Israel; -- and Peace
at the last, which shall last for ever, bringing us unto Jesus who is the
Author of that Faith, which though fighting, in a state militant we have kept;
the Finisher of that Hope, which in a tempestuous sea has been a sure
Anchor-hold, even the Anchor of our Hope fixed in Heaven; and the Prince of
that Peace, which as a reward of our valor in the Fight, at our Triumph we
shall enjoy, that Peace which passes all understanding, and is full of Glory:
Whilst in the mean time, our Pious and Holy Zeal for Good, which cannot but be
good being in the way of Godliness, shall be like Elijah's Chariot (that I may
conclude with the same instance with which I begun) a Chariot of flame to carry
us from a troublesome evil world, to our Mansions of Rest and Peace; where we
shall no longer need to be so eagerly sollicitous for God and for his Glory;
but, throughout the days of eternity, our Love shall be our satisfaction,
nothing else but Complacency, our Delight: To which place of Bliss and
Contentment, God of his infinite mercy bring us all, for Jesus Christ his sake,
who is gone before to prepare those Mansions for us; To whom, with the Father,
and the Holy Ghost, three Persons and one God, be ascribed Honor, and Glory,
and Blessing with Adoration, World without end. Amen.

MODERATION AS AN APOSTOLICAL COUNSEL Explained;
Philip. 4.5. Being part of the Epistle for the fourth Sunday in Advent.

Let your Moderation be known unto all men: The Lord is at hand.


OUr Lord and Blessed Savior being to come into the world, and to appear a
Minister of Reconciliation to the People; sent his Messenger before his face to
prepare the way of the Lord, and to make his paths strait; and the voice from
God, at that time in the mouth of his Prophet, crying in the Wilderness of
Judea was this, St. Mat. 3.2. Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.
Afterward, John being cast into Prison, Jesus, himself went forth and began to
teach in every City; and he was, as it were, the Echo to the voice foregoing,
the message he delivered being the very same, St. Matthew 4.17. Jesus began to
preach, and to say, Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand: This John,
who came neither eating, nor drinking, sequestring himself from the World, and
denying himself, the pleasures of ordinary Converse; our Blessed Master Jesus
Christ the Righteous, who came eating and drinking, who lived after the common
manner of men; the one in every crowded City, and the other in a waste howling
Will derness, Both have the same Lesson to teach, and the same Argument to
enforce it; Repent, for, the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand: and, though from the
days of John the Baptist, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the
violent take it by force; that is, the fruit of Repentance is not only
carefulness, but Indignation likewise, and a holy zeal; though our Savior
himself too, as meek and lowly as he was, came to send Fire upon the Earth, and
before his departure hence, what, if it were already kindled? Yet, Jesus being
risen and Ascended, sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on High, his
Gospel being strangely propagated, he having given to such as shall be saved by
Faith in his name, and Repentance toward God; Love, and Charity, is now the
Law by which he will rule and govern in the hearts of all Believers; the feet
of those that follow him, or expect his coming again, must be shod with the
Preparation of his Gospel, as it is a Gospel of Peace; Et speciosi Pedes, and
these feet are to appear Beautiful, that so all may see them; Brotherly Love
was the precious Legacy which he left behind him; and this to continue till he
come again: so that, the same Motive which gained Proselites at first, to
embrace the Christian Doctrine with Repentance and godly sorrow, is an
Apostolical incitation to the several Churches, as they were Planted, that they
continue in the Faith which they had received, as knowing on whom they
Believed; the Product of Repentance now, is not only to be Indignation, Zeal,
and a holy Revenge, but also, the Peaceable fruit of Righteousness; whatsoever
things are honest, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good
report, if there be any virtue, if there be any praise, they who embrace
Christianity, must think upon, and follow those things; and that because of
Christ's Coming, whether in the Flesh, or unto Judgment; in the Flesh, in our
Flesh with which he was clothed, The Lord of Heaven is at Hand, and with him,
the Kingdom of Heaven also, he being himself the King, and the Kingdom too, he
is at Hand, not far from every one of us, carrying our Nature, and our
Constitution with him, Sanctifying our Inclinations and Affections, whilst he
subjected himself unto all our Passions; unto judgment, the Kingdom of Heaven,
the Lord from Heaven is at Hand, to call the World to an account; if for their
idle words, surely, for their hard speeches, their heart-burning thoughts,
their uncharitable Actions, against such as are quiet in the Land, not
suffering their Brethren, for whom Christ died, to live securely by them:
therefore, considering these things, that the Man Christ Jesus, who came in the
fullness of time, shall come again at the end of all time, after which, time
shall be no more, to judge both the quick and dead; and withal, lifting up our
heads in a comfortable expectation, that our Redemption draws nigh, and our
Salvation is nearer, than when we first believed; what manner of persons ought
we to be, in all holy, humble, affable Conversation and Godliness? Let our
Moderation be known unto all Men: the Lord is at Hand.

You see, that our Church has furnished me with a Text every way suitable, not
only as to the present time, but consequential upon my former Discourses:
though I have already, I hope sufficiently set bounds to a holy zeal, that it
do not transgress the law of Love, and Charity; yet, since nothing is more
usual, than to urge this portion of Scripture, now read in Defense of
Luke-warmness, and since likewise nothing is more incident to our Natures, than
that we deceive our selves, mistaking our Passions many times, too too often
uncharitableness it self, for a holy zeal; therefore, as a restriction in the
one case, and a due information in the other, following the Church's
prescription, the Text is every way suitable, and a word in season, Let your
Moderation be known unto all Men, the Lord is at Hand.

The parts of the Text are Obvious; these Two.
1. A Duty enjoined; (...). Let your Moderation be known unto all men: 2. An
Argument to enforce it; (...). The Lord is at Hand.
2. The Duty is not only enjoined, but recommended also; it is not only to be
an inherent quality, or a Disposition within us, that is, Our Moderation; but
so Ours, that it may be known; yea, and known, not here and there, to one or
two; but indifferently, as the circumstances of our Conversation engage us,
unto all Men: whereupon, the Argument to enforce the Duty may be urged; this
being the scope of the Text, either in our Churches Selection of it, as part of
the Epistle for this day, or in the Apostles intention, as it is wholesome
counsel given to these Philippians; The Lord is at Hand, that is, appearing in
the Flesh, and whilst so going about, and doing good, proposing himself a
pattern of Moderation unto all; Again, the Lord is at Hand, coming to be our
Judge, when the secrets of our hearts shall be laid open, not only before the
eyes of him, with whom we have to do, not only before our own Consciences, when
our own sin, shall it self reprove us, and the iniquity of our heels shall
compass us about; but likewise as a further aggravation, either of our shame or
glory, we shall be made a spectacle unto Angels and to Men; since the children
of darkness, have loved darkness rather than light, therefore to heighten there
calamity, and enhance their misery, before their portion of utter darkness
shall be assigned them, they, and their deeds of darkness shall be brought unto
the Light; that we may therefore stand in that day upright in judgment, lift up
our heads then with joy, it will be our prudence, as well as our Piety, now in
this time to let our Moderation be known unto all Men, That I may not, in too
nice a Division, loose the whole scope of the Text, I shall confine my
Discourse to these three particulars.
1. Consider we, what this Christian grace of Moderation is, that we be not
mistaken about it in our selves? (...). Your, or Our Moderation. 2. How, and in
what particular circumstances this Grace is to be Manifested unto others,
(...). Let it be known; and that, although unto all Men; yet it is not said, at
all times. 3. How the Coming of Christ, either in the Flesh, or unto Judgment,
is an argument that we should improve this Grace in our selves, and manifest it
to all; (...). The Lord is at Hand.


This is the Sum of the Text, and the Design of the ensuing Discourse from
these words, Let your Moderation be known unto all Men: the Lord is at Hand.
First, What this Christian grace of Moderation is, that we be not mistaken
about it in our selves? (...). Your, or Our Moderation.

And here I shall propose to your Consideration Three Things;
1. What the word Moderation, (...) in its signification, does most properly
import? 2. Consider we it as good Counsel given to these Philippians; and
compare we it with the other Apostolical advices scattered throughout the whole
Epistle. 3. How this Virtue may be considered, as it was eminent in our Blessed
Savior, who is here proposed the great Exemplar for Moderation?
First. What this Moderation, (...) in its signification does most properly
import?
The word being an Adjective Neuter put for a Substantive, and the Article
emphatically praefixed, (...) seems to denote to us, that whatever it may
import, it is already supposed to be the fixed habit, and unalterable
Disposition of the Mind, and in this place advised to be something more
exerted, that so others may be the better for it. (...) Favorini Lexic. it
signifies, the well ordered Disposedness of the trational Soul; when the
apprehensive faculties are neither too slow, nor yet too hasty; but, the
wiseman has his eyes in his head, and his wits about him, neither does
prejudice possess him, interest blind him, or any by-respect balance him on
either side; but in aquilibrio, he is courteously ready to speak, and act so as
becomes prudence, modesty, and sobriety: (...), as the same Critic, the
moderate man is meek and humble, he does recede and give way, he does not stand
too much upon his terms, capitulating either with his betters, or his equals,
but being called forth unto company, as our Savior advises, he takes the
lowest Seat, (...). Hesych and Favorin. It is a virtue proper to young men, or
persons in a middle station, whose best breeding is their Humility, and the
sweetness of their Conversation, is their Meekness: if we ascribed to the Aged,
and the Honorable, to those that are in Dignity and in Power; then it
signifies (...). Hesych. It is the promoting of that which is decent and
convenient; it is affability in those that are conspicuous, and withal, it is
(...). Besych. In a Magistrate, or a Dispenser of Justice, it is a courteous
impartiality, without being prepossessed, an even and indifferent behavior in
passing sentence, it is what Tertullus the Orator, requested of Felix the
Governor, (...). A patient and an attentive hearing of the whole matter, what
can be said on either side, and then as the business under debate requires,
giving the sentence according to equity: in a word, in Scripture we find it
always joined with meekness, and opposed to strife and contention, 1 Timothy 3.3.
(...), patient, not a brawler; to which the Parallel place is, 2 Timothy 2.24.
(...). The Servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all men; to
which I add, as exegetical to all the former, and a paraphrase upon my Text,
Titus 3.2. (...). To be no brawlers, but gentle, showing all meekness unto all
men.

In all this search, in which I hope, I have been indifferent and impartial;
and shall again have occasion presently to improve it, we do not find either in
the signification, or use of the word, that the virtue here enjoined, does in
the least imply such a frame or habit of mind, as is a compliance with all men,
and all humors, especially in things sacred as well as Civil: -- Moderation is
that which we call Love and Charity, and Love is the fulfilling or keeping of
the whole, not the breaking of any of the Laws of God or Man. A man may yield
indeed his own personal right, as far as his own particular interest or profit
is concerned; but it is a great piece of injustice, and as the circumstances
may be laid, an injury unto a whole Community, tending to the utter Destruction
and Dissolution of it, if, under the specious pretense of a good nature, and a
sweet disposition, a man should dispense with himself, or (be he in Power) with
others, as to that obedience which is strictly due, and peremptorily required
in a Legal Constitution: it is true, Moderation is the result of Wisdom, and of
an honest prudence; but then, it should be that wisdom which is from above,
which, if it be peaceable amongst men, yet it is pure in relation unto God; in
the Epistle of St. James, Chap. 3.17. (...). it is gentle, and easy to be
entreated; and yet, though readily persuaded, it changes not, it is not
unconstant to it self, as it is full of mercy unto others, so it is likewise of
good fruits at home; as it is without partiality in affection, so it is without
hypocrisy in intention; this is the fruit of Righteousness, sown in peace, of
all those who make peace.

Secondly, Consider we this virtue Moderation, as it was good and wholesome
Counsel given to these Philippians, and as it may be compared with those other
counsels, scattered throughout the whole Epistle. To these Philippians it was a
virtue recommended, after they had newly embraced the Faith of Christ, and were
to meet with sundry afflictions, and various troubles; Chap. 1.29. Unto you it
is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to
suffer for his sake; they lived amongst those, of whom the Apostle had told
them formerly, and now with tears, Chap. 3.18. That they were enemies to the
Cross of Christ, whose God was their belly, whose glory was their shame, who
minded earthly things; this was to be their Moderation, Chap. 11.15. That they
be blameless, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse
Generation, among whom they were to shine as lights; and upon this account, in
their patience, they were to possess their Souls, not to cast away their hope,
though afflicted; but, let it be known unto all men, that this was their
comfortable expectation through many tribulations, that they should enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven; and this they were to be assured of, that whatsoever
afflictions did befall them, as they were for their sins, and why should men
complain, men that are alive, for the punishment of their Sins? so, were they
for their trial too, that patience might have its perfect work, neither should
their hope make them ashamed, this is the hard usage, which they that will live
godly in Christ Jesus, must expect, even the Rod of the Wicked, sometimes upon
their backs; and the Righteous must be careful, that upon this, they do not put
their hands forth unto iniquity, and so return to folly; Let us examine him
with despitefullness and with torture, says the ungodly oppressor, Wisd.
11.19. (...) That we may know his meekness, and prove his patience: So then,
this grace Moderation, as it is here recommended, implies valor as well as
meekness, whilst it is gentle, it is courageous too; (...). Sylbury. Etym. Its
Concomitant may not improperly be a steadfast Hope, (...). Gloss. It is not in
the least inconsistent with, nay, the very word it self does sometimes import,
a generous resolvedness, a well-grounded immovable Constancy; and therefore,
it is the APostles advice to these Philippians, Chap. 1.27. That they should
stand fast in one Spirit, (...), striving together for the faith of the Gospel;
Chap. 3.16. Whereunto any of them had attained, they were to walk by the same
Rule, and to mind the same things: And, ver. the first of this Chap. They were
thus his dearly Beloved, and longed for, his Crown and his joy, in that they
stood fast in the Lord; thus, while the Apostle recommends to his Philippians
Moderation, a Spirit of Love and Charity toward all men, he gives them this
likewise in advice, ver. the 8th. of this Chapter. That they follow things that
are true and just in themselves, as well as honest in the sight of men; things
that are pure, as well as those that are lovely, or of good report; if there be
any virtue, as well as if there be any praise; and this chiefly to be their
Moderation, that they think upon, and do those things: And after all, and
throughout all, that they be sure to have an eye to him, and to his both work
and reward, who is to be their pattern, the great exemplar for Moderation;
Chap. 2.3. Let nothing be done through strife, or vain glory, but in lowliness
of mind, let each esteem of others better than themselves; let the same mind be
in you, which was also in Christ Jesus; In the Text, Let your Moderation be
known unto all men; The Lord is at Hand; which is the

Third Thing I propounded, to wit, the consideration of this virtue, as it was
eminent in our Savior, who is proposed here as the pattern for our Moderation:
the Lord is at hand; whilst, converseing with our Flesh, he went about doing
good, humility was his clothing, and love was his delight; 2 Cor. 10.1. (...).
the Moderation of our Savior was his Meekness, as a Lamb, he was led unto the
slaughter, and as a Sheep before his shearers is dumb, so he opened not his
mouth; being reviled, he reviled not again, being persecuted he threatened not,
and yet, though dumb and answering nothing, it is said of him, that before
Pontius Pilate, he witnessed a good confession; silentem videmus non audimus
confitentem reum, his silence was no argument of his guilt, but of his
well-resolved constancy, his courage and fortitude was all the while as
evident, as were his Meekness and Gentleness, and throughout all, he committed
himself and his cause to God alone, that that judges righteously: We therefore
being to learn of our Savior, who was meek and lowly, must be careful that our
Moderation be manifest, as was his, in the personal occurrences of our lives:
His Moderation was not in the least a Dispensation granted either to himself,
or his Disciples, from that Subjection which he acknowledged to be due to the
Jewish Polity, whether Sacred or Civil, under which he lived: No, in such cases
it behoved him to fulfill all Righteousness; he wrought a Miracle, rather than
he would not pay Caesar his due, and his command to his Disciples, was to hear
those who sat in the Chair of Moses; (to sum up what I have elsewhere delivered
at large) he went up to Jerusalem, according to the custom of the feast, every
year; and though once the Pharisees enquired most eagerly after him, what; will
he not come unto the Feast? his presence immediately took off those suspicions,
and told them, and all the World, that his Principle was Conformity; he kept
the Feast of Dedication, though of humane institution; this being an argument,
both of his innocence and his Piety, that he could thus defend and plead for
himself to the very last, that he was daily in the Temple, and in the
Synagogues; and that in secret he had said nothing: But then, where his Person
was in the least concerned, there his Moderation was conspicuous; to show, that
he was no enemy to Caesar, he withdrew himself, when the People would have took
him by force, and have made him a King; he never rode in Triumph, but once, and
then it was to his Passion; and at the same time when he owned himself to be
the King of Israel, he publicly professed, and denied it not, that his Kingdom
was not of this World; true, he was Crowned, but with Thorns, the Scepter in
his hand was a Reed, the Purple Robe upon him, was the Robe of shame, his
humility was his greatest honor, his Cross was his Throne, the Proclamation of
his Majesty was at Golgotha, and whatsoever truth might be in the Title, St.
Mar. 15.26. The Inscription over his head, is styled his Accusation written,
Jesus of Nazareth the King of the Jews: This is he, who is thus proposed to our
imitation, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, and
despised the shame; this was his Moderation (Chap. 11.7. of this Epistle) in
that he made himself of no reputation; He took upon him the form of a Servant,
and was made in the likeness of man; and being found in fashion as a Man he
humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross.
And thus I have done with the first thing I proposed to you, What this
Moderation is, that so we be not mistaken about it in our selves? Your, or Our
Moderation, it is no Indifferent luke-warmness; and here I have made a search
into the signification of the Word, into the Recommendation of the virtue, as
it does consist with those other Apostolical Admonitions given to these
Philippians, throughout the whole Epistle; and into the Example proposed to our
imitatirn, our Blessed Savior being a pattern as of Meekness, so of Integrity:
thus, let our Moderation be known, as was his, not in a dispensation, or
relaxation from our Duty, but in the personal circumstances and occurrencies of
our Lives or Deaths; the Lord is at hand: and this brings me to the

Second Thing proposed; how? and in what particular Circumstances this grace of
Moderation is to be manifested unto others? (...) let it be known.
Though the injunction is, that it should be known unto all men, yet it is not
said, at all times: And here, in the first place, we are to be careful, that in
our Moderation, there be no Affection, lest it degenerate into flattery and
hypocrisy; it is indeed to be seen of men, not that we, but that God himself
may have the Glory of it: our Moderation is to be exerted, just as our Alms
are to be dispensed, not with a Trumpet sounding before us, that men may have
our good nature in admiration; but our left hand must not know what our right
hand does, so shall our Heavenly Father, who sees in secret, reward us openly.
To appear all things unto all men to gain the more, is not a virtue for every
one to be trusted with, it seems fit only for an Apostle to practice, who, in
his whole Ministration is more immediately assisted and directed by the Spirit
of God; and this practice of his too, if we rightly consider it, was only in
such circumstances wherein the Doctrine of Christianity was like to suffer, or
be promoted according to the more or less wary Dispensation of it, betwixt
Mosaical Judaism, and Philosophical Gentilism; and therefore we find the same
Apostle, when he with-stood St. Peter to the face, because of his
Dissimulation, thus to vindicate himself throughout his Ministry, Gal. 2.18.
That what ever mis-apprehensions some might have of him, or mis-constructions
they did put upon his Practices, he did not in the least build again the things
which he had destroyed, and so make himself a Transgressor: But now, the Gospel
is so far propagated, that as soon as we are come into the World, our Names are
given up to Christ in Baptism, and with our first Milk we may suck in the
Principles of Godliness, being weaned from our Mothers Papps, we are sent unto
the Churches Breasts of consolation, The Scriptures of God, which are able to
make us wise unto Salvation, hence we may suck the sincere Milk of the Word,
and grow thereby, and whatsoever variety of Persuasions there be now in
Religion, they do not proceed from our different estate, before our receptation
of it, but from the different interests of Parties so and so affected under its
Administration, having espoused a quarrel, they are too tenacious of it, they
are unwilling to to fore-go what they have eagerly maintained: herein
therefore, is to be the great expression of our Moderation, that we stand fast
to the profession of our Faith, and hold it peaceably in the Unity of the
Church; keeping, as the Apostle directs, the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of
Peace; that we have a tender regard to those that are gone aside. of some, we
must have compassion, making a just, and an equal difference; and others, we
must endeavor to save with fear, pulling them out of the fire; and yet all the
while we must be careful, that we keep a strict watch over our selves, hating
the Garment whech is but spotted with the Flesh, St. Judes Epist. v. 22.23.
Thus must we make it our daily Prayer, as the Church directs, that God would
bring into the way of truth, all such as have erred, and are deceived; and for
our selves, that from all Sedition, false Doctrine, Herisie, Schism, and
R^bellion, our good and gracious Lord would deliver us. Would we convert a
sinner from the error of his way? it is not to be done by going astray with
him, and bearing him company, and so endeavoring our own stedfastness; for how
do we know but that he may seduce us, as well as we hope to regain him? but, it
is a Pious endeavoring to restore such wandering Sinners, as have wandered
either from God, their Father, or the Church their Mother, in a Spirit of Love
and Charity: there is no reason, that to make sure of Moderation, we should let
go our own integrity; that to show our love to our Brother, we should forget
that Charity which we owe unto our selves; that in keeping his, we should loose
our own Peace; that in Love to any men's Persons, we should court their Vices,
have their errors and their failings in admiration, and so much the worse, if
it be because of advantage: 2 Timothy 1.7. The same God, who has given unto his
Servants a Spirit of Love, has given them likewise the Spirit of a sound, and
of a sober Mind: Gal. 6.1. Do we see any that is overtaken with a fault? herein
consists our Christian Moderation, that we consider our selves, lest that we
also be tempted; and out of a Principle of good Nature we must not venture to
run out after him; but, says the Apostle, You, who are your selves Spiritual,
do you restore such a one in the spirit of Meekness: in the Parallel to my
Text, Titus 3.2. In whatsoever station of life God has placed us, we must
labor to show all Meekness unto all men; 2 Mac. 9.2. (...). Moderation is a
kind of holy Philanthropie, by which, abstracting some particular respects, not
so acceptable unto our selves, we can prosecute all with whom we have occasion
to converse, with love, as Knowing them to be of the same Make with our selves;
that they, and we are all of us in the Body; and yet for all this, every one of
us must faithfully abide in that Calling wherein he is Called in the Lord,
watching thereunto with all Diligence and Perseverance. After all that has been
said, though all men have a right to our Moderation, the Holy and the Good,
that they may rejoice with us; the froward and the perverse, that they may be
won by us; our friends, that they may go hand in hand with us; our enemies,
that they may be reconciled unto us; those who are our Superiors, to whom we
have submitted our selves, in the fear of God, our equals, with whom we do
converse in the love of Christ; and our inferiors, to whom, an example of
meekness and sobriety, alluring them to the ways of holiness, by our affable,
and acourteous Behavior, in the strictness of a well-ordered Conversation; yet
I say, though this Grace is so universally, so impartially to be made manifest
unto all, there are mollisma tempora, certain times and seasons, in which it is
most amiable, and it is part of Christian prudence so to exert it, that it may
appear beautiful and lovely unto all in its proper season; the present
circumstances are to be consulted seriously, least our Moderation do degenerate
into a sordid and a sneaking compliance; an Holy Zeal must sometimes have its
perfect work, as well as Patience: when once Remissness gets the upper hand of
Order, God himself is neglected, whilst his Divine Offices are perfunctorily,
carelessly, and slubberly performed, when the public Solemnities of Religion
are, if not laid aside, yet so managed, as if they were altogethar needless and
to no purpose, the Moderate Man may mourn in secret, and by his silence, at
such a time manifests his prudence; because it is an evil time; but, this seems
to be, rather an opportunity for courage and constancy in the Resolute, that
the world may see, that we are neither afraid, nor ashamed of that which some
count madness and folly, that we are neither to be complemented by the sly
Politician, nor Hectored by the profane Atheist out of that Faith which we
have professed, and wherein we stand: In a word, this is our Moderation, when
in affliction we are not froward, under discouragements we are not
discontented, when we can love those who persecute us, and are ready to do good
to those who do despightfully use us, when we count it all joy, that for
righteousness sake, we are evil thought of, or evil spoke of, when we are not
over-sollicitous of every ones good word; but, should God and his Truth require
it, we can venture through a bad report, to show our Constancy and
Perseverance; and though the Moderate Man walks circumspectly, not as a fool,
but as wise, endeavoring to approve himself to the Consciences of those, with
whom he has to do, yet his heart does neither mis-give him, nor reproach him;
as his humility is conspicuous, so his integrity is solid; if he does approve
himself; it is that the Lord may commend the singleness of his heart, and the
integrity of his Soul; even the Lord who is at Hand: And so I press to the

Third and Last thing propounded (to wit) How the Coming of Christ, either in
the Flesh, or to Judgment, is an Argument to us, to improve this Grace of
Moderation?
The Lord is at hand; just now gone from us, lately appearing in our Flesh; And
he is at hand, in like manner to come again; the day is approaching in which
God will Judge the World, by the Man whom he has ordained, even the Man Christ
Jesus; and the Apostle does in another place join both these together; (to wit)
that the consideration of Christ's first Coming should have this effect upon us,
that we live in a continual expectancy of his Second; Tit. 2.11, 12. " The
Grace of God which brings Salvation has appeared unto all men, teaching us,
that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present evil world, (Moderation is but one
comprehensive word for all these) looking for that blessed Hope, and the
glorious appearance of the Great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ.

First, Let your Moderation be known unto all men; the Lord is at hand, not far
from every one of us, lately appearing in our flesh, having Sanctified our
inclinations and affections, whilst he was subject unto like Passions with us,
being in every thing tempted, as we are, yet without sin: we might indeed
sometime have been foolish, deceived by, and deceiving one another, Status
Naturae status Belli, in this sense, we were by Nature the Children of Wrath;
not only in relation to God, whom we had provoked, but also, in relation to
each other, delighting in violence and oppression; But, Tit. 3.4. After the
kindness and love of God our Savior toward Man appeared, we are freely
justified by his Grace, and made Co heirs together according to the Hope of
Eternal Life; and this is that which we must Persevere in, since we have
believed on God, that we be always careful to maintain good works, and those,
such which are not in the least Destructive, but every way profitable unto men;
let every one, that names the Name of Christ Jesus our Lord, depart from all
iniquity.

Our Savior in the Flesh, God incarnate in his Birth, throughout his Life, but
chiefly at his Death, was not only a most successful example, but a prevailing
argument for our Moderation.
First, His Birth was, the Son of Righteousness, arising with healing in his
wings; it was through the tender Mercies (...). through the Bowels of the mercy
of our God, that the Dayspring from on high did visit us; and this is our
Happiness consequential hereupon, that being delivered from our Ghostly, and
our carnal Enemies, we may serve God without fear, in holiness and
righteousness before him all the days of our lives; this was the Angelical
Hymn at his Birth, that as his coming into the World, was Glory to God in the
highest, so it was in Earth Peace, (...), and good will toward Men: nay
further, that our Love upon this occasion might be raised to its due pitch,
those words are not unfitly rendered by the Vulgar, In terris pax hominibus
bone voluntatis, On earth Peace, unto Men of Good will. And now, shall our
Savior empty himself of his honor, that he may accommodate himself unto us,
and we be puffed up one against another? are we not all of us now Brethren,
doubtly dear unto each other, both in the Flesh and in the Lord? or rather, in
the Lord, who was made Flesh?

Secondly, Nay, yet again, not only the fruit of his holy Mothers Womb, at his
Birth, but the whole course of his Life was nothing else, but a continued
labor of Love; could he do any good, were it to the poorest, and the meanest,
to the basest, and unworthiest, it was his meat and his drink; he loved much,
and therefore all along, though loaded with indignities, he forgave much, he
had not where to lay his head, and yet he wrought Salvation wheresoever he
came; how glad was he, though in a crowd, that virtue wentout of him! and in
this chiefly was his humility conspicuous, in that he confessed and he denied
it not, that He, though the Son of Man, and so the first born of the whole
Creation, came not to be Ministered unto, but to Minister, and to give his Life
a Ransom for many: And are not we likewise to tread in his steps? is not this
the Lesson which hence we are to take out, that the greatest amongst us, be in
all good and virtuous offices, as it were a Servant unto all, remembering
always the words of our Lord Jesu Christ, that it is better to give than
receive; we should therefore from his example be ready to give, and willing to
communicate.

Thirdly, Yet once more, and chief of all, his Death was the Reconciling of the
World unto God and to himself; all enmity was slain, when he hung upon the
Cross, though bleeding and dying, he was the Prince of Peace; herein the love
of God toward man appeared, in that while we were yet sinners and enemies,
Christ died for us; And shall we be froward and peevish against one another,
vexing and fretting our Brethren, for whom Christ died; the Legacy that he left
us, the Boon that he procured for us, was Love and Peace; he could not die till
he had expressed his Charity to the worst of his enemies, pitying their
ignorance, and praying against their malice, Father, forgive them, for they
know not what they do; And shall we live in contention, and in strife, as if we
had no interest in this common Salvation, this unspeakable great Redemption;
what shall I say? To observe the strange animosities and fewds, the
contrivances and intreigs of Malice and of anger, by what arts they are
industriously promoted, and wickedly fomented, even amongst those, who yet
profess their Faith and Hope in one and the same Savior, would make a man
sometimes sadly to conclude, that such men are so desperately at variance
amongst themselves, that they are loath to be reconciled in Heaven it self;
these little think upon a Savior, who has made an atonement for them; yea,
and though he be sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high, yet he is
rising out of his place, to judge the World for their iniquity; Oh! why then is
not our Moderation known unto all men, since the Lord, coming to be our judge,
is at hand.

Secondly, Christ coming to Judgment, to take vengeance of all ungodly sinners
for their wicked deeds, which they have ungodlily committed, is an argument
unto us, that if we would then behold our Lord in Righteousness, and with
comfort, be satisfied when we shall arise in his likeness, now in this time, we
must tread the paths which he has traced for us; follow Peace with, let our
Moderation be known unto all men, the Lord is at hand. -- The Lord is at hand,
either in a particular, or in a general judgment; for I find the Text Commented
upon in both respects.

First, In a particular Judgment; that is, the Lord is at hand, to visit upon
the City Jerusalem all her iniquities, whose sad Desolation was to be, not only
a forerunner, but a clear Type of the last dreadful Doom: And this is the
Paraphrase which the most litteral and verbal Interpreters of the New
Testament-Text do give upon this, and the like expressions scattered and
dispersed, especially, throughout (...) Epistolical writings. Christ had
foretold the Destruction, both of the City, and the Temple; and this was the
expectation of the Christians, looking for the accomplishment of that
Prophecy, assuring them, that true was the word which their Lord had spoken,
and that with so much vehemence and eagerness, that when he foretold the thing,
he said, That Heaven and earth possibly might, but not a little, an iota of the
word which he had spoken, should pass away; and verily, faith our Savior, This
Generation shall not pass away until that all these things be fulfilled: this
therefore being the general expectation of the New Converts unto Christianity
amongst the Gentiles; that Jerusalem's extirpation was nigh at hand, and that
their Destruction was to be a day of Retribution, wherein God would recompense
unto the People of the Jews, all those injuries and Persecutions which they had
raised against Christ and his Apostles, in the Plantation of the Gospel; When
you see these things come to pass, lift up your heads with joy (said our
Savior) for the day of your Redemption draws nigh; that is, in the Letter,
you shall be Redeemed, not unlike Israel of old, from Egypt and the House of
Bondage, God shall render tribulation to those that trouble you, and my Gospel
shall run and be glorified, it shall be Salvation to the ends of the earth; And
so the Advice in the Text is very much a word in season, that the Christians be
not high-minded, but fear, lest they likewise perish; let their Moderation,
their universal Love and Charity, their impartial pity and compassion, be
known and extended un to all Men, yea, though they have been violent enemies,
and cruel, bitter Persecutors, for the Lord, in his particular judgment to the
City and Nation of the Jews, which they all so much look for, is even now at
hand.

And is not this Lesson a suitable, serious, and seasonable advice to us
likewise? The Lord is at hand; Nay, his hand has been hard upon us, in the day
of his fierce anger he opened all his hand; How has the City of David amongst
us, even the City of our Fathers Sepulchers, been laid waste, and our Jerusalem
been made an heap of stones! The Fire of God has burnt, and it has consumed,
God spared not so much as his Footstool in the day of his wrath! not his
Temple, nor his footstool there, not the places where the steps of a Divine
presence meght be traced; were we not almost set forth like the Cities of the
Plain, which the Lord destroyed, for an example of terror, and astonishment to
the world round about us, suffering in the Type, and the Representation of it,
the Vengeance of Eternal Fire? surely, except the Lord of Hosts had left us a
very small remnant, we should have been as Sodom, and we should have been like
unto Gomorrah: And now, after all this sore evil which is come upon us, would
we have our breaches made up, and places restored unto us to dwell in? would we
have the Walls of our City, and of our Temples raised again? Love and Charity
is the best Cement in the Mortar, this is the bond of all perfection, even of
the Perfection of beauty and of safety: Our Hope is, that the Line of Confusion
is not utterly stretched out upon us; and our care must be, that in our
compassionate sorrows on the miseries of the afflicted, without an evil eye,
either upon injuries received, or sins committed (which we are too willing to
remove every one from himself) our Bowels be enlarged impartially, and
indifferently to any object of mercy which Providence shall offer to us; what?
is judgment begun at the house of God, and in the City of David? laying aside
all animosities, uncharitable surmises, and wicked speaking, let every one put
to his helping hand, that so the City may once more be called Bethlehem, an
House of Bread, because of the Shewbread, even the Bread of our God,
continually to be offered up, and dispensed in it; for, unless such be our
Moderation, and it be made known unto all men, we have just cause to fear, that
our God is still at hand, his hand, not turned away from us, but his Arm of
Vengeance stretched out still; or, if Wrath overtake not our hard-hearted
uncharitableness here, the Day is coming, in which, it will be too late to ask,
neither can we presume upon any pity; for, as has been our Moderation, our
Love and Charity one to another, so shall be at that dreadful day our Final
Doom; Ye have not clothed, nor fed, nor visited, nor Ministered to the
necessities of the afflicted, therefore Go ye Cursed; And this brings me to the

Second and last observable, that the coming of Christ to judgment, as it shall
be a General, Universal, and a Final Doom, is an argument unto us, that our
Moderation be known unto all men: So that, what the Apostle uses in another
Place, as a Motive to constancy in the Faith, is here an incitement to Unity
and to Peace in Conversation; 2 Thessalonians, 2.1. We beseech you, Brethren, by the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him, that
you be not soon shaken in your Mind; yea, and by the same coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, by the same collection of the Saints together in one unto him, we
beseech you Brethren, be pitiful, be courteous: And is it not high time that we
should cease from wrath and anger, from evil speaking, and from evilthinking,
from backbiting and backsliding, since that our Great and common Salvation is
now nearer, than when we first believed: Rev. 16.15. Behold, says Christ, I
come, blessed is he that washes, and keeps his Garments, lest he walk naked,
and they see his shame; would we put on the garment of praise at that Day, let
us be clothed with humility now; though humility be modest and bashful, yet it
is Covering and Fence sufficient against everlasting shame and contempt: They
who do abuse this Christian Grace of Moderation, are great pretenders unto
Liberty; but as for us, in the Love of men, and in the fear of God, let us so
speak, and so do, as those who shall be judged by a Law, that so the Law by
which we shall be judged, may be to us, what really it is in it self, a Law of
Liberty; -- A Law of Liberty, when we shall be delivered from our earthly
Prisons, and without obloquy, shall be brought out of those Prisons, to Reign
in the more glorious Liberty of the Sons of God.

The Sum, Conclusion, and Application of all, is briefly this: Let your
Moderation be known unto all men; the Lord is at hand:
That is, the Celebration of his Nativity is now approaching, and his Coming
unto Judgment is every day hastening; let us so commemorate the First, that we
have all the while a continual Remembrance of the Second: our Moderation let it
be known; be in perfect Charity with all men: The Constitutions of our Church
oblige us to begin that solemnity with a Sacrament, and that is a feast of
Love: again, our Moderation, let it be known, even in our pleasures, and our
recreations; twelve days are allotted us for rejoicing, not one of them for
chambering, or wantonness, for riot or excess; is not this the Feast which God
has chosen, to deal our Bread unto the hungry, to give gifts unto the poor, a
portion to six and to seven, to have our hearts and our hands open to the
needy, not to throw away that substance which God has given us by the shaking
of our elbows. I do confess, that we serve no hard Master: and times of joy,
are times of indulgence too, we may eat our bread with cheerfulness, and drink
our wine with a merry heart; yet let the World see, that we can be Moderate;
let the B. Sacrament which we shall receive upon the first day, be a restraint
upon us, that we run not out to excess in any of the rest: Oh! Why should we
entertain the holy Child Jesus, yet once again in a stable? with our filthy
lusts, and our beastly sins about us? This is to celebrate his Birth, and at
the same time to renew his Death, Crucify the Lord of Life again a fresh, and
put him to an open shame! whatever therefore may be the Ecstatical raptures,
either of serious Melancholy, or profuse Joy, let us be careful that they do
not degenerate either into Profaneness, or Enthusiasme, a Moderation betwixt
both will do well; that so, neither a morose reservedness, a grim presciseness
on the one hand, a debauched licentiousness, a drolling rude Atheism on the
other, do transport us to do those things which are not convenient: in a word,
while we keep Christmas, we are to think upon the Advent, just gone before,
upon the Lent, presently to follow after; the Feast shall be no sooner over,
but the Church will call us to Sorrow, Mourning, and Penance, Oh! that we could
be sober and watchful, that the reckonings betwixt God, and our own Souls, may
be kind and easy; the Feast, we see, is ushered in with the Apprehensions of
future judgment; let therefore our Celebration of the first Coming of Christ,
in the time of this Mortal Life, in great Humility, be no other than our pious,
and earnest expectation of his second appearance, when in the Last Day he shall
Come in his glorious Majesty to judge both the quick and the Dead; that so this
may be the result of all our pious Festivals, and Festival Solemnities,
especially this of the Nativity, Christ, as it were Newborn, formed in us,
and we Regenerate, and Born again to him, and so this to be unto us, the Hope
of Glory, whilst our fruit is unto Holiness, The end of all will be Everlasting
Life: Thus our Blessed Apostle has backed his advice in the Text with a
Promise; Let your Moderation be known unto all Men; ver. 7. And the Peace of
God which passes all understanding, shall keep your Hearts and Minds, through
Christ Jesus our Lord, who is the Prince of our Peace, who with the Father of
all Mercy, and the Holy Ghost the Eternal Comforter, Lives and Reigns One
God, even the God of Consolation, now and ever; To whom be Glory, Dominion, and
Adoration given throughout all Ages, in the Church, by Christ Jesus, Amen; Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge, 40. diligent. p. 48. dele Secondly. p. 51. Vpper-Chambers. p. 54. Verse.
Aethiopic. p. 69. recover our first Love. p. 71 dele destructive, etc. p. 75.
heard, ibid. (...). p. 82. persecution. p. 84. their backs. p. 87. caetum
exert. p. 107. reception of the Gospel. p. 108. Orders of Men. p. 118. were
there not. p. 120. visibly terrible. p. 127. Boar out of. p. 139. against
Providence. p. 143. heel: ibid. (...). p. 160. exclude you (or us) that, p.
162. two such potent. p. 166. dele affected. p. 169. (...). p. 176. dele as. p.
180. wish that they would. p. 186. (...). p. 205. serve our God. p. 209. then
it is bad. p. 211. pretend the impulse. ibid. or ruling. p. 213. dele (...). p.
216. they left. p. 217. received from. p. 220 the Multitude. p. 227. our
thoughts. p. 236. dele (2). p. 139. (...). ibid. (...). ibid. Hesych. p. 247.
reception. p. 248. endangering.


