THE Sad and Lamentable CRY OF OPPRESSION AND CRUELTY In the CITY of BRISTOL.

RELATING To the Prosecution of certain Dissenting-Protestants in some Passages
most Notorious to the Grieved Inhabitants of the said CITY.

LONDON, Printed for John Alexander, MDCLXXXII.

THE Sad and Lamentable CRY OF OPPRESSION AND CRUELTY In the CITY of BRISTOL.
IT is remarkable, that two Gentlemen (for so they would be accounted) viz.
Sheriff Knight, and John Helliar an Attorney, assisted with some Inferior
Officers, and a rude multitude of Youth, etc. have been, for some Months last
past, most vigorous in the severe prosecution of Dissenting Protestants in the
said City, whose Fury has transported them beyond all bounds of Humanity, Law
and Justice. They are not content with their own respective Offices of Sheriff
and Constable, (for the Conservation of his Majesty's Peace, in Subordination
to his Justices,) and addition of the Place of Informers, but they Peremptorily
assume to themselves the Authority of Justices and Rulers over the Heads of the
Lawful and Chief Magistrates of that City, to the great disparagment and Infamy
of the Polity thereof, as by the following particulars is evinced.

1. John Helliar, attended with other Officers, and a rude multitude, did in a
most riotous manner deface and spoil several Houses which are Free-holds,
(because in part thereof the Dissenters usually have met) to the value of some
hundreds of pounds, much of which have been acted upon the Lord's Day, with
Iron Sledges, and other Tools, making a terrible noise, to the great wonder and
amazement of the Inhabitants of the said City, and of Strangers and Tradesmen
that came to the Fair: At which time much of this was Transacted, by occasion
whereof, as also by the Excessive Spoil upon some Tradesmens Goods in the Fair,
the Trade and Commerce was much distracted and spoiled; and many with great
disappointments forced to return home under sore discouragments and discontents.

Secondly, The said persons after the aforesaid defacing and spoil made upon
the Houses, have taken and kept possession, not suffering the Inhabitants,
Tenants or others to Re-enter.

Thirdly, Many of the said Dissenters are violently pulled and forced out of
their Meetings, and the Doors barred against them: These officious Gentlemen,
viz. Sheriff Knight and John Helliar, with the rude Multitude attending them,
have constantly visited the Quakers Meetings without doors, near their usual
place of Meeting, where, in their presence, the Rude Persons have offered very
gross abuses; by haleing Persons, beating some and tearing of Women's Scarfs,
and other shameful Incivilities. And it has been observed, that these things
have been done, at the abusive Example of John Helliar; and notice given by him
in these or such like words, to wit, Boys, have a care of the Women's Hoods and
Scarfes, etc, upon which they have fallen to such their abusive Work.

Fourthly, Besides these sordid Abuses, the Persons aforesaid, viz. Sheriff
Knight, and John Helliar, with their Retinue, have frequently come to dissipate
the said Meeting so early, before any pretext of Religious Exercise performed
by the Meeters, and have several times sent a considerable number to Prison at
their own voluntary pleasures, viz. Bridewell and Newgate, without convening
them before any of his Majesty's Justices of Peace, or Judicial Examination or
Warrant of Commitment, and there detained them for some time, till brought
before the Mayor or other Justices.

Fifthly, But that which m^st aggravates their merciless Cruelty, is, their
thron^ing and crouding such numbers in the Goal, which is known to be a Strait,
Nasty and offensive Goal; wh^^^, after they had Imprisoned near Fifty, there
was such straitness of lodging, that all could not ledge at once, without
crouding three or four in a v^ry narrow Bed: Several accounts of credible
person; are given, that the last Lords Day being the 26 of February, they sent
forty more of the Quakers, first to Bridewell; and then about ten of the Clock
of the same Night, removed them to Newgate: And that Night Thirty five were
forced to sit up, for whom there was no Beds; some lay upon the Table-board,
and some under the Board, where the Mastiff Dog used to lie, having the
Foot-frame of the Board for their Pillow; so making what shift they could to
get a little rest. The next Night they got in some Matts, where they lay as
thick as they could thereon, in a cold Room, and some in Hamocks over their
Heads, and in the morning they took up their lodging, and heaped it up, to make
Room for to pass by, it being the public Thorough-fare of the Gaol.

Sixthly, Before this last crouding of these Persons in Goal, the Prisoners had
not been wanting to address the Magistrates for Enlargement of the Prison,
laying the danger, not only of their Healths but Lives before them, as also of
Infection to the City: whereupon one Chief Magistrate did openly confess, That
if he had a Dog he loved, be would not put him there. And the Mayor and other
Justices in pursuance of a sonmer Order of Sessions, have urged for the
Enlargement of the Goal, and Richard Lane Esquire, the Elder Sheriff gave
consent and desired it. But the said Sheriff Knight, like a person void of all
good Nature and Humanity, has been the chief obstructer therein, as diverse
Indifferent and Credible Persons of the Neighborhood have certified under
their Hands.

Seventhly, But this is not all the misery that these People are exposed to,
with respect to the endangering of their Lives, for while they are under these
hard usages in Prison, diverse of them have been greatly spoiled by exorbitant
Distresses made upon their Household Goods, Shop-ware, and Merchandise; in which
John Helliar is principally officious, sparing not to break open Doors of
Houses Shops and Cellars, etc. carrying away Linen, Beds and Bedding, Plate,
Brass and Pewter, etc. taking from one Merchant, for a Fine of Ten pounds five
shillings, a Tun of Wine, and Six pounds in Money besides out of his Counter;
pulling off one man's Coat from his Back in his own House, and taking Ten
pounds odd Money out of his Pocket: Besides, it is notoriously known how most
shamefully they under-sell the Goods Distrained. All which Precedent
Barbarities, seem to bespeak a design of Destruction to the said People, both
in their Persons and Estates, with absolute Ruin to their Wives, Children, and
Posterity: Besides, the great Distress that is hereby brought upon many poor
Families, that have dependence upon diverse Sufferers in their Trades and
Manufacturies, diverse of the said Prisoners and Sufferers are known to be
considerable in Trade and Traffic, by means whereof some Thousands per Annum
have accrewed to his Majesty's Customs.

The Consideration of the said sad Premises has brought great amazement and
consternation upon many of his Majesty's Subjects being Spectators, being very
Anxious about the Design, Tendance and Consequence of these proceedings: The
verity of matter of Fact hereby exposed is not aggravated with all the grievous
Circumstances attending the said prosecution, notoriously known in the said
City, and many other places; Many indifferent and Credible persons being able
and ready to attest the same.

The precedent Account being an Abreviation out of some Letters from Credible
Persons in Bristol; the further Relation of the Cruelty and Arbitrary
Proceedings of the beforementioned, and others their Abbettors and Assistants,
is left to the immediate Sufferers themselves to enlarge on in due time, and as
they shall see Cause.

FINIS.

