A Second REMONSTRANCE by way of ADDRESS FROM THE Church of England, to both
Houses of PARLIAMENT.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Hope the tender Concern of a Mother for her Childrens safety, and the tie of
Nature for self preservation, will sufficiently Apologize for this my Second
Remonstrance: And I hope if either Piety toward my Children, or solicitude for
my self, or both, should make me seem Importune, or, as you may think, too
apprehensive, Nature will be my Plea; which cannot hinder the one, and also
commands the other.

Yet I cannot think my Apprehensions Vain, nor my Importunity unseasonable,
when I consider what mischief the Basilisk may do if not crushed in the Egg;
What Conflagrations have been occasioned from neglected Sparks; and what
Countries and Kingdoms have been imbroyl'd and ruined, for not obviating small
beginnings.

I am concerned for You, and all my Children, and You ought also to be
concerned with Me, both for Me and for your selves; I am concerned for the King
and the Kingdoms good and quiet, and You ought equally to share with me in this
concern: For when I see Rebellion begin to appear barefaced, and my Phanatick
Enemies flock to an ungrateful aspiring Wretch; I cannot but think, that though
his and their cry be, The Security of the Protestant Religion, Yet it is not
the Protestant Religion as by Law Established; It is not Me they mean thereby,
but a Religion composed of all Dissenters: It Is not Episcopacy they would
secure, but on the contrary I fear pull down, under the Name of Popery Or
rather if we look upon their Practices, though Religion be in their mouths, we
may assure our selves it is not in their Intentions; seeing they destroy the
very Foundations of it by Rebellion. No no, it is not Religion, it is Ambition
and Des^ animates the unthinking Tool their Leader: 'Twas not Religion, 'twas
(...) hatred of Monarchy excited the Republicans to invite him in, and lend him
their assistance; it is not Religion, it is a delight to Fish in troubled Waters,
and to enrich themselves by the Spoils of others, causes the Crowd to follow
him: And if some be led by a Zeal (no less Criminal then blind) for Religion,
they are but like their Leader, Tools in the hands of Knaves, who, should they
obtain their ends (which God forbid) would throw them by as useless.

When therefore I see Ambition grasping at a Crown; as the last Refuge of
Desperation: When I see Republican Spirits lending their assistance to pull
down Monarchy: When I see the discontented hungry Rabble, flock together, in
hopes once more to enrich themselves by the Ruin both of Church and State: And
when I see blinded Zealots cry up Religion with all the other damned crew of
Rebels, whilst they all join hands to pluck it down, I think I have great
reason to fear my own and my dearest Childrens Ruin, and to offer up my poor
Endeavors toward our common security, from the rage of those plodding Knaves,
and Hood winked Fools.

I know no thinking Persons, who are either zealous for mine or the Kingdoms
good and quiet, will ever join with them; For they cannot but see, the Methods
these pretended Zealots take to secure Religion, are the only means to ruin it.
We find our selves safely sheltred under the promise of Our most Great and
Gracious Sovereign; and we see and experience in this as in all other things,
His Constancy to his Promise: But it behooves us to reflect, this promise was
Conditional, if we were true to Monarchy; Those therefore who join with or
abett Rebellion, against their Lawful Prince, have neither Right nor Title to
his Promise, as having broken the necessary conditions required by it.

Religion is, and always has been the common Cry of Rebels, but what Religion
must that be, which takes its rise and its security from Rebellion? I am sure
it cannot be Orthodox, which does so manifestly thwart the Gospel, that teaches
due submission. No no, it is not Religion, but Interest sways such Monsters, as
this ungrateful Rebel; And we may assure our selves also, that those
Republicans who help to set up such a Tool, and lead the Rabblerout by the
plausible cry of Religion, intend no other but a Republican Religion as well as
Government: And then a farewell being given to Monarchy, we must give a farewell
also to Episcopacy, and your Mother the Church of England.

Can we imagine a Person, who has no Religion but Debauchery, will be a sit
Instrument to Protect or Establish Truth and Piety? Can we imagine, He, who
never sought any thing but his own private Ends, will have any generous
thoughts for the Public? Can we imagine, He who Plotted the death of a tender
and a Royal Father, and preferred the Lives of those Conspirators, (who seduced
him, before the safety of the King and Kingdom,) has any sense of Piety,
Honesty or Religion in him? Can we think, He who declares against all You my
Children here Assembled as a packed company of Papists, because you have shown
your selves true and Loyal Subjects to your King, and Zealous for the Welfare
and Honor of the Nation, can intend any thing but Your and My Destruction,
with the Kingdoms Ruin? In a word, can we imagine He who is a monster of
Ingratitude, of Impiety, of Debauchery, and of all the ills imaginable, (as
appears by This, and all his late attempts) carries any thing but the Seeds of
these Crimes under the goodly Husks of Liberty, Property, and Religion? Or can
we imagine those, who abet such Villainies, have either better or more Religious
Designs, though they Cloak them under that most specious appearance? It is not
an Age since we sufficiently experienced the effects of Rebellion. That Tree,
though it may for some time spread and flourish, yet the Fruits thereof are
always bitter: It may promise much in the Blossom, but the Fruit, (though fair in
appearance,) is poisonous in the effect.

It behooves You therefore (my dearest Children,) to endeavor by all means to
defend His Sacred Majesty against his Enemies, upon whom the future quiet and
Glory of the Nation does depend. It behooves You to defend Him, upon whom
depends my Peace, and my support. It behooves You to defend Him, upon whose
Security Your own Lives and Fortunes do depend, and to obviate all those Evils
which make have (to ripen if they be not nipp'd) in the Bud. This it behooves
you to do, if you love your King if you love your Country, if you love Me, or
if you love your selves: And when so many Motives excite you to resist those
Rebels, and to quell them to secure our quiet, methinks nothing that is
conducing thereunto, but may be seasonably represented to you.

My own thoughts I told you in my last Remonstrance, which I must here again
repeat. The only way and most secure is without doubt to procure a Union with
those who are undoubtedly the King and Kingdoms Friends, and whose Interest as
well as Principles oblige them to be Faithful to Him. We ought to secure all
the Friends we can, and not exclude those, who are both able and willing to
assist us, by Oaths and Tests, which are so far from assuring us of their
Fidelity, that we cannot firmly rely upon their Allegiance who take them. The
Romanists have often offered to swear Allegiance to their King in any form, so
it thwart not what is due to God, and as we may assure our selves, that they,
who break their Allegiance due to God, under pretense of serving their King,
are led by nothing but their Interest, which would bias them to any thing: So
those who are known to be faithful to their God, and prefer their Religion and
Conscience before their Interest, will, no doubt make a Conscience likewise to
serve their King and Country, when the same God and Religion obliges them to
do it.

Our former Christian Kings were for many. Ages secure even under the Roman
Religion, when their Subjects were tied by Oaths, no less obliging it is true
then these, but couched in other Terms. Other Kings and Kingdoms think
themselves no less secured than We when such an Allegiance is sworn unto them.
And shall We alone endeavor to Fetter the Consciences of those who make a
Conscience to serve their King and Country, though tied by no other Bonds than
the true Principles of Religion and sound Morality? We know it is not Allegiance
they boggle at, for That they are always ready to pay with the hazard of their
Lives and Fortunes, but it is their Religion they would not abandon, their
Faith, they would not quit, their God, to whom they would not be Rebellious.
Shall we therefore, when we know they are Persons will be faithful to a King,
who has promised Us His Protection, and under whose Protection alone we can
ever hope to subsist, shall We I say, refuse their assistance in these
conjunctures? We know many of the Romanists have shown their Valor and their
Conduct in Foreign Countries, where they learnt Military Discipline by
Practice and not by speculation only: And shall We, when we know them to be fit
Persons to be Employed, so far injure our selves and the Nation, as to exclude
them from assisting us for Niceties in Religion? We cannot doubt of their
Fidelity to their own King, who sought so faithfully for Forr^igners; we cannot
doubt their Courage, who showed their Valor in the greatest hazzards: and we
may hope their Conduct will be no less advantageous, having learnt it in so
great a School. Those no doubt who are either for His Majesty's security, for
my safety, or the Kingdoms good, will be desirous to see them employed. None
certainly but those who care not if they saw me again pulled down, and the
Kingdom turned into a Commonwealth, can be against it? Both They, and I, and
all those who are for Monarchy, are concerned in the preservation of His Sacred
Majesty, and where our concern is common, why should we not be at perfect Union?

My Lords and Gentlemen, generous Action to see this great thing effected. We
see His Majesty is not willing to infringe the Laws, nor alter any thing
without your Council, nor give occasion to the discontented to esteem him
Arbitrary: But You methinks should prevent him in this, and before you break up
this Assembly; freely desire him to employ any that are known to be his
Friends. If you be afraid of Persons who are nor tied by Oaths, either take
those old Ones which secured His Predecessors, or frame new Ones with all the
ties imaginable to Fidelity, so they touch not upon Religion. Then will you
show your selves true Subjects to your King, truly concerned for me, Your
tender Mother, who run the same Fate with Him; true Friends to Monarchy, and
may therefore expect His Majesty's protection under Gods. I hope you will be
Unanimous in this step to our Unity, Peace, and Security, which I shall
perpetually pray for in giving you My Blessing.

God save King JAMES the Second.

