The Second Part of the Peoples Ancient and Just Liberties ASSERTED In the
Proceedings against, and TRIALS OF Tho. Rudyard, Francis Moor, Rich. Mew, Rich.
Mayfeild, Rich. Knowlman, Gilbert Hutton, Job Boulton, Rich. Thornton, Charles
Banister, John Boulton, and William Bailey. At the Sessions begun and held at
the Old-Bailey in London the last day of the 6th Month, and there continued
till the 7th day of the 7th Month next following, in the year 1670. against
the Arbitrary procedure of that Court, and Justices there. Wherein their
Oppression and Injustice are manifested; Their Wickedness and Corruption
detected; and the Jury-Mans Duty laid open.

Psa. 11. 5. The Lord tries the Righteous; but the Wicked and him that loves
Violence the Lord hates. Prove. 13. 23. There is that destroys for want of
Judgment. Isa. 59. 14. Judgment is turned away backwards, and Justice stands
afar off, etc. -- He that departs from evil makes himself a Prey. Printed in
the Year, 1670.

The Preface to the READER.
THat State which would preserve it self from Ruin and Destruction is ever to
keep its Inhabitants pure and clean from Vice and Debauchery, and their Laws
from violation and corruption, as the first is a way or means to engage a
conscientious obedience and observation of the just and upright Law of God; so
the second by reason of their due execution are the Sinews or Sanctures that
bind the Inhabitants of such State in a perpetual Bond of Safety and
Tranquillity; and its certainly true where either of these are violated or
neglected, the ruin of that State is near at hand. There Is no better way to
incline the Subjects of any State to Morality and Vertile, then that those that
sit at the Helm, or have the Government thereof, should hold forth clear
Examples and Patterns of Piety and Justice in their Lives and Actions; Regis ad
exemplum totus componitur orbis, says the Poet, The whole World immitate the
Example of their King. And as the Divine Historian Josephus observes in his
Ecclesiastical History, Fol. 209. But (says he) mortal men most usually are
corrupted by the untoward Flatteries of wavering 2 Chronicles. 13. 18, 19, 20.
fortune, as appears by King Reoboam, seeing his Kingdom thus increased, he
bent himself to all unjust and impious Actions, and contemned the Service of
God; the People also conformed themselves to his Impieties; for the Life of the
Subjects is oftentimes perverted by reason of the corrupt and dissolute Life of
their Princes; and those that are Inferiors beholding the Riot of their
Superiors, will easily be withdrawn from all Modesty, and follow those Vices
they profess, as if they had been their professed Virtues: For should they do
the contrary, they should seem to disanul and mislike the Actions of their
Princes -- The Subjects addicted themselves to Impiety, and all Errors; for
they would not make profession of honesty, for fear they should seem to studdy
the means to be offensive unto the King. From this lively Pattern, or
Representative of our present Times, or State, we must wish that Princes in
this Age would consider, and put in practice that Golden Rule of Demosthenes,
Been gubernare, recte W. H's Epistle in his Translation of Myrror of Justice.
judicare, just facere; to Govern well, judge rightly, and do justly, so
should their Kingdoms flourish, and they themselves be in high estimation in
the eyes of their People.

And next the Princes curious eye over his own personal actions, a due heed
care and regard is to be had to his Representatives in his Courts of Justice;
viz. those Justices whom he constitutes by his Commission (to hear and
determine betwixt him and his People) that they be such who by their due
Administration and faithful dispensing-of the Laws, Justice and Right may be
done to all men without respect of Persons.

But as Vice and Debauchery have devoured and eaten up the Nations practice of
Religion, scarce leaving us the outside Shell of profession; so has the
corruption of our Laws, and the violation thereof turned back those wholesome
Streams of Justice which should naturally slow from the use of them.

And that thou (Reader) may see that thy self art one, who is in danger of
being buried in the ruins of Religion and Piety, as well as thy Civil Rights
and Liberties; which are the two Basis, or Foundations on which thy temporary
here, and future well-being hereafter consists and stands. Cast thy Eye upon
the Magistrates of the City of London (anciently styled Caput regni and legum)
in their Court of Judicature at the Old-Bailey, and behold on the one hand
Virtue termed Vice, Sobriety Debauchery, Religion Faction, Pious and Peaceable
Assemblies Riots and Routs, and punished as such; On the other hand, the
Ancient Written Laws denied, and their not written ones the Courts Authority:
Justice turned into Gaul, Right and Equity Quod non lego non credo August.
by Will and Power overruled; so that its now become a Proverb, Tell me thy
Judge, and I Will tell thee thy Law.

Said the learned Cook, Qui non libere veritatem pronunciat proditor veritas
est; He who conceals Truth is a betrayer thereof. Therefore for the sake of
Truth, and the Readers benefit were these Proceedings made public, and
according to that due Observation and impartial Account, which could be taken
and collected of the manner of that Benches Arraigning and Condemning as well
Religion, Piety, Virtue and Sobriety, as Right, Equity, Liberty and Property,
with due Comments upon their procedures from the Ancient and Fundamental Laws
of this Land, are laid to thy view.

And had not the Mayor and Recorder, with the rest of the Bench, prohibited
many, by severe threats, from writing down the Courts partial Dealings both
toward the Prisoners and Jurors; and also by violence took away what others
had adventured to collect (commanding some to their Bale-dock) in all
probability this ensuing Piece might have been much more enlarged to thy
satisfaction.

But what has been faithfully Collected and Observed, and whereof there were
some hundreds of Witnesses, is presented to the World, the Author (desiring
rather to spare their Injustice then wrong their Judicature) has contracted
this Relation to what comes within the limits of his own knowledge and
undeniable proofs; but impartially laid Judgment to the Line, and discovered
that which may tend to the good of his Country men, in the Vindication of the
Laws, Truth, Innocence Equity, and Justice.

THe Laws of England, by Just and upright Ministers and Officers, faithfully
dispensed, and impartially administered, have ever been the Upholders and
Preservers of Right and Liberty, The high esteemed and precious Jewels of its
freeborn Inhabitants: but when unlimited Prerogatives have spung up, like
Mushromes out of the sappy Apprehensions, aspiring Brains, and heady Humors of
inferior Officers and Ministers; Then Tyranny and Oppression have under
disguise of Justice and color of Law, deprived the Commonalty of these things,
which they have held most precious and dear to them.

The pretended Crimes or Offenses laid to the charge of Thomas Rudyard, are far
different in their kind and nature from those other Persons, who have undergone
with him the severe Judgments, or as some call them, the Inquisitory like
Censures of that Court, which were so far from Juris Dicta, The Law of Right or
impartial dispencing of Justice, that they are clear contrary and directly
opposite unto them: The Justices of that Court, Judge Cook, that famous English
Lawyer, does well describe in his 2d Inst. Fol. 55. in a Poetical Simile of an
unjust Judge.

Grosius hic rodamanthus habet durissima Regna castigatque auditque dolas,
subigitque fateri. And in another place.

Leges fixit praecio atque refixit. They Punish, then Hear, compel to Confess,
make and mar Laws at pleasure.

The Occasion of T. R's being Envyed and Prosecuted by these Adversaries of
Peace, was because of his faithful defending, and Constant appearing (when
called thereto) for his Clyents and Retainders, in such Matters and Causes as
Will and Power had forged, and daily did put in execution against them; so that
the 3d of the 4th Month, called June, the Magistrates of the City of London,
in the Name or Color of a Lievtenancy or Militia, Issued out a Warrant, to
break open his house in the dead of the Night, to apprehend him (when they
might have had him at Noonday, upon the Exchange, about his occasions) and did
take and carry away him, and also what Arms they there coudl find; which
Warrant was executed by the Soldiers of one Captain Holford, and the next day
was sent to the ^o^l of Newgate, as a person suspected and disaffected to the
Peace of the Kingdom, as was alleged in his Mittimus, under the Hands and
Seals of Samuel Starling Mayor, Will. Peak, Rob. Hauson, A. King, J. Dawes, John
Cutler, William Rouswel, A. Stanyon, John Tivell, Will. Allott, J. Sheldon, and
T. Davice.

The 7th of the 4th Month, the Lievtenancy (so called) ordered T. R. to be
again brought before them, who without alleging any Crime, or certain Matter
that was proved against him, though earnestly requested by him, That he might
hear his Accusation or see his Accusers face to face; did demand 2000 l.
security for his Good-behaviour, which unreasonable Demand being not complied
withal, T. R. was remanded to Goal, with a Mittimus under Sam. Starling and
John Robinsons Hand and Seal, Pretending therein, That T. R. did stir up
persons to the disobedience of Laws, and abetted and encouraged such as met in
unlawful and Seditious Conventicles, contrary to the late Act, in the 22th C.
2. of which things they alleged, that they found cause to suspect T. R. to be
guilty.

Which Case being brought before the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas at
Westminster, by Habeas Corpus: That Court, after solemn debate, Trinit. 22. C.
2.
gave their Judgment, That T. R. was unjustly Imprisoned, and unlawfully
Detained. And so by them was set at Liberty.

His Adversary, viz. S. Starling the Mayor, being incensed at his Deliverance
and Discharge, finds out new Stratagenis to encompass his ends upon him; so
that at a Sessions of the Peace, at the Old Bailey, the 29th of the 4th Month,
an Indictment is framed and preferred against T. R. the Tenor whereof was, That
whereas at a S^ssions of the Peace held at Guildhall for the City of London,
the ^^^h of May the 22th year of the King, before S. Starling, etc. an^ ^he
^ustices of the Peace of the said City, assigned, etc. a certain Bill of
^^^ic^ment was exhibited and preferred against one Samuel (...), late of
London, Stationer, written in Parchment, for speaking these seditious and
menacing Words, viz. The first man that shall disturb Mr. Vincent will never go
out of the house alive; and whereas one N. Grove and J. Tillot were sworn to
give Evidence (in behalf of the King) to the grand Inquest, that T. R.
intending to hinder and pervert Justice and due course of Law against S. A. for
speaking the seditious and menacing words aforesaid: the 30th of May, with
Force and Arms, etc. the said Bill of Indictment, before it came to the grand
Inquest, unlawfully, secretly, and subtly, did get, take, and had in his
hands, and unlawfully did conceal and detain from the Jury, in contempt of the
King and his Laws, to the hindrance of Justice and due course of Law against
Allingbridge, unto the evil example of others, and against the Kings Peace,
Crown and Dignity.

To which Indictment T. R. appearing in Court and pleading not guilty, John Lee
told the Bench that there was no cause for that Indictment, by reason that S.
A. was tried, convicted, and acquitted, the same Sessions that the pretended
Indictment miscarryed: Whereupon the Mayor pulling an Affidavit out of his
Pocket, that bore date the 29th then instant, alleged, That the Indictment was
not drawn to the Case, and according to the Instructions that he gave to Jo.
Lee, and showed that Affidavit to -- Archer, one of the Justices of the
Common Pleas, who when he had perufed and read it over, acquainted the Mayor,
That the matter therein contained was no cause for an Indictment: To which the
Mayor answered, That it is cause, and shall be cause, and he would stand to it,
withal affirming, That he had asked chief Justice Keeling's Judgment, and he
advised him to prosecute it: So the Instructions were delivered to John Lee to
draw up another Indictment.

This piece of practice was in open Court, which manifests their partiallity
and unequal dealings to such whom they convened before them, to receive Justice
at their hands: And how little they (who sat there as Judges) regarded their
Oaths, and the duty of that place of so great a trust, is easily resolved,
weighing them in the Balance of Law and Justice, Said the learned Cook in his
3 Inst. fol. 29. The Judges ought not to deliver their Opinion beforehand upon
a Case put, and 1 Hen. 7. Fol. 27.
proofs urged on one side in absence of the party accused; For how (says he)
can they be indifferent who have delivered their Opinions before hand, without
hearing of the party accused, when a small addition or substraction may alter
the Case? And how does it stand with their Oaths, that are sworn, That they
shall well and lawfully serve our Lord the King, and his people in the Office of
a Justice? And they should do Equal Law, and execution of Right to all his
Subjects.Yea he says further, That the Kings Council shall not so much as put
the case in absence of the Prisoner, to the Judges. As may be seen at large in
3 Inst. fol. 30. And the 3d Statute of 18 Edward 3. In the Judges Oath its
said, And that ye give no advice nor counsel to no man great nor small, in no
case where the King is party.

Now if the Mayors prosecution and Justice Keelings Advice, be according to the
Law, Justice, their Oaths and Duty, in their respective places, let the World
judge.

The Clark of the Peace drew up another Indictment, by the Mayors Directions,
which contained the substance of the former, and further, That the said T. R.
the said 30th of May, coming to the aforesaid Nicholas Grove, said to him,
That the Bill against S. A. was lost, and that N. S. should attend next
Saturday; and that T. R. unlawfully and craftily did say to N. G. these words
viz. I will come to you some time this Week, and we will go and drink a pint of
Wine with Mr. Tanner, and contrive to draw up a slight Bill, that may not be
found, and so make an end of the business: In contempt of the King and his
Laws, to the hindrance of Justice, and perverting of due course of Law against
S. A. for his Offense; to the evil example of others, and against the Peace of
the said King his Crown and Dignity.

To this Indictment also T. R. pleaded, Not guilty, and gave security by
Recognizence to try them both the next Sessions.

This Prosecution falling short still of the Mayor's purpose, which was, To
clap T. R. up in a Goal, demands of him to give security, or at least, his own
Recognizance for his Good-behaviour; being the same thing that the Judges
lately had given their Opinion against.

Therefore he refused that piece of Bondage, (yet offering the Court (in case
of health) to appear once every day at the Mayor^ house, there to answer any
matter that should be justly charged against him.) Whereupon he was committed
to Prison, and by the Mayors special Order and Direction kept close Prisoner in
Newgate.

During the time of this unequal Prosecution of T. R. many others felt the
weight of the Mayors injustice, and were made Witnesses of the various
Stratagems used and practiced by him and his Brethren, upon several Citizens of
London; and likewise upon several other innocent peaceable men.

Upon the 19th of the 4th Month, Francis Moor, Richard Mow, Richard Mayfeild,
Richard knowlman, and Gilbert Hutton, with diverse others of their Friends;
being (as at other times) met together (to wait upon, and worship the living
God in Spirit and in Truth) at Whitehart-Court in Grace Church Street, London,
(being forceably kept out of their own house by Watchmen, and Constables)
after they had there peaceably continued together, about the space of one hour,
the two Sheriffs of London, with their Guard of Officers and Soldiers, came in
and made a Proclamation by one of their Servants, That all persons there
present should depart; which being not regarded by those who peaceably came
there, to give to God the things that were God's; they continued in peaceable
manner together without distraction, not fearing what man's violence could do
unto them, knowing that against the Innocent there was no Law: Yet the Sheriffs
singled out of the Assembly the above said Persons (and delivering them into
the custody of one Whiting Beadle to the Bridgeward (who was a person very
diligent in such services) and his Watchmen, who carried them by the Sheriffs
order to Bishopsgate-Goal; a place, who ever has had the Experience thereof,
can witness its filthy noisomness; and a horrid shame it is, that the
Magistrates of this City should make no better provision, then to incarsarate
peaceable men, and their Fellow Creatures, in places as it were on purpose to
stifle or poison them, that they might be incapassitated to make a due defense,
against their intolerable and arbitrary Oppression.

The day following they were called before the Lievetenancy, or Council of War,
at Guildhall, who wanting Proof and Witness of some hostile Action, done by
them, they were remanded back to Prison.

The 21th of the 4th Month, They being brought before the Mayor, and the
Officers swearing that they saw them in Whitehart-Court in Grace Church Street,
though peaceable and quiet, (as the Sheriffs being then present acknowledged)
yet because the Sheriffs of London had taken up, and apprehended them, as
persons present after their Proclamation made, as may appear by their
commitment. The Mayor made their Mittimus to Newgate as Rioters, the Tennor
whereof was thus.

Land. ^ss. Receive into your custody the Bodies of Francis Moor, Rich. Mew,
etc. Herewith sent you, being apprehended and brought before me, and charged to
have made, and to have been present on the last Lord's Day at an unlawful
Assembly, Riot and Rout in Whitehart-yard in Grace Church Street London; and
for want of sureties for their Good-behaviour, and personal appearance at the
next Sessions of Jail-delivery, to be held for the said City and Liberties; and
them safly keep in your custody, until they shall be thence legally discharged,
and this shall be your Warrant, dated the 21th of June, 1670. Samuel Starling,
Mayor, To the Keepers of his Majesty's Goal of Newgate. (Where they were kept
till the Sessions following, with several others of their Friends, which were
sent to them as like Offenders.

The Court ordered these, with Richard Thornton, Charles Banister, Job Boulton,
Ezekiel Archer, Margery Fann, and Samuel Slaughter, whom the Sheriffs had taken
up from their Meeting in Boshopsgate-street, to be indicted, the Tennor of
which Indictment was, That they together with others were met at London, etc.
with Force and Arms, in a Riotous manner etc. to the disturbance of the Peace
of our Lord the King; and that they together with about 200. more unknown, did
assemble in an unlawful manner, Riotously, Routously, and Tumultuously, under
color and pretense of Religious Worship, in other manner then was practiced in
the Church of England; and that after three Proclamations then and there, in
the name of the King, by John Smith Esquire, and James Edwards Esquire, then,
and yet Sheriffs of the City of London, were made, That all persons there
present should from thence depart, forthwith upon their peril: The said F. M.
etc. together with the other 200. unknown, then and there, by the space of half
a quarter of an hour, did remain and continue together, Riotously, Routously,
and unlawfully, in contempt of the King and his Laws, to the disturbance of his
Peace, to the evil example of all others in the like Case Offenders, and
against the Peace of the said King, his Crown, and Dignity, etc.

Justice Moreton sitting on the Bench, the Prisoners were called to the Bar,
and as they passed along, the Goalers would have taken off their Hats, but
Justice Moreton commanded they should be let alone, and said he would fine them
five Marks apiece for their contempt to the Court, and so urged them to plead,
Guilty, or Not Guilty, to which they generally answered, That they were not
Guilty of the breach of any Just Law: So the Court took that for a Plea, as not
guilty, and asked them whether they would be tried presently or traverse; to
which they answered, That if they might have a Copy of their indictment they
would be tried next day; the Court replied, That they must either try it
presently, without a Copy of the Indictment, or traverse till next Sessions,
and then they should have a Copy thereof and Justice done them; to which they
agreed, and passed their words to appear the next Sessions.

Soon after that Sessions the Military Forces (who were every First Day,
ordered by the Lievtenancy, to guard as well the public Meeting House in
Gratious-Street, as their Mercenary Priests, whom the Bishops sent thither, to
read their Church-Homilies and Prayers) apprehended and took into custody,
William Bailey, whom they carried before the Mayor, and upon Information of the
Priest (which on that day was to have officiated in that place, had he had
courage to have performed what he had undertook) the Mayor committed W. B. to
Newgate, for opposing the Priest in officiating his Function, as was alleged
in his Mittimus, when as the said W. B. had not at any time either seen or
spoke with the said Priest.

Not long after, John Boulton, an ancient Citizen of London, of seventy Years
of Age, and very well known to be a quiet and peaceable person, was sent by the
Mayor to Newgate, as a Riotous person. And soon after him, William Penn and
William Mead, all which were taken up by armed Forces, from their Public and
Peaceable Assemblies, and committed to the Prison of Newgate.

The last of the 6th Month, the Sessions of Oyer and Terminer beginning at the
Old Bailey, not only such, who the former Sessions had been Indicted, but those
newly committed, attended the Court, where constantly waiting three days in
expectation of being called to their Trials, and according to the Laws of this
Land to be Condemned or Acquitted, were never once called until the 3d of the
7th Month, at which time the Bench of Justices consisted of Samuel Starling
Mayor, John Robinson, Rich. Ford, Joseph Sheldon, Geo. Waterman, Will. Peak,
Tho. Bloodworth, Aldermen of London; John Howel the City Recorder, together
with Richard Brown, who pretending himself to be something learned in the Law,
came there to second the Recorder, and with much confidence took upon him to
examine persons according to his Will and Pleasure, as if he had been a Justice
in Commission for London. John Smith and James Edwards were Sheriffs. O yes
being made, and Silence commanded, William Penn, William Mead, John Boulton,
William Bailey, Francis Moor, Richard Mew, Richard Mayfeild, Richard Knowlman,
Gilbert Hutton, Richard Thornton, Charles Banister, Job Boulton, Ezekiel
Archer, and Thomas Rudyard, were all called into the Court, and not giving that
Cap Reverence, and Hat Honor, to the Place, which the Hammon-like-spirited
there upon the Bench expected, and looked for, the Mayor with great
indignation, openly amongst his Brethren, first expressed himself against them,
(calling out to the Officers who attended the Court) saying, POX ON THEM, KNOCK
THEM ALL DOWN.

Surely such Language as this was very ill becoming that Court of Justice, and
especially to proceed from the chief Magistrate of this imperial City; its
said, He bears the Sword in vain, that's not a Terror to Evildoers, and a
Praise to them that do well: If in this the Mayor of London has manifested his
Christian Behavior, let him have the Praise thereof. A time has been when such
an Expression for its Prophanness should have merited a pair of Stoks, or a
Whip; and for its Rashness and Violence to be bound to the Good-behaviour.

But the misery of our Age is such, That Judgment is turned back, and Justice
stands a far of: And he alone who turns himself from evil makes himself a
Prey.

But the under Marshals and Goalers manifesting more of humanity, then to obey
the inhumane and unchristian command of the Mayor, exercised no other violence
upon the Prisoners then pulling off their Hats, for which the Recorder rebuked
them, and bid the Officers put on the Prisoners Hats upon their Heads again,
which was no sooner done, in obedience of the Courts command; but presently the
Clark of the Peace requires every of the Prisoners, in obedience and reverence
to the Court to pull off their own Hats, the Prisoners not complying with these
whimsical humors, ridiculous precepts, and antic acts of Justice, the Recorder
gives order to the Officers a second time to pull off all their Hats, and set
Fines upon their Heads, some twenty Marks, some twenty Nobles, using variety of
airy expressions against, and taunting those Prisoners, whom he so illegally
fined.

Which piece of ridiculous Pageantry being over, O yes being made, and Silence
commanded, (as truly there was need of it) the Crier called over the Jury, who
when they had answered to their names, and taken their places, were commanded
to look upon the Prisoners at the Bar, the Prisoners were also required to look
upon the Jurors, and make their challenge before they were sworn; the names of
the Jury men were, Thomas Veer, Ed. Bushel, John Hammond, Henry Henley, Henry
Michel, Charles Milson, Gregory Walklet, John Brightman, Will. Plumsted, James
Damask, William Lever, John Baily. Who all took an Oath, Well and truly to try
and true deliverance make betwixt the King and the Prisoners at the Bar,
according to their Evidence, and so that God should them help: The Prisoners
without objecting against any one man of the whole Panel, accepted freely of
them, though they had Liberty by the Law, to have made their challenge against
whom they pleased. So now their Country being thus solemnly sworn to try, and
deliver, etc. they were the true and proper. Judges, to acquit or condemn, to
deliver, or judge guilty, the persons that were given them in charge

In this of the Jury its acknowledged, the Prisoners had right and Justice done
them, and the Court acted under their Commission, according to that Clause,
Facturi quod ad Justitiam pertinet secundum Legem and Consuetudinem Co. 2 Inst.
Fol. 51.
Angliae: To do Justice according to the Law and Custom of England, contained
in the Charter of the English-mans Liberties, which declares, Quod Dominus Rex
non capit imprisonabit, nec super eum ibit, nec mittit nisi per legale judicium
parium suorum: That the King shall not take, imprison, or pass upon any
Freeman without trial by his Equals.

And these are called the Good and Lawful men of Mag. Char. chap. 14.
the Vicinage, whom the Prisoners had freely accepted and given up themselves
and causes unto, as to their Judges, to be by them condemned or acquitted, as
in their Consciences they should judge Equal, Just, and Righteous, according to
the stablished and fundamental Laws of England. The Court proceeded to try Will.
Penn and Will. Mead, the manner whereof is more largely set forth in a Book
called, The Peoples Ancient and Just Liberties Asserted in the Trial of W. P.
and W. M. at the Sessions held at the Old-Bailey in London, the 1st, 3d, 4th,
and 5th of the 7th Month, 70. against the most Arbitrary Proceedure of that
Court.

Which was but an Introduction to their after Illegal and Tyrannical
proceedings against the other Prisoners; for when the Court sound that all
their severe Menaces, scurrilous Invectives, and hard Usage toward the Jury
could no wise avail, to make them alter that Verdict, which according to their
Oaths, they brought in for W. P. and W. M. they presently consult how they
might separate this Jury and the rest of the Prisoners, whom they had sworn to
try and deliver, according to Evidence: Thereupon most Arbitrarily and
Illegally against our Fundamental Laws, Magna Charta, the great Preservers of
our Lives, Freedom, and Property: This Court imposed Fines of forty Marks a
piece upon every of the Jury men, and committed them to the Goal of New-Gace,
until they should pay the same: Which Proceedings are Innovations in the trial
of men for their Lives and Liberties; and the usage of such arbitrary and
illegal Power is of dangerous consequence to the Lives and Liberties of the
people of England, and Vide p. 60. of the Peoples Ancient and Just Liberties
asserted. Printed An. 1670.
tends to the introducing of an Arbitrary Government; as was resolved by the
high Court of Parliament of England, December. 11. 1667. in the Case of Justice
Keeling.

All Ages have had a venerable esteem of Juries; and Observe, this Trial of
twelve good Fol 155. for
the Fact, per duodecim liberos and legales homines, by and lawful men, is very
ancient says Cook 1 Inst, (says he) hear what the Law was before the
Conquest, In singulis centuriis commitia Sancto, atque libere conditionis viri
duodeni aetate superiores una cum praeposito Lambert verb. Centura.
sacra tenentes Juranto, etc. Twelve just and honest grave men were to be in
every hundred, to judge their Neighbors. And thereupon in affirmance of this
upright Way of Trials by twelve men were the Charter of our Liberties made, and
from time to time confirmed; and how this Trial excels others, Artic. super.
Cart. cap. 9.
and wherefore other Countries have them not, see Fortescue, cap. 25. and 29.
And as one observes our English Laws have taken so great care to find out 29
Assize, pre. 27.
the true matter of Fact, in issue, That every one of the Jurors agree together
in the matter in issue before they give their Verdict, which is the Foundation
on which the Judgment of the Court is grounded; for Ex facto jus oritur, as
says Cook 2. Inst. 49.

And in the 29th Chapter of our great Charter, its said, No man shall be taken,
imprisoned, etc. but per legale Juditium -- by lawful Judgment of his equals;
showing that anciently the Jurors were sole Judges, to pronounce and give
judgment against their Neighbors, and such whom they had in charge, according
unto that Myrror of Justice, written by Andrew Horn in the time of Edw. 1.
chap. 1. Sect. 3. It was assented unto that free Tenants should meet together
in the Counties, Hundreds, and the Lords Courts, if they were not especially
exempted, to do such Suits, and there judge their Neighbors: Hence we may
observe, and impartially conclude.

1. That a Jury of twelve men are (and anciently were) the proper Judges of
their Neighbors Actions, Mis-deeds, or Mis-carriages; which is founded on
Reason and equity, because the Neighborhood is best acquainted with, and has
the most certain knowledge both of the Persons and Actions there done and Acted.

2. The Law requiring, that twelve good and honest men should agree as one,
before they determine their Neighbor to be guilty, or not guilty of the Fact
or Matter charged against him, show us, not only that the Fundamental Laws of
this Land have appointed its Inhabitants, merciful Judges, but also such who
should be the proper sole and ultimate Judges (in the matters charged against
any man) to acquit or condemn according to the Laws, as in their Consciences
they should find Equitable, Just, and Righteous.

3. The high Esteem our Ancestors have ever had of these twelve Righteous
Judges in former Ages, bespeaks the little regard and honor that the Recorder
of London, the Mayor and his Brethren, have showed to their Predecessors and
Antiquity; as also their low Esteem of the English-mans Liberties, which in all
Ages and Generations have been mostly preserved and secured by weighing men's
Actions in the equal Balance of their Good and Honest Neighbors Judgments.

4. We may observe how little regard this Court has had of the performance of
such Oaths, which they impose upon men at pleasure; for, notwithstanding they
had sworn twelve good and lawful men of the City of London, Well and truly to
try, and true deliverance make, between the King and the Prisoners at the Bar:
Yet they refuse and deny these Jurors to perform that Oath, which they had so
solemnly taken; manifesting to the World that the Bench assumes a Power and
Jurisdiction equal with the Church of Rome, to enforce and absolve from Oaths
and Covenants at their Wills and Pleasures.

5. Its most apparent how little this Court minded 20 Edw. 3. chap. 1.
or regarded their own Duty, Oaths, and Commission, to do Equal Law and
Execution of Right, without respect to persons, according to the Laws of this
Land: For when the Prisoners had given their consent to be tried, and the Jury
had sworn to try; without, and against the consent of both, or either of them
(or any Act done whereby Common Right should be denied the Prisoners) or
Justice to the Jurors) to separate them each from other, is such a piece of
Tortious Justice, which there is no Law or Custom of England can or will
justify or maintain.

6. We cannot but own and acknowledge the Parliament of the Commons of England,
their industrious care and prudence to preserve our Lives and Liberties from
the violence of Usurpation, and practice of Arbitrary and Illegal Powers over
Juries, who are sworn to try and deliver their Neighbors, according to
Evidence of Fact committed. And since once in their prudence they thought meet,
just, and righteous, to check the Author of such Arbitrary Innovations, as
fining of Jurors for their Verdicts, we hope they will take occasion at this
time to manifest their care and tenderness of the People of England (whose
Representatives they are) in bringing these latter Malefactors to condign
punishment, that for the future Justice may run down its proper Channels, and
be faithfully executed and equally dispensed according to our Ancient and
Fundamental Laws, and the Laudable Customs of this our Land.

Whilst the Recorder thus treated this Jury of the Citizens of London, the
Sheriffs had summoned a new Panel, to appear at Justice Hall the 5th of the
7th Month; the Prisoners, on whom the former Jury had sworn to pass their
Verdicts upon, viz. John Boulton, William Bailey, Fra, Moor, Tho. Rudyard, etc.
were called again into Court, in the afternoon, and each of them fined as
formerly, twenty Nobles a piece for their Hats. A President or Foundation for
such Judgments, Fines, and Amercements, we challenge the Cities Recorder, and
the conceitedly learned Mayor, to show or make out to the World by the Laws of
England.

So soon as the Recorder had finished or passed these new sort of Judgments, or
rather Inquisitory Censures upon or against the Prisoners: He purused the
Panel of the last summoned Jury, and gave directions to the Clark to call them
over, who as it was observed, picked here and there such persons that were
judged the most likely to answer the malicious Ends and horrid Designs of that
Bench, calling not the Iury-men in order and direct (...) as is usual in all
Courts of Justice, where Right is impa^^^^lly administered; and withal, bidding
the Prisoners to look upon the Jurors, and before they were Sworn to make their
Challenges.

So now a second Jury was going to be sworn upon them for the trial of one
single Fact, which was a further manifestation of the Courts evil Intentions
against them, having now neither Equity, Justice nor Law, for their boundaries
or guides, it being such a piece of practice that no Age can parallel.

Says the learned Cook in his 2 Inst. 56. Lex est tutissima Cassis: The Law is
the safest guard to defend the Innocent from Tort and Wrong, which declares,
That Mag. Cha. chap. 29.
Justice and Right shall be denied to none. Neither shall any man be destroyed
by any manner of wise, on which Cook observes, That every Oppression against
Law Cook 2 Inst. 48.
by color of any usurped Authority is a kind of Destruction: For says he,
Quando aliquod prohibetur, prohibetur and omne per quod devenitur ad illud. The
Law admits not of the least wrong to be done to any man. Therefore says the
same Author, That its tho worst Oppression which is done by color of Justice.

Observe then, 1st The Court to swear two several Iuries upon one person, to
try one and the same Cause or Fact, upon one and the same Indictment; What is
it but under disguise of Justice to commit such Absurdities, that our Laws
allow not, or Lawyers ever before heard of.

2d If such Practices as these be allowable, what person shall know when that
Jury, whom the Court will permit to try him, is or shall be sworn upon him, to
acquit or condemn him, according to his Fact, and the Law of the Land?

3d What Right and Justice can a Prisoner expect, when his Adversary, shall not
only summon what Jurors they please, but also in the Court pack together such,
whom they Judge will answer their Malicious Designs upon those who shall be
committed to their charge.

The Prisoners taking notice of the Courts partial Prosecution and unequl
distribution of Justice, and bold attempts to commit such horrid Rapes upon
their Liberties, made an unanimous Protestation against the second Jury. First,
Desiring to know by what Law or just President they practiced such sort of
Justice upon them; and how the Recorder could Swear two Iuries to try one and
the same Fact etc. The Recorder answered, That the first Jury was imprisoned
for their Misdemeanour, (meaning the not finding W. P. and W. M. guilty) and
the Prisoners must take that for an answer: Which being far short of the
Question, the Prisoners still persisted to know what Law or Custom justified
their proceedings. The Recorder replied, That the Court had overruled them:
The Prisoners told him, That the Law should be and ought to be the Rule and
Guide of all Courts of Justice, and that such Answers as (The Court overruled
you) was not sufficient to satisfy their reasonable and just Demands.

Whereupon the Recorder, with great Indignation and Rage, told one of the
Prisoners, That he should be Gagged, and deserved to have his. Tongue bored
through with a Hot Iron, and his Mouth Nailed to the Dust; with many other
inveterate, approbious, and tainting Expressions, telling him, That he was not
bound to produce Presidents, but it should satisfy, That the Court was of
another Opinion against them, and had overruled them. To which the Mayor
joined his consent, saying also, We will overruled you.

By the Statute 25 Ed. 1. chap. 1. it was accorded, That the Kings Justices,
Sheriffs, Mayors etc. that had the Laws to guide them etc. This is a Clause
(says Cook) worthy to be written in letters of GOLD, That the Laws are to be
the Judges Guides. And therefore not Judges by their Arbitrary Glosses, to be
Guides of the Laws, which never yet misguiden any, that truly followed them.
Sub Clipeo Legis nemo decipitur, as says the same Cook 2 Inst. 56.
Author. Common Right in 2 E. 3. is called Common Law in 14 E. 3. etc. and in
this sense it is taken, where it is said, It a quod stet recto in curia, i. e.
legis in curia, The Law is called rectum (that is Right or a Rule) because it
discovers that which is tort, crooked, or wrong; so as Right signifies Law,
so Tort, Crooked, or Wrong signifies Injury, and Injuria est contra jus
against Right. Hereby (says Cook) the crooked Cord of that which is called
Discretion appears to be unlawful.

So that (First) its plain, The Law rules and guides, but Discretion, Force,
and Violence overruled.

Secondly, The just Judge makes the Law his Rule and Guide, but the Unjust
overrules the Law: So that its apparent, that this overruling is no other
then by Discretion (which is tort, crooked, and rough) to oppose with violence
that Justice and Right, which the Laws allow and afford every Freeman of
England; then there is no defense to be made against the Recorders overruling,
that is gone beyond the Laws Rule, to his own overruling Will and Discretion.

The Clark of the Peace, in obedience to the Courts command, proceeds to Swear
the second Jury upon the Prisoners, upon which some of the Prisoners objected
against several of them, as one Steed the Foreman, and several others: The
Recorder denied they their challenges, telling them still that the Court
overrul'd them. And although Judge Cook in his 3 Inst. fol. 27. says, That the
end of Challenge is to have an indifferent Trial, and which is required by Law,
and to bar the Party indicted of his lawful Challenge, is to bar him of a
principal concern in his Trial; yet this Recorder, who does, or should know the
Law, and those Rights and Privileges which it affords the Prisoners (both in
the Challenge of the Array of the Panel, and also of the Poles) admitted their
Challenges to neither, but cried out still, The Court overrules you; that as
well the Spectators, as Prisoners, were fully satisfied, that the purpose and
resolution of the Bench was to make them subject and slaves to their Injustice,
and most Tyrannical Will and Pleasure, in dispite of the Laws and that
undoubted Right and Liberty, which is the best Birthright the Freeman of
England has.

The names of the Jury were Henry Stead, Foreman, Edward Dermer, Thomas Moss,
John Ashborne, Edward Langton, Henry Osstly, Edward Hanney, Walter Hungerford,
Tho. Pendleton, Robert Twisord, Rob. Cooper, and Daniel Waiton.

As its most certainly true, that every Freeman of England may, and does
challenge the benefit of Ancient Fundamental Laws to protect and defend his
Life and Liberty against violence and oppression, most especially that which is
contained in the 29th Chapter of the Charter of Liberties, viz. Not to be
taken, imprisoned etc. but by Judgment of his Equals, (which Cook calls in his
Exposition) twelve of his good, and honest Neighbors. And to have equal
Justice and Right done him, according to that Charter, as by the first Statute
of 20 E. 1. So its as true that by the Recorder of London, the Mayor and his
Brethren, those Rights and Privileges have been denied; those Laws, and such
who claim a benefit from them, have been contemned and overruled by the
Censures and Judgments which they passed upon, and carriages and usages which
they practiced toward both Prisoners and Jurors, so that this consequence will
follow.

First, Although a Jury of good and honest men shall be sworn well and truly
to Try, and true Deliverance make between etc. according to their Evidence, yet
if the Verdict that is confirmed by the Oaths of twelve men (agreed together
as one) be not congruous to the will and humor of one Person sitting on the
Bench (as the Recorder) these twelve Judges shall be Fined, and Imprisoned as
perjured Persons, and as such who are guilty of as high misdemeanors as any
they came to judge and try.

Secondly, When twelve good and lawful men shall be so impannelled and sworn
to try etc. and the Prisoners shall accept of them without Challenge (except
after this the Court also approves of them) these first sworn shall be
imprisoned, and another Jury summoned, and packed together, to serve and answer
the ends of the Informers and Prosecutors, upon the Prisoners, contrary to Law,
any Usage or Custom whatsoever.

And now we dare put those Questions to be resolved by the very Enemies of
these Prisoners that were so tried by that Court, Whether this Bench (and the
Sheriffs of London, who from the beginning were either Prosecutors or Informers
against these Prisoners) First, So menacing and threatening and afterward
Fining and Imprisoning one Jury. Secondly, Summoning, packing, and enforcing
another Jury upon Prisoners, (to try that Fact which a former Jury were sworn
to determine) against the Law, Usages, and Practices of all Courts of
Judicature; have not with Violence oppressed the Freemen of this Land, and
denied them that Justice and Right, which by the Fundamental Laws they ought
freely to have and enjoy, and which also these Justices (by their Commissions,
Oaths, and Duty of their Places) ought to allow, yea or nay?

The second Jury being thus sworn, the Clark of the Peace read over the
Indictment against Fra. Moor, Richard Mew, Rich. Mayfeild, Richard Knowlman,
and Gilbert Hutton; as also that against Rich. Thornton, Charles Banister, and
Job Boulton (the substance whereof is before set down) and their Indictments
for form and matter being alike, they were tried together.

The Crier calling the Witnesses, the Court proceeded to Trial. The Prosecutors
and Witnesses were one Whiting the Beadle of Bridgeward, and the rest were the
Sheriffs Officers, whom the Mayor had bound over to prosecute the Prisoners:
Whence it may be observed, That either the Sheriffs themselves, or their
Servants, were the Informers in this Work, from which so many large perquisits
have fallen to them, as hereafter shall be mentioned.

The Substance of the Witnesses Evidence was, That they saw the Prisoners in
Grace Church Street in Whitehart-Court, amongst the Assembly of People there
met together, and that they stayed there till after Proclamation was made, That
all persons there present should depart.

The Prisoners being asked what they could say for themselves, they answered,
That they owned that they were at Gratious-street, met together to worship the
true and living God in Spirit and in Truth, against which there is no Law: And
further said, That the Indictment consisted of much matter, as meeting with
Force and Arms to disturb the Peace, and continuing there Riotously, Routosly,
and Tumultuously, in contempt of the King and his Laws, and against the Kings
Crown and Dignity, which none of the Witnesses had sworn, therefore they
desired to know upon what Law they were Indicted, and that the Law might be
produced, and read to the Jury, that thereby they might know whether they had
made a Breach of any just Law. The Recorder answered, That he was not bound to
produce the Law, for it was Lex non scripta. Then (replied) the Prisoners, How
shall the Jury know whether we are guilty of the Breach thereof. Said the
Recorder, It is the Common Law, which you have broken in your tumultuous
Assemblies, and staying there after Proclamations were made to depart. The
Prisoners objected, That the Indictment alleges three several Proclamations
were made, when as but one was made that day: Whereupon the Witnesses were
again examined, whether there were not three Proclamations made? Who answered,
that there was but one made: Upon which the Mayor demanded of one of the
Witnesses, whether O YES was not said thrice? Who answered, That the Officer
who made Proclamation said O YES three times, before he commanded the People in
the Kings Name to depart: Then said the Mayor, That was three Proclamations.
Such a piece of Violence in the explanation of a Word, that has not been known
in a Court of Justice.

The Prisoners further urged, That they were always quiet and peaceable in
their Assemblies; That the Law against Riots were never intended against them,
but Popish, or such like Disturbers of the Peace. To which the Recorder
answered, That the PAPISTS were better Subjects to the King then they were, and
that they were a stubborn and a dangerous People, and must either be brought
under, or there were no safe living by them.

The Prisoners offering to vindicate themselves from those soul Aspersions laid
upon them by the Recorder, telling him, That they had broken no just Law to
their knowledge, and that they never had been guilty of being Rioters and
Routers, as was pretended, which they desired the Jury to take notice of, and
that there had not any such Proof been offered by the Witnesses.

Whereupon the Mayor and Recorder commanded the Goalers to thrust them into the
Bale-dock, and in their absence the Recorder gave his Charge to the Jury, not
so much summing up the Evidence (which truly proved not the tenth part of the
Indictment) as giving in matter of his own, of foul Criminations, telling the
Jury that they were a Refractory People, such who delighted in deeds of
Darkness, and that they must be crushed, or there would be no living by them;
so that upon the Indictment they must find them guilty.

Now surely there never was greater Oppression and Violence manifested in a
Court of Justice, either upon the just and righteous Law, or a quiet and
peaceable People, as has been acted by the Lievtenancy (its pity to say
Magistrates) of the famous City of London: Had there been color for their
proceedings by any Statute Law of the Land, pointing out the Offenders and
their Punishment, these several Actings of theirs might have been in some
measure tolerable; but when men dare at once, against the very face of Law,
Justice, Equity, Reason, Right, and Liberty, commit such Oppressions upon their
Fellow Creatures, yea, on a People too, who never yet could be justly charged
for using Violence, Force, or Arms against any man, no, not so much as to
defend themselves against such, who have violently and inhumanly abused and
tortured their bodies, without the least color of Warrant or Authority from
the Civil Magistrate. We cannot but stand in admiration of this Court of
Judicature; Let us a little see the Judgments of our Sages of the Law, touching
the matter of Riots, in former and latter times, not only Statute Law, but also
the Opinion of the Learned.

First see the Statute of 17 R. 2. chap. 8. (1393.) It was Enacted, That the
Sheriffs, and all other the Kings Officers, should suppress Rioters, and
Imprison them. 13 H. 4. chap. 7. (An. 1411) If any Assembly or Rout of people
against the Law be made, that three or two Justices of the Peace and Sheriff,
or under Sheriffs, shall come with the Power of the County (if need be to
arrest them, and shall record what is done against the Law; and that the
persons by that Record shall be convict in manner, as inforceable Entries. 2 H.
5. 8. The Kings Liege People, that were Travelers, should be assistant to the
Justices etc. when warned to ride with them in aid to resist Riots, Routs etc.
upon pain of Imprisonment.

The Riotors and Routers, mentioned in these Statutes, were certainly such
persons, who did really meet with Force and Arms; else, what need was there of
the Power of the Country, as is directed, to quiet, appease, and arrest them;
or else, what need of engaging Travelers to resist them; notwithstanding, they
may have the Power of the Country to apprehend them.

2. Read the Judgment of the Oracle of our Laws, Cook in his 3. In. c. 79.
tittle Riots, Routs, and unlawful Assemblies, Forces etc. says thus, Riotum
comes of the French Word Rioter, i. e. Rixari; And in the Common Law
signifies, When three, or more, do any unlawful Act, as to beat any man, or
hunt in his Park, Chase, or Warren, or to enter or take possession of another
man's Land, or to cut or destroy his Corn, Grass, or other profit etc.

Routa is derived of the French Word Rout, and Lamb. intr. Legib. In. cha. 13,
14, 15. vide Abu. chap. 26.
properly in Law signifies, When three, or more, do any unlawful Act, for
their own, or the common quarrel etc. As when Commoners break down Hedges, or
Pales, or cast down Ditches, or Inhabitants, for a way claimed by them, or the
like.

An unlawful Assembly is when three, or more, assemble themselves together, to
commit a Riot or Rout, and do it not.

So that its most plain and evident, That a Quiet, Religious, and Peaceable
Assembly of people were never intended by our Predecessors, to be punished as
Rioters, Routers, and unlawful Assemblies, as our Law-Executioners now a days
would have it.

The Lord Cook said, Interest regi habere subditos pacatos, That the Kings
Interest was to have his Subjects peaceable. And what must it be the inferior
Officers Interest to have them accounted otherwise, and that for filthy Lucre
sake?

A new Contrivance to advance the Sheriffs perquisists, which our Forefathers
were ignorant of, (viz.) The Sheriffs to ride to an Assembly of People, whom
they, or their Confederates, against all Law, had forceably kept out of their
House and Freehold; and because (upon Proclamation by them made, for which they
have no Ground or Authority by the Law) the people presently departing not from
their own Ground, and before the Door of their own House, they shall be
committed to Goal as Rioters, condemned as such, and the Sheriffs shall have
400. or 500 l. for their days work, out of these Innocent persons Fines.

This new construction of Religious Assemblies seems the more strange, by
reason, there cannot be one President produced to back this upstart Opinion,
that Religious Meetings deserve of late years that ignominious term of Riots or
Routs.

So that this seemly piece of Law, or Wit, must be owned to have had its Rice,
Spring, and Original, from the prerogative brain of S. S. Mayor of London, and
confirmed by the City Recorder, who doubtless will not be the last that may
repent of his days work.

The next whom the Court called to their Trial was Ezekiel Archer, and Margery
Fann, who being indicted for Rioters the Sessions before, and the Evidence
being deficient, the Court coveting to come off with credit in all such
Indictments, as were of the new stamp, ordered an Indictment for Felony to be
read against them, which they had forged and framed for that purpose, and piece
of Iniquity, which well deserves the search and condign Punishment for the
Contrivers; so these two were found Not guilty.

The same day this Bench called T. Rudyard into Court; when the Clark had read
over the first Indictment, which the Mayor the former Sessions declared was not
drawn up according to Instructions and Evidence; and also the second, which the
Mayor said he would stand by, and prosecute: The Informers Witnesses were
sworn, viz. N. Grove and I. Tillot; Grove being first to give in his Testimony,
declared, That there was an Indictment drawn against S. Allingbridge, for
saying, The first man that disturbed Mr. Vincent should never go out of the
House alive; and that he saw T. R. take it out of Mr. Lees hand, and told him
that it was lost, and T. R. would go with him to Mr. Tanner, and drink a pint
of Wine with him, and draw up a slight Bill that might not be found. So (said
the Mayor) here is both the Indictment proved already; which Evidence Grove
delivered, as being one entire Action and Discourse; and being asked what time
this Discourse was, whether when T. R. took the Bill; he answered, He did not
well know; and T. R. asking him some further Questions, the Mayor interrupted
him saying, He was not to examine the Kings Witnesses. I. Tillot was next
called, who swore that T. R. acknowledged to him, that he had the Indictment.
T. R. acquainted the Court that he owned that he was at the Sessions at
Guildhall, where S. Allingbridge attending, requested him to enquire and know
from the Clark, whether his Adversaries had drawn any Bill of Indictment
against him, and what the Indictment might be: Thereupon T. R. enquired of the
Clark, whether he had drawn such a Bill: Jo. Forman, an Officer, standing by
him, with several Bills in his hand, gave this Bill into T. R's hand to read,
which when he had done, in open Court, returned the Bill to Forman, and
immediately went out of Court, ordering S. A. to send for his Witness to try the
Indictment, in case the grand inquest should find it Billavera. The Evidence,
as it was much contrary to Truth, so it was as far short of proving the
Indictments, as by the ensuing Exceptions may appear. But what was deficient in
that respect the Recorder made up in his charge to the Jury.

Exceptions to the Indictment.
First, It appears not by the Indictment, that the Bill of Indictment against
S. Allenbridg was Conusable to the Court, it being against the Justices Oath to
take notice of it before the Grand Inquest had found it.

Secondly, It appears not that the words charged against Allenbridg were
punishable by Law; for the House mentioned in the Indictment might be Vincent's
dwelling House, so Burglary to break into it without lawful Warrant.

Then, as to the Evidence to the first Indictment, 1. No proof that Grove ever
read the Indictment (which indeed he could not) against S. A. so he swore
peremtorily upon the Clarks information, which was a false Oath.

2. That T. R. took the Bill out of Lee's hand, could not be, for the Officer
keeps the Bills of Indictments, when the Witnesses are sworn, and not the Clark
of the Peace.

3. Improbable that Grove should know that Bill amongst so many more; but
impossible that he should see the Bill taken away (knowing it) and not mention
one word of it all that day, no not when the Bill was pretended to be wanting.

4. Not sworn he took it out of Court.

5. Not sworn that Justice, or that any course of Law was hindered against S. A.

6. As to the acknowledging the Indictment to Tillot, it was not three hours
before the Trial; who asking T. R. whether he ever read the Indictment; T. R.
answered, he did, and left it in Forman's hand, why that's enough said Tillot,
the Mayor sent for me to swear it, which I could not do before.

7. If T. R. had taken the Bill, it could not benefit S. A. or hinder the
Prosecutor.

8. That T. R. should hazard his reputation in a thing of no value, wherein he
could neither advantage his Friend, nor prejudice his Enemy, could not stop the
proceedings half an hour, yea in a quarter another might have been written and
preferred, is very improbable.

9. Its most apparent, that if Grove did not perjure himself, in swearing such
a Bill was drawn against S. A. (he having neither read it, or had copy of it)
he or the Mayor, or some of the Confederates must themselves have concealed the
Bill, and kept it in their own custody, else N. Grove could not swear to it,
one of which must necessarily be.

As to the 2d Indictment, the words there pretended to be spoken, 1. If true,
were not advising Grove to do an Action, but telling him that we would go etc.
so nothing being done in prosecution of the words it was only discourse.

2. Not sworn that the advice was taken.

3. Improbable that T. R. should thus discourse to a Stranger, whom before he
had never seen.

4. That he should undertake to go to Tanner, that was as much a Stranger to
him.

5. T. R. never came afterward to Grove, nor spoke with Tanner; but S.
Allingbridge was tried and convicted the very same Week, in an Adjournment of
the same Sessions.

Now whether there was either sufficient Cause for an Indictment. or apparent
Proofs to Evidence the Truth of these upon which T. R. was tried, or whether
all these pretented Crimes and Misdemeanors, were not the product of the
Mayors malicious, envious, and inveterate spirit, causlesly carried on against
him (who not only appears to be the first Informer, but the Maintainer and
Prosecutor of the Quarrel, as also Evidence and Judge upon) let every
unprejudiced person (seriously considering) give his Judgment.

The Jury was commanded to withdraw, which for the formalities sake they did,
and not longer staying then about a quarter of an hour, returned again, and
brought in the nine persons that were tried, guilty in manner and form as they
stood indicted, which some of these Jurors had over their Cups sworn they would
do, if ever they come to try the Quakers.

John Boulten and William Bailey were the last called to their Trial, who were
indicted several, For that they such a day, and year, and place, with Force and
Arms etc. with Two hundred more Persons, were assembled together, to disturb
the Kings Peace; and being so assembled, they unlawfully took upon themselves
to Preach and Teach to the People; then and there assembled and congregated, by
reason whereof a great concourse of People did remain together, in contempt of
the King and his Laws, to the disturbance of his Peace, to the terror and
disturbance of his Subjects, unto the evil example of others, and against the
Kings Crown and Dignity etc.

Not guilty being pleaded, the Informers Evidence being produced, swore, That
they saw or heard them speak or preach to the People, which was sufficient for
the Court to make out the whole Indictments; for the Recorder said, the Jury
were only Judges of matter of Fact; so that if the Jury have Evidence they
Spoke or Preached, the Court says that must be with Force and Arms, unlawfully
and tumulruously, to disturb the Kings Peace, and that Tumults of People were
occasioned thereby, and continued together, in contempt of the King and his
Laws, to the disturbance of his Peace, terror of his People, evil Example of
others, and against the Kings Crown and Dignity: A ready way to perjure Jurors,
and oppress the Innocent.

These are the Concomitants of Speaking in the Name of the Living God, and
worshipping him in the Ways of his own appointments: And although the
Prisoners desired to see the Law that their Adversaries pretend they have
broken, they shall have neither that, nor reason produced that might give
satisfaction either to the Prisoners or Spectators; the Lord Cook gave this as
a Rule, viz. Incivile est, part una perspecta tota re non cognita de ca
Judicare; That it was uncivil, seeing only one part, to give Judgment on the
whole matter. Yet how little regarded these Jury men, or the Court, to know the
whole matter before they gave Judgment upon the whole Charge. Surely this Jury
was packed to be cutthroats to their own Liberties, and Reputations also, or
else they would have better regarded what they undertook; to find guilty every
one in manner and sorm, and yet not the tenth part of any Indictment proved; to
be sworn truly to try, according to Evidence, and yet to find that for which
no Evidence was given. Is it possible that they should commit this horrid
perjury out of a slavish fear, debaucht principle, and horrid partiallity, and
yet be quiet from the terrors of Conscience; nay, for which we are sure they
cannot free themselves without serious repentance.

At the close of the Sessions all the Prisoners (who had been found guilty by
this Jury of the Benches) were called down to the Sessions House, where all day
they expected to be called into Court to receive Judgment, being prepared also
to give in their Exceptions in Arrest of Judgment, purposed to be delivered to
the Recorder in writing; but of this expected Defense they were all prevented,
the Bench giving their Judgments or Censures without calling any of the
Prisoners to hear them; the Tenor of which, as appears by the Newgate Book, are
in this manner, John Bonlton fined forty Mark, William Bailey fined thirty one
pound thirteen shillings four pence, William Penn forty Mark, Francis Moor
fined twenty Mark, Richard Mew, Richard Mayfeild, Rich. Knowlman, Gilbert
Hutton, Ric. Thornton, Charles Banister, Job Boulton, T. Rudyard, every of them
fined twenty Mark a piece; Ezekel Archer fined forty Mark; for diverse evil
Carriages and Contempts in words and deeds by them severally, openly,
voluntarily and obstinately committed in and toward the Court. And the Court
gave further Judgments or Censures, viz. Francis Moor, R. M. R M. R. K. G. H.
R. T. C. B. I. B. Katherine Everett, I. Boulton, and W. Bailey, fined every of
them twenty Marks apiece, and T. R. fined a hundred pound, being convict of
several Trespasses and Contempts, and to be committed to Prison until every of
them pay their several respective Fines.

The Court understanding that their Goal of Newgate was so full of Prisoners,
that there could be no tolerable entertainment for these new Convicts,
discoursed with the Keepers where to Imprison them; so the Bench having an
account, that out of the Dog, by Newgate, that very Sessions there dyed two
persons of the Spotted-feaver, or Plague, (one the Master of the House, the
other a Prisoner, whom Jo. Robinson Alderman had there sent for refusing to
take an Oath, prescribed in the 3d of Ja.) whereupon they were commanded to be
Imprisoned there, and a Keeper set upon them to prevent their going abroad upon
the most urgent occasion. Where through the Goodness of the Almighty they were
preserved in Health, beyond the expectation of their Friends, or hopes of their
Enemies, who doubtless out of an evil end and purpose sent them thither, into
an infected house.

But that Goalers, of what degree or state soever, may in some measure know the
Duties of their respective places, and not through ignorance abuse such who are
committed to their Charge, we have thought it meet at this time to instance and
give an account what their duty is to their prisoners, according to the Laws of
this Land, which all Goalers are obliged under great Penalties to observe, and
the people of this Land to preserve, as their Liberties, least by such neglect,
slavery be insensibly drawn upon them.

By the Common Law we find, Quod care ad continendos non ad puniendos haberi
debet, as Bracton lib. 3. fol. 105. Goalers are ordained to hold Prisoners, not
to punish them. For Imprisonment by the Law, is (neither ought to be) no more
then a bare restraint of Liberty, without those illegal and unjust Destructions
of close and open Prison (as is usual) See Stamf. ple. Cro. fol. 70.

Therefore Cook in his 3 Inst. 91. says, That if the Jailer keep the Prisoners
more straightly then he ought Britton fol. 18.
of right, whereof the Prisoner dies, this is Felony in the Jailer by the
Common Law. And this is the Cause, That if a Prisoner dye in Prison, the
Coroner ought to Flet. lib. 1. chap. 26.
sit upon him. See also the said Cook Fol. 34. Cap. Petty Treason; how
Prisoners are to be used wherein is also an account of an Indictment of a
Jailer for evil usage of his Prisoner, Fol. 35 in Trin. Term, 7 E. 3. cor.
Rege rot. 44. -- Praesentat. quod ubi quidam Robertus Bayhens, de Tavesly
captus fuit, and in prisona Castri Lincoln detentus per quodam debito Statut.
mercatorii in Custodia Tho. Boteler, Constabularii Castri de Lincoln ibid
predict. Tho. Boteler posuit ipsum Robertum in profundo Jail inter Lenones in
ubi Prisona, contra formam Statuti etc. et eadem profundo detinuit, quousque
idem Robertus fecit finem 1 E. 3. cap. 7.
cum eo de 40 s. quos ei soluit per Extortionem: That whereas one R. B. of T.
was taken and detained in the Prison of Lincoln Castle, for a certain debt of
Statute Merchant, in the custody of T. B. Constable of the Castle of L.
aforesaid; That the said T. B. put the said R. into the Common-Goal amongst
Thieves, in a filthy Prison, contrary to the form of the Stature etc. and there
detained him, till he had paid him a Fine of 40 s. Whereupon Cook makes this
Observation, So as hereby it appears, where the Law requires that a Prisoner
should be kept (Vi salva and ancta custodia) that is, In safe and sure Custody;
yet that must be without any pain or torment to the Prisoner.

So Co. 3 Inst. 52. says. If a Prisoner by the Dures, that is Hardusage of the
Jailer, comes to untimely Death, this is Murder in the Jailer. And in the Law
implies Malice, in respect of the Cruelty.

Horn, in the Mirror of Justice page 288. says, That it is an Abusion of the
Law, that Prisoners are put into Irons, or other pain, before they are
attainted.

See also Cook 3 Inst. 34, 35.

And Horn also page 34, 36. Rockons the starving Vox plebis par. 1. fol. 55, 56.
of Prisoners by Famine, to be among the Crimes of Homicide in a Jailer.

Which also Cook in his 3 Inst. chap. 29. Title of Felony in Goalers by Dures
of Imprisonment etc. by Statute and by the Common Law. Fol. 91.

And next, let us see what the Law says for the Fees due to Goalers, The
Mirror of Justice, p. 288. tells us, That its an abusion of the Law, that
Prisoners or others for them, to pay any thing for their Entries into the Goal,
or for their Going-out: This is the Common Law, there is no Fee due to them by
the Common Law. See what the Statutes say, The Statute of Westminster. 1. cha. 26.
says, That no Sheriff, or other Minister of the King, shall take Reward for
doing their Offices, but what they take of the King, if they do they shall
Suffer double to the party agrieved, and be punished at the will of the King.
Under this word, Minister of the King, are Included all Escheators, Coroners,
Goulers, and the like. See Cook 2 Inst. fol. 209. affirms. And agreeable is
Stamf. pl. Coron. 49. Nay by the Statute of 4 E. 3. chap. 10. Goalers are to
receive Thieves and Fellons, taking nothing by way of Fees for the receipt of
them. So odious is this extortion of Goalers* that vety Thieves and Fellons are
exempt from payment of Fees.

And we find in our Law Books, That no Fees are due to any Officer, Jailer, or
Minister of Justice, but only those which are given by act of Parliament; for
if a Jailer will prescribe for any Fees, the Presciption is void, because
against this Act of Parliament, made 3 E. 1. being an Act made within time of
memory, and takes away all manner of pretended Fees before; and we are sure
none can be raised by color of prescription since: and therefore we find by
the Books of 8 E. 4. fol. 18. That a Marshal or Jailer cannot detain any
Prisoner after his discharge from the Court, but only for the Fees of the Court
(the Court being not barred by this Statute of Westminster 1. aforementioned) and if
he do, he may be indicted for Extortion. And agreeable to this is the Book of
21. E. 7. fol. 16. where amongst other things its held for Law, That if a
Jailer or Guardian of a Prison, takes his Prisoners proper Garment, Cloak, or
Money from him, it is a Trespass, and the Jailer shall be answerable for it: So
that we may undeniably conclude, That there is no Fee at all due to any Jailer
or Guardian of a Prison from the Prisoner (but what is due unto him by special
Act of Parliament.

And if a Jailer or Guardian of a Prisoner, shall take any thing as a Fee of
his Prisoner, he may and ought to be Indicted of Extortion, and upon conviction
to be removed from his Office; and if his Prisoner, by Constraint, Menace, or
Dures, be enforced to give him Money, he may recover that Money against the
Jailer again, in an Action of the Case at Common Law.

Item, The King Considering the great Perjury, Extortion, and Oppression, which
be Stat. 23 H. 6. chap. 10.
and have been in this Realm by his Sheriffs, Under-Sheriffs, and their Clarks,
Bailiffs, and Keepers of Prisons etc. has ordained by Authority Sta. 4 H. 4. 5.
aforesaid, in eschewing all such Extortion, Perjury, and Oppression, that no
Sheriff Rast. predict. fol. 318.
shall let to Farm in any manner his County, nor any of his Bailiwicks. Nor
that any of the said Officers and Ministers, by occasion, or Cco. pred. 365.
under color of their Office, shall take any other thing by them, nor by any
other Person 21 H. 7. fol. 16.
to their use, profit, or avail; if any person by them or any of them to be
arrested or attatched, for the omitting of any Arrest or attachment to be made
by their Body, or of any person by them, or any of them (by force or color of
their Office arrested or attatched) for Fine, Fee, Suit of Prison, Mainprise,
letting to Bail, or snewing any Ease or favor (to any such person so arrested
or to be attatched) for their Reward or Profit; but such as follow, that is to
say, For the Sheriff 20 d. The Bailiff which makes the Arrest or Attachment, 4
d. And the Jailer of the Prison if he be committed to ward, 4 d. -- And that
all Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Rast. predict. fol, 371
Goalers, or any other Officer or Ministers, which do contrary to this
Ordinance, in any point of the same, shall lose to the party in this behalf
Stat. 21 Ed. O.
indammaged or grieved, his trebble Damages, and shall forfeit the sum of 40
l. for every such Offense, the one moiety to the King, the other to the
Prosecutor, to be Recovered at Common Law, in either of the Courts of
King's Bench, or Common Pleas at Westminster.

This is a perfect Account of the Goalers Fees in all Cases, where persons are
laid in Prison upon Civil Matters and Causes, which Fee of 4 d. is more then
any other Statute or Law allows them to take from their Prisoners: But in such
Cases where the King is party, its stablished, That the Prisoners in all the
Kings Prisons should be maintained at the Kings Charge, and out of the Kings
Revenues, according to the old Law of the Land, much less to have Money
extorted from him by the Jailer. But look into the Prisons in and about the
City of London, what horrible Oppressions, Extortions, and Cruelties, are
Exercised upon the Freeborn People of England, yea in most Prisons throughout
this Kingdom.

Which excessive Amercements and Fines (after all their other Partial Dealings,
Lawless Proceedings, and Arbitrary Carriages toward the Prisoners, from first
to last) do manifest and evidence to the World, their Malice and Envy against
an Innocent, Upright, Quiet, and Peaceable People. What proportion is there
here betwixt the pretended Fault and the assessed Fine, provides not the
fourteenth Chapter of the Great Charter, against such unjust Judgments and
partial Censures, which declares; A Freeman shall not be Amerced for a small
Fault, but after the quantity of the Fault, for a great Fault, after the manner
thereof; and the Amercement shall be assessed by the Oath of Honests Men of the
Vicinage.

H^^e's Justice and Equity, Righteousness in Judgment, which affords every man
Common Right, declares, That all Offenders ought to be Amerced, by their
Neighborhood, according to the quantity of the Trespass. Wherein have these
Judges (who are commanded by the Statute of 25 E. 1. Confirmed by Pet. Right 3
Car. 1.) allowed the Charter before them in Judgment, in all its Points etc.

It may truly be said, that our ancient, just, and fundamental Laws, which Cook
on the 14th chapter of Magna Charta calls a Law of Mercy, are (as the same
Author there writes) now turned into a Shadow; for by the Wisdom of the Law,
these Amercements were instituted to deter both Demandants and Plaintiffs from
unjust Suits, and Tenants and Defendants from unjust Defenses, which was the
Cause in ancient time of fewer suits, but now we have but a Shadow of them.
Habemus quidem senatus consultum, Cicero.
sed in tabulis reconditum and tanquam gladium invagina repositum: Yea, our
ancient Charters are as a Sword 2 Inst fol. 28.
in its Sheath, which if drawn, are and will be sufficient to defend us against
all Injustice, Tyranny, or Oppression whatsoever.

But its often objected by many of their Aversaries, That the Public Meeting
Houses, wherein the People called Quakers are, and have been of late accustomed
to meet in, and assemble themselves together, and out of which the Military
Forces do from time to time hale and expel them, and by force keep and restrain
them from entrance, are by Orders of the King and Council, invested and
stablished in the now King, and that he has right to dispose of them, as his
own Inheritance, yea, to pull them down, sell and burn the material of them, as
his inferior Officers have lately dove by some about London: and thereupon
such who come there to assemble together are Trespasser^ Rioters, Routers, and
unlawful Assemblies, and as such are rig^^ly and duly punished according to
the Laws.

To which is answered, That by the Ancient and Fundamental Laws, which have
been already recited, as the 29th of Magna Charta; There is no man's Right,
Property or Freehold shall be taken away from him, but by trial of a Jury, and
the Law of the Land. Read Stat. 2 E. 3. 8. 5 E. 3, 9. 14 E. 3. 14. 28 E. 3. 3.
Regist. sol. 186. Cook pla. sol. 4. 56. Cook 2 Inst. 45. 3 Inst. 136.

And set a Statute of latter date, 17 Car. 1. cap. 10. Entitled, An Act for
Regulating the Privy Council etc. which speaks in this wise; Be it likewise
declared and enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament, That neither
his Majesty, nor his Privy Council, have or ought to have any Jurisdiction,
Power or Authority by English Bill, Petition, Articles, Libel, or any other
Arbitrary way whatsoever, to examined or draw into question, determine or
dispose of the Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods or Chattels of any the
Subjects of this Kingdom; but that the same ought to be tried and determined in
the Courts of Justice, and by the ordinary course of Law.

Also Learned Cook in his 2 Inst. sol. 36. says, The Common Law (of which the
great Charter is Declaratory) has so admeasured the preragative of a King, as
he cannot take or prejudice the Inherirauce of any.

So that by the Law of the Land these pretended Offenders are still rightfully
possessed of their own Houses and Places of public Assemblies; and their
cruel Adversaries have no more Property, Right, Interest; or due Claim therein
or thereto, then a Pirate has to the peaceable Merchant-mans Ship, a Robber has
to the innocent Travelers Purse, or the Wolf to the Blood of the harmless
Lamb: And in case such Laws as these will not preserve that interest which
those people have to their Inheritances and Properties, we can none of us
expect to have our Rights or Liberties, Wives or Children, yea, or our lives
secured unto us longer then pleases or likes the Will and Pleasure of cruel
and ravenous Adversaries.

Its worthy taking notice of, that after the Jury had, on so slight ground,
brought in T. R. amongst others guilty in manner and form, how palpably the
Court manifested their envy and malice, in the Fines imposed upon him: And
though, as is declared by the Statut^ of 20 E. 3. cap. 1. That Justices shall
do even Right to all people, without showing favor more to one then to
another: According to that just Law, Lev. 19. 15. Ye shall do no
Unrighteousness in Judgment, thou shall not respect the person of the Poor, nor
honor the person of the Mighty, but in Righteousness shall thou judge thy
Neighbor. Yet for a piece of written Parchment, the value whereof was not 1 d.
a thing whereof a Court of Justice could not take recognizance, according to
the Just Laws of this Land, or damages in case it had been taken away, or
profit to any man, that could have it, not appearing to be any, neither indeed
could there be to any person living: No course of Law obstructed, admitting all
to be true of that Fact, which the Mayor gave in, or his Witnesses swore falsely
to the Jury; the cause of Justice against an Offender not a moment prevented;
these painted Sepulchers or partial Inquisitors finded, or censured him an
hundred pounds, although they had before convicted S. Allenbridge, and finded
him but five Mark for being principal, (yet too much for such an offense) and
T. Rudyard being as an accessory must be a hundred pounds, whether this be just
and equal let the World be judge; and to proceed from a person (I mean the
Recorder) who has had for many years the Reputation of honesty and justice,
which its feared he carried about with him, only as that aspiring Clergyman
did his Fishing Net, which he caused to be laid aside, so soon as he had
procured a Cardinals Cap, saying, The Fish is caught. And truly so may the City
of London say of its Recorder, who has not since he came to be Recorder,
manifest that candid and equal justice toward this City or Citizens in their
public concerns, as was expected, yea, little but what first passes the stamp
of our Sword Aldermen, and Classis of the City Lievtenancy; and since he by
experience has found, that sowing and dedicating his Law and Endeavors to
their Designs, is that which procures him the best, and most fruitful Harvest,
he ever has been sedulous to plead and studdy that causr; whose Actions may be
the more clearer manifested to this City and Nation, if weighed in the Balance
of Justice and Righ-teousness.

As Gods indignation rested on the Children of Israel till one Achans Thieft
was discovered and punished; so this City suffers sore Judgments till it has
puged it self of these many Achan's that lodge in her Bosom not only Robbing
her Inhabitans of Rights their Liberties, and Properties, but also her Chamber
of her Treasure, the poor Orphants Security.

Our Predecessors out of their prudence and care, that equal Justice and Right
should be done to all men, by a Statute in the 18 E. 3. 3. appoint Judges an
Oath, wherein is this Charge; And that you take not by your self, or any other
privily, nor apertly gift, nor reward of Gold, nor Silver, nor of any other
thing that may turn to your profit, unless it be Meat or Drink, and of small
value, of any man that shall have any Plea or Process hanging before you, as
long as the Process shall be so hanging, nor after the same Cause.

If the City Recorder has forgotten this Oath, his Crimes not the less in
breaking it, the Justice of it remains; and all persons in Judicature are to do
Justice to all, and sell or deny it none; and Bribery is such a Crime 29 c.
Magna Charta.
that its punishable where ever its found; and its hoped Justice may reach this
Recorder, if it appear that his Fingers have touched this forbidden Babulonish
Garment.

But in order to Discourse of this so foul a Crime, First, See the Mark which
such an Action leaves behind it, Fortescue cap. 51 Bribery (says he) is a
great Misprission, when any man in Judicial place takes any Fee, or Pension,
Role, or Livery, Gift, Reward, or Brocage of any Person, that has to do before
him, any way, for doing his Office, or by Color of his Office, but of the King
only, unless it be of Meat and Drink, and that of small value, upon diverse and
grievous Punishments.Says Cook, This Word 3 Inst. 145.
Bribery comes of the French word Briber, which signifies to Devour, or Eat
greedily, applied to the devouring of a Corrupt Judge, of whom the Psalmist,
speaking in the Person of God, says, Qui devorat plebem meam sicut escam
panis: Qui cognoscit faciem in judicia, Psalm 13. 4. Prove. 28. 21. Coo. 3.
Inst. 145.
non been facit, iste pro buecella panis deserit veritatem. In the 23th year of
E. 3. Sr. William Thorpe, chief Justice of the Kings Bench, for taking of four
Persons 50 l. against his Oath, was tried, and judged upon his acknowledging
the Fol. 147.
Fact, to be Hanged etc. Cook further sets forth, That this Offense of Bribery
may be committed by any that has any Juditial Place (or Ministerial Office)
either Ecclesiastical or Temporal. Non accipies personam nec munera (and the
reason is expressed by the holy Deu. 16. 19.
Ghost) quia munera excaecant occulos sapientium, et mutant verba justorum: If
Bribery has so great force, as to blind the Eyes of the wise Judge, and to
change the words of the Just: Beatus ille qui excuit manus suas ab omni nerae
Judex debet habere duos Sales; salem sapientiae, ne sit insipidus, et salem
conscientiae, ne sit diabolus.

Though the Bribe be small, yet the Fault is great; and this appears by a
Record in the reign of E. 3. Quia diversi justiciarij ad audiendum and
terminandum Pas. 17 E. 3. Coram Rege. Rot. 139. Esse. Jo. Bemers Case Rot. Pa.
7 R. 2. number. 12. 13.
assignat, ceperant de Johan is Berners, qui indictatus fuit, 4 l. pro favore
habendo die deliberationes suae, finem fecerant domino regi per IV. M. Marcas:
So as they paid for every pound a Thousand Marks See before Sr. Will. Thorps
Case, Rot. Par. 7. R. 2. The Chancellor was accused of a Bribe of ten Pounds,
and his man four Pounds, and certain Fish, which though the things are small,
yet it had been punished if it had been proved.

But now to the Fact of the City Recorder, it was observed, That when he gave
Judgment against the several Convicts before related, and assessed the several
Fines and Amercements upon the Convicts, and others, both for their Hats and
pretended Crimes for which they were Indicted, That John Smith, one of the
Sheriffs of London, being, as was supposed, over-joyed to hear of the Courts
Gratitude in rewarding his pains for making Proclamations in the Steets etc.
but being somewhat in doubt whether many of the Fines might not fall short or,
prove Bad Debts. hastily steps out of his Chair, and going to the Recorder
saying, BUT HOW SHALL WE COME BY THESE FINES? To which the Recorder answered,
GIVE ME ONE OF THEM, AND I WILL SECURE YOU ALL THE REST: At which answer, with
a seeming joy and alacrity, I. Smith returned to his Chair, and spoke to some
who were supposed his Friends, there present in Court, and audibly declared to
them, That the Recorder told him, That if we (meaning the Sheriffs) would give
him one of the Fines, he would secure us all the rest of them.

Surely this was two open and public a place to make such Bargains as these:
But what Wonder, when scarce any Passage or Action of theirs, that Sessions,
was in Law and Righteousness any more justifiable: What Ratification or
Confirmation of this piece of contracted Bribery has been since betwixt them in
their private Chambers we know not; but what is done and acted in public
Courts we may and can assert, and declare to the World.

Some may conjecture, That the Money which I. Howel the Recorder afterward
received, was upon the first proposed and offered Contract, made in open Court
with Jo. Smith the Sheriff.

Others may Imagine, That it was the Mayors Benevolence, for justifying his
Dirty and Filthy Actions and Prosecutions before the People at the Sessions.
But the case is this, That the Mayor, Sheriffs, Jo. Robinson etc. and other the
Justices for that Sessions, being met together at Guildhall in a Court of
Aldermen, proposed to pay the Recorder for his extrordinary pains, and reward
him for his execution of Justice, or sitting in Judgment at the Old Bailey upon
the Quakers: I. Robinson the chief of that Flock, and not the backwardest to
give what is not his own, told the Court, THAT THE RECORDER DESERVED AN HUNDRED
POUNDS FOR HIS SERVICE DONE AT THE OLD BAILY THE LAST SESSIONS. Whereupon the
Court consented to pay him for that service an Hundred Pounds, by the
Chamberlin of London: Who doubts of the truth hereof are desired to repair to
the Chamberlins-Office, and they may there find the Order, bearing date the 8th
of October, 1670. Besides other Orders for 200 l. more to him, within eight
Months last past. An excellent way to ease that Treasury of being
overburthened with Orphans Money, by which Sinister Ends and Cursed
Dispositions of its Cash, the Chamber is run so deeply in Debt that its almost
incredible; and here Modesty engages to conceal, being in hopes that ere long
some more saithful Stewards and Guardians may be appointed to have the Charge
and Wardship of it etc.

So that notwithstanding that large provision which Englands Laws have made for
the safety of its Inhabitants (as in chapter 29. of its Charter of Liberties
(Nulli vendimus etc. on which Cook observes, That all the Kings People,
Ecclesiastical and Temporal, Free or Bond, Old or Young, yea, although he be
Outlawed or Excommunicated, or any other without exception, is to have Justice
freely without sale and fully without denial) yet those Prisoners at the hand
of this Recorder and Bench, instead of having Justice freely, have been
apparently sold into the hands of their cruel Adversaries; and instead of
having it fully, they have been unjustly overruled by their Arbitrary and
Illegal Sentences and Censures against them.

Thus are we forced to cast the blame of the Prisoners Sufferings upon the
Authors thereof, which we must attribute either sprung from their falsness to
their trust, or their incapacity to execute that weight of Authority committed
to them: and surely this Nation throughout is made sensible of nothing more,
then the daily Breach of their Liberties, and of Violence to the Freedom of
their Persons and Estates, by such hosts humani generis, as these oppressed
Prisoners have had just occasion to complain of.

The Actions of that Sessions were a Riddle to the Englishman, beyond all that
this latter monstrous Age has brought forth; its needless to repeat how much
the public Liberty (in denying the commonalty that freedom of Jurors the Law
allows, fining and imprisoning Jurors for doing their duty, imposing Fines
arbitrarily without inquest upon the Freeborn men of England, denying to
produce that Law which is pretended to have been transgressed) is wounded, and
how much the Injuries are doubled and trebled upon their Fellow Members, and
the evil consequence thereof, which if drawn into president, who can count
himself free either in Person or Estate. The consequence of a wicked Sentence
(said Chancellor Bacon) was infinitely worse then a wicked Fact, as being held
a President and Pattern whereby oppression beginning upon one is extended as
warrantable upon all.

And this conclusion he draws out of this place of Scripture, Fons turbatus
and vena corrupta est justus cadens little impio: A just man falling into the
hands of the wicked, is like a Fountain troubled with the Foot, or the Urin
corrupted in the Body.

The honor of which arbitrary Sentences, Censures, and severe Judgments have
stricken the Commonalty with Amazement, that the Courts of Justice, ordained
for public preservation and safety, should be wrested to enslave, oppress,
ruin and destroy us: How much that Mayor and Recorder have usurped upon the
Rights and Liberties of these Prisoners is too apparent in their waving the
Rules of Law, and measuring out Justice by their fantastical Discretions and
Arbitrary Wills and Power, the consequence of which cannot but he inevitably
mischievious and inconvenient to both these that there were sensured, and
judged evil to the People of England hence was derived that excellent Maxim,
Melius sub iniquissima lege quam sub aquissimo arbitro vivere: That is, Its
better to live under a hard and hush known written Law, where every man may
read his duty, and know his Offense and Punishment, then under the mildest
Arbitrary Government, where the Subject is condemned (at the well of every
Bench of Justice before which he shall appear) without any certain or known
Rules and Measures for the Offense and Punishment: And how spetious soever the
pretense for these proceedings may be, we know that the pretense of necessity
(to act contrary to the known written Laws) in the Mayor, Recorder etc. or any
others, is but to Usher in Tyranny and Oppression.

There appears no other end that this Bench had in this tortious sort of
proceeding, then to fill their Sheriffs Pockets, with extorted gain, or
arbitrarily to punish a most innocent and peaceable people, to gratify their
Lusts and Malice.

And how many flourishing States have been ruined by the Avarices, Cruelty, and
Non-observance of the Laws, by the Governors and Magistrates were tedious to
insert; only take notice what Cook in his 2 Inst. 388. declares, That three
things overthrew the flourishing State of the Roman Empire: Latens odium
inve^ile consilium, et privatum lucrum: And observes there, That its the
greatest injustice, when the Innocent, under color of Justice, (whereby he
ought to be protected) is oppressed.

But good Government, consisting principally in the execution of their just and
known Laws procures Love from the Subject; its only their Love which supports a
State in adversity: ^^ our desire that such as Londons Mayor and Recorder etc.
may not by their actions sow a jelousie among the freeborn people of England,
that its the intent of our suproam Magistrates to hold up that common Maxim of
all oppressing States, That their Interest is to maintain the public wealthy,
and the particular Poor.

Therefore permit not these persons in their Courts to creat the presidents of
Oppression to enslave our Posterity in future times; to that end has this been
made public, that the supreme Magistrate and Legislators of this Nation, for
the dignity and honor of their Rule and Government, and for the safety of the
freeborn people of this Land, not only take care to purge the Benches of
Justice from that partiallity and corruption, which has usurped those places
of great trust, and punish the Offenders who have been guilty of such enormous
Crimes with condign Punishment answerable to their respective Offenses and
horrid Oppression, but also command the keeping, observing, and executing in
all their Courts the known, written, promulged, ancient, and fundamental Laws
of this Land; and that they may as they have often avowed, maintain the
Liberties of the freeborn people of England, in assuring to them that Salus
populi is supremalex. Can it be reasonably thought, that the impunity of these
that have been so faithless to their Oaths and Trusts reposed in them shall
ever be serviceable to this State or Magistrates under whom they act, no
they will rather take courage to betray them, when they find the first
oppertunity; therefore like our old Proverb, Though we love the Treason yet we
hate the Traitor: So it has been the prudence of the wisest and best governed
States, Never to pardon any man for a notorious Crime committed against the
Commonwealth, for any good service before done to it: To which Clement Edmonds
upon Caesar's Comentaries, well agrees, fol. 174. It more imports a
Commonwealth to punish an ill Member then to reward a good Act: So that State
or Commonwealth, that will keep it self in good order, and free from ruin,
must cherish Impeachments and Accusations of the people against those that
through ambition, avarice pride, cruelty, or oppression, seek to destroy the
liberty and property of the people, so shall they keep their State free from
Envy, and secure from supplantation; and the freeborn people of this Nation
being thus preserved and secured against Tyranny and Oppression, will never
seek after other Liberty, but rejoice under their own Governors: For as it
never turned to any States advantage to gain the peoples hatred, so its the
most stable lasting Government, under which the people rejoice and live
cheerfully, according to that Maxim of Camillus the Roman, Firmissimum
imperium quo obedientes gaudent.

An Appendix, by Way of DIALOGUE, in a Plain and Friendly Discourse between a
Student in the Laws and Liberties of England, and a true Citizen of London;
whereby is showed, That a Jury of twelve men are the only proper Judges of
their Neighbors Actions, and may by the stablished Laws of England give a
Verdict of such Facts, according to their Consciences, without incurring Fine
and Imprisonment, etc.
Stud. VVHither are you hasting out so fast this Morning my Friend?


Cit. Truly, about some earnest business, that will not admit of delay.


Stud. I know you to be a man of business; but in my apprehension you seem more
then usually in haste, now I am come to give you a visit.


Cit. I acknowledge your kindness; and since you are so opportunely come, I
would request your advice in what I am going about.


Stud. Yea, most freely: But what is the Case.


Cit. I am summoned to appear tomorrow, as a Jury-man, at the Old Bailey, but
would willingly get my self exeused, and was but now going out to one of the
Sheriffs, my old Acquaintance, to entreat his favor, to do me that kindness;
but its probable you know a nearer way to effect such a matter, and may direct
me.


Stud. Its very like, did it much concern you, I might get your discharge: But
why should not you rather serve your Country in these public concerns? If all
men were of your mind how should Right be done in Courts of Justice?


Cit. There Is many others that are better skilled in such Matters, who are more
fit to perform that Office; as for my part, I have ever so loved peace that I
have forborne going to Law, though it has been much to my loss.


Stud. That Is no Excuse; for the more peaceable man you have been, the more fit
you are for such services: The Office of a Jury-man is conscientiously to judge
his Neighbor, who needs no more Law then is easily learned to direct him
therein.


Cit. I should willingly appear, according to this Summon, but that the Mayor
and Recorders carriage to Juries was such the last Sessions, that I question
whether I could under-go so much Hardship, and not endanger my Life; so I find
that all my Neighbors, as well as I, are endeavoring to get themselves
excused.


Stud. Then its a restraint from your Trade that deters you?


Cit. No truly, that's not all; but to be kept without Meat and Drink two Days
and Nights together, and not to be allowed the privilege of Natures Easement;
and after all, to be cast into Newgate, is hard Service.


Stud. I must confess this was very hard, yet it should not deter you from
doing your duty: and if those Jurors suffered unjustly (which I Question not)
their Service was the easier to them.


Cit. I am of opinion they were unjustly dealt withal; many of them I know, who
had the repute of honesty, especially those four who yet lie in Durance; but I
may suffer by reason of my Ignorance of the Duty and Office of a Jury-man;
therefore on that account principally I desire to be excused my appearance,
which if I understood as well as many do, withal my heart I would do my
service.


Stud. Now you speak honestly like an Englishman, and in case that be all your
cause of scruple, it may soon be removed if you will take my Advice.


Cit. Yes with all my heart: Then pray let me have your Answer to some
Questions, which often of late I have had upon my thoughts to propound to you,
or some Practitioner of the Law, that would be plain with me.


Stud. Offer what you think meet, and I will endeavor to give you that
satisfaction you desire.


Cit. Since Jurors are thus of late Menaced, Threatened, Fined, and Imprisoned,
by our Recorder at the Old Bailey; pray wherein lies their Privilege or Safety?
What say the Fundamental Laws of England to such Practices?


Stud. The Jurors Privileges, and every English-mans by them, as they are very
Considerable, so the Laws have very well Guarded them against Usurpation, as I
shall show you.


Cit. But pray first let me know their Antiquity? I have heard it said, That
Trials by Juries have been of long standing in this Nation.


Stud. Their Antiquity no one knows, but all Authors agree that they have been
very ancient: Cook the Oracle of our English Laws, writes, That long before the
Conquest it was ordered, That in every Century there should Co. 1 Inst. 155.
be twelve good and honest men to judge etc. And Cambden in his Britania
corrects Pollidor Virgill, for saying William the Conqueror first brought in
this way of Trial, affirming that it was most certain and apparent by the Laws
of Etheldred, that such Trials were in use many years before: Which Horn in his
Mirror of Justice, written in the time of E. 1. does well confirm and assure us.


Cit. But what say the Law Books of later date, and our Predecessors in later
years about them.


Stud. When the great Charter of our English Liberties in the 9th year of H. 3.
was made, and put under the great Seal of England, then were these Trials by
Juries confirmed down to us, and therein it was stablished, That 9 H. 3. 14. 29.
no Amercments should be assessed upon any man but by the Oaths of good and
lawful men of the Vicinage: And also that no Freeman of England should be
imprisoned in his Person, or destroyed in his Estate and Liberties, without the
Lawful Judgment of his Equals, which Charter has been confimed by thirty two
Parliaments, and now stands firm to justify and maintain the freedom Co. 2
Inst. 41.
of this sort of Trials, which Cook calls the Subjects Birthright: And which I
must say is the only Preserver of our Lives, Freedom, and Property, as you may
read the Book of the Trial of W. P. and W. M. last Sessions.


Cit. I am very well Satisfied in this point; but pray, what says the Law
about menacing, threatening, fining and imprisoning of Jurors, as before I
mentioned to you?


Stud. As to the menacing and threatening language which that Bench gave the
Jurors, it only evidenced and manifested to the world their Envy and Malice
against the Prisoners, that the Jury had in charge, and so may be said also of
their fining and imprisoning of the Jury afterward.


Cit. Has a Court then no power by the Law to fine and imprison a Jury?


Sutd. We find in our Law Books, or Books of Cases, that Jurors have been fined
by a Court, for these following matters.

1. If a Jury man take money (from the party to be tried) before, or after he
be sworn. 39 Ass. 19. Fitz. Exam. 17. 14 H. 7. 30. 36 H. 6. 27 per Cur. C. B.
and B. R. 34 E. 3. Fitz. Office de Court 12. 40 Ass. pl. 10.


2. If they receive any Writings from the persons they have in trial.

3. If a Jury man appear, and then depart before he be sworn, is a contempt of
the Court.

4. If a Juror, after he shall be sworn, depart from his Fellows before they
deliver in their Verdict.

5. If Eleven Jurors shall give in their Verdict without, or against the
consent of the Twelfth.

6. If a Jury eat or drink after they are gone Dyer 37. b. 218. a. b. Old
Entries 251.
from the Bar, and before they bring in their Verdict (This I suppose is meant
where the Court will accept of the Verdict, when the Jurors tender it.) And for
such like Misdemenors as these they have been Fined and Imprisoned, but how
Warrantable, is a Query.


Cit. As for these Miscarriages you have instanced, it seems reasonable they
should be punished, which no honest man will be found guilty of; neither do I
fear to suffer for such like misdemeanors. But what say you to the fining a
Jury for giving in a Verdict according to their Consciences, yet pretended by
the Court to be contrary to Evidence.


Stud. To fine them at all is an abuse, though it has been long practiced; but
to fine them for giving their Verdict according to their Conscience, such
practices are very much against Law and Reason too: For a Jury of twelve men
are by the Laws the only proper Judges of matter in Co. 4. Inst. 84.
issue before them, as for instance.

1 That Evidence which is delivered to induce a Jury to believe or not to
believe the matter of Fact in issue; its called Evidence, because the Jury may
out of many matters of Fact (evidere veritatem) that is so clearly the truth,
of which they are proper Judges.

2d When any Matter is sworn, Deed read, or offered, whether it shall be
believed or not, or whether it be true or false in point of Fact, the Jurors
are the proper Judges.

3d Whether such men met together intentionally to do such an Act or not, the
Jurors are Judges; for the Court is not Judge of these matters, which are
Evidence, to prove or disprove the thing in issue.


Cit. What then is the Court to take con^sance of in the Trials of men's
Liberties and Properties.


Stud. The Court (as their duty is, are to do equal Justice and Right) so they)
in such Trials do direct, whether such matter shall be admitted to be given in
Evidence or not, such a Writing read or not or such a man to be admitted a
Witness or not; and this belongs to the Judgment of the Court, as they are upon
their Oaths to see Justice done twixt party and party: Therefore has the Common
Law ordained, That matters of Fact (which are drawn to an issue) shall be tried
by Jurors, and matters of Law (upon a Dem^rr^r and special Verdict etc.) by the
Justices, according to that Rule, or Maxim of 11 Co. 10. b. 4 Inst. 84. 4
Inst. 207.
Sr. Ewd. Cook, Ad Questionem facti non respondent Judices, it a ad questionem
leg is non respondent Juratores: The Justices meddle not with matter of Fact,
nor Jurors with matter of Law. So its the Jurors Office to find (veritatem
Facti) the truth of the Fact in issue, and the Court to give Judgment
accordingly: By which we may see the Wisdom of the Law, in referring things to
persons, in which they have conusance and are most expert, according to that
Maxim, Quod quisque norit, in hoc se exerceat. 9 Cook 13.



Cit. According to this Account you have given me of the Duty and Office, as
well of the Court, as the Jurors; the Law seems to have dealt justly and
equally betwixt them both: But one Question further, pray Whence is it that
Jurors are summoned of their Neighborhood, where the Fact is supposed to be
done or acted.


Stud. As the Common Law of this Land is nothing else then Common Right, pure
and tried reason, so it never fails to render a Reason of its own Actions; a
Jury is therefore summoned of the Vicinage, because its always presumed that
the Neighborhood are best acquained with the persons inhabiting, or the
Actions and Facts, done or acted within their own Limits and Jurisdiction: And
that they themselves may know something of the matter in controversy, being
(de Vicineto) of the Vicinage where such matter was in action. Therefore the
Jury must be returned, de vicineto, of the place where the Fact was done, and
of men (per quos rei veritas melius scire poterit) by whom the truth of the
matter may be better known; so the Jury having some self-knowledge of the
matters aforehand; besides, hearing the Evidence, may the better pronounce
(veritatis dictum) or a just Verdict of the Fact.


Cit. But Wherein do you conceive a Jury-man may have self-knowledge of matter
that may not as fully be evidenced by Witness?


Stud. Its probable, First, That they may know the Witness on the one side, or
the other, to be persons of no Credit; or,

Secondly, They may know the Party accused to be a man otherwise qualified or
principl'd, then to do such an act or thing, that is charged against him; as
for instance, They may know a man to be,

1. A Quiet Peaceable Quaker; therefore no Fighter or Rioter or Routous Person.

2. A Protestant of the Episcopal Church of England; therefore no
House-Preacher.

3. An honest sober man amongst his Neighbors; therefore probably no Thief or
Robber: And many other Instances might be offered to this purpose.


Cit. To fine a jury then for things, which probably they may know of their own
knowledge, to be true, or false, seems very hard; and surely our Jurors of
London have met with hard usage, to be fined and imprisoned for doing their
duty, in what the Laws of this Land have made them sole and proper Judges.


Stud. Their hard usage and severity to the Jurors is not so much as the
ill-consequence, that such practices will be to every Englishman, and their
Posterity, if not timely Remedied.


Cit. Truly the Citizens of London, in general, have much dreaded the late
procedure at the Old Bailey, and fear its a Forerunner of much Mischief, that
may be acted in the Country, who generally take London for a President in their
Courts of Justice: But pray what is your Thoughts about these things?


Stud. The consequence of such Practices, the Parliament have very well set
forth in Chief Justice Keeling's Case, 11 Dec. 1667. when they Voted, That
fining Juries were not only Innovations, in the Trials of men for their Lives
and Liberties, but that it was of Dangerous Consequence to the Lives and
Liberties of the People of England; and tended to the introducing of an
Arbitrary Government: And their reason was very good, for the King sits not in
Judgment upon his Subjects, but by his Justices in his Courts; and if the
Justices, who are commanded to be guided by the Law, shall contrary unto the
Law fine and imprison Iuries, for giving Verdicts in such matters which the
Laws allow and appoint them to be proper Judges of: Where then is the
Englishman tried by his Peers, and by the Law of the Land? To deny us this
free Trial, is to Rifle us of our Birthright, and most Arbitrarily and St. 3.
13 E. 3.
Tyrannically to deny us Equal, Law, Justice, and Right.


Cit. Surely when the Parliament meets again they will call these illegal
Proceedings of that Bench to Question before them, as well as they did Keeling
's?


Stud. It as much concerns them, in behalf of themselves and Posterity, as any
of us, to curb these subordinate Judges, who have broken both their Oaths and
the Law, to run into those Arbitrary and Illegal Practices, the consequence of
which, if suffered, in a short time will be, Sic volo, sic jubeo, stat pro
ratione voluntas: And it will necessarily follow, That,

1st Every Justice of Peace, Mayor, Bailiffs of Corporations, Stewards of Letts
etc. what ever matters are tried before them, shall have Verdicts to their
minds, or Fine and Imprison the Jurors till they have; so that such must be
either pleased, humored, or gratified, else no Justice or Right to be had
before them in their Courts.

2d A further ill-consequence will be, That although a person may challenge a
Iury-man, or Shereffs, if they be of Kin to this Adversary, yet he cannot
challenge a Justice, Mayor etc. who will have a Verdict for their Kinsman, or
Fine and Imprison them till they have; so that by this means our Lives,
Liberties, and Properties shall be solely tried, and wholly at the Will, and in
the power of every mercenary or corrupted Justice, Mayor, Recorder, Bailiff etc.


Cit. But has it been practicable in former times to fine and imprison Juries,
for finding contrary to Evidence, as the Recorder pretends our Jurors have
done?


Stud. No surely, we find not one President in all our Books, till Keeling's,
and he scaping that condign Punishment, which the Parliament promised him, your
Recorder and Mayor has trod his Steps. And pray see how such Judgments on
Jurors leave them remediless of relief, which is sufficient ground to conclude
such practices to be against the Law.

First, It can never be tried whether they found with or against their
Evidence, by reason no Writ of Error lies in the Case.

Secondly, They are in worse condition then the Criminals, that are tried by
them; for in all civil Actions, Informations, and Indictments, Appeals and
Writs of Error, do lie into superior Courts, to try their regular proceedings
of the Inferior; but here can be none.

Thirdly, In the way of an Attaint, the Truth or Falsehood of a Jurors: Verdict,
in matters of Fact, may be tried by another Jury; but in this case the Jurors
are concluded, by reason that whether they have found with or against, their
Evidence can never be tried. Litt. Sect. 108.

And further Reason (which is Law) tells us, That F. N. B. 21.
as the Kings Justices of the Law have given out, that they ought not to have
any Action brought against Par. Max. 62 Co. 2 Inst. 422.
them, if they shall in any thing err or mistake the Law: So much the more
twelve Jurors, who are Judges of all matters in issue before them, agreeing
together in one, ought not to be fined, where they find a Verdict according to
their Consciences, albeit, the Evidence may seem strong and clear to another
person, to the contrary of which the Jury have found: For they may (being (de
Vicineto) where the Fact was done) know something of their own knowledge of the
matter of Fact before them, which the Judge or Standers by, are probably
Strangers unto, and ignorant of it. Therefore the Knowledge of twelve men,
agreeing together, ought to be preferred before the single Apprehension of any
one Person whatsoever: All which does manifest, not only the Illegal and
Arbitrary Proceedings of your Mayor and Recorder, against those twelve men, but
the Ill and Dangerous Consequence of such Practices to all the People of
England.


Cit. But its pretended, That one of the Crimes charged upon the Jurors (by the
Recorder) was for finding their Verdict against Law. How can the Jury justify
such an Action? Sure they are not (as it is said) Judges of Law, but Fact.


Stud. Admitting they are so, which will not he granted yet, That a Jury can
find against Law, is to me a Paradox; for as we say, Where there is no Law,
there is no Transgression; so where there is no Transgression, there is no
place for Law, the Law being made for the Transgressor, And said Learned Cook
(Exfacto jus oritur) upon stating the Fact, or transgression, Law does arise;
yea, the Law does grow 4 C. 42. b. 53. b. 11 Coo. 10. b. in Pinddle and Nappers
Case.
out of the Root of the Fact: Therefore its one of their adjudged Cases, That
if a Jury find a matter of Fact, but conclude against the Law, the conclusion
is void, and the Court ought to give Judgment according to Law.

Now the Jury being the sole Judges of Fact, and matter in issue before them,
not finding the Fact on which the Law should arise, cannot be said to find
against the Law, which is no other then a superstructure of Fact; Then to say
they have found against the Law, when no fact is found, is most impossible.


Cit. You have given me very good satisfaction as to the unreasonableness and
illegallity of that Courts procedure; and since I see the Law has made so good
provision for our safety, I purpose to appear upon the Jury, according to my
Summons, but desire withal a little of your Direction about my Office of a
Jury-man?


Stud. I am very confident, that you would not willingly violate an Oath, which
you take, but that there are such, who as frequently break them, as take them,
is too too much apparent, through their careless custom on the one hand, or
slavish fear on the other, against which I would fully caution you, that you
may defend your self against those Enemies of your Countries Peace, and keep a
good Conscience toward God and man.

First, The Oath that's administered to you, at the Sessions, is, That you shall
well and truly try, and true deliverance make, between our Sovereign Lord the
King, and the Prisoners at the Bar, according to your Evidence. Then is the
Indictment read against the Prisoner, either for his Life or Liberties, which
probably takes up a large time in debate, and in examining Witnesses on both
sides, according as the Case may be. And when the Jurors are commanded to
withdraw, that they may consult of their Verdict; they soon forget that solemn
Oath they took, or that great charge of the Life and Liberty of men, whereof
they are made Judges; and without one serious thought, or consulted reason
offered, (pro or con) presently go to holding up of hands, or some other way,
voting whether to find for Prosecutor or Prisoner; so the Major votes of such
shall dispose of men's Lives, Liberties, and Properties, which the Law counts so
dear to every man: This practice is too customary among Jurors, as I Am credibly
informed, which occasions their dispatch of that business in a quarter of an
hour, which held the Court full six hours debate: witness that second Jury,
that were sworn on the Prisoners last Sessions, and tried T. R. F. M. etc.
Therefore have a care of such Fellow-Iurors.

Secondly, Such a slavish Fear attends many Jurors, that let the Court direct
to find Guilty, or not Guilty, accordingly they bring in their Verdict; and
therefore many of them never regard, what the Evidence was more or less to
prove the Indictment, but as the Court sums it up, they bring in; as if Jurors
were appointed for no other purpose, but to echo back to the Court (as one
observed) what the Bench would have most Illegally and Arbitrarily acted upon
such persons, against whom they themselves Prosecute and Inform: Now against
those Companions I caution you to beware of.


Cit. I am very well satisfied that these Practices are too frequent amongst
Jurors, of which I have been Witness: But pray what is the Reason that the
Mayor turns Informer, and forces his Officers and Servant to prosecute?


Stud. You Citizens should best know the reason of your Magistrates Actions:
But its most probable, that your Mayor turns Informer to get Money into the
Sheriffs Pockets, who have purchased all the fines from the King, which the
last Sessions amounted to no less then 500 l.


Cit. Its too apparent they are Confederated; I have heard a muttering, that
they together have licked their Fingers of 500 l. and more of Cripple-Gate
-Ward Money; I can give no certain account of the business; but the Hugh and
Cry is gone out, and its like in a little time the Malefactors may be
apprehonded: And since London was incorporated. I believe it never had such a
pack of Knights to govern is: But to our business, Let me have some further
direction?


Stud. My Advice to you is, That those things in issue, whereof you are proper
Judges, you still remember, as I instanced before, Ad questionem facti non
respondent Judices) If any injustice he done by the Court to a Prisoner, by
reason of their negligence or carelessness, that injustice will lie at your
door: Qui non malum prohibet cum potest facit: He that prevents not an Evil,
when it is in his power, does it. Therefore remember, as you of the Jury are
Judges of the matters of Fact in issue (that is) Whether a thing sworn is to be
believed, or not? Whether any thing offered be true, or false? Whether men met
together to do such an Act against the Law, or not; in Manner and Form as the
person is Indicted? You are conscientiously to (...) to. Therefore,

First, Observe well the Indictment that is read, and the several Parts
thereof, both as to the Matter, Manner, and Form.

Secondly, Take due notice and regard to the Evidence offered for Proof of the
Indictment, and each part of it; as well to manner and form as matter, which
endeavor to write down, or so much thereof as you are able, and weighing them
seriously together you may give a Verdict upon that joined issue, according to
truth, which is called by Cook (veritatis dictum) The Saying of Truth.

And observe, That as you are sworn to try and deliver according to Evidence;
so also you deliver in your Verdict, That the person, you have had in Trial, it
guilty in Manner and Form, as the party stands indicted, which thing you should
very well weigh; and though a person be proved to be guilty of some Fact or
Misdemeanour, yet, if it be not also proved to be done in such Manner and Form,
as the party stands indicted, he is not Guilty, and ought to be acquitted by
you.


Cit. But is not there both Law and Fact in an Indictment, as those against W.
P. and W. M. and the rest of the Quakers last Sessions? And how shall a Jury
deal in such Cases?


Stud. If matter of Law do, or shall arise, and mingle it self with the Fact,
the Jury are not compellable to find the Law, but only the Fact, if they will,
according to the Statute of Westminster. cap. 30. the second, which declares, That,
Justiciaril ad Assisas capiendas assignati non compellant Juratores dicere
precise si sit disseisimavel non etc. Justices of Assize shall not compel
Jurors to say precisely; that is, to determine a matin Law: And Cook commenting
upon this Statute Cook 2 Inst. 425.
puts a Question, whether in all Actions a Jury might give a special Verdict.
In the end (says he) it has been resolved, that in all Actions, real,
personal and mixed, and upon all Issues joined, general and special, the Jury
might find the special matter of Fact pertinent, and tending only to the Issue
joined, and thereupon pray the discretion of the Court for the Law: and this
the Jurors may do at the Common Law, not only in Cases between Party and Party;
but also in Pleas of the Crown at the Kings Suit. And if Jurors be not Judges
of Law, but Fact, as our Sophisters in Law would have it; then the Jury may
give in the matter of Fact, and leave the matters of Law to the Court: Which
special Verdict (Cook says) the Court cannot refuse, it being Cook 1 Inst. 92.
pertinent to the matter in Issue: So according to their distinction of Law and
Fact, the Jury is not bound to give in upon their Oaths, that men did meet Pla.
Cau. 92. Lib. 9. 12. Lib. 9. 69.
or assemble themselves together unlawfully, but only to find that they did
meet and assemble themselves together, and let the Court judge of the
Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of it; for Exfacto (says Cook) jus oritur. Therefore
upon an Indictment for Murder (Quod felonice percussit) That he felloniously
struck him, the Jury finding (percussit tantum) Only that he struct him, the
Verdict was adjudged good etc.


Cit. What Is the Reason then, that the Court will not accept of such special
Verdicts, but frequently turn the Jury back, till they bring in general?


Stud. Because then they have your Oaths as well for Law as Fact, and if the
Judgments be severe, it shall lie at your door.


Cit. But we are not Judges of Law, as they say; Wherefore then should they
have our Oaths for the Law?


Stud. This is an Artifice, whereby they cheat the Jury into frequent Perjury,
as I shall at large plainly show you. As,

1st Observe the Form wherein they draw up their Indictments; that is subtle to
place a small matter of Fact, as they call it, in the midst of a whole Sea of
their Decriminating and Obnoxious Terms, which they call Law, that deserve
severe Punishments where ever they are found, viz. To do an Act with Force and
Arms, Riotously, Routously, Tumultuously, Seditiously, Illegally, Deceitfully,,
Subtly, Falatiously, in contempt of the King, and his Laws, to the
Disturbance and Affrighting the Kings Liege People, to the evil Example of
others; against the Kings Peace, his Crown, and Dignity, and such like.

2d The Fact in issue, pretendeded to be committed, although it be never so
Innocent or Lawful, (as standing in the Street, or Highway, in peaceable
Manner, or Assembling in their own House, there persuading the people to turn
from the evil of their ways, as Drunkenness, Whoredom, Swearing etc.) they
environ with many of those foul Criminations, thereby to misrepresent the Fact,
or Matter in issue, to the Jury; like as the Inquisitors in Spain (so much
applauded Garments on which are painted the shaps of Devils, and infernal
Spirits etc.
by I. H. your Recorder) do cloth those Innocent Christian Protestants (whom
they have Censured to the Faggot) with their Sambenitoes, that the people
beholding them in so Dismal and Hellish a Dress, may be so far from pitying
them, that they may rather condemn them in their very Thoughts as Miscreants,
not worthy to live.

Against any of which Criminal Terms, if the Jurors object, by reason the
Evidence did not reach them; the Court presently stops their Mouths with
saying, You have nothing to do with that, its only matter of Form, or matter of
Law, you are only to examine the Fact: Which the ignorant Jurors taking for
Answer, bring in the Prisoners Guilty (as they suppose) of the Fact or Trespass
only; but the Clark of the Peace recording it, demands a further confirmation
(saying thus) Well then you say A. B. is guilty of the Fact or Trespass, in
Manner and Form as he stands Indicted, and so you say all? To which the
Foreman answers for himself and Fellows, Yes.

Whereupon the Verdict is drawn up (Juratores super sacramentum suum dicunt)
That the Jurors do say upon their Oaths, That A. B. did, or committed such a
Fact, with Force and Arms -- did such a Seditious Action -- did meet such
persons in a Riotous, Routous manner -- did such an Act Deceitfully, Subtly,
Illegally, Fallatiously, in Contempt of the King and his Laws, to disturb or
affright the Kings Liege People, against the Kings Peace, his Crown, and
Dignity: So the Jurors are ignorantly and fallatiously perjured upon Record,
and Oppression thereby is Acted upon the Innocent; so by reason of the Courts
subtilty on the one hand, and the Juries ignorance on the other; they upon
their Oaths having clothed the Innocent Matter or Fact in issue with the
Sambenitish Garment, the Court with safety passes most severe Judgments and
Censures upon such Prisoners; and all because the Jury have upon their Oaths
(as was said before) made that ^nnocent Action, or pretended Fact, Criminal,
which the Law or Court never could have done, had not they in such manner given
a Verdict, so many degrees worse then the Fact in isssue, was evidenced unto
them.


Cit. Then I perceive those subtle Fellows make use of our Oaths, (as its
fabled of the M^nkey, Did by the Cats Foot to claw the Chessnuts out of the
Fire) and so thereby cover their cursed Ends and Designs upon the Innocent,
whom they daily Prosecute; as for my part, I never heard of so much of their
Knavery before, neither did I think that it was possible that so much Villainy
should have been Acted under color of Justice.


Stud. Sr. John Howel your Recorder, and your City Magistrates, have a further
artifice, that is, To indict all men by the Common Law, and wave intermeddling
with any of the Statutes in force against such misdemeanors, as they pretend
the persons indicted are guilty of.


Cit. Pray what do you suppose their drift is in that?


Stud. No other then that they may as well make the Law, as Proportion the
Punishment; for when an Indictment is grounded on the Common Law, and the
Prisoner desires to have the Law read to the Jury (who are his Judges, whether
he be guilty, or not guilty (Modo and Forma) of the matter in issue) on which
such Indictment is grounded; the Court answers, Its (Lex non scripta) a Law not
written, therefore not to be produced: By this means the Prisoner is
incapacitated to make his defense, and the Jury kept ^gnorant, whether the
Offense charged to be done by the Prisoner, be Innocence or Guilt: And so the
Bench at the Old Bailey acted last Sessions, in the Case of Riots, Routs, and
unlawful Assemblies; and although there be several Statutes in force, which
point out the persons that ought to be apprehended and punished, as Rioters and
Routers, as the Statute of 17 R. 2. 8. 13 H. 4. 7. 2 H. 5. 8. with others, yet
your Recorder and Magistrates pretending to proceed by the Common Law (non
scripta) apprehended quiet and peaceable Religious Assemblies, as Riots and
Routs, and punished them as such, the greatest abuse to the Common Law, as has
been done in any age, by such who pretend to sit upon a Bench of Justice.

And after the rate of their Proceedings, by their abuse of the Law, they might
have framed an Indictment against a man, for (vi and armis) eating Meat at his
own Table with his Wife and Children, and at last ushering in the Fact
committed, with these obnoxlous Terms, as, Against the King and his Laws;
Illogally; and in contempt of his Crown and Dignity etc. And a Jury of their
packing would have found them guilty (Modo and Forma.) Therefore it concerns
you to have great care and regard to the Charge you undertake, which is, Well
and truly to try, and true deliverance make, according to what is evidenced to
your Conscience.


Cit. But what is the Reason that Indictments, and all the Proceedings of the
Sessions, be drawn and entered in Latin, a Language which few, either Jurors or
Prisoners understand.


Stud. Its such a Practice, that no Reason can be given for it, except to keep
the People ignorant, especially the Grand Inquests who first pass the Bills of
Indictment; who being generally unknowing in such Language, may perjure
themselves blindfold, being only informed or made to understand (so much of
what they swear to) as a mercenary Clark will read to them, or let them know,
which besure shall be no more then what is for the interest of the Prosecutors,
and the Prisoners disadvantage. And if these twelve men (who by the Law are
uncontrollable Judges) shall not bring in, or return, Billavera, to such
Indictments as the Bench shall favor, your Mayor and Recorder, after Justice
Keeling's Example, do frequently command them back, till they find those Bills
according to their direction, which great abuse of the Law, as Horn calls it,
is not Mor. Justice cap. 5. Sect. 1. 134.
only one of the greatest Violences that is offered to our Lives and Liberties,
but also expressly against the very Oath that those Justices take for the
execution of that place of Trust (which says) 18 Edw. 3. 3.
Ye shall do even Law and Execution of Right to all, Rich and Poor, without
having regard to any person; and that ye give none Advice, nor Counsel to no
man, great nor small, in no Case, where the King is party.


Cit. How comes it to pass, that these Judges (who so violate their Oaths,
oppress the People, so illegally censure the Innocent, and condemn the Just)
escape condign punishment (in all Ages) which is a due reward for their
Oppression and Injustice.


Stud. To call them Judges is a Title beyond their Place or Commission, They
are styled Justices, according Cook 2 Inst. 26.
to their Office, which is to see Justice done betwixt party and party, not to
fine and imprison persons at their will and pleasure without a Jury; 5 chap, 1.
Sect. numb. 32 and 33.
which practice of theirs is no more legal then evil Custom can make it, which
practice A. Horn in his Mirror of Justice, reckons amongst the Abuses of the
Law, they having no other Law, Ground, or Authority for it, then some former
Uses or rather Abuses acted by their Predecessors; and by the same rule, in
case the Jurors bring their habeas Corpus for relief, the Recorder or his
Council may offer Keelings sining of the Jury, although condemned in
Parliament, to justify this latter piece of Injustice: After which rate a
Thief or a Robber may legally justify his Actions, because of his long Use,
Custom, and frequent Practice; which abuses the Justices at Westminster, rarely
dare or will punish, by reason (such crimes advancing prerogative) it may
occasion a Frown or Rebuke from one or other Superior, forgetting, or else
neglecting that obligation that lies upon them, To deny Stat. 18 E. 3. 3. 9 H.
3. 29.
no man Common Right by the Kings Letters, nor none other man's, nor for none
other cause. Nor delay Justice or Right to any man, according to the Charter of
Liberties. And although many corrupt and faithless Executioners of Justice have
escaped their due Reward in all Ages, yet there are some, who have received
their Portion; as Lambert in the Translation of his Saxon Laws, reports, That
King Alfred, the famous Compiler of our English Laws, executed many such: Of
which Andrew Horn, a worthy Author (in his Mirror of Justice, written in the
time of Edw. 1. cap. 5. sect. 1. among the many Violences and Abuses offered,
to the Common Law (i. e. The Common Right of the People) of England) gives a
punctual account, saying, It was an abuse of Justices and their Officers (who
kill people by false Judgment) were not destroyed as other Murderers, which
King ALFRED caused to be done, who caused Forty Four Justices, in one year, to
be HANGED as Murderers, for their false Judgments. Amongst which says the
Author.

He Hanged Cadwine, because that he judged Hackwy to death without the consent
of all the Jurors: And whereas be stood upon his Jury of twelve men, because
part of them would have saved him; Cadwine, (like your Recorder) removed those,
and put others on the Jury, against Hackwy's consent.

So observe, Its said without the consent of his Jurors, though twelve men had
given a Verdict against him; for those who were put upon him against his
consent, were not his Jurors, by reason all or any of those, who were first
sworn to try him, could not (by the Law) be removed, and others put in their
rooms. This is a Case (save only in the punishment of the Justices) parralel to
that of your Mayor and Recorder at the Old Bailey London, 5 Sept. 1670. who when
one Jury of twelve men were sworn to try several persons called Quakers, and
the Prisoners had accepted of them; they (Cadwine like) removed the first Jury,
and forced other Jurors upon them, against their consent, and by that means
condemned them (like Hackwy) without the consent of their Jurors.

He Hanged Seafoul, because he judged Ording to Death for not Answering.

So it was Murder in a Justice to condemn a Person, before a Jury had tried the
Fact, which in this case they could not do, the Prisoner not pleading to the
Indictment.

He Hanged Freburn because he judged Harpyn to dye, when as the Jury were in
doubt of their Verdict, (and the reason is given) because in doubtful Cases one
ought rather to Save then Condemn.

Here Is not only a Maxim (for Jurors and Justices) Rather (in doubtful Cases)
to Save then Condemn, but a seasonable Caution to Justices of Assize and
Sessions, who not only when a Jury are doubtful, but when they are agreed to
acquit, will menace and threaten them with Fines and Imprisonment, until they
bring in a Verdict against a Prisoner, upon whom they purpose to pass a
Freburn's Judgment.

He Hanged Hale because he saved Tristram the Sheriff from death, who took to
the Kings use from another, Goods against his will, for as much as any such,
Taking or Robbery, has no difference.

He Hanged Arnold because he saved Boyliffe, who robbed the people by colo^r of
Distresses, whereof some were by selling Distresses, and some by extortion of
Fines; as if by extortion of Fines, releasing of tortious Distresses (...) such
Distresses) and Robery there were difference.

How many Burglaries, Theses, and Roberies, are daily committed by the
Miscreants of our Age, under the names of Informers, and other the Kings
Officers (like Tristram the Sheriff) by taking away Goods, against the will of
the Owner, to the Kings use (as they pretended) and by color of Distresses,
and selling and releasing Distresses, and extortion of illegal imposed Fines,
against the Fundamental Laws, upon Englands Quiet, Peaceable, and Religious,
yet Oppressed and Abused Inhabitants; and the Justices of the Peace, not only
like Hale and Arnold, save and secure them from condign punishment, but abet
and encourage them to such sore and grievous Oppressions, yet no relief upon
the Oppressors complaint, nor redress, for these public Grievances.

He Hanged Oskitell because he judged Cathing to death by record of a Coroner,
without trial of the Truth of the Fact by the Jury: So zealous was this King
for the execution of Justice, and tender of the Lives of his Subjects, That (as
says the same Author) he hanged all the Judges, who had falsely Saved a man
Guilty of Death, or had falsely Hanged any man against Law, or any reasonable
Exception.

And in lesser Offenses, where they wrongfully grieved any man, or passed the
bounds of their Commission, or the Law, he disinhorited and removed them, to
the satisfaction of the people, stablishing of sure upright Laws, maintenance
of the honor of his Courts of Justice, and his perpetual Renown and Fame to
future Ages and Generations.

Besides, Hubert de Burgo in the 17 year of E. 3. -- Spencers,
Father and Son: Trisilian and Belknap: Sr. William Thorpe in 23 E. 3. Empson
and Dudley, persons most Co. 3 Inst. 145.
famous for Tyranny and Oppression, left upon record, that our Justices of
later date, beholding their ends, should avoid their Footsteps, So although
some of your Fellow Citizens, by reason of this Injustice and Oppression, of
your City Recorder, Mayor etc. have undergone the hardship of Imprisonment
(yet they standing in the gap against the introducing of an Arbitrary
Government) Votes Parl. 11. December. 1667.
they may live to see a due reward render to their Oppressions, and enjoy the
fruit of theird faithfulness to the trust reposed in them, that is, Liberty and
Freedom from Tyranny and Oppression, then, as says the Wiseman, Prove. 21. 18.
The Wickod shall be a ransom for the Righteous, and the Transgressor for the
Upright.


Cit. Well, I acknowledge you have given me ample Satisfaction as to what is
the Jurors Duty, and since I see, That the English -man's Life, Freedom, and
Property, principally depends on the faithfulness and honesty of his Jurors; I
shall endeavor to perform my Duty in that Office; and what my Assistance may
avail to defend us against that Torrent of Violence, Usurpation, and Oppression
(which is overflowing all our Liberties) shall be freely tendered and given up
for the good of this City and my Native Country.


Stud. Now (my Friend) you speak like an Enlish-man, and as one that would
faithfully serve your Country; and if you will take my advise, at leisure hours
read your Charter of Liberties, and the Fundamental Laws (By which (as Cook
says) you have a better Inheritance then by your natural Parents) some of the
most impartial Writers have been the said Sr. Ed. Cook in his 2d, 3d, and 4th
Institutes; Horn's Mirror of Justice; Lambert's Translation of the Saxon Laws;
as also, The Trial of W. P. and W. M. lately printed; they are Books without
difficulty to be had, and very worthy your perusual; wherein you may not only
see the English-mans Rights and Liberties asserted, but Tyranny and Oppression
in all Ages (endeavoring to exterpate and violate our Laws, the equal
Distributer of every man's Property) detected and laid open. These I would not
have one true Englishman want in his House, the consulting with which at
vacant hours, will so accommodate and furnish him with the knowledge and
understanding of his own inherent Rights and Liberties, that he may be able to
defend (not only himself) from Violence and Oppression, but also his Neighbors
from Tort and Wrong.


Pro. 29. 7. Cognoscit justus causam tenuium, improbus non animadvertit ut
cognoscat. A Postscript.
THIS impartial Account of these persons Trials, with the Appendix of the
Jury-mans Duty and Rights, had been earlier presented to thy view, but that the
difficulty of a Printing-Press is such (by reason of their frequent Searching
and Examination) that its no easy matter to bring forth Truth to Light without
Hazard: As the Author has on the one hand, avoided the Censure of a flattering
Hypocrite (that with his Mouth destroys his Neighbor) so on the other hand,
the Lash of the Wise Man, Pro. 24. 24. He that says unto the Wicked, Thou art
Righteous, him shall the People Curse, Nations shall Abhor him.

What Violences and Oppressions may at the rate of that Courts proceedings
(against these Prisoners) be committed not only upon the Citizens of London,
but upon every Freeman of England, are apparent to the Judicious.

Have not such Arbitrary and Illegal Proceedings upon Jurors (the Staff of the
English-man's Liberty) been condemned by the Commons of England, in Parliament,
and declared, That they were of evil Consequence to the Lives and Liberties of
the People, (which thing these Prisoners have sadly experienced) and that they
tended to the Introducing of an Arbitrary Government. Which no Sober Man
questions, yet no sufficient caution to that Court.

O Wicked Times! O Miserable Age! What, Injustice avowed, Oppression become
familiar, yea Legal; Oaths of Jurors in public Courts, solemnly made and taken
in the Presence of God and man, by a Bench of Justice absolved, or denying them
to perform what they had enforced them to Swear? Must we by our Laws, under
grievous Penalties, abjure the Sea of ROME? And our Magistrates tread its steps
in assuming the like prerogative? And not only so, but commending their
Idolatrous, Cruel, Tyrannical, and Inquisitory Practices, upon sober and
religious People? As John Howel the Recorder, frequently did that Sessions.

What Is the end these persons aim at, in their Judicature? Its too apparent,
Not (Salus Populi) the Commonalties Good: What Religious Persuasion do they
defend or stand for? In punishing Dissenters from the national Church: We know
they commend the Papists, and spare the Atheists. Never was there any so wicked
or cursed Betrayers of Right, Liberty, Justice, or Religion in any Age, but
they would pretend to be Patronisers of them: Yea, Its Recorded, That the
Thieves and Vagabond Jews getting power into their hands (a Presage and
Forerunner of the sore and lamentable Calamnes that befell that people) chose
themselves, a High Priest, and usurped power in Jerusalem, to give Laws and
Oppress at pleasure, of whom Josephus thus writes, page 637. D. But they used
the Temple as a Castle, and defense for themselves, against the people, and
made the Sanctuary a place for them to exercise Tyranny in.

Consider well, and weigh the Actions of S. Starling, Londons Mayor; John
Edwards, and John Smith, its Sheriffs, the head and Chieftains of the peoples
Oppressors, in enforcing their Officers, Sargeants, and Servants, to be
Informers and Prosecutors against the Innocent, by their Proclamations making
peaceable people Riotees, and thereby not only to forfeit their Rights and
Liberties; but these their Adversaries assuming Authority to demand what part
of their Estate they shall think meet: And judge if these practices run not
parallel to those of Albinus President of Judea, which Josephus thus impartially
relates, Who was over all as a Tyrant, and a Prince of Thieves; and he used the
help of his Guard to Robb the meaner sort -- Nay, he was not ashamed to
proclaim it throughout the whole Country, Lawfully for any one that would, to
Robb and Steal, so that they would bring him a part of their Booty. Fol. 623.
E. and F.

And although he had (like these late Oppressors) power for his Law, and
authority to enforce what he willed upon the people, yet the Divine Historian
terms Albinus but a Tyrant, and his Actions Thieft and Robbery.

Thus are poor Englands quiet,, peaceable, and religious Inhabitants torn in
pieces by those Sons of Beliel, their Lives, Liberties, and Estates made preys,
to gratify their Lusts, Avarice had Wills and Pleasures: And where do these
Violences and Oppressions arise, but from the undervaluing and villifying of
our Good, Ancient, Wholesome and Votes Parl. 11 Decom. 1667.
Fundamental Laws, our great Charter of Liberties, the Preserver of our Lives,
Freedom and Property.

However, too many of the minds and spirits of our Countrymen are besotted,
through that deluge of Vice and Debauchery, that has overspread and covered
the face of our Land; sure we are, that the right Noble and Virtuous will ever
have a high esteem of those Laws, that were not only dear to our Ancestors, but
famous throughout the World, for an equal Balance of Justice, whereby every
man's Right and Liberty might be Weighed.

Its observable what that Roman Senator, C. S. Saturninus (a Lover of Virtue,
Liberty, and Wholesome Laws) declaim in the Senate, (says he) For to them that
know what Virtue is, it is no small Felicity, to live one Hour in Freedom of
Mind, and in a free Country, Governed by such Laws, which in times past, have
made our Commonwealth to flourish -- For in regard of the present time, there
is not any thing that we ought most carnestly to effect, then to live
Virtuously; For only Virtue is the thing that confirms men in their Liberty
-- I know how great Mischiefs Tyranny do ordinarily breed in a public State;
for they utterly extinguish all Virtue, and deprive Freemen of that perfect
Magnanimity that may be in them, and teach both to flatter and to Fear; for
that the Common Wealth is abandoned, not to the Wisdom of the Laws, but to the
fury of the intemperate Governors.

And Complaining of Julius Caesar's Violation of that course of Law whereby the
State was polliced, (says he) In Subverting the Laws to his good liking, and
himself to his particular desires; there is not any kind of misery and Mischief
that has not overthrown our City.

Whence we may observe and conclude that all these horrid Oppressions and
Violences, that have been in Ages past, inflicted upon, and offered to any
People, State, or Commonwealth, they have naturally flown from the want of
Virtue, or from the debauched Practice of the Magistrates, governing and
judging the people by Will and Power, and not by stablished Laws, which is the
Case of these Prisoners, who yet lie in Durance at the Will of their cruel
Adversaries, because, as one says,

Sepultum est jus in Regno, prava Voluntas,
Vis and Volentia magis regnat quam Juditium.
FINIS.

