Animadversions Upon a BOOK Entitled Inquisition for the Blood of our late
SOVEREIGN, etc.

AND Upon the offense taken at it.

Wherein, in order to Peace, The Ground, Reason and End of our Wars are
discovered: The Old Cause stated and determined: The late Insurrection
Animadverted: And a way of Peace propounded.

By William Sedgwicke.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold in St. Paul's Churchyard,
Fleetstreet, and Westminster Hall, 1661.

AN EPISTLE, To them that are offended at the Inquisition; and to all that now
suffer for their opposing the present Government.
YOur offense and anger, begot this Treatise: And therefore it is yours;
intended for you: Not only to remove the offense, but to instruct you, into a
way of peace and love: Your anger was the Father of it; but love conceived it,
and is its Mother: It being begotten of anger and love, you may well expect
both natures in it: And must receive them both together, for they cannot be
separated. Severity and kindness, are one in their Original and End: They meet,
in the present Providence of God upon you: They are bound up together in this
little volume: If your minds be as large as it, or in any measure, suitable to
your present condition, you will easily comprehend and digest both: If you
cannot agree with some sharpness; you will neither agree with your selves, nor
with God: For you have been, and are so, to others; and God is now so to you.

I write both against and for all: Against and for my self: Against and for
you: And against and for your adversaries: Because there is some good, and evil
in all: My quarrel is only at malice, which makes all the quarrels in the
earth: And at that, because it destroys: If I meet with any, in that way of
enmity and destruction, I do not forbear them: You will, I hope, find in the
reading of it, that the root and spring of it is love; the design of it, in all
the parts of it, is to unite divided Parties; and the conclusion is peace.

I would gladly that you should have the honor, of being the first movers in,
and seekers of peace: Your Profession of the Gospel and Kingdom of peace,
should incline you to it: You have proved war, and it at last fails you: Your
present sufferings press you, to meekness and patience: It is to me evident,
and in this Book, I think demonstrated; that those good things you expected by
war, you can obtain and inherit, only by love and peace, and in the good spirit
of Jesus: And therefore I have endeavored to search the roots of your state
and standing in enmity, as deeply as I can: that they being slain, you may be
free, to go forth from your present captivity, into largeness: and so into
peace and deliverance.

There are two things which I suspect may deny you the benefit of what I have
written.

First, I doubt the things here written, may not, at least not in all parts, be
fully and clearly understood: Because my mind having long traveled, in the
pursuit of the reason and principles of things, lies at some distance, from
men's ordinary apprehensions of things; and therefore may not be so readily
conceived: I am sensible also, that by reason of my long retirement, there is a
cloud upon my spirit, that I cannot yet come forth, with that evidence, that I
would, and I believe shall: I know likewise, that men's understandings, live
much abroad, in outward things, and are little conversant with the inward
reason and spirit of things: And that at this time, your minds are like
troubled waters, disturbed and not clear.

To remedy these defects, both in your selves and me, let me prevail with you,
to read this small Treatise, with a little more then ordinary diligence and
consideration.

I am sensible of the obscurity of the former Book, which made it so liable to
mistakes: And have endeavored all plainness here, even to coursness, and have
taken liberty, rather to write the same things again, then to be too short: Yet
I doubt some parts of it may be veiled to thee: If thou meet with any places
that are so; Possibly the greatest treasure of truth may lie hid there: True
wisdom yet lies deep, and is hardly found, hardly expressed, and hardly
understood: If thou will dig for her, by a little study, she will reward thy
pains: If therefore there be a curtain drawn, before any part, do but rouse up
thy reason, and press in upon it, you may have admittance, by a little
consideration and labor.

My second doubt is, lest you meeting with something, that may cross your
opinion of your selves and way; you should turn away from the justice and truth
of reproof: But consider, if you will hear nothing against you, you can never
come to know your faults: If you will receive nothing, but what agrees with
your present apprehensions, you must resolve never to be wiser: If thou meetest
with a strange, different, or opposite notion to thine own, consider; it is
either true, or false: If it be true, then it is a dangerous thing for thy
soul, to refuse a truth, and embrace a lie: For no man can be happy but in
truth: If it be false, do but thoroughly examine it, and thou will find the
falsehood of it; and then it will be a great confirmation and enlargement to
truth in thy mind^: Therefore turn not from it, nor reject it; but rather
search it and subdue it: For no lie can long stand out, against a true mind: If
an error have gotten some show of reason, or truth, to cover it; if it be, by
a just mind searched and tried; that reason and truth, will come over, to that
just mind, and leave the lie naked and destitute; such conquests are very much
to the advantage of truth: The experience I have of this thing, makes me love
the exercise of opposition; and to delight to read, above all things, those
that are contrary to my judgment: For I constantly find, that things said and
done against the truth, do as our Lord promised his Disciples: It shall turn
unto you for a testimony.

I know and feel that sore travel is upon you; pangs have taken hold of you: It
is, that you may be born again, into a new state and life, more holy, large,
merciful, and heavenly, then that wherein you have lived and acted: It is that,
I labor with you for, in this Treatise: If you could once come to understand
this design of God, in his present afflicting of you: That it is not to
upbraid, much less to destroy, the Party or your persons, for your or others
personal sins; no, he pitties and forgives: But it is that carnal and corrupt
state, of war, enmity, and destroying, that is accursed of God: If you could
but discern this; and turn* away from that fleshly, corrupted, and now perished
state; you would quickly find ease, rest and safety for your souls; and escape
much of the guilt and curse that yet sorely afflicts you: It is the intent of
this Treatise, to bring you off from that; and to show you a more excellent
way. Your former ministry is finished, that state is perished; you must have a
new one: Read diligently, and you will find, here is an entrance into that,
which will not fail.

I know the prejudices you have against me; I know that there is weakness in
what I write; both may disadvantage my work: I leave it to the Lord of all
hearts and spirits: The things I have written, are I think just; and it is just
I should publish them* The Law of love and truth, in my mind, led me to it, and
upheld me in it; and therefore I am satisfied in my self: And in the
righteousness truth, and faithfulness of God, in whom I live and rest,

Yours W. S.

The Contents.
SECT. I. Shows the nature of the offenses taken at the Inquisition, and the
Authors sense of them. SECT. II. Shows the justice due to them: and the
friendly way of dealing with them. SECT. III. Censures the Book: and first for
its unseasonableness; with the cause of it: and the Authors suffering for it.
SECT. IV. Censures the multiplicity of things in the Inquisition: and the
sharpness of its reproofs: Of several kinds of reproof. SECT. V. Opens the
Allegories in the Inquisition: and shows the thing intended in it: A trial of
principles in order to peace. SECT. VI. Prosecutes the same thing of peace, and
shows the necessity and possibility of it: And examines the ground upon which
the opposition stands. SECT. VII. Compares the Old Cause, 1. With the
deliverance of the Israelites out of Egypt. 2. Out of Babylon. 3. With the
ministry of Christ and the Apostles. SECT. VIII. Measures the same cause, by
the Prophetical Scriptures, and compares it with Zion her self. SECT. IX.
Further examines the ground of the enmity, and advances a standard of love.
SECT. X. The original cause of the war it ceased. SECT. XI. Hatred blinds the
eyes, else we may see that there is good in enemies, with which we may agree:
There is good and evil in both Parties. SECT. XII. Shows the root of enmity is
the Devil. How opposite it is to the Kingdom of Christ. SECT. XIII. War and
enmity are not for, but against holiness. SECT. XIV. Common liberty, not to be
in, nor to be attained by war and opposition. SECT. XV. Liberty of Conscience
animadverted: Not to be obtained, but by agreement with the Magistrate. SECT.
XVI. Animadverts the late sufferings, and shows the nature and kind of them.
SECT. XVII. Considers the late Insurrection, with respect to what has been
written, and the use of it to both sides. SECT. XVIII. Shows a rational and
easy way, for all opposite Parties, to obtain a Treaty, and by it, an
Agreement with his Majesty: both for his security and their safety.
ANIMADVERSIONS Upon a Book entitled Inquisition for the Blood of our late
Sovereign, etc. AND Upon the offense taken at it.
Sect. I.
THat I did deny my name, to go forth with that Book, when it was first
published, was I think, a foolish or weak niceness? Possibly the want of that
courage and confidence, that was due, both to my self and it, may expose both
to the greater contempt: But I did resolve in my mind, and promise, that if
ever it came to be questioned, I would own it; and either correct and amend it,
if it needed; or else justify and defend it, if it deserved it. What I
promise, is ordinarily required of me; and if it be, I am bound to perform it:
There is a justice due to things, as well as to persons: If to any thing, then
certainly to a man's own works, which are his children, and therefore he ought
to Father them; and either to call them home, or maintain them abroad.

A man's Spirit, Religion and Name, are all tender things; if I have any sense
of any of them, or of my self, and what I have done, I cannot but resent the
grievous offense that is taken at that book, and at me for writing of it: The
minds of many are exceedingly disturbed at it; and the censures run as high
against it, and me, as possibly they can: It is judged, the very Spirit of
Antichrist, and of the Devil, the sin against the Holy Ghost, Apostasy,
Persecution, Treachery, Bloodiness and Cruelty: And the condemnation is
answerable, the curse of horror, despair, and self-destruction; which are not
only threatened, and expected, but reported to be already upon me.

These things are in their own nature weighty, and they come thick upon me,
from all sects and sorts of people; from friends and strangers; and discharged
at me, from their very hearts, with all the strength of their Religion, with
all their might; in a bitter and angry Spirit, sharp and fierce; and in some
with great seriousness and gravity; yea in love to me: And most of them
solemnly in the name of God, and for his cause; as against an enemy to God, to
godliness, and to his people: This is the sense I have of them, and I think the
description is just and true: These things being breathed forth from men,
friends, Christians professing godliness and the Spirit of God: besides the
common rage that foames out, Rogue, Jesuit, hang him, etc. They do requite and
justly challenge from me, that I should Animadvert, and duly consider what
these things are? whence they come? What they would have? and what I am, and
have done to deserve them?

As these things drive me in to review both my self and book; so they do peal
and call me forth, to show in what Spirit and Light I live; from what root this
work came, and upon what foundation, that and my self stand; so that I now
count my self bound, not only in honor and justice, but in love, freely to
open and discover my self, and my mind and spirit, concerning my self, my book,
and the great offense taken at it.

I confess, I do feel that these censures are high, and that men are hearty and
serious in them, and do lay them on with all their strength, and with a sharp
spirit, angered and provoked: And that they do sometimes sting and twinge a
little, and consequently stir some choler in me, that I could be as heartily
angry at others, as others are at me: But as yet I do not find that they go
deep, or abide long in me: But on the contrary, I have been well able to bear
them; yea to slight and neglect them, as sick and sore passions, which cannot
live long; and although they stumble at me, and bruise me, yet if I did but lie
still, I should quickly see them fallen in their own dirt, by their own darkness
and weakness: For that I find constantly to be the nature of Passion, it is a
blind thing that runs it self into ruin, and needs no enemy to destroy it: it
is the Gunpowder of the mind, while it is shot at another, it does crack, stink
and vanish.

As I must confess they do sometimes sting a little; so I must profess that
hitherto they have not only been tolerable and easy to bear, but that I have
had pleasure in suffering of them: I shall honestly discover the reason of it
to you; in justice to truth, and in love to you; that you may hereafter learn,
better to bear the reproofs that either I, or others shall charge upon you; if
you do indeed find the same cause in you.

What ever infirmities are either in my self, or the Book; I know most
certainly, and feel, that I am not that, which I am judged to be: or if I am
all that, I am also something else, that supports me under it; else I could not
live: I know assuredly, that there is both Truth, Reason, Love and Innocence in
me, and in what I have written, however it is veiled, and therefore people are
much mistaken in me: Learn this then.

That Truth, Love and Innocence, have a constant peace in them, that none can
take from them; When under infirmity, and under Judgments and Trials for
infirmity, they have then a singular and special luster, and brightness in
them, and an answerable complacency: For he that indeed enjoyes these things,
knows that he has a royalty within himself, an autarchie, content and
self-sufficiency: And not only sufficient to bear, but an absolute and supreme
authority, by which he can deliver himself from the judgment of others, as
weak, remote and ignorant, and can justify himself: Truth knowing its own
sufficiency, ability and authority, to deliver it self both from its own
weakness and others mistakes, secretly triumphs, and is well pleased to lie
down under, and to rise up out of obscurity: These things I discover to you, as
my present and constant experience, knowing that you have great need of them in
this day of your rebuke: if you have them not, search for them; they will be
far better then striving with, or victory over enemies.

I was for some time passive and quiet under these hard censures, and much more
at rest in my mind since I writ the Book, then before: Be it good or bad, be
the mistakes in it, or concerning it, what they will; I am thus far well
satisfied, as to my self, it is better out then in. It was a burden to me,
while it was in me, and an ease to be delivered of it.

Being quiet and still under his storm, I was at work about another piece;
drawing a line of History, Divine and Spiritual, Humane and Rational,
Scriptural and Literal, of Church and Kingdom, from the beginning of both unto
this day: Wherein I found great content; seeing that the state of the Church
now under Controversy; and the things that I had produced, now the matter of
offense, had so excellent ground, in the Divine and Eternal Law of God, in the
Reason and Nature of man, and in the letter of the Scripture.

That there are these three distinct Laws, I think no man questions; and that
these three do perfectly agree, is as generally confessed: For the Divine and
Eternal Law or mind of God, has imprinted his own image upon man: And
therefore the true reason or understanding of man, must answer to its Original,
the mind of God: The same God has expressed: he same mind in his written Word:
And therefore the written Word must agree both to the mind of God that declared
it, and to the true reason of man, that is formed by the same Original; and
they cannot but all answer to each other.

If these three agree, and are united and brought together by Christ, as
certainly they are; for all three meet in him, and come sorth together from
him: Then if we truly understand one, we shall understand all: And that which
is truly spiritual, or the mind of God, is also most Rational: and that which
is Spiritual and Rational, is also Scriptural, or according to the written
Word: And it is as true on the contrary, that what pretends to be Spiritual,
and is not also Rational, is not of the man Christ, but is a spiritual beast:
And what seems Rational, and is not also Spiritual, that does not derive it
self from the heavenly man, it is earthly and sensual at least: And what men
have from the Scriptures only, and not from the heavenly pattern, must needs be
a broken reed, not fit to measure any thing: For the heavenly mind, which gave
forth the Scriptures, can only interpret them; and what is Spiritual and
Scriptural, will be also Rational.

Therefore these two things do necessarily follow. First, That no man can
justly expect to be received in the Church, or to be believed in what he
affirms, if he do not demonstrate what he brings, from all these three: because
the Church is the body of Christ, and partakes of Christ's nature: if these
three agree in him, she cannot subject to any thing rightly, but what has the
Light of all three in it: Neither can there be any demonstration made of any
thing in Religion, but from the first and highest of these, into the two lower.
And secondly, That which has the joint testimony of all these, may challenge
belief from all men and Christians, and from the whole Church: And it were
great breach of Charity and Trust, to doubt the success of Truth so delivered
to the Church.

And therefore I was not a little pleased, to find that I had so much light
with me, as to essay such a thing and to satisfy my reason, that it was
possible for me to do it: Not doubting, but if I could attain it, I should not
only enlighten and satisfy my offended Brethren, but bring forth that which
might heal and restore the Church of God, by leading of her up, to her own head
and heavenly pattern; whereby only she can be cured, purged, justified and
honored.

I do desire by the way, that men would take notice of this, That what I have
brokenly and briefly hinted in that Book, concerning a National Church, the
right of Kings and Bishops in the Church, etc. whatever you judge of them, that
they are now started up from the basest and vilest spirit of time-serving for
preferment: yet I do affirm to you, whatever weakness does attend the manner of
expressing of them: that they are from the holy Mount; from the heavenly and
divine Law; thence I received them, how ever I may mis-represent them; and that
not of late; twelve years since I writ and published the same things: and they
have continued in the inward frame of my mind, through many and sore spiritual
trials, ever since, without any change.

This being plainly, and honestly affirmed to you, and upon the review of my
self and mind, occasioned by your rebukes: I may expect from you, so much
friendly and Christian ingenuity, that you would not so scornfully reject them,
to throw them away, as not worthy to be read; but that you would read them,
with that seriousness and consideration, that is due to things that come under
such a name, and profess such an original.

I was interrupted in this work, thus, having written some part of it, I
offered it to the Press, by the Bookseller that printed the Inquisition: Upon
consideration he told me, that there was that rage kindled in men's minds
against the other Book, that his men durst not show them in the shop; and that
nothing of mine would pass till that spirit was laid, and therefore he durst
not meddle with this to print it.

My mind being very weak and tender, and apt to take check at such things; this
did not only put me to a stand, but turned my mind quite about, to hearken more
attentively to this cry that did thus earnestly pursue me: And to consider,
that sure this mouth, that was thus opened against me, did require something of
me: And that I could not fairly, nor justly slight and neglect it any longer:
And that I could not proceed in my intended work, till I had answered this plea
against me.

SECT. II.
IT IS a position in my mind, that no persons or things, that we converse with,
are absolutely evil; but there is some good in every thing, else it could not
be: and therefore nothing is to be reprobated, or not, till it be first sifted
and tried. By my own rule, I am bound to think, that though these angry
speeches against me, are my enemies, yet sure there is some just reason in
them: such sounds at these, are not without their significancy. If so, then I
must not reject them, because opposite and unpleasing, but must admit them to
the bar of my own reason: and not only give them a fair hearing, but all the
advantage also that I can; because the Court is my own mind, where they are
strangers; and being weak distempered things, I ought to humble my self to
them, though mine enemies, and to descend from my own right, to hear and
satisfy them if I can, or at least to do them justice: For I consider, though
they be dark passions, yet they are humane: and every man is honorable; and
every affection in man, though sick and distempered, is of value; besides they
are zealous, serious, brethren, friends, Christians: therefore I must query:
Have I not erred against them? have I not done them wrong? have I not detained
something from them, that is their due? We have professed a Kingdom of Heaven
within us: if it be there indeed, then we have in us a throne of judgment:
which must do right to all things, that come before us. In this Kingdom, there
is also sufficient, to answer every plea, and claim, that is made to it, or
against it; and therefore we need not fear to admit the greatest and strongest
accusation to a full and fair hearing.

Where there is authority to judge, and sufficiency to answer, there is
likewise wisdom to understand, what there is in these clamours, though they be
of themselves very dark and confused things: for the mind may taste and try all
things thoroughly; and every thing that comes into it, must be opened, and seen
in that light that is in it; because the mind is a supreme light, to which all
things are subject, that come before it.

Therefore setting my self to examine and consider these things, I found first,
that although there was just reason in the book, yet there was something, that
hindered men from the seeing of it: and though there was love and good in it,
yet there was something also, that denied men the benefit of it: and therefore
it is righteous that it should be animadverted, and endure a trial.

And secondly, I find that there is some thing in my self, that is justly due,
both to my friends, and brethren, and to the Book it self: that was not therein
communicated: which is my life and spirit; the ground upon which I stand: upon
which I wrote, and by which I am enabled to assert things so different from
others. As these high challenges of my spirit and peace, do tell me, that this
is the thing wanting, and now demanded of me: so I am upon this review of
things, conscious to my self, that I have not fully opened my self, and my
mind: but have in a great measure concealed it, as well as my name.

And therefore I must thus far justify the plea against me: That if a man
bring forth a notion of things, different from, and contrary to the life of
others: they may justly refuse that notion: if the Author do not bring forth
his own life, spirit, and peace: which only can maintain those notions: and
satisfy for that life, that he would take away by those notions. This is for
you, and therefore I hope you will well observe the justice of it. I am content
to condemn what I have done, as guilty of this capital offense: It may possibly
stand as a Law to me and others hereafter: That if any man write, be it never
so good reason, and with good intention; if he do not produce the head of the
spring, from whence it comes, and his own heart, soul, and peace with it: let
it wither and be rejected; truly I believe it will.

There is a further justice in the persons offended. If any man utter his
matters to his friends, and conceal himself, he deals injuriously with them: in
bringing forth the weaker and worse, and hiding the better part; which the
royal Law of love will condemn, as a great wrong: for certainly if there be any
thing worthy in a man, it is his spiritual life: and therefore I justify your
anger, you do like friends and men; not to take words, notions, and reason, if
there be a better thing in me: your own life and peace, being aimed at; you may
well challenge me, to show a better: I have this relief against this charge:
that though I am guilty, in not discovering the best, yet the best is still
with me, and being my own as yet, it will support and justify me.

Neither can I complain justly of any injury done to me by these sharp
censures: for if any man will put on an appearance, strange to his neighbors,
and withal cover his face; it is no wonder if men beat him, and the dogs bark at
him: if he be ill used, he may thank himself, and his covering: There is this
remedy also, if hiding the life and face, be the fault, that enmity that is
occasioned by it, will rend that vayl, and then the quarrel will be ended.

If I have a right sense of the offense that is against me, (it being at me,
and upon me, it sure belongs to me to feel and understand it) then I am called
forth to give a judgment of my Book, and to hold forth to the view of all the
world, my spirit and life from whence it came; and to show what righteousness
and power is with me, that can maintain me, and others, in the receiving and
practicing such things as I have writ.

I have been very inward, and retired in my spirit a long time; not without
some motions to look out; but I have suppressed them; and till now declined all
public appearance. Being sensible that my mind is both weak, and a great
stranger to all the Forms and ways of Religion that are abroad; and having
found by experience, that when I did look out, I met with great trouble and
opposition, from all sorts of people: I have been willing to enjoy my peace and
comfort at home, and alone. I did the least think to come forth in opposition
to any party, having in my heart a general love to all men; But I am by this
Book, unexpectedly engaged to come forth in some kind of opposition to many, if
not all sorts of spirits, now stirring in the Nation.

The people that have severely censured this book and me for it, are
Independents, Anabaptists, Quakers, Fifth monarchy men, and such as profess
themselves spiritual, and are in no particular form; I desire them all friendly
to consider, how high they have raised the controversy, and what must
necessarily be the issue, if it be determined: If any of them had taken the
book, and dealt with the reason of it: and had answered it, and convinced me; I
had been bound to have been their Scholar, and to have subscribed to them as
my Master: And if my reason had been too good for theirs, I might have expected
the same from them, and no more: But they all leaving the reason, and falling
directly upon my person, and the state of my soul, my life and peace; the ^ar
is like to be of a higher nature; and the question, who is the Antichrist? who
the Apostate? who has sinned against the Holy Spirit? and consequently who
must go down into horror and trouble, into Satan, and the displeasure of God?
and so it is a war of souls and spirits about the most solemn things of life
and peace with God.

And therefore the issue must be this: if you subdue me, and overthrow my
state, I must bow, and seek for mercy and peace of you, upon such conditions,
as you shall think good to give it: This I know you do expect: and as
necessarily I must, so I do believe, I readily shall perform it: on the other
side, if my state and peace be good, and yours fail; I may require the same of
you, that you should submit to me, and accept of my peace and pardon, according
to that equal and just Law, Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do
ye even so to them.

I do earnestly desire, that we may on both sides heartily engage in this
quarrel: if I find you do shrink from it, I shall endeavor to compel you to
stand to it, till there be a complete victory gained by one of us: If you be
men, and true to any thing that you say or think, you cannot avoid the trial;
for I know and feel, that you are come forth against me, in your censures of
me, with all your hearts, and with the strength of your God, Religion, and
Life: as against an enemy to God and his cause; it is so evident it cannot be
denied: And by it you have drawn forth my life and spirit, (which till now lay
close and still) to answer you; and therefore you are bound to stand and abide
the dispute: This I write neither lightly, boastingly, nor threatening, but
soberly and seriously, in love to you, and to the good and peace of souls.

The combat may be sharp, but it may be friendly also: For I do constantly find
this truth in my mind: that as all good does, and will overcome evil, because
it is larger, stronger, truer, and more durable then evil: so does love
conquer, and swallow up enmity; enmity is a mean, inferior, base thing, that
is but a servant to the greatness and majesty of love. And at this time, I find
a special love, both of pity and friendship, provoked and stirred in my heart,
by these wounds that you have given me: For I feel such a nature in me, the
more you pierce, the more freely my love and life will flow forth to you; so
that there is a ring of love made for us, in which we may safely try our
strength: and therefore, though it be both a serious and sharp contest, yet it
must also be a friendly strife: It may be, love has laid a train to catch us
all, and all the enmity of all men: For observe our quarrel, it is of a very
high nature, for no less then the life and peace of our souls; yet if we fight
it out, the end will be this: either I must return to you, and receive mercy
from you; of you must come to me, and receive it from me: Either you must be my
Pastors or Ministers, and so heal and feed me, as a brother: or I your Bishop
and Father. The quarrel is, Whether you shall serve me, with your life; or I
serve you with mine? Whether I shall forgive you, or you forgive me? Possibly
after some anger spent in the conflict, it may be comprimised, and we may both
have our ends, both serve and be served, forgive and be forgiven: But let us
resolve to try it out: for if you draw back and refuse the combat, you will go
down into your dark holes of enmity; but press forward, and we shall certainly
come to feel and understand one another, though through some smart: and at last
after we have spent our heat, end in love.

If we had dealt in opinions that concern the State, you might have feared
trouble: but you shall have the state of my mind to deal with: which you may
do, without danger of any suffering, but in your spirits: our war will be now
purely in and about spiritual things: If we should controvert National Church,
Episcopacy, etc. the power of the Nation might be with me: but declining that
as you do, and dealing only with my spirit and life: possibly the Bishops may
be as different from me, and from my spirit and life, as you are: yea, and be
more with you, then they are with me; and I am apt to think it may prove so:
How ever you may be confident, you are free from, outward danger, in dealing
with the spirit of a private person.

You have advantage, enough: you are many: I am alone: you are whole and sound;
I am I confess, much broken and weak: you stand firm, I have been tossed about:
my infirmities and failings are many, and visible to all the world; and most of
all to my self: yet truly I do desire and shall endeavor a fair trial, not
doubting the issue; which way soever it fall, it must be good.

SECT. III.
FIrst for the Book, I have had many complaints against it, but only in
general, as a monstrous, strange, wicked, and cursed thing: I have invited many
to show me particularly, what false or unrighteous propositions there are in
it: and to this day not one man has said to me, that this or that sentence is
untrue, or will give me any reason against any passage of it: But when we come
to the point, either they have not read it, or but part of it; or I do not
understand it; or What do you mean by this or that passage? It Is strange,
totally condemned but not examined in any parts of it; I may say in my case, as
Job, chap. 31. v. 35, 36, 37. That mine adversary had written a Book; surely I
would take it upon my shoulder, and bind it as a crown to me: I would declare
to him the number of my steps, etc. Had his reproofs been heavy, true or false,
I would have taken them upon my shoulder, and born either my own, or his
infirmities: I have done it, and by the same grace of God, I can do it again:
Or had his book been more true, righteous or merciful then mine; I can boldly
say, I should have put it upon my head, openly worn his understanding,
professed it, and gloried in it, as a crown. I know I have in me, that
authority over my self, and have been so conversant in self-judging, and
retracting what I have seen to be short, and also such a love to truth, that it
would be a glory and crown to me, to meet with a light, that could convince
mine of darkness: yea I have this experience of my self, I can prefer another
before me, and give honor, time, and place to my adversaries, even when I know
they are the weaker. But I may and do think, that men are not able to deal with
the reason of the Book; and therefore it is left to my self, to Animadvert upon
it: and possibly I may deal as severely with it as another.

The first thing that I blame the book for, is its untimeliness, it came too
late. I have in my heart a love to manknid, to all English men, and to the
opposite parties in the Nation: my place and work is to heal, unite and
reconcile: and so to prevent ruin and destruction; if I might be heard, none
should execute it, nor any suffer it. Many things did offer themselves in my
mind, that did tend to a universal peace, and a composing all differences, to
the great advantage of the whole, and of every part; They have been long
conceived in my mind: and did offer themselves to birth, at the beginning of
this great change: but I delaid so long, till another spirit had stepped in,
and engaged the minds of men, both in doing, and suffering: so that what was
proposed toward mother course, could not be heard by either; and for this I
suffered a very sharp rebuke from the Lord, before the Book came forth: it was
like that to Moses, Exodus 4.24. God met him and sought to kill him. A more
dangerous assault I have not received a long time, nor a de^per wound: I have
still a frequent sense of it, which keeps me in an awe of God.

My evil was suppressing a that light of love and peace, which did arise in my
mind from the divine nature; This we must know, and I declare it from a living
sense; That God is in his nature, most gracious, tender, and patient; yet he
knows how to take vengeance on all iniquity, even in his dearest children.

Where there is the greatest love, there is the greatest authority and majesty,
yea the greatest jealousy and severity: I find it so in his constant dealings
with me.

The supreme Law of God, is himself, Love; and with it peace, salvation,
forgiveness, good will to man: The very nature and Law of this love is, to do
good, and communicate: none receives it for himself only, but to give forth to
others; of all things it must not be confined nor imprisoned, being in its own
nature infinitely large: You have freely received, freely give. If this be the
highest Law, it does punish accordingly; being offended, or transgressed
against, it requires the sorest punishment, which is, to take away that love:
They that have felt love, must needs have the sharpest sense of the want of it:
and its nature being large and communicating: that evil servant that hides and
buries this talent of love and peace, and not communicate it; it shall be taken
from him: This was my danger.

All men live under a Law: the Law of love is the exactest and severest, where
it is in life and power: or the Law of the spirit of life which is in Jesus: it
is there the quickest and sharpest; and works most fully and strongly, where it
is engraven and written upon the heart, and put in the inward parts: Every
stroke of a Law of eternal life, in the most inward parts must needs be
terrible, threatening eternal death. I write this not only that you may know,
that I live under a Law and exact discipline: but that all may learn to fear
the Lord and his goodness: For know assuredly that God will be known and feared
of all, and that in great mercy and severity; For his love and grace, where it
is in its truth and power, will not be abused, and turned into looseness and
wantonness: you may abuse and corrupt lesser favor, but it will rise and be
revenged, and at last have that absoluteness in it, that it will rule, and give
Law to us: else it cannot save us.

My suppressing the movings of general and healing love, was thus: it often
rose up in my mind, and required to be written and published; I did attempt and
essay to do it: but what I did one day, I disliked the second or third day:
either from the weakness of my mind, or from a growing spring of light, or
both: but finding larger and deeper discoveries, I refused and rejected the
former: and so in hope of doing better, more strongly, more certainly and
completely; I delayed to do what was present, till the season was past.

There is in this a great evil, for which I received a great rebuke, and yet am
I not wholly delivered from the snare: for the further enlargement of my mind,
and the instruction of others, I will examine the particulars of it.

In not giving forth truth, light and love, as it arises naturally in our
minds, but deferring till it be more accomplished and complete; or till we can
give it a finer dress, which may render it the more acceptable to others, that
so the fruit may be more certain, and our selves more honored and justified:
In this there is a great transgression against the Law of love and life.

First, it is a fin against that truth or light; an undervaluing of it, as if
it were not worthy to be seen and looked upon by men in its own natural form,
wherein there is the greatest beauty; it is sufficiently, if not most lovely,
in it self, and in its own naked and native goodness: All light has a natural
Majesty in it, and is best when purest and unmixed; it commands by its own
brightness: but above all, the light of love is absolute and perfect: It has
in it a sufficiency of glory, to take away the spots and defects of other
things: and therefore it self needs no accomplishments: All additions to light
and love, do darken and eclipse them both: for they give beauty and glory to
all, and receive from none.

Secondly, it is a sin against God, a distrust of him, not to commit our selves
wholly to the leadings of his spirit: it is an ignorance of his presence with,
and dominion over every spirit: he being in and over all men, he will plead the
cause of Truth with them, especially when it rises simply and purely from
himself, and his own good Spirit: And will make it effectual to that end that
he sends it: It is most righteously due to him, that he should have the
managing, of what light and grace he gives to any man: and to employ it to his
own holy ends and purposes; to be a savor of life, or of death, as he please.

Thirdly, there is in it, want of love to Brethren: for why should we be either
afraid or ashamed to appear to them we love just as we are? if I love my
neighbor as my self, why should not I appear to him as I do to my self? and be
confident of him, that if I be found weak to him, he will both pity, cover,
and help me, as I would do to my self, or as I would do to him: Sure such
confidence and openness of heart, one to another, will sooner gain entrance
into the heart, then formal and neat discourses into the head, being most
natural and familiar: And if they obtain a place in the heart, they will effect
more, then by pleasing the fancy: yea weakness as well as confidence suits
best, with them that are weak: A man may overpower a weak mind, by too great an
evidence and strength of Reason: We are all weak; if any will seem to be
otherwise, I doubt he does but dissemble, and get a covering; but if any could
attain a perfection, he would by it, be more a stranger to his Brethren, except
he could make them like himself; or descend into their imperfection, and be
like them:

Fourthly, I am not justified, in rejecting or scorning infirmity: There is a
time for all things, and a season proper for weakness: A mixture of light and
darkness, makes the morning pleasant and growing: simplicity and mistakes in
children, is better then cunning and politic exactness: Yea natural weakness
is better then artificial strength: Christ became weak for us, and what is any
man, that he should refuse, what he chose? or to be weak with the weak: much
less to appear so, if he be so.

Exactness and compleatness is desirable, and exceeding beautiful in its
season, when we grow up naturally to it: But we must come to it by degrees, and
arise to it, out of weakness: In a child, perfect strength or wisdom, seems
strange and monstrous; if it be feigned or affected in any, it is Serpentine,
deceit and hypocrifie.

Besides, if we refuse to do good, because we would and may do better, or best
of all, we reject the first degree of good, which is the root and foundation,
both of better and best: And cruelly slay and destroy the first spring and
buddings of life, which are the fountains, that only can nourish and feed unto
perfect strength, and Eternal Life.

Lastly, there is in it, as distrust of Truth, God and Brethren, so of a man's
self, and his own life: If a man have any true life in him, it is sufficient to
carry him forth into the world, because it is better and greater then the
world: He that is in you, is greater then he that is in the world: By distrust
and diffidence of a man's own life, he weakens it: It is the design of the
enemy, to keep us in fear and bondage of spirit: If that life that is in me, be
true, it is best when it is natural: all art and contrivance do weaken and clog
it: If it be not true, it is abominable hypocrisy, to personate an holy or
heavenly thing: We see, all studied and made things, come to base ends; they
will wear out and leave a man's soul destitute: But true and genuine life, will
stand and increase: Therefore I would be natural; as in all things, so
especially in Religion; which though it is supernatural, yet is never good, if
it be not also natural: Yet I may not wholly condemn the exercise, either of
fancy or judgment, in composing and forming things; for that they also are
natural faculties; and are excellent when the spiritual life does purify them,
fill them, and rule over them.

By this you see the first and great evil in this Book, and in my mind, in
writing of it: delaying or dallying till another spirit had entered: and so
long, till all parties were so engaged and disturbed, that they had neither
time, nor clearness of mind to examine the reason of it: For which I was so
sharply afflicted, and threatened; not only to the rejecting of my present work
and Ministry, but of my life also: Yet it was a sin, not of wickedness, but
weakness; and therefore I found mercy, and God accepted of a sacrifice from me;
and not only permitted me to proceed in my work, but continued and enlarged his
assistance, and healed my foul also: Which gives me hope, that though the book,
and my self suffer awhile; yet I and others may at last reap fruit and comfort
from it: It is for the present in the fire, and let it be tried thoroughly, that
all may see what is in it.

SECT. IV.
YOu have seen the first and great evil of the book, its unseasonable birth,
occasioned by my delaying to write it, when the things contained in it, first
offered themselves to come forth: You have likewise seen the severe
chastisments suffered for it; and animadversions upon both: If this evil be
really removed and taken away; and what I have written, may a little calm and
compose your minds, but into a willingness to read it, and seriously to ponder
the things contained in it; other defects, the consequents and effects of the
former, may be cured.

There is a continual spring and growth of light in my mind, which makes me
distaste this day, what I wrote two or three days since: this made me suppress
things; and not giving them vent in their season, they multiplied so fast upon
me, that at last they crowded out, one over another, so thick and in a huddle,
that people know not what to make of them; whereas had they marched out in
their own order, although rude and natural, yet they would have been more
perspicuous and so more easily discerned and understood: There is, I am sure, a
strange mistake in men, even of the very drift and nature of the book; so much
wide of reason, that I wonder at it: besides other causes, this may be one;
things pressed out so fast, when they found the door open, that they obscured
themselves by multitude and force: Being born in turba, they are children of
strife from the womb; and then it is no wonder if they disturb others.

But this is a curable evil, if any will be at the pains to part the notions
and conceptions, and take them asunder, and set them at a greater distance one
from another: I do think he may have another view of them: The matters
contained in the book are very weighty, concerning the great change and turn in
the Nation, by which the lives and liberties of thousands are in danger: The
things written, and manner of writing them are not vulgar, most people say they
do not understand them: They that have read it often say, it has in every new
reading, a new face: When I review it my self, I find more in it, then I
apprehended when I writ it: I profess when I consider it, I cannot think of
men's slighting of it, without an indignation: I must deal freely with you, when
I hear of your unworthy and irrational scorn of it, my soul does upbraid, and
wonder at that shallowness and froward headiness that makes you so incapable of
the justice, reason, and mercy that is in it: I do know, and am able to write
it, upon mature deliberation, and consultation, That there is in it that love
and righteousness, that must and shall be considered and understood: And that
very fury, that makes you impatient of the reason and rebuke of it, will run
you upon a foolish and desperate opposing the present Providence and Power, and
so bring you into misery: And then you will repent of your too late
considering, as I have of my too late writing. I could return scorn for scorn,
and auger for anger; it is in me to do it; you know you are liable to it, and
may know I am able to do it: But such is my love to you, that I cannot but
earnestly desire you to mind and study the things: I dare promise you, you
shall not lose your labor; if that which is there written do not answer your
time and pains, do but complain of it to me, and you shall have satisfaction;
It is but just you should: and I have such opinion of my honesty, and ability,
as to assure you, if it does not perform to you, I will.

Another fault is found in the Book, that it is too sharp and cutting in the
reproofs of it: It is a sensible complaint in some, I have the more reason to
Animadvert upon it, because it is so: If they be afflicted at it, there is
great reason it should afflict me also. Of all repentings, I find the easiest
and sweetest, is to repent of anger: God has made it easy and honorable, by
his own example, who has often repented of his just rebukes upon his people:
It is easy in it self: for anger is no pleasant thing: If it were not
necessary, no man could choose it: Indeed, it is so mean a thing, that few men
enter into it in judgment: Most men are thrust upon it, without understanding:
I think I may say all; It is so unruly and troublesome a guest, that none but
fools will entertain it; Solomon says, Eccles. 7.9. Anger rests in the bosom
of fools: If it be just and good, it is mean and poor; but if it be malicious,
wicked, and false, then it is devilish: Be it what it will, I always find it
as yet, an offense to my weak nature; it always wounds and stings me;
therefore I am inclined to be jealous of it, and of my self for it.

If there be a sour and severe spirit in it, it may possibly arise from the
first ill root, deferring or delaying to give it forth in its season, when it was
tender: the keeping it so long within, made it more fierce. But if the nails be
too long, we may pare them, I will be better then scratching and clawing.

Angry and vehement reproofs do abound in this Age: You reprove and condemn
your adversaries to utter destruction; and they condemn you: I have rebuked
you, and you rebuke me, as a man irrecoverably lost: The Nation is so full of
judgment, that men can administer little else: wrath is so strong, that most
men are quite drunk with it; love and peace is so weak, that they that incline
to it, find great difficulty in exercising any of it: It may be for the good of
all to understand the nature and kinds of rebuke.

There are four sorts of it subject to my observation: The first and worst is
devilish: A malicious searching into, and aggravating the sins of them we hate;
and accusing of them to make them odious, that we may appear just: or a finding
but iniquity in them that are opposite to us, that we may destroy them: There
is a great deal of this; it is meet you and I should consider how far we have
been in this spirit: it is a very gross and common evil; yet no discerned:
because them that we prosecute with such enmity, we first paint them in our
fancies, as devils and enemies to God, and then think we do well, to destroy
them, believing they are appointed to it: But I hope this darkness will not
last long: For no parties now stand in opposition one to another, at so great a
distance, as the children of God, and the children of the Devil: Because if any
were indeed the children of God, they would be like their Father, Mat. 5.44,
45. Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate
you, pray for them that despitefully use you, and persecute you: That you may
be the children of your Father which is in heaven, etc. How contrary is men's
ordinary practice to this! We say we are the children of God, and therefore
ought to destroy our and Gods enemies: to do good to sinners, and to them that
hate us is Divine: to hate, accuse, and destroy, is certainly Diabolical.

The second kind of rebuke is Legal or Angelical: To reprove and punish men, as
Gods children and creatures, in a holy zeal for God and righteousness, with
intention to humble, subject, and reform: and that from a holy and pure Law,
and from a just and godly nature and life: This is no Christian, or divine
dispensation, but a legal one: yet who is there of you that can justify
himself by this Law? Consider it seriously: Do you reprove and punish men as
men, as brethren, as Gods creatures and children, though enemies? Do you do it,
with intent to humble and reform, or to ruin and destroy? Do you do it from a
holy, pure Law, or from your own conceptions of the Law, which are broken,
uncertain, and changeable? Do you do it from a just and godly nature and life?
or is there not also envy, covetousness, self-seeking, partiality, and
unrighteousness? you may ponder these things in your hearts, and measure your
selves by this rule.

The third kind of rebuke or reproof is Evangelical, that which was administered
by Christ, when he was in the flesh: he was a Minister of the circumcision, and
did oncumcise in his Ministry; he Ministerd sharply, cuttingly: but when he
had done that, he was lead by his Father, to lay down his life for them that he
had so reproved, and after he had discovered sin, in a holy spirit, in
obedience to his Father, and in all his work knew no sin, yet he himself was
made sin. His Father by a superior Law, judged him as the sinner, and
acquitted, pardoned and justified them: This is Christ's way, first reprove
severely as a legal Minister, purely and holily: and finding that short or
weak, he lays down his life for them he had condemned: And when he had
administered the Law in its highest purity, he then nailed it to the Cross, as a
weak thing that could not save: and died under it, to bring in a better Law of
peace and forgiveness.

The fourth and last is the best: the reproofs of the Spirit; which Christ
prefers above his own, John 16.7, 8, etc. It is expedient that I go away: for
if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will
send him unto you: And when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, and
of righteousness, and of judgment. Christ reproved of sin from righteousness:
The spirit reproved of sin, and righteousness: Christ reproved of sin, in the
flesh, in weakness, as under it and the Law, and so grieved at it: The Spirit
reproved of sin, and of righteousness, in glory and power, because, says
Christ, I go to my Father, where he was glorified; Being now exalted not only
over their sins, but by the worst of their sins, by their crucifying of him,
The Son of man was lifted up: His love and life overcame both Law, Sin, Death,
and the Devil: having taken away their sins, his Spirit could now manifest to
them, this one only sin, unbelief: That there was in him, love, peace, pardon
and salvation for them and their worst sins, hatred of him: that he had born
them himself, and was acquitted of them, and so they were all done away: and
this sin only remained, that they believed not this blessed and mighty grace,
that could overcome all that evil and bring forth glory to himself, and good to
them, out of their sins, and his death: And this the Spirit did not only
declare, but convince so strongly, that they could not resist it. For his own
descending upon them was an undeniable proof of it: He convinces of
righteousness, by showing that they had a righteousness, as well as sin: and
that as their sins were Christ's, so his righteousness was theirs: that their
righteousness was with the Father, in a heavenly invisible state, because I go
to the Father: That this is true, his own coming, as Gods gift, is a sufficient
proof: And therefore it is conviction with judgment; or, of Sin, Righteousness
and Judgment. For except both the evil and the good be produced, both Sin and
Righteousness, in the light and power of the Spirit, there may be wrath
administered, but not Judgment: It is said, of Judgment, because the Prince of
this world is Judged: And that is true Judgment, that convinces the creature
of Sin, and of Righteousness, and by the Spirit releases him, and judges the
wicked one, the enemy, that is the principal, the author and worker of all this
mischief.

This Judgment does right to man, to Christ and to God; to man, it humbles and
abases him, and brings him to God, where his righteousness is; It does right to
Christ, and the sufficiency of his love, life, death, and resurrection, to save
the world: And it exalts God, his love, mercy, fullness, and justice: that he
has the righteousness of the whole world with him; and that he has accepted
Christ to it, as Lord and Prince of the whole world, as head of man; and has
given him power and spirit to reveal and dispense that righteousness freely to
whom he will.

Now it much concerns you, and me, and all men, that are busy in reproving
others, to examine our selves by these things, what kind of reproofs we do
administer: If you will admit your work to be tried, which you now cannot
avoid: upon a little humble and sober consideration you will find, that in the
administration of condemnation upon the Magistracy and Ministry, of Church and
Kingdom, persons and things, officers and offices, you are very much short of
the second of these, which I call a Legal or Angelical reproof, and punishment
for sin: For true, legal, lawful, or angelical justice, is administered; First,
upon men as Gods creatures, made in his image, and so his children, though
drawn away by Satan into the worst evils. It is secondly, not to ruin or
destroy, but to reform. Thirdly, it is by a just, holy, stable Law, and not
from men's uncertain and broken imaginations. Fourthly, it is from a just, holy
and godly life and nature: If these things be true, as they are; then consider,
What spirit have you acted in? Is it not mercy and, justice to you, and all
men, that this should be known? That you dealt with them, not as men, but as
brats of Antichrist: And sought not to reform either persons or things, but to
destroy, root branch, abjure and curse for ever. And that by no steady known
Law, of God or man; such you never could own or profess: but by uncertain
opinions and imaginations; which you never were, nor could be true to, or agree
in, either for Church or Commonwealth: yea generally, ye acted besides all
rule, Law, and authority; only by that you call necessity, self preservation
and interest: And this you did not from a pure nature, as is too grossly
manifest, but from a mixture at least, of pride, envy, malice, covetousness,
and self-seeking; seen now by your selves and all men.

If you fall so short of the second, I know you will not presume once to think
of the third kind; which Christ our Lord administered in the flesh: first to
discover sin, and then to bear the curse and punishment of it himself: This was
^nce an example, and the Saints of old were called to practice the same thing:
read 1 Pet. 2.19, 20, etc. and chap. 3.17, 18. But alas, you are not yet
instructed in the doctrine of such a thing; but are taught the contrary, that
this is only for Christ to do, and not for men: But you are sheep gone astray,
and led away by false spirits, and for the present have lost the Sheeps nature,
and acted as Woolves: When you return unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your
souls, chap. 2. v. 25. he will teach you another and more excellent way: And
therefore as you are short of the second, so you are opposite to the third, in
the very form of your spirits. For Christ the holy one, dies for the ungodly:
your holiness serves only to punish and destroy the ungodly: his holiness to
your practice, must needs seem either unrighteous, or foolish and impolitick:
to suffer the just for the unjust; and only for well-doing, and to commit his
cause to God: Why did ne not justify himself, and condemn others? Had he power
in his hands? Yes, he could command legions, and that of Angels: Why then did
he not cut off the wicked out of the land, and plant himself and followers in
it? because, he came not to destroy, but to save men's lives: Because he was
Lord and owner (...) the world; and not a thief: therefore he would not destroy
it, but suffered for it: he had the life of the world in him, and therefore
shed his blood for them: Because he would not gain it to himself, but by death
bring it to God: because he knew he had an eternal life, and could lay down his
present life in the flesh: But they had only a fleshly and sinful life, and
could not die, therefore he chose to die for them: In fine, he died for
sinners, because he loved man, though fallen, sinful, and enemies to him: and
because he would be like his Father, he chose by death to go to God (that is)
be and do, as God is and does; suffer for the ungodly: Certainly, if God loves
you, as I believe he does, he will bring you to more acquaintance with himself
and son; and show you what it is, that makes you such strangers or enemies to
the Cross of Christ.

As you are short of the second, and opposite to the third, so totally ignorant
of the fourth: Indeed where is among us, that Messenger, that Interpreter, that
one of a thousand, to show to man his uprightness? Job 33.23, 26. That will
pray unto God, and he will be favorable unto him, and render unto man his
righteousness. This Messenger sent from God, this Ad^^cate and Interpreter, is
the holy Spirit, who knows how to make crooked things straight, unsound things
whole; and to plead out an uprightness in man, to which God the Father of this
uprightness will be favorable, and render his righteousness; for all our
righteousness is with him: But alas, we are either wholly ignorant of this, or
do but stammer it out; know not how to interpret it plainly. You believe you
have an uprightness, and I believe you have a righteousness with God, which he
will render to you in his season. But when you come to know the righteousness
that is with the Father, you will see Kings and Bishops have a Father also in
heaven, and that Christ with God, is both King and Bishop; and the King of
Kings, and Bishop of Bishops; nay possibly you may come to know and see their
righteousness, before your own; and be glad of it, and willing to have your
part and share with them: but you never yet were in heaven, nor have you seen
it opened to you; but you measure things by an earthly and outward rule.

You may easily make a conclusion if you will; You are short of the second,
opposite to the third, and ignorant of the fourth kind of reproof; then sure,
you act much in the first, which is the wors^* Turn back and look what it is

If I declare this as a Law to you, I am very unjust if I do not submit to it
my self; Therefore know this, that I do acknowledge, that reproof only to be
spiritual, and from heaven, which convinces of sin, righteousness and
judgment; and therefore if I do write either contrary to it, or short of it, I
justly suffer condemnation for it; and am willingly subject to it; yea pleased
and satisfied, that nothing shall stand in the earth, neither in my self, nor
any others, but what is measured by this righteous, merciful, and perfect
standard: knowing the equity, authority and majesty of it, and subjecting my
own life to it: I may justly require that all men and Angels should submit to
it, as the only rule of all censures and administrations of justice: and so I
do.

But observe and learn this also; that as I would make the highest, the rule of
my practice, as I ought if I be spiritual, and as is due to it, being the
heavenly pattern (and therefore admit of the second and third only in order to
this:) yet would I submit to the lowest: I would administer only for God in his
spirit, but bear that reproof which comes from the Devil, with patience, as
comeing through Satan, f^^m God: so David entertained Shimei his bitter curses:
so far as I am willing or able to do the one, I am equally willing and able to
bear the other.

But plainly the question now is, Have I so done? Formerly, when this act of
taking away the life of the King, was committing, which is since punished; I
did reprove the Army then of sin, in one book: and of righteousness in another:
but they did refuse both, and neither repent of the sin, nor rceive the
righteousness: And therefore sure it was not conviction, or not in judgment:
It Is true, and because I administered it, not in power, nor in judgment, but in
weakness, I have first suffered that judgment my self in my own spirit: but
yet there was that truth in both, which God has since justified, and they
fulfilled.

For this last book, the reproofs of it are I know, so clear and convincing,
that no man does, or can deny, or resist them; I never heard any question the
truth of one syllable of them: none rise s up to plead a word, no not of
excuse, for the reproved: As to reason and righteousness men's mouths are
stopped; and opened only in wrathful and angry reviling, and fretting against
the hand that smites: which is a proof of the truth and weight of them; And so
I accept your passions against m^ as a witness that you have life in you, and a
sense of your reproof: The sore is launced, and the corruption comes forth: And
know this, that as, there is reproof of sin, so there is of righteousness: more
then you are able to plead for your selves: Indeed if a reproof be just and
righteous: the righteousness of God is in it, and that only is the
righteousness of the creature: After your anguish is over, search for it, there
it is; you will find that there, which you will be glad to make use of, to
cover your selves, if the weather proves cold and sharp, as it is likely to be.

That which makes you sensible of the reproof of sin only, in the book, and not
of righteousness, is this: It fell upon you in the very nick of time, when you
were under judgment and condemnation from the Magistrate: which is, I confess,
a very bitter cup: for men to fall of a sudden, from the highest of rule, and
reigning, to shame and punishment; you were so drunk and drowned with this wine
of wrath, and so full of anguish, that you had no sense of any thing but wrath:
Men drunk with passion, while the fit lasts, are not capable of the love or
reason of friends, but thrust them away as enemies: which renews my sense of my
first and gr^^^ error, in delaying till you were incapable of the reason of it,
by reason of sore and grevious bondage.

During the extremity, you could hear but one thing, and that only which was
against you: so you thought that all were your enemies, that did not say as you
said: and that every thing that opposed you, was one and the same enemy; In
that troubled state you conclude, I was turned to the world, and backslidden to
the present rising power: Great guilt, and great suffering meeting together,
must needs much disturb the mind of poor man: If you in the trouble of your
souls mistake me, and if my mind be clear and at peace, I may well bear it, and
pity you, and so I do.

My business was to be dayes-man between adverse parties: I know I did not
intrude into the office, but refused and excused, as Moses: Who am I? they will
not believe, nor hearken to my voice. I am a man of no power or esteem: and so
put it off till I was compelled to appear: and now I find the common fate of
them that interpose, to part the fray; both parties fall upon him. You think I
am turned Courtier: the Court thinks I am still a Fanatic: It Is but just I
should receive both your neglects into me, standing between you: I am content
to feel the evil of both, because I love both; and have in my soul good for
both.

But you do not only judge me to be an enemy, but worse, an apostate brother;
and more wicked then your open adversaries, for they only afflict the outward
man; I fall upon your spirits and principles; We shall have occasion to
discourse of spirits and principles hereafter: but here I shall only mind you
of two or three things.

First, It is I confess a very difficult thing to judge of principles and
spirits, because they are inward: and therefore strangers and enemies cannot
judge of them: It must be some friend or brother, that has conversed with
them: They that are still under them; are judged by them, and therefore they
cannot judge of them: It must be some that have traveled through them, and
have had experience of them: spirits and principles are Gods: and who can judge
the Gods? If any, they that have been amongst them, and tried them: you may
from this find some reason, why I should be chosen, to do this service for you:
you generally know me; my way and work has been trying of spirits many years.

Secondly, as it is difficult to judge spirits and principles, so it is hard to
bear the judgment of them: Men can easier die and lay down their natural
lives, then suffer their principles to be touched; Men of any common honesty,
do freely expose their flesh to death, to save their Gods, although they be but
Idols.

But thirdly, There are false Gods, false spirits, you know it, and have
familiarly accused others of it: you know I know it; I confess I do, as we say,
to my cost: it may be to your profit: you have of late been hammering at a
spiritual Antichrist, an Antichrist within; and it is most true many such there
are: and can you think that you should be acting so many years against
Ant^christ, and all the while be ignorant of an Antichrist within, who does but
now begin to peep ^ut, and be discovered in you, and you not guilty of
receiving false principles or spirits? Can all this smoke of confusion
darkness, and enmity be amongst you, and no fire of false spirits? Can there be
so much reeling and staggering, giddiness and instability, and no wine of
fornication? no sophisticated or adulterated wine? No spiritual harlots, or
false lovers? Must all the corruption, rotteness and filth, he laid upon the
poor flesh? Is there no evil spirit that came in, under the name of God, to
join with her; to beget these bastard brood of hypocrisy, covetousness and
self-seeking? Must man only bear the blame, and not the unclean spirits that
are gone out? Or must God and his name only stand accused; that he, led his
people by his Spirit into no better ways? Is it not then both justice to his
name, and mercy to man, that these evil spirits and principles should be
discovered and detected? As it is proper for a friend or brother, that has
been partaker with you in them, and has suffered greatly for it, to discover
them; so it will be found a friendly and brotherly office to reprove them.

The plucking up these principles that lie deep and secret, is I know terrible;
I have felt it so; It seems to threaten the rooting out of religion and
godliness it self; I have found the same thing in my trials: God comes against
them, and his people engaged with them, in great jealousy, enraged as an
enemy, in fiery indignation, and vengeance: because nothing but his vengeance
can destroy them: but I have found great love in these fires of jealousy: yea
love to our nature, and persons, with forgiveness to our iniquities, even then
when he takes vengeance of our inventions.

I know you can neither be inwardly cleansed, nor outwardly saved, but by a
death in your spirits, and loss of these principles which have deluded you, and
brought you into this grievous snare: and therefore shall in love and good will
to man: to your souls, lives, and liberties, prosecute my purpose, of
manifesting those unsound principles, that have deceived and misled you: and
shall not spare for your crying or frowardness.

SECT. V.
ANother objection against the Book, is, it is written much in Allegories;
because the present state of things is there represented in and by ancient
Scriptures: I acknowledge this to be a fault: and possibly it might arise from
the first great error of delay: by keeping it in too long, it might be thus
overgrown with hair, and get this dress: or at least, the same distrust that
made me unwilling to write, might make me willing to shroud my mind under those
coverings of Scripture, wanting confidence to appear more open, or strength to
go without that help.

I might affirm, that the things written, are not mere allegories: if they be
so, they are to me hateful Idols: for I know nothing more abominable, then
mere similitudes and forms of truth. I may affirm, that the same eternal
spirit, that brought forth those works in Adam and Noah, of which you there
read, does for ever keep the living image of them in himself, and many ages
after brought them forth in Moses mind; and by Moses into writing: so that the
works done, and the words writ, are one, and of one mind and spirit: The same
eternal spirit having in himself the same eternal image, does by it preserve
the image written, or the words and history: The same eternal spirit, eternally
works, and brings forth his own likness in all times, and in our age: and the
same spirit that did them, and writ them then, does them now, and reveals them
in that Book: He that is wise will understand these things.

But let them go for Allegories, and let me bear the blame of it: I am content
it should go so; because I know we shall gain by all our miscarriages: grow
wise by mistakes: For sin has something of Physic in it; many times, if not
always, it has its own cure with it, because it has its own destruction in
it: yea not only its own, but of other evils also: It Is certainly true to the
godly, Dan. 11.35. And some of them of understanding, shall fall, to try them,
and to purge, and to make them white; And therefore I shall learn and get
experience by this weakness. I now see plainly, the Scripture may be and is a
vail: in some it is made use of, to cover filthiness: others make use of it out
of fear to hide the truth of their hearts: It serves sometimes to reveal, and
sometimes to conceal the mind: But withal I see there is no hiding place for
me; I am necessitated to forsake my coverts, and come forth naked. Many have
hid their poison of error and enmity under Scriptures, and by them conveyed
their deceit and lies neatly wrapped up in similitudes and allusions: and that
to destroy: I would convey peace and truth by it, and it will not be end^^ed: I
am beaten from these bushes, and necessitated to all kind of openess and
plainness: I was unwilling to come to it, I confess: but I see, I must say
aside the Velvet scabbard, and draw the naked sword, or else must be content
with such shameful usage as no man can bear.

As sin, so shame has its own cure, because its curse, with it; He that
obscures himself for shame, or from it, and for fear of it is driven into a
hole, must suffer double. And there is reason for it; because first he is weak,
and then a coward; and so deserts himself, his name, his mind, his cause; and
betrays his life and, righteousness, if he have any in him: If a man be
upright, he need not go into a corner; if he do, he cannot stand upright in
that hole and corner: holes are for Bats and Moles, for dark creatures; the
light is for truth, and the open heavens for uprightness; I hope I shall find
room and place abroad; I cannot hodestly abide any longer at home; sure the
open heavens and earth are made for me, as well as others; why should not I
enjoy them?

As I see a necessity, and my duty, to cast off all coverings; so I now
experimentally find, how little you have of the Spirit of God, or of true
reason: and that both these are exceeding low, in the minds of men at this
time: If not quite slain, yet very feeble, weak, and ready to die; imprisoned
also and shut up, under false imaginations and fancies of things: And therefore
if we think to instruct men, it must be; not only by truth; but with that
evidence and demonstration that may heal and recover, men's spirits arid
understandings.

I profess this, that the same eternal Spirit that wrought those things in Adam
and Noah, and writ them by Moses, keeps that image in himself; and by it,
contains and upholds the Scripture, the outward image of his eternal mind; and
the same spirit working according to himself, produces the same works now, from
the same foundation; and from the same light, gives forth a discovery of them:
yet because the works were wrought long since, and in a remote part of the
earth from England, as in Paradise, in another world, and at Mount Ararat:
therefore they are to us strange and foreign things, or at best, but
allusions: Whereas to a spiritual man, all times and places are present, and
all things in heaven, and earth, and under the earth, are gathered into one,
even into Christ: In whose spiritual person we at once see and measure all
things and ages: because they are all in him, and made by him.

I am sensible that there is as much shortness of reason in men, as want of the
Spirit: For we are the natural children of Adam and Noah, and do as truly
derive our natures from them, as we do from our Fathers or Grandfathers; yea we
derive our selves more from them, because they are heads, roots, and common or
public Fathers or Stocks of mankind: our immediate parents are but means,
branches, or conveyances of life from those roots to us: And we are more
certainly and infallibly the children of Adam and Noah, then of our later
Ancestors: And do receive greater benefit from them; Moral, Natural, and
Personal blessings from Adam: these renewed by Noah, and conveyed to us by him,
with the addition of civil and politic blessings: And these given by Covenant
for ever, establisbed with him and his seed for perpetual generations, Genesis
9.11. Me thinks it shows great shortness, if not sensuality and slavery in men's
minds, that will enquire after every foot of Land that was their Fathers and
Grandfathers, and boast of their descent, if they have it from a Lordship in
England, or a Mountain in Wales: and not enquire after their natural or moral
properties, civil and religious privileges, which they do derive, and may
challenge by descent from these Ancestors; yea not only not enquire and search
for this royal and noble pedigree, but reject it when produced: as if they were
beasts, not men; and rose out of the earth and Sea, as the beast in the
Revelations; and as if we were sons of the earth, that came into the world in
some by-way, and were of another case then that which God made in Adam, or
saved and Covenanted with in Noah: For truly, if the same life be in us, that
God made in Adam, and saved, blessed, and covenanted with, in Noah; it will as
naturally lead us to its outward and visible head, by a line of reason, as our
spititual life leads us to Christ, by a line of faith: For all ages, times, and
states of things, wrought in our nature, are the proper objects of our
understandings and reason; and we, if we were not captivated to foolish and
brutish darkness, and silly conceits, might as freely converse with them, as
with present sensible things: yea we cannot discern any present thing, if we
know not the reason and principles of it; and they are only to be seen in the
first founding and forming of them: men are therefore drunk in fancies, and are
not yet come to the exercise of reason, which fathoms and measures all the
things of man, from the beginning to the end: indeed he is not truly a man,
that comprehends not in some measure his own nature, in all ages: For the whole
history of the world, and all the parts acted in it, are but the things of a
man, and so pieces of our selves, if we are men: Every thing is beautiful in
his time; also he has set the world in their heart, Eccles. 3.11. But says
he, I know that whatsoever God does, it shall be for ever, ver. 14.

There is under these things which you call Allegories, real, substantial
Truth: if you will not crack the shell to have the kernel, accept of my help: I
will give forth that which is there writren, concerning your selves at least,
in a few plain affirmations: I have and do affirm concerning that party, that
acted against the life and power of the King, and are now fallen.

1. They had many of them a work upon their spirits, and many gifts wherewith
they were anointed.

2. These works and gifts were but flesh, but earthly, but man: after the image
of the first Adam, which is of the earth, earthly; and not the second Adam, the
Lord from Heaven; Not the Lord, nor from Heaven.

3. As they were earthly and fleshly, so they were private and personal:
servile and ministerial: not the Lord: no largeness to comprehend the whole:
nor authority to subject the whole; nor wisdom to rule the whole; either the
whole Nation, or their whole party.

4. That they had Commission, only to destroy, subdue and punish the Church and
Kingdom, standing in darkness and corruption: There never was in that party, or
people, any union, strength, glory or success, in any thing, but in fighting
and killing: And therefore could never attain any Civil or Religious body,
either to be a Church or Kingdom, but an Army to fight: And for this work they
were anointed and sanctified. So was Cyrus and his Medes, Isa. 13.3. and 45.1.
which is not only a Legal Ministry, but a heathenish and bloody one.

5. That when they had subdued and broken down, they had nothing to build: no
new Law or Religion, either from heaven or earth; either for themselves only;
or for the whole Nation: No man, or sort of men, did ever so much as pretend,
that they were Legislators; nor did ever tender to the Nation a Law, either
from heaven or earth: but after they had cursed and rejected the old state,
they dressed up the carkase of King, Lords and Commons; in a Protector, another
House, and a Parliament; and had more stability in it, then in any of their
inventions beside: They never could produce any thing, like unto the wisdom and
reason of a Law; but every bird would chatter its own note; such broken stuff
and absurd confusion never was.

6. They never had a public or healing spirit; talk they did of the common
good of all men: But their spirit was not only narrow, but stood in opposition
to the spirit of the Nation: They were always bound up most firmly and
strongly to a private, and so to a selfish spirit, and could never be persuaded
to accept of any thing that was large: Those miserable principles, of Interest,
Self-preservation, and Necessity, began, carried on, and ended the War and
Party.

7. Their gifts and work being fleshly and earthly, and having only figures and
prophesies of the heavenly Kingdom of God, and not the nature and substance of
that Kingdom with them, they could not administer it; but those prophesies and
figures must cease and die, before the truth of the Kingdom can come forth.

8. Their gifts being only private and personal, and their work only to subdue
and ^ull down, when they aspired beyond their ^bility and commission, to reign
and to make ^ew Commonwealths, and new Churches; ^hey corrupted, into pride,
enmity, op^ression, covetousness, self-seeking: greedily ^evouring the wealth,
riches, pleasures, ho^ours and places, which they had cursed and condemned; and
therein were more foul ^hen those that they cast out.

9. And from corruption they fell into divisions, jealousies, persecuting
others and ^ne another, and so into destractions and confusions.

10. And by that, into their present re^ection, from all power, authority,
riches, and estates, into contempt; imprisonment, poverty; plunged into a deep
Baptism of afflictions and disappointment.

11. Into which if they can retire, with meekness, humility, and repentance,
they will find rest, safety, and purifying: A condition more sweet, and clean:
and as to God and their souls, more comfortable and profitable, then their
former greatness, though it be to the flesh grievous.

12. There, the Book would leave them in quietness, and cover them from the
wrath of their enemies; justifying them in the exercise of their private and
personal gifts, as honest men: And promising them a resurrection in a more
large, pure, spiritual and durable state.

Ministries and Dispensations of a far more excellent glory then this, have
perished; and why there should be such unwillingness to bury this, I know not:
It died to me, and in me long since; and has been ever since, corrupting,
rotting, reeling and staggering, till it fell in pieces: It has had its time,
done its work, fulfilled its Ministry, emptied and poured out all the wrath it
had upon others, and when it had executed others, it was a torment and vexation
to it self, wanting other matter to work upon: The Party it self was weary of
it, complained of the vanity, corruption, and filthyness of it, were ashamed of
it, annoyed by it; it stunk so in the nostrils of every ingenuous and
enlightened spirit: none pleased at it, but for what they got and kept by it:
none easy under it, but sick of it; and it self sick and hated, at last
executed it self: to fulfill that word, He that takes up the sword, shall
perish by the sword; even by that sword they took up, and by that force they
fomed. That Power, that Army they raised against the King; turns to the King,
and against them that raised it: It was long dying, and every Party watched to
have had it themselves, and were pulling and catching at it; some had it one
while, and some another; whilst quarreling amongst your selves, it is fallen
into your Adversaries hands; and that I suppose is the great trouble: You would
be content it should die, and you would execute it; but thought also, it
belonged to the Executor, to have its riches, honors, power and success: But
it seems there was an elder Brother, an heir alive, that you did not dream of:
Though this work of yours, with its power, fall very contrary to your hopes,
designs, purchases, and carnal confidences; yet not contrary to many hints of
prophesies, in their own spirits, nor contrary to common justice and reason:
For first, it has been often said to you, and in you, Not by might nor by
power, but by my Spirit: That an Army is a harsh, cruel, worldly, brutish,
self-seeking power; and that while it stood it was a burden to all, but them
that received pay in it or by it: And secondly, if it does fall, as you thought
and desired, what must necessarily follow? The ancient Government of the Nation
was suppressed by force; if it had been by Light and Reason, that Light that
removed one, would have showed us a better; but that we could never see: The
old one, being suppressed, (and only suppressed, for all you could do, could
not root it out) and no other prepared; if that force that suppresseth it, be
weary, sick, forsaken, and spent, whether should it go, but to its center, to
the standing foundation? If the force ceales that suppressed, what can be
expected but that the old suppressed Government should rise?

When therefore either the purity or truth of your spirits, or the power of
your reason, shall prevail over your passions and losses, you will rest
satisfied.

That you still arc chafing and rubbing this dead body, to keep or recover life
in it, or are so lamentably angry for the loss of it, I would have that charity
to hope, that it is, because you think: that holiness and godliness will be
suppressed, and profaneness and wickedness will get up.

To satisfy you, know this assuredly: 1. Iniquity and unrighteousness had got
a Sanctuary in and amongst you: and was lodged more secure in your professions
and gifts, then in any company or state of men in the earth: and therefore 2.
It is a most holy and righteous God that has pulled down, or is pulling down
that strong hold, that spiritual wickedness in high places: And 3. As God will
not suffer iniquity to harbor under his own name, and cause: so he will not
suffer it to rest upon the earth: for the earth is the Lords, and the creation
is his. 4. Sin and ungodliness got ground of you, in your greatness and riches;
you know it did: And while you thought to reform the world, you were deformed
by it; and that the spirit that engaged for righteousness against the world,
betrayed that cause; and fell into the unrighteousness and filth that it
opposed: The Lord rejects this pretender, in great jealousy: know assuredly,
God in this act is gone forth with vengeance against unholiness, and will
manifest himself in such holiness as you will not bear, if you were not plunged
into suffering. 5. Know, God has set his holy Son upon his holy hill of Zion:
The Lord reigns in righteousness: and in righteousness has brought you down
for your unholiness: and if you have any true love to holiness: but a spark of
the truth, of what you profess, you will rejoice more in these fires, while
they consume you, and your dross, then ever you did in your success and
greatness: because God is now avenging himself of his wicked enemies, that
lurked in the prayers, preachings, gifts, prophesying of his kingdom; and for
the world, trouble not your self with that: he has laid you aside as unworthy
of, and false to the work of reformation, which you professed; he that refuses
that spirit, because it was unholy and base, has a more excellent spirit,
which he will manifest to the purging of all things and all men: I cannot
without some indignation pass this point: that men so palpably corrupt, and
unclean, when under rebuke and judgment, and that for their impurity, yet
should think, that they are the only Champions of holiness: as if the cause of
holiness did die or fall with them! No, it is iniquity and hypocrisy that
falls: There is an incorruptible holiness that is mighty, and will thoroughly
purge away yours and others dross, and cleanse the whole earth.

As to the things that I write in my Book concerning his Majesty, and those
principles of rest and grace, laid in Noah, and in that Covenant, which God
made with him and his seed for perpetual generations; which I affirm to be the
firm foundations of all the Kingdoms of the world: that tried stone, tried
first in all Nations, and then laid in Zion, and is now the root of his
Majesty's restoration, after his long sufferings: I confess the things are
deep, and remote from common understandings: What I feared and writ concerning
these principles, I find true: that they are little understood, being yet low
and under a vail, and therefore might appear remote and strange, both to his
Majesty and the Nation, which way prolong our trouble, etc. They are so
indeed, understood neither by one side nor other; Let them lie and sleep a
while; foundations must do so: when shaking and troubles make us need them,
they will be enquired after: if any do, there they are.

But my friends, let us reason a little together, and lay aside all allusions,
and all passions, and soberly consider what evil was offered to you in that
book; After the case of the prisoners, and so of the party, was represented (I
still think to their advantage, more then ever I yet met with elsewhere) the
desire was, to wave that trial, and procure another Court, that should try
principles, that might at least supersede or succeed that. What the issue of
that Court and trial is, we now see, and had reason to foresee. Supposing his
Majesty and the Law of the Nation, to be offended, and provoked against them
that took away the life of the late King: what probable or rational way was
left, to save the Prisoners; but by moving that they and their principles, and
so the principles of the whole party, should be tried in a higher and more
spiritual Court: A trial must be; the common Law, and ordinary way certainly
destroys both life, liberty, and estate: To avoid that, another must be
proposed: What rests to be tried, but opinions and principles? And how can that
be done humanely, but by such a Court, and by such a Law, as is there
propounded? If those principles are good, they may not only be justified, but
prevail to rule: if they be not found so, then their deceit will be discovered,
your judgments delivered from them, and the prisoners and Party in a fair way
to be pardoned by, and reconciled to the present power: Or else a third and
middle state would have appeared: A large, righteous, and merciful Law might
have been produced, that might have united, comprehended, and saved both
Parties: I confess freely, I do believe and know, it is to be had, and will
come forth, whenever the righteous and good Law of God, may obtain among men,
and right reason may be heard.

I confess to obtain this, I did declare to his Majesty, my sense and
judgment of your principles; which I have long had, and do still retain, upon
a judgment made by many and great trials in my spirit; and confirmed by
constant experience, much examination and deliberation: And being many years
fully convinced of, humbled, and sore afflicted for that profane, carnal,
cruel, and selfish spirit, in which this work was begun and carried on, I did
and do still offer them up to trial; and was and am still willing, that his
Majesty and the Nation might see, that they need not seek the lives of men,
seeing they might have the principles, which is the best satisfaction can be
given.

It is that which I have long desired, even of this Party, when they were up,
That we might have a Bar of Religion, and Reason, where the right of all
parties in the Nation may be fairly argued and heard; but could never obtain
it: I do judge it the true and only Christian, and humane way, to come to
Peace; and therefore I shall and do earnestly desire it: There is nothing in the
earth that I do seek more then this, That my mind and judgment may be tried by
the Reason and Religion of the Nation; or the Reason and Religion of the
Nation, tried by my Judgment.

Had it been a known enemy, that had propounded such a thing to you, why should
you be angry at it? or why not embrace and seek it? For a people that profess
themselves Spiritual and Saints, to engage in a war, to the expense of so much
blood for their Religion, and at last wave an argument for it; it is strange:
you will sure in time examine the reason, why it should be so; And consider
whether that cause be truly Christian, that avoids a Christian trial; that
shrinks from reason, and will not appear against its enemy, but in arms, with a
rude and tumultuous rabble: Truth and integrity, cannot but rejoice in a combat
of Reason: and it is gross guilt and carnality, either in the cause or persons,
that declines argument, and flies to brutish force.

If you fear treachery, that your principles might have been drawn out, and so
your persons exposed to danger: That wisdom that makes you suspect, would
enable to prevent such danger: freedom of discourse, is commonly granted in
time of arbitration; with security against taking advantage by such discourses:
But alas, neither you, nor any other, no not your enemies, can possibly bring
forth your principles so ill-favored, as they have appeared in action: I dare
say, there is no man in this Nation, but his Reason or Religion will teach him
a better state of things, then has been acted in the Nation, since these wars
begun; that no man's mind or reason is so crooked and absurd as the series of
actions have been: It will be found that poor men, have been hurried and thrust
into many things, either by company, incogitancy, the influences of the stars,
or rather the predominancie of evil spirits, by the irresistible fate of times,
or some superior overruling determinations of Providence: Few men have
exercised judgment in these wars; either humane or Christian, but have been
tossed about, by the earthquakes, and violent commotions of greater powers:
And if we could come but to look into men's minds, when passions and furies are
over, we shall see that men are better things, then they have appeared in this
Scene of War: And that at bottom there is but one man, one nature, one
religion, and that a good one: Therefore I know I am a friend to you and to
mankind, in seeking to draw forth the reason of men, to sift and try
principles and opinions. But there is so much jealousy and accusation in the
world, that men are not only jealous of all others, but of themselves also. If
men misjudge mankind, they must needs misjudge themselves: the first they do,
it is too manifest: and therefore cannot be wholly free from the second: It is
sure your too hard thoughts of your selves, and suspicion of your principles,
that makes you afraid to appear in them: I know there is a strong passion of
fear upon you; a great dread of sufferings in your minds: And all your thoughts
are, how to bear the evil of this day; so drowned in a sense of it, that you
can hardly think a thought of any thing else, nor admit of a proposition of
peace and safety to your selves.

It is true and evident, that the way and course of your actions, have been
directly against the ancient power, authority, and Law of the Nation: And you
are unhappily set in an opposite and contrary spirit to them: and have done as
much against them, as you could: You thought you had laid them all low enough,
and had buried them so deep, that they could never rise again: And that you had
gotten into a heaven, into the Kingdom of Christ, or so near it, that all
danger of suffering had been quite past:

But now you see, that all the weight and strength of your Prayers, Gifts and
Knowledge, together with your Armies, cannot keep down the things that you
opposed, nor uphold you against them: But contrary to all your thoughts, when
you were strongest they rose up against you. A state, law, and power of a
Nation, is a mighty thing; and to rise up from death and the curse, (whether
you had sent it) provoked against you by so many and great injuries, must needs
be very terrible to you: It would scare a man to see his enemy alive, that he
thought he had slain, were it but a single person: But to find the whole
Magistracy and Ministry of the Nation, the King, Nobility, and Gentry, with
many thousands of oppressed people, rise up against you, in all the power and
strength of the Nation, Civil and Military (all which have suffered from you) I
know it must needs astonish and amaze you; coming upon you so much contrary to
the assurance you had (as you thought from God) of a better state: I do not
wonder when I consider it, that you are overwhelmed with fears, and despair of
receiving any good from them, that rise from that pit of destruction, into
which you had doomed them for ever: looking upon them as you do, as
Antichristian, enemies to God, and for in rejected, you cannot expect good from
them.

You are so oppressed with the evil that is upon you, that you sink into
resolutions of suffering, and judge your selves lost for the present; and your
thoughts are only to bear the indignation that is upon you: You could not
forgive your selves, nor your enemies; neither could your enemies forgive you:
I do forgive them, and you; and so shall, do the worst you can: For my love is
absolute, without condition, and therefore without repentance: In love to you,
I proposed a sacrifice, and an atonement: Which is not your honesty or
godliness: but these things which we call principles, (I care not to call them
so any longer) I mean opinions or tenants, which I say, are delusions, deceits,
or at best broken, imperfect, and short apprehensions, or mis-apprehensions of
things, that have misled you in all your business, into such crooked paths;
that perverted your Counsels, corrupted your spirits, and made you a vexation
to your selves and friends, a burden and scourge to the Nation: These would I
have found out, and sacrificed, that not only your honesty and uprightness may
be discovered, which is certainly another thing from them, but that your lives
and liberties may be preserved also.

But neither side, would regard what was offered: You would not part with your
opinions, called principles, no nor offer them to trial Neither would the Law,
and authority of the Nation accept of any such sacrifice: but being of a more
outward and earthly nature, has required outward and bodily satisfaction: What
could not be resisted, we must be content patiently to endure.

SECT. VI.
WE may now hope, that this scene of blood is over, and that the Law and
Authority of the Nation is satisfied, if it be not again provoked by new
attempts upon the peace: My soul is a friend to peace, and an enemy to
destruction: And therefore I shall, I hope, perpetually seek Peace, and
endeavor to prevent mischief: May I now obtain so much favor of you, in your
low and afflicted state, as calmly and rationally to consider, what I have and
do propose; weigh it well.

I do affirm, that there is that good in the office and institution of a King;
and that good in the nature and person or his Majesty, as a man and a Prince,
if we consider no more, that you may live under him, with more Peace, spiritual
comfort, more holiness, and godliness, and with less sin and evil, then you
have done all these wars, or since: This I affirm upon knowledge of a sure root
and foundation laid by God and Jesus Christ, in the beginning of the world (now
manifested and revealed) so firmly and strongly, that no humors, passions, or
lusts of men, nor any spirits and powers of darkness can overthrow: so that
what ever men say or do, the foundation is sure; they may prejudice themselves,
and deprive themselves of the comfort and benefit of it, but the foundation
remains firm: for it is that tried stone, that has born all Nations, in all
ages.

I have likewise affirmed to his Majesty concerning you, and your way and
work: that the spirit of that Ministry, in which you acted against him, is
dead: that your power both Civil and Military has resigned to him; and that
the principles, or opinions being proper only for that work of destroying, and
of their own nature weak and short, are reducible: And then, that there are in
you, those gifts and abilities, that may be of singular use to him, and the
Kingdom: So that upon a good understanding between you, the King may be happy
in you, and you in him.

As the thing propounded is not only just and honest in the sight of all men:
but also good and profitable for all Parties: To you, no less then saving of
life, liberty and estate: To his Majesty, security, honor, and the great
advantage of the hearts, affections and judgments of a great and considerable
people: And to all the Nation, that rich blessing of Peace: in knowledge and
right understanding: So the means propounded to this end, is as innocent and
safe: That wise, sober, and spiritual men, of large hearts, and indifferent in
their judgments, should have the hearing and trying of men's principles and
opinions.

The end being unquestionably good, peace and love: and the means to that end
proportionable, a trial of men's opinions before the wisest and best in the
Church: We cannot reasonably doubt of a good effect: except we conclude one of
these two things: that there is not with men, or in the Church, that Grace and
Spirit of Christ, which is able to judge and lead into a way of Peace: or else
that men are not willing to receive that blessing of Peace, though it should be
manifested: No man can conclude the first, without the guilt of unbelief: and
denying the truth of the Promise of God, that his spirit shall abide with his
people for ever: nor the second without great injury and uncharitableness to
mankind: But if his word and Spirit be with us; and that Word and Spirit be
sufficient for that end, whereunto it is given, which is to purify, enlighten,
heal and unite the body of Christ; (to deny it is blasphemy against that
Spirit) then walking according to the rule of that Word and Spirit, we need not
doubt of obtaining that end, which is so much according to his own nature;
which is love, peace and salvation.

Why you should think that such a proposal should come from an enemy, I can
impute it to nothing but this, the extremity of your anguish, under your fore
and grievous loss and disappointment; which makes all things seem harsh, while
the mind is drowned in that sense: It is true, you meet with sharp reproof
there; but you must come to find true love in the severest reproof, before you
can be soundly healed. Proposals of a Treaty and Peace, for the preventing of
present and imminent danger, use not to be the way of enemies: If such things
should come from a professed enemy, I think the nature of the things deserves
acceptance, and not scorn or reviling: I confess I think you have wronged me,
and the Book, and I therefore might require reparations of you; I know in time
you will give it: There is that right and reason in you, which will give me
satisfaction, when it shall recover it self, from the passions of fear, grief
and anger; which now darken and suppress it.

In the mean time let us consider, whether there be not something in the Book,
that is yet improveable for the good of the whole Party that stand in
opposition to the present Government, and so are in danger to be destroyed by
it.

We hope his Majesty, and in him, the Law is satisfied, and by that sacrifice
of blood that has been shed, is attoned, as to past things: yet the breath is
not healed, but your spirits are still set in opposition to the power of the
Nation; and the Law and Power of the Nation, looks upon you with jealousy and
an evil eye, thinking that yet you may attempt against the Peace of the
Kingdom: Great discontent appears in you; it cannot be hid; all endeavors are
used to uphold, and revive the cause; and consequently, that enmity and war
that has formerly been acted against his Majesty and Party.

This is seen, known and felt; and does undoubtedly provoke the Power of the
Nation, to endeavor the suppressing the Party, for preventing future
inconvenience: It cannot be otherwise, all men do it: When you had the Power,
you did as they now do: you interrupted their meetings, and required Oaths of
them: This now fills the prisons, ruins many Families, exasperates men's
Spirits into bitterness and wrath, which destroys the sweetness and comfort of
religion, wounds the life and power of godliness, and grieves the good spirit
of love and peace in Christ.

What ever you think of it now, I know it is in it self a good and merciful
work, and will be so acknowledged by you in time; to reconcile a poor broken
people, (guilty by Law, and their own consciences,) to the authority and power
of the Nation, in which they live. For a naked people, to be in their
judgments and affections zealously set against the Law and Government of a
Nation, which is provoked, and enraged; newly recovered and restored;
experienced, forewarned, and fore-armed against them; what ever may be
expected hereafter, there is in it, apparent ruin for the present: Alas, a Law
and Power, is an Iron Scepter; and in the hand of a self preserving spirit
(such as was in you, and is in all men yet) must needs be hard to them that are
professed enemies to it.

The consideration of it wounds my soul, and affects my bowels of compassion to
you; which urges me to do what I can, to prevent misery to your persons and
families:

And therefore I do earnestly entreat you to consider seriously, whether your
botom upon which you stand, in this divided and opposite state, to the present
power and Government of Church and Kingdom, be sufficient to bear you up,
against what you are likely to suffer if you persist.

The foundation upon which you stand, is this; You presume and conclude, First,
That you are the select and only people of God; his Zion, and Israel; the true
and only Gospel Saints: And those that you oppose are Egypt, Babylon, the
World, and Antichristian. Secondly, that your way in which you have and do
walk, and the works that you have done, and would do again, are according to
the pure word and Law of God; and that which you oppose, is all Wickedness,
Superstition, and Idolatry: Thirdly, That the war in which you have been
engaged, and upon which you stand, is the way of God according to his will and
word, and therefore has been and will be owned and justified by him.

Supposing all this, that you are the people of God, and Zion, in Gods way and
word, engaged in his cause, against Babylon and Antichrist, there is then an
unquestionable ground and assurance of a blessed success, from the manifold
promises of the Scripture.

But if this be not true; and that you in this state, and in this opposition,
are not that body that shall attain those promises: And this be not the only
way of God, in which you walk, and this war and engagement, be not the means
appointed by God, to attain that glory you expect; then be your intentions
never so good and zealous, your prayers never so fervent, your gifts never so
many, your constancy never so great, yet you will fail; and the further you
proceed in it, the greater your loss will be.

If all this should be true; that you should be the people, yours the way, war
the means: yet if you fail but in the circumstance of time: if this be not the
time determined for the fulfilling of what you expect; there is righteous and
merciful reason, for your retreating, from such an opposition and engagement.

To have faith exercised, about the promises of God, to be fulfilled in these
latter days to his people, is an excellent thing; whereby God will have glory,
his people deliverance, and the whole earth peace; But you may have a sight of
this at a distance, and know assuredly, you shall have your share of it; and be
entertained with great joy concerning it, have strong persuasions about it: and
yet may not attain it, in that state of enmity, and opposition in which you
stand; but in another more large, holy and spiritual way; Or the whole Church
may enjoy it here, and your souls for ever: and yet your bodies may fall as
carcasses in the wilderness, for the impurity, carnality, uncharitableness,
frowardness, and enmity of your way, and spirits in your present state: And
therefore it is love and mercy to you, to put you upon a thorough trial and
examination of your bottom, spirit, and way.

I consider not now your particular forms of Worship, which are various, and
opposite one to another; Nor your private and personal holiness, fear of God,
conscience of his commands, obedience to his word, so far as you know; which
are not only to be admitted, but approved and encouraged in a right way, and in
a right spirit: but I would consider, the way, actions, and work of the whole
body, in this public engagement, against the Government of the Nation: and
your private forms, gifts and godliness as they have acted, and still continue
in the same opposition: in order to turn your minds toward that, which else is
like to ruin your selves and families.

If this great affair and cause, in which you have acted, and do constantly
persist in, be the right, and that you are the people, yours the way, this the
means and time to attain the glorious things expressed in the Scripture; then
you must have these two things for your foundation, strength and rule; the Word
and the Spirit of God: If you are led by them, and stand in them, you will
certainly prevail: if not, you will fall, and must repent.

We may consider them either jointly or severally; for though they are two, yet
they are one also, and never separated.

Let us consider the word of God, the Scriptures: There are three great works
of God, declared in it: The deliverance of the children of Israel from Aeypt,
The redeeming of them out of Babylon: And the grace and salvation revealed in
the Gospel: We have built our work upon all these, and do think that our cause
is the same with them all: and therefore we have been fed continually with
strength which we got, as we could, from them all: But whether our work do
justly and evenly square to any of them is the question: I am fully satisfied
in my self, that it does not: And that you, if you will be ingenuous, and in
any measure of uprightness, examine what you have done, you will quickly find;
that you have not in your whole business come near your foundation, and
pattern: I shall only hint some few things to you, as they do occurr, and leave
you to consider the rest.

Only by the way, be persuaded to think and feel, that you are but men, and may
err: many may err: many good men may err: actually you have erred: though you
be much better then others, yet you may err, and err greatly; sometimes the
best people err most; Israel sinned beyond all the Heathen: God will shame and
humble all; and make first last, and the last first: the best worst, and worst
best: The Jews that seek, shall not attain: the Gentiles that sought not, shall
attain. You differ one from another, and so must err one against another: you
have all sinned and come short of the glory of God.

And therefore you may have erred, as to this business, fundamentally, and
either not know your bottom, or be upon a false bottom And so through loss and
missing, come to attain a true and right bottom. If once you be but willing to
be tried, you will quickly see much.

SECT. VII.
COnsider first, Whether this great business, you have and are engaged in, do
justly and evenly square to the first foundation, Isreal's deliverance out of
Egypt; It has been so believed, so prayed, preached, and praised but not so
done; For

1. Israel was visited by God; he came expressly to Moses, spoke to him in the
bush; when he had: called him, he sent him to Israel to lead them forth: they
stirred not till he had proved his commission: But we can boast of no such
visit; the troubles of the Nation gave us opportunity to deliver our selves:
the necessities of the Parliament made us useful, whereby we got power, and so
by degrees broke the yoke that was upon us.

2. Isratl had a King and High Priest given of God, to be their Leader and
Guide: he was also himself their Leader; he went before them in the wilderness,
in a pillar of cloud by day, and of fire by night, and never left them: We had
neither King nor Priest, no Guide nor Leader, but left to shift for our selves,
and wander from one thing to another, as our own crooked and blind reason led
us.

3. They had Officers sent by God, which did call them forth, and then continue
to judge them, and God maintained his own, and their authority over them: We
were called out at first, not by Officers from God, but by part of that we call
Egypt, or the world; by the Parliament, which we used as Egypt, or Egyptians,
or worse; we overthrew them and their authority.

4. Israel had a Law given them from heaven, and one Tabernacle built for all,
according to the pattern, in the Mount of God: We never had a Law from heaven
to govern us, but were left to the Laws and Customs of Egypt, of the world: No
pattern for a Tabernacle, but every one built according to his own mind; which
must needs make division, and so bring confusion.

5. God destroyed Egypt with his Plagues, and armies of Frogs, Lice, Flies and
Locusts; but we our selves were these Armies, that eat up this Egypt: we were
the Frogs, Lice and Locusts, that vexed the Egyptians.

6. Israel were led out of Egypt, into a Land that the Lord their God gave
them: We could never get out of Egypt, nor had we any Land to go to: They were
driven out of Egypt by Pharaoh and the Egyptians; we drove Pharaoh and the
Egyptians out of Egypt; and kept Egypt for our selves: the goodly buildings,
the riches, honors, preferments, and all the Laws, Ordinances, and Customs of
Egypt; and could do no other ways: for we had no Land of our own to go to.

7. Pharaoh and Egypt first tasked and oppressed, then persued Israel: We had
got the way, of tasking and oppressing Egypt, and then persued Pharaoh into the
Sea, and beyond the Sea. Pharaoh and his Charets and Horsemen were drowned in
the red Sea, for his pursuing Israel: And now our Charets and Horsemen, are
drowned in a kind of a Sea of confusion; and it was for persuing with endless
and implacable enmity.

Here is a wide difference betwixt us and our foundation; and as wide an end:
There, Israel overcame, here, Egypt overcomes: And if that be our bottom, and
we build so very far from it, we cannot expect a better end.

Let us consider the second ground, the redeeming of Israel out of Babylon;
whether we have been truer to that Copy: we have made great use of those
Scriptures, Prophesies and Promises; how justly, must be examined.

1. First Israel did not destroy their enemies; Babylon and the King of Babylon
was destroyed by the hands of the Medes and Persians, under the command of
Cyrus a heathen Prince, but anointed for that purpose: But we have destroyed
Babylon our selves; and therefore have hitherto acted but the part of Cyrus;
the part of Israel is yet to come.

2. In the deliverance of Israel out of Egypt, God visited them by a King of
their own, Moses, Who was King in Jesurun: In this deliverance, God visited
them in the Emperor Cyrus, and charged him to build his house: And the Jews
moved not but by Proclamation, Command, and Commission from the Prince. When a
succeeding King Artaxerxes, forbade them to build the City, they ceased; until
Darius made a new Decree, enlarged their Commission, and contributed to the
work: Afterward another Artaxerxes was stirred up, to give command for the
carrying on the same work, and supplying of all the wants of the builders: We
had no such authority for our work: but on the contrary, we went forth upon our
own heads, at our own pleasure, according to our own minds: without any
authority; and overthrew the Authority of the Nation, because they would not
join with us.

3. Israel were the known people of God, visibly distinct from the world; owned
to be so: Even by those Princes in whose Dominions they were: God gave them
honor in the sight of the heathen, where they were carried captive: We have no
such visible character, no such justification; but assume it to our selves, and
destroy others, because they would not so honor us.

4. Israel, as they were outwardly and visibly the people of God, so they were
the known heirs of that Country, to which they went; they had an unquestioned
Civil right to it; although they had been for a time, sequestered from it for
their sins: And when they returned home, they recovered but what they lost,
enjoyed their own Temple, Priests, Tithes, Offerings: But we, not content with
our own inheritance, usurp other men's rights: Indeed the parallel fits the
other side much better: who have been for their sins driven out, and now return
to their inheritance; to their Law, Church, Temple and Worship, from which they
were sequestered and driven away

5. When God brought Israel out of Babylon, he instituted the same Officers,
Prince and Priest, that he did, when he brought them out of Egypt: For Moses
and Aaron then, there was Zerubabel and Joshua now: and to those was given a
spirit that would scatter confusion; a line and plumet, the seven eyes, the
fullness of the Spirit, to furnish them for the repairing the Temple and City of
God: The two anointed ones, that stand before the Lord of the whole earth:
which through the golden pipes, empty the golden oil out of themselves. And
therefore it was then, not by might nor by armies, but by my Spirit, says the
Lord: But alas, we have no King, nor Priest, no anointing to scatter confusion,
but confusion scattered us: Our Motto may be contrary to theirs: Not by Gods
Spirit, but by might and by Armies: For we were successful in nothing else, but
in force and arms: Therefore if the Scripture be a rule to measure your
actions, you must confess you have grossly erred, and walked not only in
crooked, but in contrary paths to it.

Consider fairly the third dispensation of God to his people, the grace and
salvation revealed by Christ and the Spirit in the Gospel: Gospel Ordinances,
Gospel-Saints, Gospel Order, and a Gospel Spirit, have been much spoke of: I am
grieved at my heart for you, to think that any men should be so grossly
deceived, or deceive themselves, as to persuade themselves, that such works as
you have done, and such a way as you are engaged in, should have any
countenance or authority from the holy and pure Gospel of of the Lamb of God:
For though you have endeavored to frame your outward forms of Worship,
according to the outward letter of the Gospel: yet you have denied and opposed
both the Doctrine and Spirit of the Lamb and his Apostles: and that not only in
those things which you call miscarriages, but in the main of your work and
business.

1. First Christ begins his Ministry with blessing; he blessed the poor in
Spirit, them that mourn, the meek, the merciful, the peacemakers, the
persecuted: so he taught, so he practiced: he was himself a Lamb; he sent his
Disciples out as Sheep among Wolves; and commanded, resist not evil, love your
enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, pray for
them which despitefully use you, and persecute you, that you may be the
children of your Father which is in heaven, etc. This was the Law of his whole
Life and Death; He that will be my Disciple, must deny himself, and take up his
Cross, and follow me. Alas, alas, how can you look into this glass, and not
blush to see the deformities of your whole work, how directly contrary yours is
to this: Instead of blessing, you have cursed; What he blessed, you reject; the
meek, the mourners, the merciful, the peacemakers, the persecuted; you begun
this war, because you would not endure persecution: Instead of not resisting
evil, you have inflicted evil, and would not be resisted in it: Instead of
loving enemies, you have hated and destroyed them: Instead of blessing them,
you curse as bitterly as you can: Instead of bearing persecution, you
persecute: Instead of denying self, you sight for self: Instead of taking up
the Cross, you fly to force to avoid it, and load others with it, make others
bear it. So has the blessed God set things, that they that are not with him,
are against him: And they who refuse to bear the Cross, must become Crucifiers
of others: All men that will not endure persecution, they will persecute; they
that cannot or will not be killed, will kill. So have you done, and therefore
been enemies to the Cross of Christ; and so enemies to Christ himself; for he
is crucified in all crucifying: And they that hate the flesh of the whore, and
burn her with fire, they make war with the Lamb also, Rev. 16.14. So have you
made war with the Lamb, with his doctrine, nature, life and death

2. Christ our Lord, humbled himself, and became a servant to others; you have
exalted your selves, as far as you could, into all kinds of places of honor:
He became poor, that he might make others rich: you have made others poor, that
you may be rich: He suffered the errors and contradictions of sinners; but
sinners (those that you have judged sinners) have suffered your contradictions,
in your several Oaths and Impositions: He bore the infirmities and diseases of
the whole Nation; the whole Nation have born your infirmities and diseases,
your blindness, haltings and staggerings: He bore the sins and curse of the
people; The poor people have born yours, both sin and curse: He died, that
others might live; You kill others, that you may live your selves: He suffered,
the just for the unjust; but others have suffered from you, because they
resisted your unjust power and will: I believe you have been misled by an evil
spirit; and therefore I pity you: Alas, you have walked in darkness, and not
known whether you have gone. You did not think your way and work had been so
contrary to the way of Christ: you found it weak and short; but now you will
see, that it is in the whole, from the rise of it, to the end of it, contrary
to the nature and spirit of the Lamb, and to his Law and Doctrine.

3. Christ in the Gospel, brought forth a new Creation, a new and Spiritual
Kingdom, a new Law, new Ordinances, new Ministers, new Worship: And this, not
in opposition to, nor to the destruction or disturbance of, any authority,
either of the Jews or Gentiles; but he taught and practiced obedience to both:
But you have only disturbed and destroyed, what you could, of the Government of
the Nation; but have brought forth no better, no new Kingdom, or new Law for
the people: and what forms of worship you have made for your selves, and
several Parties, are but some broken pieces of the letter, of the old
Apostolical frame, set up in another spirit.

Let us compare your work and way with the Spirit, and his holy and pure
Ministry: He came from Heaven, himself, clothed with an outward and visible
appearance, in great Majesty and Power, openly manifesting himself to all
Nations, in mighty signs and wonders, that were his own and not another: He
did truly glorify Christ, and set him up above his enemies, making them know
that Jesus was the Son of God, and that the Kingdom of God was with men: And
this to the face and in the consciences of all the powers of the earth: He
formed and built a Church upon the rock, from the heavenly pattern: He came
from heaven, and carried the Saints into heaven, and made them sit down
together with Christ, in the heavenly: He led them into the holiest, and
brought them to Mount Zion indeed, the City of the living God, the heavenly
Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels, to the general Assembly,
etc. Have you had the substance and truth of any of these things with you? You
have been able to talk of them to notion, fancy, or prophecy something of
them, which others could not: But had you had this heavenly glory, you needed
not your earthly Armies, nor worldly Polities, nor the help of profane and
loose people and practices to save you.

The Spirit had his own manifestation, his union, his own tongues,
interpretation of tongues, his own signs and miracles, his own power and glory,
pure, holy and clear; his own anointing was sufficient to lead into all truth:
But instead of manifesting, you have by your ways extremely darkened others,
your selves, and the name of Christ, and Religion which you professed: Instead
of tongues, and interpretation to others, you were in such confusion, that you
could not your selves understand one another: you pretended to signal mercies
and successes; but they are not spiritual, but such as are common to others: so
is victory in battle: Instead of being led into all truth, alas you were led
into all kinds of contradictions, and into many erroneous ways, which proved
to be lies and delusions to you.

And therefore you must not any longer boast of the Spirit of God: You cannot
show that he is descended upon you, or that he has led you, as he did the
Apostles, into a heavenly state: You are still in the world, in the gross
uncleanness of the world, in the wrath, malice, destruction, pride,
covetousness, deceit of the world.

You are, and have been, under the Ministry or Judgment of the Spirit: In his
giving you up to corruption, that you may be manifest to be but men, and not
born from on high: In blowing upon and infatuating your Counsels; In scattering
and dividing your spirits: In rejecting your work and way, as not his own, as
abominable to his purity, goodness, truth and righteousness: In judging of you
in the sight of all the world, for abusing his name: and in kindling a sire
upon all your riches, honors, and works; a fire of jealousy that burns like
an Oven; which will purify you: And therefore you are in this day, nearer to
the Spirit of God, then you were from the first day you engaged.

Consider now what ground you stand upon, in your present opposition to this
Power and Providence: You cannot stand up with Moses and Aaron, in their
Office: for you have not led us out of Egypt into Canaan; but have been
entangled and fettered in Egyptian darkness: Nor can you stand up with Joshua
and Zerubbabel; they scattered confusion, and brought Israel out of Babel: you
have led us and your selves into a Babel of confusion: Nor can you stand before
the son of man and his Spirit; alas, you are fallen before him, judged and
rejected by him for ever; never to he restored in that vile and abominable way,
in which you stood and still are.

I desire you to remember what is my intent in this present discourse; it is to
undeceive you, and to bring you off from those unsound principles, in which you
are engaged, and in which you will ruin, if you be not delivered out of them:
And to show you good reason for inviting you, as I did in my Book, to offer up
your Principles to a fair trial, in order to satisfy his Majesty, and
reconcile you to his Government: And if you consider what I have said here, it
will be found no wicked design, but righteous and merciful Counsel, both to
your selves and to the Nation.

SECT. VII.
BEsides the three former great dispensations in Scripture, which you have
seemed to make the bottom of your Cause and Way: There is one thing more, which
sometimes you have glanced at with your eye, as a rule to you; and that is the
Prophetical Scriptures, yet unfulfilled, and especially the Revelations: You
have sometimes harped at them, and catched hold of some broken pieces of them:
But you never could attain such a knowledge of them, as to make them either a
founda^ion or rule: I do believe, and know, that the Revelation is a line,
drawn from Christ his first appearing, quite through that state, unto his
second appearing, and leads the Church both into her suffering and captivity;
and out of it into glory: And therefore does discover the state of the
Gospel Church, from the beginning to the end: from Christ his Ministry to the
glorious and eternal Kingdom of God: And so all the works of God, in these
times, both in Churches and Nations, come under the Law or Line of that Book.

And therefore those revelations rightly opened* will extricate the Church,
from her Babylonish enemy confusion, and enable her to build up her self again
in glory, peace, light, and love: That line will also measure the late
revolutions in this Nation. For I am fully satisfied that so considerable a
work as this has been, in and about both Church and Kingdom, was certainly in
the Council of God, and also expressed in his word.

But this much I know, that you have been as ignorant of that book, as you have
been of your own work; and that you have not had, nor yet have a reed to
measure, either the one or the other by: neither can you rationally six your
work upon any one part of that book: Nor have you had light to make that, or
any part of it, or of any Scripture, a Law to you in your work: but have been
driven on by snatches, without any rule or judgment, or any dependence of one
thing upon another. Which is not the understanding of a Man or Christian: but
in plain terms, it is the beast: Being led and leading by impulses, or by
present sensible, and occasional things, and not by any certain rule. If the
beast and his mark* image and name, be not yet overcome in your spirits, as
certainly he is not, then though you had power and a kingdom, it was but with
the beast, and but one hour. What that means, read and you may understand.

Having fallen upon the Prophesies and Revelations, which are the only written
rule of the dispensations of God to his Church and people in these days, for
your better instruction hereafter, know these three things: 1. It is not wise
or sa^e, to appear in any public business, before you understand clearly, by
the unsealing of that book, where you are, what you are to do, whether you are
to go, and what will be the end. For if that be the only declaration of Gods
mind, concerning the government of his Church and Kingdom, in these latter
ages, we are not to stir, either upon guesses, presumptions, or broken hin^s:
nor to be moved by a crowd, a noise, a multitude which are uncertain and
deceitful things, and will fail any people that follow them, but upon clear
knowledge of that only rule. 2. That ignorance of a rule to act by, and
forwardness to attempt without a rule, in such great and weighty matters, do
declare that there is yet an enemy among you; the Prince of darkness, which
hinders you from seeing your rule: And also much fleshly, unmortified worldly
matter, that dares move, without the knowledge of that rule: And where these
two are; an enemy that blinds, and a bold impatient, unmortified mind, to
follow him blindly, no wonder if both fall into the ditch. 3. You are, and have
been fulfilling some part of that book, it is no question; if you know not what
part of it; it is but reasonable that you should fear, that it is an evil part:
you little think how bad it is: Where there darkness, there is also a lie:
Therefore seeing you know not, nor can say what it is, I may say it is far
worse then you imagine: you shall know more hereafter, if God please.

We have tried your state, work and spirit: First by the Law of Moses and his
Ministry: Secondly, by the Prophets, and the deliverance of Israel out of
Babylon: Thirdly, by the Gospel, and the Ministry of Christ and the Apostles.
Fourthly, by the Prophetical Scriptures, to be fulfilled since Christ and the
Apostles: and do find that neither of all these are your foundation; because
you have not kept to them, nor made them your rule: Before we give a final
judgment, I shall show you the thing it self, that you have professed and
pretended to; that Zion, and that Jerusalem, which has been so much talked of:
I will a little unvail her to you, as she is with me, and stands before me, and
at this time going out of Babylon.

1. She is an holy Nation, City or Kingdom: Holy and righteous, not by gifts,
notion, purpose and prophesying; but by nature, and in the matter and substance
of her being: being one with the Lamb, and so in her nature patient, innocent,
meek: She is from heaven; Jerusalem that is from above; comes from God out of
heaven, and is of the same nature with him; and therefore has his name written
upon her; which she could not justly wear, if she have not his nature likewise.

2. She is an holy City or Nation, built and formed according to the eternal
Law or mind of God, in most excellent union, beauty and order: and not a
confused heap of profane and filthy matter: She has both Magistracy and
Ministry in equal and proportionable parts, all in order: She is built both
according to the Law and Gospel, and has the beauty of both, and sings the
song of Moses and the Lamb, in excellent harmony.

3. In this state, she is joined to the Lord, her head, in immediate
conjunction and union: And the Lamb is with her, dwells in her: she is the
Mountain of God, or the City of the living God.

4. She is washed, cleansed, enlightened, and filled with the Spirit of the
Lord, whereby she is established, strengthened, guided and kept, in even and
straight paths; she is adorned and beautified with righteousness, wisdom,
peace, honor and salvation* and therefore when she appears, she will be a
praise in the earth.

5. She is in all things ordered and ruled, by the pure and perfect Law and
Word of God, whereby she walks steadily, surely, justly, to God, to men, and to
all creatures.

These things, in word and notion, are not strange to you! that Zion is a Body,
a Nation, a holy People, united and compact according to the heavenly pattern,
joined unto God, sanctified, established and adorned by the Spirit, ruled by
the eternal Word.

Then consider and compare your state with this Zion: where is this body, this
holy matter? or when was this body formed? was it in the Parliament? at what
time? though you sifted and purged it, yet it was mixed, unclean and corrupt;
and afterward rejected as chaff. Or was the Army this holy body, with all that
vile and filthy rabble? If this was the body, how came it to be such an offense
to you? why did it at last cast you off, and betray you and your cause? Or is
it all the godly people? why then are you not drawn out, united, built into a
holy Nation, or City by your selves? Zion and no Union, Consistencie or Order?
No Magistrates nor public Ministers? Can you say when, in which of the ten
powers, that you set up in twelve years, you were formed by the Spirit, or Word
of God? which state, Oath, Protestation, Covenant or Engagement was made by the
Word of God? If all, then you were led into contradictions, if any one, why did
not that one judge and condemn all the rest? and why does it not still stand
and defend it self and you? It grieves my soul to think, that you should be so
drunk with the wine of your own gifts and success, as to need such sensible
demonstrations, to convince you, of the evil of your state.

We have briefly showed you the beauty of Zion: I can give you a view of your
own state, possibly you have not observed it, as I have done: now you have time
and opportunity to think seriously of it: It is this.

You are a confused heap, raised from the earth, by the tumults and commotions
of the people, being impatient of suffering, and full of consultations for
self-ease, self-safety and advantage; actuated and stirred by the Providence of
God, who can make use of all creatures, natures, and dispositions: And
sanctified by, and furnished with a spirit and gifts, fit to execute his
displeasure upon the Nation for their sins: Finding success beyond your
expectations, you grew into high opinions and conceits of your selves;
overthrew the Government of the Nation; break all Oaths and Bonds; prey upon
the wealth of the Nation; enrich and exalt your selves, under a name and
profession of Godliness; for which you are rejected into misery and shame.

I do feel what effect this may have upon your minds; some will think it very
hard and severe; so think all children when they are beaten: Others will rage
and gnash their tee^h, yet it must be born: Others will say, this is true, but
why should it be published to all the world? I would avoid it, if it were
possible: but it cannot be otherwise: how can one write to a people, but all
may read that will? But alas, I see it is most righteous and just, that you
should bear shame; for you have put the Lord to open shame; and your iniquities
and abominations are discovered, in the sight of all the Nations: they cannot
be hid; and public sins must have public shame, public confession and
repentance, Eze. 16.52. Thou that have judged thy sisters, Samaria and Sodom,
bear thy own shame for thy sins, that thou have committed, more abominable then
they: they are more righteous then thou; yea be thou confounded also, and bear
thy shame, in that thou have justified thy sisters: And know for certain, that
till you are ashamed and confounded for your abominations, you never can, never
shall, know a better state: But when you see God pacified toward you, it will
make you to remember, to be confounded, and never more to open thy mouth; And
then will he lead you into a better state.

Therefore know this, I do not charge all this upon some eminent persons of the
Party, as some do; nor upon the persons of the whole Party, as most do: My soul
pitties you; I know you have a sore and grievous burden upon you; and your
personal sins are punished with personal judgments: I do both pity and
forgive you, and if I could prevent it, I would: It was the intent of the other
Book, and is the intent of this, to take you off from your state, and spirit of
opposition to the power of the Nation, from which you have, do, and will
suffer, so long as you persist in it.

The judgment I pass, is upon the state in which you stand, and the spirit by
which you are acted: This state which I have discoursed to you, it is not Zion,
but Babylon: Her filthiness is discovered, in the sight of all the world, and
can no longer be hid: In one hour is her judgment come: Great is the Lord that
judges her: Righteous and true are his Judgments, and they are made manifest:
God has openly showed, what was in you; it is seen, known, and felt, that it
is Babel, confusion; Therefore is the name of it called Babel, because the Lord
did there confound the language of all the earth: and from thence did the Lord
scatter them abroad upon the face of all the earth, Genesis 11.9. Shall I need to
apply it to you? Do you not remember, how much your language was confounded?
And do you not now feel, how much you are scattered? Does it need to be said,
This is Babel?

As to your persons, gifts and graces, I do admit them to be the Lords, and to
belong to Zion: But it is Zion that dwells with the daughter of Babylon:
Therefore I do write this, to call you forth of Babylon: Come out of her my
people, and be not partakers of her sins, that ye receive not of her plagues:
Sword, war, blood, killing, persecuting, wrath, cursing and destroying are her
sins, and must be her plagues: Neither you, not any men, can live in them; but
they will perish, by them: No man, or men, can act in them, but they must
suffer them: It is the righteous jugdement of God against the beast, and for
the Lamb: he that takes the sword, shall perish by the sword; and the meek
suffering Lamb only shall reign: If you had again, or could recover, all the
power and force you had, and an hundred times more, you could hold it but one
hour with the beast: And in one hour would you be made as desolate as you have
been: You neither could, nor can resist it: For strong is the Lord that
judges: For he that has sworn, he will bring down them that exalt themselves,
be they never so mighty: and raise up the lowly, the meek, the Lamb, who only
trusts in him, and shall be saved by him.

If you could not resist this Judgment, when you were great and strong, why
should you not be wise now, and cease from that state, and those ways, which
lead you upon sensible ruin? For what more certain destruction can there be,
then for a naked people to dash themselves against a rock of power and
authority, that is rooted and grounded in the Laws and minds of the Nation, and
now after proof and trial, rises up strongly against all its enemies?

You are as to your persons, part of the Israel of God, I do most freely grant
it to you: But as yet, but Israel after the flesh, and no more: And God has
used you, and the fire of your fleshly Zeal, ( Rev. 17.16, 17.) to hate the
whore, make her desolate, and naked, and to eat her flesh; The war has been of
fleshly knowledge, fleshly forms, and fleshly wisdom, by fleshly power, policy
and arms, against outward and fleshly corruptions: which God has put into your
hearts, until the words of God should be fulfilled: And during this Ministry,
you pleaded the cause of Zion, and had the name, title, and success for that
work: But those words are fulfilled: And then there appeared in this fleshly
Israel and fleshly work, a spiritual Antichrist, which your own mouths have
acknowledged: and a spiritual Sodom, Egypt and Babylon; which your works have
manifested. Sodoms pride, idleness, and fullness of bread: Egypts falsehood,
cunning and cruelty: Babylons loftiness, glorying, and self-exaltation: Where
our Lord also was crucified: As well as the flesh of the whore desolated.

It is this spiritual Antichrist, this adulterated wine, or wine of
fornication, in and with your fleshly gifts, and fleshly success, that
bewitches your minds, abuses your understandings, and enrages your spirits,
into a foolish confidence, and presumptuous opposition to the power of the
Nation, to your apparent ruin: My endeavor is to redeem your understandings,
from those vain and rejected confidences, and to recover your minds and reasons
into a sober consideration of your selves, and of your condition: that you may
not desperately throw away your lives and liberties, in a heady, drunken and
rash zeal.

Friends, I do earnestly desire you seriously to consider, if you can, or if
your high conceits of your selves, your principles and cause, will admit of
reason and consideration: Then consider, what is there in your present state,
which now lies under so great conviction in your consciences, and so great
condemnation from men: that should make you disdain, either a reproof, or a
proposal, of trying your principles at a bar of Religion and Reason, before the
wisest, justest, largest, and soberest men, in the Church and Nation: For that
was the intent of that Book, that you so fiercely and bitterly condemn: It was
humbly desired, that the persons to be tried, together with their principles,
might not be judged, at least not finally, by the Common Law, but might have a
Chancery: And why should you not now be reconciled to it, and seek it? what
should hinder you from petitioning it, as a singular mercy? To the utmost of my
understanding, it might be, not only a means of saving your selves, but, a
blessing to the Nation: I am very confident that you, and all men, after you
have wearied and spent your selves, your peace and comfort, in these unnatural
and brutish violences, will be glad to hearken to a brotherly and friendly
debate of things: When that pride, that makes men scorn all men's Reason and
Religion, but their own, is brought down: For he that knows any thing of the
general and large love of God, and of Jesus to all men, must conclude; that
that pride, will as certainly be ruined and ruin it self, as he knows God is
just or merciful.

SECT. IX.
I Intended not to prosecute this point of accommodating the present distance
and opposition that is betwixt you, and this Government of the Church and
Nation: But being unexpectedly fallen upon it, and engaged in it; and it being
the end of my first Book, and the constant frame of my mind, to seek peace by a
right understanding: And there being still great need of it, in respect of the
great numbers that do suffer; and possibly a better opportunity for it,
satisfaction being taken, to the Law of the Land, and justice of the Nation,
upon them that have suffered: The same love to you, that led me at first to
propound it, continues still in me, and leads me now to prosecute it.

The enmity is strong and great, confirmed by a long and cruel war; heightened
and inflamed by many wrongs and injuries: It is a fire that has and does burn
fiercely in the minds of men: It is now upon you, if it be not quenched, it
does and will utterly destroy you, and all that cannot yield to the present
Government of the Church, except a new war relieve you: And both you, and the
whole Nation, have found by woeful experience, that war is no friend, but an
enemy to all Civil and Religious blessings: And that fighting may destroy both
the good and the evil without Judgment, but save nothing: I hope it is and
will be the mind of all sober Christians, and Englishmen, that consider the
effects of our late wars, rather to suffer in their own particulars, then to
raise a new war, whereby the whole Nation must suffer, thousands be slain; and
at last they that raised it, will be far worse then they were when they begun:
That Law and Sentence that came out of Christ's lips first, and was afterward
confirmed by the Spirit, in the Revelations, as a divine Law to all ages, is;
He that takes up the sword, shall perish by the sword: And therefore woe be to
that Party or Person, that makes war and division his hope: that longs to see
the Kingdom in a flame, that he may warm himself at the fire: Or would have the
whole ruined and Shipwracked, that he might have a share of the pillage.

You have had the sword, and could not keep it, it is turned now against you,
and the strength of the Nation also, all highly provoked by your evil dealings
with them: And yet you are the sharpest enemies to the Propositions of Peace: I
know no good reason, why you should be so: A good friend of yours and mine,
has said again and again, One side must yield; why should not we first lie
down and submit? We that profess most knowledge of the Gospel, and are most
conversant with Scriptures, should be most inclined to meekness and peace;
there is sure some notable evil spirit gotten in, that makes the most gifted,
the most quarrelsome.

I am bound to examine what it is, that upholds this state and spirit of
opposition in your minds: In order to peace, I must pursue this enemy; and if I
can beat him out of all his holds, therefore bear with me; it is the enemy I
pursue, not you: if he have gotten possession of your minds, gifts, and cause,
he will destroy you and them: For I constantly find, that he is worse to the
subject, then the object; he does more mischief much, to him in whom he lives,
them to him whom he kills: And he that acts wrath, must needs be worse then he
that suffers it: For he that acts it, is the servant and subject of that enemy,
or enmity, but the patient, by suffering from it, is removed from it, into the
contrary state, the Lamb; therefore enmity, when it gets into an active,
knowing, zealous people, it is dangerously seated: If it be by war, success,
and advantage, gotten into your hearts, affections and spirits; though I do
some violence to all these, to remove him: if I be not judged a friend, I am
sure I am so. For none but a friend, will pursue enmity it self, and my war is
with enmity it self, and my endeavor is to destroy it.

Let us therefore consider, what it is that engages your minds so stiffly, in
an opposition to, and hatred of the present authority of the Nation. It is some
Spiritual and Religious thing, that commands your consciences, and overrules
your judgments, to that which to sense and reason, is so full of danger: It
has the place and power of a God in you, and requires this of you, under the
notion of godliness, and as a service to him, and his cause: You being so
engaged, it must needs be a high provocation to you, for a man to question your
God, Religion and Principles: I need not wonder, if you be enraged at me: You
were dull souls, if you did not come forth against me, with all the might and
power of your Zeal and Religion; to condemn me for blaspheming your Cause.
Indeed I do not blame you for being angry at me; I rather blame you, that you
do like women, fret and scold, but do not bring forth your reason against me:
If there be any courage or strength in you, I shall do what I can to engage it:
It may be a mercy to you, to draw you off from a fleshly and worldly contest
with the Nation, which will ruin you: to a spiritual and friendly strife about
Gods, Principles, and Religions: In which war, we shall draw no blood, wast no
treasure; destroy no families; nothing will be hurt, that is right and good;
nothing be lost, but the chaff and dust: With this fire and sword of Spirit and
Word, will God plead with all flesh: This is truly and only the war of God, for
the cause of God: And the weapons of this warfare are not carnal but spiritual;
mighty, to pull down the strongest holds of the enemy: With this fire and sword
of the Word and Spirit, God pleads with all flesh, with all Parties, with all
opinions: Episcopal, Prosbyterian, Independants, Anabaptists: A fleshly war, by
fleshly means, in a fleshly spirit of pride, envy, impatience, self-seeking,
etc. may destroy men, but increases division, multiplies corruption, provokes
sin in the subdued, swells it in the conqueror, fills all with misery. But this
war is, of one God, one life, one peace, one salvation: against all men in
their fleshly opposing one another, and proud exalting themselves one over
another, and destroys no men nor sort of men, but the evil and enmity of all,
it destroys only him, that destroys the earth: The standard that I do advance
in this war is love, the royal Law of love: love to man, to mankind, to all
men, to humane nature: love to sinners, to enemies, to the worst of sinners.

You are religiously and conscientiously engaged to oppose, pray against, curse
and destroy the present Magistracy and Ministry of the Nation, because it is
corrupt and sinful, both persons and things: This was your cause and spirit;
and still is, except you repent and desert the principles in which you have
been acted. Against this spirit and religion do I advance this standard: it was
asserted in my former Book, but not raised high enough to be publicly observed
or dealt with: It is more fully this:

Since God has revealed his good will to mankind, and his large mercy, to all
men, to sinners and enemies, not only to the godly, but to the ungodly and
unrighteous, and made his own example, a Law and Rule, in his house, to all his
children: He that hates his brother, is in darkness: knows not, lives not in
the true light of Christ; is not of Gods mind: If he says, he is in the light,
and pretends to religion, and the way of God, he is a liar, and is in darkness
until now, and knows not whither he goes: 1 John 2.9, 11. I know this is
exceeding strange, and contrary to the whole frame of religion, wherein you
have been exercised these many years: For of late, all religion and light has
only served to hate and destroy: and in this kind of religion the further and
higher men go, the more they hate, and with more cruel hatred: first hate the
evil Council, then the King, then the Lords, then the Commons: First hate the
Bishops, then the Ministers, then the Presbyterian equal to the Episcopal, then
the Independent and Anabaptist Churches: then all Religion: and so one
generation of hatred, ha h begot another, worse and worse; but no salvation, no
healing, no pardoning any: Sure this is very different from that large and
universal good will, that is declared by Christ. This hatred is condemned here
to darkness, to the Prince of darkness, who is the enemy, the wicked or
malignant one: For if we walk in the light, as God is in the light, we have
fellowship one with another: and the blood of Christ cleanses from us all sin:
He is in the light, and in him is no darkness at all: the darkness is no
darkness to him, he does not stumble, is not offended at it: he is pure and
holy, and nothing can pollute and defile him: he shines in darkness, and the
darkness comprehends him not: thanks him not, loves him not; yet he shines
still. And they that have fellowship with him, may be, and are, where he is,
and see as he sees, do as he does, and not be polluted or offended: he that is
taught of God, as God is, so is he in this world: he shines in darkness, and is
not comprehended by it, nor subjected to it, nor offended at it: and therefore
quarrels not with them that are in it: but pitties, pardons, and relieves them:
yea though they are not only dark and ignorant, but malicious and spiteful
against him, and would destroy him, yet he sets not himself against them: but
on the contrary feeds, clothes, sustains their outward and inward man, their
bodies and souls; And this he does as an example, and pattern to his children;
If you see God going before you, in restoring, delivering, forgiving; and
instead of following his example, you be angry at it, fret and curse: and think
that your wrath should lead him, and your prayer call forth his vengeance: This
is not like the Gospel, nor like his Sons.

There is another principle, which I will set at the foot of this standard:
Whosoever hates his brother is a murderer, and ye know that no murderer has
eternal life in him, John 3.15. He that hates his brother is a murderer: then
he that murdereth his brother, hates him: why else does he murder him? He then
that hates, and out of hatred endeavors the destroying or removing by death,
them that he hates, is a hateful murderer: And then to prepare war is hatred
and murder, by the Law of love: It is not just or good, because it is commonly
done: It is not good, because it is done by many, but worse: If it be murder
for one man to kill another, it is more murder for one party to kill another
party: If it be done by a more religious party, upon a more profane party, it
is still worse: Wars for Religion are worse then for Civil rights: because by
such wars, not only men suffer death, but the peace, purity, and love of
Religion, which is the Law of Christ, is violated: Wars raised by a better
people, upon a worse (if we be Christians) is still worse, then for a worse to
raise war upon the better. For according to the Law and example of Christ, The
strong ought to bear the infirmities of the Weak, and not to please themselves,
Romans 15.1. and the just to suffer for the unjust. It follows, no murderer has
eternal life in him: For if any man have eternal life in him, he need not, he
cannot, out of fear, that another will take away his life destroy him: Neither
can he prey upon another life, to maintain his own: Nor can he take away the
sinful life of another, to secure his eternal life; it is contrary to divine
reason and goodness: But he that has eternal life will be enabled to lay down
his life for others; because he knows his life is eternal, and cannot be lost:
This is according to our pattern, ver. 16. Hereby perceive we the love of God,
because he laid down his life for us, and we ought to lay down our lives for
the brethren: By this we perceive that his love was the love of God, that he
could lay down his life for us; and that his life was the life of God, that it
could lay down it self for us: And we ought to lay down our lives for the
brethren: If this be truly and only, the nature of the love and life of God,
and a rule to us: Then that only is true godliness that answers to this
pattern: And what is contrary to it, is of the wicked one.

You cannot, you must not think to slight and scorn the authority and Majesty
of this standard: if ever you be saved, you must come to it; if you be saved by
it, you must also be judged and ruled by it: I am able to say it does save, and
shall judge and rule you and all men: and therefore by this, I must and will
try and measure your present state and cause.

You profess, in this state of opposition and enmity wherein you have been and
are still engaged, the cause of God and godliness. Is there a cause of God,
that differs from himself, from his life and love? or another godliness, then
that which is born of him, and conformed to him? Does he lay down his life for
us that are sinners, and enemies; and give the same life to us, which he laid
down for us, that we might be like him? and shall we, because we are his
children, destroy others that are not so?

If this be light, and a rule, then your enmity in which you stand, is
darkness, and you are lead into it by a false God, by an evil spirit, and by a
crooked rule.

SECT. X.
ALL enmity is betwixt two parties; this enmity being in darkness, there is a
false judgment of both: He that hates is ignorant of himself, and of him or
them that he hates; in both respects the darkness of malice blinds his eyes,
and he knows not whither he goes: In your present enmity, you are guilty of
both: mistaken and deceived, 1. In your selves: And 2. In your enemies; If
there be these two errors, there must be a third also, ignorance of the way
that you are in, in prosecuting these enemies: You think you are engaged in the
cause of God, and that you move in the way of God, against the enemies of God.
But you will find that you are blinded by the enemies in all three; and that
you are not what you think you are: nor are your enemies, that which your
hatred suggests they are; nor is the way of opposing and destroying, what your
enmity imagines it is: In all, your eyes are blinded, and you know not whither
you go: It will be a mercy to you, if God please, to open your eyes, and to
turn you from this way of wrath, into the Way of peace, we shall endeavor it.

First, for your selves, you take it for granted, 1. That the cause in which
you stand is the cause of God: 2. You conclude that that religion and holiness
in which you live, is the only godliness and Christianity: I doubt you are
deceived in both.

For the first of these, the cause, it is cried up among you, as the Jews cried
up, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord: I fear your cry has less
ground then theirs: However while the sound of it lives in your spirits, it is
no wonder if it over-powers you: For there is certainly nothing more high and
honorable, then to be engaged in the cause of God; to be his friends, and
champions, and to be employed in recovering of a Kingdom for Christ, and
setting him upon the throne: All that are called to this work may well be
zealous in it, and freely adventure their lives for it; knowing they shall have
a great reward for it: and whatever their lives or sins are, they shall at
least go to heaven, if they dye in the quarrel; the service is enough to answer
for all.

Besides what we have said in the seventh and eighth Section: That this cause,
as you have managed it, agrees to no rule or example of Scripture: Not to the
way or work of God, in delivering Israel out of Egypt; nor to that of bringing
them out of Babylon, much less to the way of the Gospel in Christ and the
Apostles; nor to the prophetical Scriptures: nor to the thing it self which you
profess, as we have I think convincingly showed: And besides that standard of
the love and life of God, set up in the last Section: all which you must either
overthrow, or subject to: I shall now desire you more particularly, and closely
to consider,

First, Whether this cry of the cause, be not only a great sound, or more sound
then substance: Empty vessels give the greatest sound: Most noise, least truth
and substance, is very common: Or things when they go off, make the greatest
report: This I have observed of this cause: it floats like Wine in men's heads,
fills men's Prayers and Sermons, flies about in Books and Discourses, and so
raises a smoke of talk, zeal, and affection. But in all this time: First, It
never attained, or gathered a body, into any consistency, but men's minds are
still blown about like dust: one people talk this, and another that; but there
never was any consent or agreement about it: 2. As it never could gain a body,
so it never had any form, it was never yet stated by any man, or by any company
of men: only confused thoughts and talks there are about it. Thirdly, it never
yet attained any power in the Nation: it never was owned as the cause of God by
either Parliament or Army: Men in their private prayers and Sermons, talk of
the Kingdom of God, of the fall of Babylon, and building Zion; but those powers
owned nothing but necessity, safety, interest of the people, and such like
things: And therefore you may well think what a bottom it is, that you
adventure your selves in; or rather, how bottomless it is: Many words, many
affections, many duties, multitudes of sacrifices, many Scriptures quoted,
preached on: But what power and substance is there in these? What heavenly
glory is there in them or among you, that is able to convince your enemies? Or
what earthly strength is there in them, that can defend and support a poor
naked people, against a strong and mighty Prince, against a standing Law and
Authority? My reason, experience, and knowledge tells me, that as you are, so
you will be left in confusion, in any engagement, for such a cause, that has
no more solid body, state or power in it.

And therefore be persuaded to retire, from the noise that you make in each
others ears and affections; and enquire within in your own reasons and
memories: And remember if you can, where had you this Cause? from whence came
it? where and when was it born? in what year of these late changes? in which of
them was it brought forth? Or from what Scripture do you derive it? is there
such a thing spoken or named there, as the Cause of God? God pleads the Cause
of his people, by outward Judgments; and by his Spirit the Advocate; and by
Christ their Counselor: But his Cause is not now at the Bar; no, he has set
Christ upon the throne, and he is exalted far above all principalities and
powers: He is now actually judging and ruling the world: he pulls down and
sets up whom he will: You may feel his power and authority, he judges you,
for your unrighteousness, and sets up your enemies above you: What is it that
thus blinds your eyes, that you should contend, or that which is already done,
for Christ's Kingdom? does not the enemy abuse your understandings? and persuade
you, it is the Cause of God, and his Kingdom, when indeed it is your own
honor, dominion and greatness?

But has there not been a cause of God in this Nation? Yes there has been
that which we may call so: and it was this, The Church and Kingdom of England,
stood in a very dark, fleshly and corrupt state; and the Governors of it were
also corrupt, and had sinned against God: For which God had a Controversy,
both with their persons and standing: And therefore sanctified you, with a
fleshly holiness, against their fleshly corruption, and called you forth for
the executing of his judgment upon them: And therein you were justified, being
engaged (to speak in your language) in the cause of God; or being employed to
administer that judgment which he had given in the cause: Thus much I can
grant to you, and it will be found the right of the case.

But if the Judgment decreed be executed, and the measure of outward
punishment be fulfilled, then your cause ceases: If this kind of wrath, by war,
blood, and spoil be finished; why should not you be content to be discharged
from this employment?

First, it is a mean service to be the Executioners of an outward destruction:
It is, O Assyrian, the rod of my anger, and the staff in their hand is my
indignation: I will send him against an hypocritical Nation, and against the
people of my wrath will I give him change, to take the spoil, and to take the
prey, and to tread down like the mire of the streets, Isa. 10.5, 6.

Secondly, as it is a vile service, so it has been vilely polluted: It is a
filthy thing to destroy, and the filthiness of it is manifested: It is
Babylonian, and the confusion is sufficiently discovered: The brightness and
cleanness of it, and all the honor, and glory of it was, the wrath and justice
of God: when that was finished, then it presently showed its vile nature:
covetousness, self-seeking, pride and cruelty: Nothing but ignorance, or a love
of the prey and spoil, can make men to dote upon it, and desire to continue in
it.

Thirdly, being it self unclean, it cannot purify nor reform the Nation: It
reaches but to the outside, to the outward life, honor and greatness: It
never touches the spirit, and therefore may waste and spoil, and so restrain,
for a time, the fleshly part; but the nature and spirit of the thing still
remains, yea confirmed and strengthened: It may tread down in the mire, but its
unclean feet of wrath and pastion, pollute more then purge, and so make worse.

Fourthly, to purify, is left to the fire of of his own Spirit; which will
thoroughly purge, with the spirit of judgment and burning: You administered 1.
without judgment, you could not discern between the gold and the dross. And 2.
without burning, for if the dross be not separated from the gold, it cannot be
consumed: as yet we have had neither separation nor burning: for want of both
these, their dross still remains, after all the wrath administered: But doubt
not, the holy purpose and power of God: He will certainly purge both you and
them: by the breath of his mouth, and the brightness of his appearing: This
pure heavenly fire, is descended, is kindled, is set as a refiners fire; and no
iniquity shall escape the flame of it: For it is holy, mighty, effectual and
eternal; it does, and will burn for ever: You have heard the sound of it in
your spirits; ye are in the smoke of it, and so is the whole Nation, which is
the reason of the present blackness, darkness and confusion: But when the evil
is brought forth and discovered, he will certainly destroy it: yea it is
actually destroying, and in destruction; in being brought forth.

Fifthly, That outward wrath which you administered, you could nor but execute
it: you could not cease from it, till it was finished; but you have since
turned from that cause, and made another: which is planting your selves, in the
place of them that you thrust out; exalting your selves and Ministry upon their
ruins. Pray observe, First, That the great things now boasted, of the Kingdom
of Christ, and reign of the Saints: which are indeed eternal truths and sure
things, but the application of them to your persons, gifts and Ministry; and
apprehending of them to your selves in your lace work; are things that are
sprung up since the beginning of the wars; and are the children or idols of the
success you have had in the wars; these notions were not known at first: the
war was betwixt King and Parliament: opportunity, advantage, and success, made
you bold to assume these titles. Secondly, you could not claim this title to
the Kingdom of Saints, till Babylon was destroyed: In assuming of it, your own
works declare that ministry of wrath, to be finished, you did believe, profess,
praise and practice accordingly: And therefore you cannot return to it again,
without contradicting your own judgments and opinions, yea those very
judgments and opinions in which your strength lies. Observe it well, The
present Governors and Government of Church and Kingdom, are say you Babylon,
and the enemies of God and his people: You therefore did execute the wrath of
God upon them to destroy them: Was that justice or wrath perfect, full and
complete or no? If it was, it finished, and you have no more to do of that
kind: you certainly thought it so, perfect, and sufficient, and so believed,
praised, and lived.

Babylon being destroyed, Zion comes forth: you own your selves to be Israel,
Gods people; and that the Kingdom is the Saints: which you could not do, till
Babylon was destroyed: for Israel cannot come forth, nor have her liberty till
then: This ground you now stand upon; not upon the Parliament, as at first, but
as Zion and Gods people: and this title stands only upon the ruins of Babylon:
Therefore either you must hold to this, that you are Zion, and then Babylon is
destroyed; and then you are not to engage again in a war against her: Or else
if you think Babylon yet stands and is not destroyed, you must relinquish your
confidence and title of the Kingdom of Saints, and go back again, to begin a
new heathenish work and war: But you have been the ax wherewith Christ has
hewed, and the saw that he has shaken, and as foolish proud man uses to do,
you have boasted and magnified your selves and ministry (into the place of
Christ, and so) against him that heweth therewith: and for that you suffer so
great shame and rebuke.

I have endeavored to let you see, that, that which is the most of the cause
of God, that ever you had, which is the execution of his justice, is now
finished and ceased: And that in love both to your souls, lives, liberties and
families; that I might withdraw you from this way of enmity and opposition in
which you stand, and in which you will suffer, if you do not retreat.

The true ground of our war ceasing, which is the administration of, an outward
punishment; the cause of God, as to that point cease: And therefore you are
deceived in your cause, passion having blinded your eyes.

The second thing that strengthens you in your enmity, is your holiness,
religion and godliness: This must be tried, whether you be not deceived in it
also.

It consists much in Religious duties, performed by gifts, as praying,
speaking, prophesying, and an outward conformity to the Gospel: For the power
and Spirit of Christ, and the Apostles, is not manifested in you, by any signs
or fruits; or not more in you, then in others: There is nothing singular
produced, but what is common to others, only your manner of speaking, praying,
worshipping: which is affirmed to be, 1. nearer to the rule, and 2. of more
power then others: And that the worship of your enemies, is superstition and
humane invention, and has no life in it.

It is most certain, that this kind of Religion and Holiness, is not with God
what you esteem it: You do highly, yea too highly value it: But it does not, it
cannot stand in the presence of God; not in his own immediate presence: but is
of a worldly nature, and stands only in the world: It is not the worship, that
is in the Temple of God, before the throne of God, and of the Lamb; I hope you
will confess it: For you know there is no such contention, war, blood, cursing,
nor such mixtures of uncleanness, can or dares come before him: And therefore
though it stood awhile as a Ministry, yet it is fallen, and that before him: For
what cannot stand before him, falls before him: The reason of his dislike of it
is,

First, It is not of a right kind: It is not a new nature; not a nature, but a
gift; not a divine nature, but a humane thing; not from heaven and in heaven,
but in the earth and from the earth.

Secondly, Because it is not a nature, it is not deep, solid and lasting; it
washes the outside of the platter; makes new words, gestures, expressions; but
your confessions say, the heart is still a most vile and filthy thing, and that
your natures are still corrupt: If the heart be unclean, Religion is but a
shadow, and cannot please him who is truth and substance: He requires, a good
man, that has a good treasure, in a good heart; and a good tree, of a right
kind, that brings forth good fruit; not briers and thorns of contention and
violence.

Thirdly, Being not from heaven, it corrupts and decays; it is not an
incorruptible life: Actually it has foully corrupted, into the grossest
pollutions, that any people did ever commit. Into gross covetousness, ambition,
and self-seeking: into absurd and palpable errors, lies and delusions: And
into that most, which is the worst, enmity, cruelty and persecution; and that
generally and universally, of all, both friends and foes, and in all, in the
highest most: And therefore observe it, with a special observation.

First, That the several parties, Presbyterian, Independent, Anabaptists and
fifth Monarchy-men: have all one life of holiness, one peace, one
righteousness, one hope, one heaven: Of each sort, some died in the late
execution; and they all breathed out their souls in one and the same faith and
hope.

Secondly, Yet these had been, not many Months before, mortal enemies one to
another: and attempted war one against another: some of them were for the Rump,
against the Army; and some of them, for the Army, against the Rump: and the
fifth Monarchy-men would gladly have fought them both, and have offered at it:
and yet they appeared at last Brethren: And if they were restrained from
fighting and drawing blood, yet their prayers, faith and religion, were set
against one another: which has been the constant practice of all these
Parties; they have discharged bitter curses and judgments against each other:
which is the greatest corruption, even to a dissolution.

Thirdly, And therefore if men allow of enmity against any sort of men, because
they are against them, and their ways; they will exercise the same to all that
oppose their way: He that will kill a Cavaleer, because he is not godly, will
likewise kill a Presbyterian, Independent, Anabaptist, or any other, if he
cross his way and notion; be he never so near to him, in the kind of his life:
And he that will kill an Episcopal person, or party, for his own safety, or for
the Cause of God; will for the same Cause kill his Brother, Independent or
Anabaptist.

Fourthly, This kind of corruption of a body or society of people, into deadly
hatred, and exercise of their spirits and gifts against each other, is the
worst kind of corruption that can be of Holiness or Religion: Because 1. it is
against love, which is the supreme Law. 2. It tends to a dissolution: For a
Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand; if not a Civil, then much less a
Religious Kingdom. 3. Where this sin is, all others are also: For where envying
and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work, Jam. 3.16. Therefore if
you have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory not, and lie not
against the truth: This wisdom descends not from above; but is earthly,
sensual and devilish, ver. 14, 15. The wisdom that is from above, is first
pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good
fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy, ver. 17.

From all which we must conclude, that the Religion and Holiness in which you
glory, and upon which you stand, is earthly and sensual; It began in strife and
self-seeking; and its end is devilish: It is corrupted and fallen: As great and
greater things then these, have corrupted, the Scripture witnesses it: I
testify it, upon experimental knowledge: and your works manifest this of yours
to be fallen: If you glory in this, and think there is not a better, you lie
against the truth, as the Apostle says: I know there is a more excellent,
heavenly and perfect state, which now judges this of yours, and you will know
it also, when you are ashamed of this.

SECT. XI.
LEt me mind you what we are upon. He that hates his Brother, is in darkness,
walks in darkness, and knows not whither he goes, because darkeness has
blinded his eyes: I am proving that the darkness of hatred has blinded your
eyes, that you know not, 1. What you are: 2. What your enemies are: 3. What the
way is you are going, or whither you go: You are blinded, as to your selves,
and in a mist of strife and confusion have lost, 1. your Cause, 2. your
Religion: you retain the form or carcass of both, but have lost the justice of
one, and the life of the other: I shall now show you how you are blinded
concerning your enemies; that you do not, cannot understand them, in the
present state in which you stand.

I will not urge upon you my apprehensions of them, which I have declared in my
Book: They are there published, and let them abide the trial: I meet with
nothing yet, that is of sufficient authority to make me retract them: You
wonder and are offended at the good that I have written of the King, from those
ancient foundations of rest and grace, in Gods sight, laid in Noah: My
authority for it I tell you, page 65. in these words, My love is my first and
chief guide, in this application to your Majesty. I believe it will uphold and
justify me, against that weakness or strangeness, which either is in it, or
may seem to others to be in it: For I do in my soul, give unto love, the most
absolute authority, as the most supreme royal Law in heaven and in earth; the
most certain and infallible rule: For that only is without error, that is able
to cover the errors, and supply the defects of all things else. I only advance
it as a standard, let it stand naked by it self: I do it to invite you to deal
with it: Both reason and sense are against it: Overthrow it if you can; I do
desire it may be thoroughly tried: because I know it is a stranger in the world:
You have other thoughts of this application, that it comes from the vile and
base principle of flattery: I profess the most honorable principle of love; if
you have I any strength of truth and righteousness in you, suffer not so gross
an evil as this to pass uncorrected.

My business with you, is to slay that enmity that is in you, to the present
power; and to take you off from that dangerous opposition in which you are
engaged: that so you may come to live a quiet and sober life under it: And to
let you see how hatred has blinded your eyes.

No man that hates ought to judge; while he hates he cannot judge: All passions
darken the judgment; above all hatred, which is a foul, black, devilish thing;
it is of the wicked one: whom God has cast down from all authority of rule and
judgment: And made him a slave, a vile Executioner of his wrath: I pleaded
this in my Book, in the behalf of them that since have suffered, page 152. and
now plead it with you: And shall I hope never cease to plead it with God, and
with men: and with God in man, till this base spirit of malice, be cast out of
all power, both Civil and Religious: For I know that hatred, though it seem to
judge, and to be very forward in judging, yet it has neither true right, nor
light to judge any: Only it is a servant to the justice of God: It is true, God
has given this beast a kingdom, greatness and power, but it is only in wrath
and destruction: Foolish man is deceived miserably by him, poor dust, if he can
get up into any kind of power; though it be only to plague and destroy, yet he
thinks it a great attainment: if he has so much knowledge, religion or power,
as to inflict punishment, he fancies himself a god: because he administers
divine displeasure: But if ever you come to so much light of God, as to know
what you do, you will abhor your selves for that, which you now glory in.

If you will show your selves men, and but exercise your reason, you will
quickly see, that you cannot judge of your enemies that you hate, and therefore
that they are not what you judge them to be, while you judge in hatred.

First, No man can judge, when he hates, or after he hates: For when men hate,
they suppose, those they hate, are to be destroyed: and therefore they are
already judged and condemned: For hatred is the executing of one condemned, and
that with the worst condemnation: unto the utmost and irrevocable ruin: Men
think when they hate, there remains nothing to do, but to prosecute, to utter
destruction; to spoil, pull down, shame, disgrace and ruin them: And it is
impossible that they should judge, that are thus employed to execute: For to
judge a person, or a thing, is to try the good and the evil; all judgment
supposes a right and a wrong, and an indifferency to both, with an endeavor to
find out both: Now consider how you are affected to your Adversaries, and you
will find that you do absolutely hate them as persons and things to be cut off
from the earth: As the people of Gods wrath, and of his curse: as enemies to
Jesus Christ, doomed to destruction for ever: So that judgment is past, if
this be your minds; and you have nothing to do but to seek their ruin.

As you see you cannot judge, till you cease to hate, so you may here see the
nature and kind of hatred: When God has judged a people to be scourged and
spoiled for their sins, and given them up to wrath and the curse; he has
instruments prepared for the execution of them, some; fierce, self-seeking,
hating persons; To these he discovers the Sentence, and represents the Party to
be punished, as clothed with his Curse; and then they fall on, with all their
zeal and might, as glad of such employment: But poor wretches, they know not
the counsel of God, not the measure nor end of his displeasure: And therefore
form up other conceits in their heads, as the King of Assyria did: Howbeit he
means not so, neither does his heart think so, but it is in his heart to
destroy and cut off Nations not a few, Isa. 10.7. Success in such employments
are certain and constant; which the proud Executioner cannot bear, but his
hatred is enlarged as hell, and presently thinks of destroying Nations not a
few; glorying in the success, he is swelled with pride, and thinks to conquer
all the world: This is only to show you the true original and nature of hatred;
it is rooted in the Curse of God, and in the Devil, the great minister of the
Curse, who has power of death: he sets man on to execute the Curse, and then
inflames him into high thoughts of himself, for his work: What a mercy it will
be for poor man to be redeemed from this vile service, and the absurd and woeful
errors, that do attend it.

To return to our purpose; while you hate, you cannot judge of them you hate:
and the judgment you make is no judgment, or a false one. For,

Secondly, You did judge them Babylon, Antichristian enemies; and that
therefore their judgment was for ever and ever: Such you know is the
destruction of Babylon, as a Millstone cast into the Sea, as the Angel said,
Rev. 18.21* and be found no more at all: The voice of Harps and Musicians shall
not be found in her, nor the light of a candle, nor the voice of the
Bridegroom, etc. So you thought of these, that they would never recover more:
And now you see the Music, and the Candles, and the Mirth is risen again out
of the Sea, and has escaped the millstone and the drowning too: Now remember
and consider: You judged them Babylon, and therefore to be destroyed for ever:
but now you find it otherwise: your judgment therefore is false: Had they been
what you imagined them, they had never rose: Or had you or your judgment been
true, they had never recovered, nor you fallen: if you erred as to the kind of
the punishment, you erred also as to their state: I know you must think, that
this recovery of theirs, is but in order to an utter and final destruction: And
the reason of it is, because if you do think it otherwise, you must condemn all
your prayers, praises, and interpretations of Scriptures, that you have made
for your selves and against them a long time: Therefore till you repent of
them, you must believe your enemies must perish, be it never so irrational: For
they cannot be justified, till your enemies do fall, they being grounded upon
their ruin: But pray consider, this is a present shift, and but a shift: It
will not cover your shame: It is far easier to confess ten errors, ten years
errors, the errors of ten thousand persons, then to justify one error: Be
you never so good, great, and many, you are but men; you may err, you have
erred and run out of one error into another, many years together: He against
whom you have exclaimed, delusions, delusion; is able to say to you now, You
have been and are under strong delusions: I have thought it, and published it,
and now it is proved to be so.

If ever it come to pass, as you expect, an utter and final destruction of your
enemies; it must be by a spirit, that is more holy, true, and righteous, then
that, in which you have hitherto acted: And such a spirit you cannot have, till
you repent of the former: I shall help you what I can. An utter and final
destruction will come, and now is begun upon all wicked and ungodly works;
although it be not seen and felt: for all wicked works are in the wicked one,
and he in the wrath of God: in which he and they shall lie for ever: All his
works will be destroyed, in judgment, for this fire will destroy his works,
and save the persons: But your spirit, or the spirit in which you acted, would
destroy persons and things; but did increase ungodliness; for both your selves,
and enemies also, are not better, but worse by what you have administered.

Thirdly, I hope you will now confess, that you and your Party are worse then
you thought you were: If you are worse then you judged, why should you not
think that your enemies are better then you judged? If you are not such holy,
blessed, heavenly Saints, as you thought you were, then by the Law of
contraries, they are not such Devils, or brats of Antichrist, as you conceived
them. If you are weak men, as it appears you are, then your judgment of them
is like your selves, weak and fallible: And as you fall from your Mountain of
exaltation, so must they rise, and stand upon even ground with you; and be like
your selves, weak sinful men as you are: If you are not quite void of modesty
and reason, you cannot but admit, that they have some good in them; because
there is so much evil in you that have opposed them: If there was so much
folly, giddiness, and drunkenness in your opposition; you cannot but think,
that there is some good in these that you oppose: As I do admit that there was
some good in you that did oppose, some evil in them: so you must admit, that
evil in you, and that evil opposition that you made, must be against something
good in them; For evil where ever it is, it fights against good.

Indeed, if there were no good in them, and no evil in you; you need not, you
would not oppose them; for that which is perfectly good, is above all
opposition, And that which is perfectly evil, is below it; That lives in a
heaven in it self; this in hell and confusion; that is salvation and rest in it
self, this is destruction, and sinks under the weight of its own shame and
guilt.

Most of you that have had any light or sense of things, have of late found a
spiritual Antichrist, which is within. This conviction was but late upon you,
and but weak, and therefore you have possibly now lost the sight of this enemy
in you: But there he is, and will be found, out: This spiritual Antichrist, was
in you from the beginning of your work, though he appeared but lately: And
being in you, he did work with you, pray with you, fight with you, protest and
covenant with you, was in all your zeal, judgings, fastings and engagements:
You never had any thing pure or clean without him: If this be indeed
Antichrist, as certainly he is, the Antichrist; for spiritual Antichrist, is
greater then fleshly Antichrist; more dangerous, wicked and malicious: The
nature of this Antichrist is to oppose Christ; he does it constantly, and
cannot do otherwise: Then if he has been in you, and acted in you; in your
wars and works; he has opposed Christ in those wars and works: And then, there
must be something of Christ, in them that you oppose: I shall still help you
what I can: This spiritual Antichrist has opposed Christ. First in your own
spirits; and slain that Lamb, meekness, innocence, and love in you, and set up
a proud, cruel, bloody spirit, in the worship of God, and in you his semple.
Secondly, this spiritual Antichrist made you fierce and cruel to your Brethren,
that d ffered from you. And thirdly, it made you false* cruel and unmerciful to
your enemies; not admitting them to the common favor and mercy which God shows
to all men.

My intent is, by levelling the lofty confidences of men, to bring them nearer
together, and so to prepare them for peace and reconciliation: All have sinned
and come short of the glory of God: God has concluded and shut up together,
all men, in one pit of darkness and enmity, that he might have mercy upon all,
that none may glory, or exalt themselves, one over another: None are righteous;
nor saved, because they are righteous; nor shall any be destroyed because they
are sinners: for therefore are all shut up, in one pit: that mercy may bring
them all forth: If any be worse then others, it is they that have most
knowledge, and sinned against greatest favor: And they may again receive most
mercy; for where sin has abounded, Grace shall much more abound: They that are
first humbled, will first see and partake of this large, excellent and eternal
salvation: Therefore my friends, be not stout against the Lord, but fall under
his rebuke: Of pride comes contention: If you be truly humbled, you will cease
to strive: You have been as Capernaum, exalted to heaven, in gifts, success,
titles, names, expressions, and are now brought down to hell: not only to
outward shame and lofs, but to the filth, lies, pride and enmity of hell: Who
can deny the most high this prerogative, to set up as high as heaven, in the
brightness and glory of a Ministry; and bring down again to the blackness and
foulness of hell? Shall foolish man think, that because God dresses him up, and
calls him forth, to serve him, he cannot again reject that man and his service
also? Or because he makes things honorable, at least in man's esteem, that he
shall not again dishonor them? Has not the Potter power over the Clay; to
form it a vessel of honor, or dishonor? Has he not power, to fashion it for
a service, employ it in that service; and then break it in pieces, and make it
new again?

He that knows not himself, knows nothing truly; for all wisdom begins at the
knowledge of our selves: We know nothing, till we know our selves: And we know
nothing fully, till we know it in our selves. We know nothing rightly, till we
our selves rightly measured, are the measure of others: It is apparent, you are
mistaken in your selves and in your work; and therefore those unexpected
corruptions of division, envy, covetousness and self seeking are broken forth
and discovered: After those corruptions, unexpected confusions: After those
confusions, unexpected ruin and destruction is upon you: Therefore you have
over-valued your selves: And they that overvalue themselves, must necessarily
undervalue their enemies: One cannot be without the other: Most men, their
righteousness is of that nature; they are good, because others are worse:
Enemies can no longer think themselves good, then they think their enemies
wicked: And therefore men are necessitated, when they become enemies to any, to
aggravate their evils, all that they can; to feed and satisfy their own anger
at them: and not only to think them evil, but to rejoice when their evil
appears, either of sin or punishment; which shows the vile nature of enmity, it
engages a man's soul to mischief; it makes men study it, long for it, thirst
after it; and if it comes not, his hatred stirs him and pricks him on, both to
think it, to speak it, to pray for it, and to act it as much as he can.

Therefore consider your selves: you have read Luke 16.15. That which is highly
esteemed amongst men, is an abomination in the sight of God. You highly
esteemed your work and state: It is become abominable in the sight of men; in
part, in your own sight: It was first so in Gods sight: For if he had not
abominated it, it had not fallen into that vile state, in which it now lies under
guilt, shame and loss.

Consider then, if that which is highly esteemed by men, may be abominable in
the sight of God; may not that also which men have abominated, become highly
esteemed of God? Yea, is it not always so? What men reject, God chooses: The
base things of the world, and things which are despised, has God chosen, yea
and things that are not, that he might bring to naught things that are, 1 Cor.
2.28. And for this reason, v. 29. that no flesh might glory in his presence: If
one Party only should be accepted, as sometimes it is for a season; then does
that Party glory in his presence; as you did in the time of your exaltation:
Now God rejects you, and chooses them whom you scorned; Yet they must not be
happy alone; for God will have mercy upon all.

It were no dishonor to you, that forgiveness and reconciliation should begin
in you: To prepare you for it, are you brought down from your confidence? You
laid all the evil upon your adversaries, and now must be content to bear shame
with them: You are not the only Saints and Zion; nor they the only Antichrist
and Babylon: You have found an Antichrist within, and he is worse then one
without: A spiritual Antichrist, is worse then a fleshly Antichrist: Their
Religion is corrupt, and not pure: Has not yours also been corrupted with the
worst kind of corruption, malice and hypocrisy? Theirs is clogged with outward
pomp, worldly honor: Yours was so awhile. But theirs was given by blind
superstitious people: And yours was taken by force of arms: But their Religion
is not according to Scripture: nor is any form of Religion, now in the Nation:
All build something of their own, and therefore they differ: None are exactly
according to the pattern of the Apostles, neither in form nor power.

As all are sharers in the evil, so in the good also: You are not Angels of
light; nor they Devils; you are all men; Englishmen, weak and sinful men: You
have personal gifts, but an ill state: They have personal defects; they have a
better state; an outward at least: They are upon the foundation of Law; whether
spiritually or no, is the question: It is not with you, it may he found among
them: You have suffered, they have suffered: But they are not better by
sufferings: It is well this is an objection; for by this there appears an
expectation that they should mend: Nor are you better by mercies: And mercies,
are more Gospel and effectual means of Grace, then judgments: Israel was
punished, and was worse by it, and yet not utterly rejected: You suffered for
conscience, so did they: But their sufferings are not for a pure conscidence;
neither are yours purely for conscience: Not only for well-doing; there is a
mixture in both yours and theirs.

There is great reason, why you should come to know one another, for one Party
succeeds another, and is content to let the other be their rule and pattern.

You learned of your enemies, lordlinses, gentility, ways and forms of state,
of greatness: they come after you, and learn your ways, of finding plots,
disturbing meetings, discountenancing, disgracing, imprisoning Adversaries:
They are, and do now, where you were, and as you did, not long since: They ride
upon you, as you rode upon them: They crush you, as you crushed them: You
afflicted and vexed them, they do the same things to you: Must not the word of
Christ be fulfilled? Mat. 7. 1, 2. Judge not, that you be not judged: For with
what judgment you judge, you shall be judged: And with what measure you mete,
it shall be measured to you again: This I declared to you, when you began this
judging and oppressing way; that it would return upon you; you would not bear
then; will you understand now? Then know this, and let all men learn by it.
First you began this hardness in them against your selves: You reap what you
sowed; spoiling, imprisonment, hatred, death. Secondly, God acts and rules in
all men's spirits in these things, and that justly, and therefore be not
wrathful against them, but submit to God in it: The Lord has said Curse.
Thirdly, And may we not say, (as Romans 11.28.) They are enemies for your sakes,
but as touching the election, they are beloved for the Fathers sake: It is for
your sakes that they are acted thus against you, to make you sensible of the
work you have done: What a goodly thing it is to ride upon men; and to watch
over them for evil? When you come to a right sense and repentance of that work
and spirit, you yet glory in, then will that spirit cease to afflict you;
because it is for your sakes: For God delights not in afflicting: If he does
send evil, it is for good: As it is the just fruit of your own doings; so
certainly will repentance remove it: Be not therefore angry at the hand, but
feel the staff of Gods indignation in their hand: And when you come to mourn
over your selves, that you have been so acted; your will pity them that
succeed you, in that kind of employment: For it must be found on all sides, to
be but a sad service, to be a tormentor of others: And when you come to pity
them, that they should be made enemies for your sakes; that they should be made
a rod, because you want chastening; and be that rod to you, that you were to
them: You will then see, that both you and they are beloved for the Fathers
sake; neither for your own sakes: And may also see, that they have a good root,
and will bring forth better fruit in its season: When we are fit to partake of
it.

SECT. XII.
HAtred so blinds men, that they know not themselves, nor their enemies: It
makes men worse then otherwise they would be, and yet to think better of
themselves then ever they were: It makes men think their enemies worse then
they are; and it makes those enemies worse then they would be: And therefore
the third thing follows, they that hate their Brethren, darkness has blinded
their eyes, and they know not whither they go: Enmity is of the Devil, and he
is in darkness, God has withheld light from him; he has neither the light of
Christ, nor of Angels, no nor of men: All his ways, and all the ways of men
that are acted in his spirit, are most irrational and absurd things: All men,
so far as they are led by malice, are hurried, and driven, by the wrath of God,
blowing up their passions, unto unreasonable things, without any judgment or
understanding.

Let us look back upon our wars: Did any of us know, when we begun, whither we
should go? or did we once dream or imagine the things we have since done? and
the strange paths we have trodden? Have we not been driven beyond all our
purposes, Declarations and Vows, into crooked and contrary ways* which our
Reason and Religion did at first condemn; and will again, when we recover
either the one or the other* Was there ever such a heap of inconsistencies and
independencies? such a mass of confusion in Church and state? And if we were
blinded then, we are so still, if we persist: For we are not better, but worse
now, then at first; we have multiplied notions and opinions, but have decayed,
both in innocence and love: We were then more simple, more moderate, and less
guilty and bloody. And are now more enraged, more hardened, and more polluted;
Therefore the further we go in this way, the worse we are, and the deeper shall
we plunge our selves in misery.

The whole Party that stand out in opposition to the present Governors and
Government of the Nation, are divided in all things; and in the kind or degree
at least of their enmity: Some are more gross and carnal, and thirst for war
and blood: but many are taken off in part, from hopes of any good by war, but
yet their spirits are still in enmity; preaching against, praying against, or
cursing, reviling and condemning them, as enemies to God and his people; and
denouncing and expecting judgments from heaven against them.

Both these are of the same nature, are from the same root or fountain, and
will, If there be occasion, fall into the same Channel: Indeed all strife and
envy, though it be but in the heart, yet it is in the judgment of the holy
Apostle James, chap. 3.15. earthly, sensual and devilish: And therefore it does
darken, pollute and defile the soul: And by how much more inward or seeming
spiritual it is, it is by so much the more dangerous; because more devilish:
And being so, no man can command it; it will master every mind in which it is,
and lead him at last to carnal ways, if it be not outwardly restrained: 'For
he that will curse, will also destroy: And he that does the greater, what
should hinder him to do the less? They that condemn men to Satan and to hell,
they will hardly forbear killing of them, if they have power and opportunity:
or doing such mischief, as their hatred directs them to.

The root of all this is the Serpent: Out of the Serpents root, comes forth a
Cockatrice, and his fruit a fiery flying Serpent: from this root the Serpent
shoots forth this hissing Adder or Cockatrice of cursing: And the fruit is a
fiery flying Serpent: the former soon gets wings, and flames out in open
hostility.

I aim at no less then the root of this hatred ^n all men, the Devil: And
finding, that he has at last taken Sanctuary in Religion, and the profession
thereof; and has therein acted with so much vigor and security: I must pursue
him into your heart and spirits: It is his main fort; Zeal for God and his
Cause: if we can heat him hence, we shall hope to drive him out of the earth:
For if this hold, be taken from him, he will have very little strength to make
resistance any where else: That this enemy is amongst you, we have sufficient,
proof: We follow him by a train of blood, and by the track of all the beasts
his companions; pride, covetousness, falsehood, self-seeking: And we see the
smoke of his confusion, and hear the noise of his violence among you: Therefore
you must endure to be assaulted and searched* I know it will cost you dear, it
will shake the whole frame and foundation of your Religion, to have him quite
destroyed in you; it did so in me; his root lies deep: But if you can bear the
trial, and become free from this soul enemy your persons and gifts will shine
in the true and everlasting glory of the Lamb of God: Possibly you may have the
honor of yielding up and slaying the last and greatest strength of this enemy
of mankind.

I am satisfied that the horns of his beastly power are both sawn off, and
scattered: And that the Lamb of God is conqueror; and does begin already to bud
and spring forth in many persons, who do abhor the filth and deceit of war,
blood and wrath: And do see that nothing springs from thence, but mischief and
confusion: To help forward the birth of this spirit of love, and to guide your
feet in a way of peace; have I engaged in this discourse: It will be an
honorable and lasting conquest to overcome him: He has betrayed and spoiled
all other your conquests: Now we shall be revenged on him: and destroy him, who
has destroyed by you; and then destroyed you also.

I suppose there is a rich treasure of life, righteousness, and holiness, hid
in the nature of man: Yea I know it, and am one with it: Even the very Kingdom
of God is amongst us and in us: This rich treasure has come forth in
profession name and prophecy, in your spirits: But it has miscarried and fallen
short: This is certainly from this evil one; it is he that has done you this
michief: And it is he amongst your selves: For an open enemy could not hurt
you, could not stand before you: It is he that has betrayed you: His great
strength lies in enmity, whereby he brings darkness, confusion and every evil
work: You know, confusion and enmity, divided, distracted and ruined you: What
need we any plainer evidence? Therefore it must be enmity and hatred that has
destroyed you: And it must be victory against him and it, that must save you:
We have already showed you, that hatred, though it begin against those that are
further off, yet it will not stay there: If it be admitted, it will reign. He
that will hate any man, because he differs from him, or because he is sinful;
will hate his nearest friend, because he may and does differ, and is sinful: He
that to preserve himself and his own way of Religion, will destroy a Cavaleer,
will upon the same ground, destroy a Presbyterian, Independent or Quaker; and
consequently all that oppose him: Indeed, he that will not suffer for sinners,
for enemies, must resolve to kill all sinners and enemies, or all that will not
conform to him: Therefore it is the same enmity, wherewith you prosecuted your
first enemies and your brethren: the very same violence and self-love, that
enraged you against them, kept you from agreeing one with another: And the same
conceits, that you were the people of God, and that yours was the only way of
God; that made you abjure and renounce the King and Church: the very same
opinion and confidence, made you oppose one another: Each man being confident,
his own way, was the only way, made you unyielding one to another: For that
which will not submit to any thing, but what is Gods mind, and what he knows to
be Gods mind, must necessarily oppose every man that differs from him: You know
whereunto this tends: And therefore there can be no peace, but in that love,
which can bear with that, which to him does not appear to be Gods mind, or can
submit to them that do not in all things the holy and perfect will of God: And
if we have so much love and pity, as to bear them that do err in a little; if
we have more love, we may bear them that err much: The truth is, we must either
quarrel with all; or bear the weakness of all, in love to all.

It is therefore this enemy that has abused you, and misled you, into those
dark ways in which you now he: Hitherto you have not known whither you have
gone; he persuaded now by light, reason, and experience, not to follow him, who
draws you into a snare, and there spoils you of your peace and safety.

We suppose you are traveling toward the Kingdom of Christ: I believe you
would see him upon the throne: The enemy tells you, These men that you oppose,
hinder him and his Kingdom; and that by their destruction, Christ shall be
exalted: You are herein quite out of the way to his Kingdom.

First, While you seek to gain a Kingdom for him; you deny to acknowledge that
Kingdom, which his Father has already given him: He is set down upon his
Fathers Throne: And that throne is everlasting: You may therefore seek a
Kingdom for your selves, but not for him; And in doing so, you do both deny,
and resist his Kingdom: And fight with him, because he does not set you up with
him.

Secondly, His Kingdom is first in patience: The Kingdom and patience of Jesus:
And a blessed Kingdom it is, to rest in suffering: They that are truly Kings
with him, have the Kingdom in themselves; and first enjoy it on the Cross;
triumphing there: They who by the riches of their natures, or by God in them,
can enrich poverty, make bonds free; that can live in death, love and bless
enemies, they are fit to reign: For when such come to the Kingdom, they will
enrich, save, bless and do good to all, and hurt none: But they that cannot
bear the worst of evils among men, will themselves be a burden to men, if they
get to the throne: The good God who loves man, proves and tries his own Son,
before he gives him the Kingdom: And will not commit the Government to him,
till he has found that he can be happy without it: till he can glory on the
Cross: till he can die for others, and be more happy in laying down his life
and honor for them, then in receiving honor from them: This Lamb does
overcome: For he is King of Kings: He has the Kingdom of God in him, and
therefore all Kingdoms in his nature: And needs not take from others, but gives
to others: And they that are with him, are (as he is) called, faithful and
chosen: They do partake of his royal nature, and are called, to suffer and to
reign: And in both are faithful, and therefore chosen to it, they strive not
for it.

Thirdly, That only is mighty, and shall reign, that has power with God: They
that will overcome any thing truly, must overcome him; because his is the
Kingdom, and the power, and the glory: Now nothing prevails with him, but Lamb;
absolute and perfect subjection to him, has only power with him: And therefore
none shall or can reign with him; but they that will not resist him, nor any
power that he sets up over them: For whosoever resists the power, resists
the Ordinance of God, Romans 13.2. By this Christ overcame, and is set down upon
the throne: And by the same Lamb, nature keeps what he got; for this only is
invincible and eternal: If you had all the force of England, and of the whole
earth, yea of all the Angels; you could not keep it, it would all ruin and
destroy it self, if you had it not, in the Lamb: for nothing can possibly
subsist in the nature of God, or upon the throne of God, but this meek, patient
Lamb: For it is eternally subjected to God, and therefore he is eternally
pleased with him, and eternally honors him.

Fourthly, The Lamb is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: His Kingdom is on
high, higher then the Kings of the earth; their glory, riches, titles and
honors are below him, they are his servants or children: And therefore he
cannot set himself to oppose them; nor can any that have his spirit: These low
contests of war, are the business of earthly and sensual men; that live in the
mire and dirt of the world; who are hurt and offended, with each others ways
and passions: But he is on high, and so are they that reign with him; beyond
the reach of all these things: He is over them all; and gives these Kingdoms to
whom he please: And when he has given, will defend and protect in that gift,
as long as he please, and in what way he please: And they that are with him,
are called; to know what he does, and do as he does: Therefore if you seek for
the Kingdom of Christ, you must ascend by suffering, into this glory; from
whence all men receive, all their honor, power and riches: And then you will
cease contending with that which he gives.

Fifthly, Christ is now in the exercise of his Kingdom upon you, and you are
his subjects and servants; now under his rod and iron scepter: He has brought
you down, and set up those that you would destroy: And is, you know, righteous
and just in it: You are under the justice of his Kingdom; and the first true
and pure sense you shall have of his Kingdom, is of the wrath of it: You may
talk of his glory, but must come to feel his anger, be pleased with it, submit
to it, and rest in it, before you come to enjoy his love: This I can affirm
upon certain knowledge and experience: That if you will not embrace and kiss
this his judgment, you shall never rise higher, neither in heaven nor in
earth: Therefore know he raigns now in righteousness, and give him that glory
that is due to him; give him glory, by taking shame before all the world: That
glory you may give him; and it is all the Kingdom you or any flesh can give
Christ, to suffer from him: But to think that as soon as you attain a notion of
his Kingdom, and a weak one, that presently you must have share with him in it,
is high presumption: For man or flesh, to think to have it with him, is to take
it from him, if they could.

Therefore you are miserably deceived, by the Prince of darkness, and deluded
by him: he would persuade you, that you are for Christ and his Kingdom, when
indeed it is for your selves and your own advancement: You are persuaded, that
you would exalt him, and set him upon the Throne; whereas he is already upon
the Throne, judging you and that carnal mind: You can give h m no Kingdom; you
may acknowledge the Kingdom he has: Indeed if any will give him a Kingdom,
they must give of their own: If then you had a glory and a Kingdom, and could
lay it down for him and to him; you might then be said to exalt Christ: And so
far as you can bear this rejection that you are under, and publicly justify
him, and condemn your selves and the state and spirit, in which you stood and
acted, as unworthy to stand up in his name and presence: So far you will give
him glory, and make him to be honored and feared in the world: Could you and I
come forth, and openly declare, that God may use us, and all men, and all our
Zeal and Religion, in what service he please: But that he will not suffer,
either us, or any other to reign with him: so long as any thing of a private,
self-seeking, proud or cruel spirit remains in us: This lively and experimental
testimony will make him to be honored and feared. And should I and you say and
confess, that the blessed God, has such love to mankind, that he will suffer
neither me nor you, to have place in his Church, till we can love and forgive
all; and bear the sins and curse of all men: We shall thereby render him loved
and honored: For this indeed is, and always was his mind: he would not give
the Kingdom to Jesus, till he manifested this spirit in him; neither did Christ
desire it upon any other terms: You may speak and do as you will; but this is
my sense and experience: Therefore God has brought me down, and made me taste
death again and again, because he will not endure me to stand or to minister
before his Throne, till I can bear and forgive all the folly and sin of those,
to whom I minister: And till by frequent deaths, and rejection, he has killed
that root of enmity to men, that curses them; and brought forth that love that
can be accursed for them; It is his way, it is his nature, he dealt so with
Christ, and therefore must be justified and honored for it: And so I do with
my soul: And desire office and employment in his Church, upon no other terms:
Blessed for ever be his holy name for it, in my heart: And blessed be his name,
in this Church and Nation: And let all his people say Amen: For he will
establish only such ministers over them in his house, as are of his, and his
Sons mind and spirit.

God may and does for a time employ other spirits, to do baser services, to
break, afflict and punish, so long as there is proud flesh to be subdued: But
none shall be admitted to minister healing, life and salvation, but such as are
of this spirit: The form or title is title, and the question is not great, who
or which? But this is the Nature and Spirit chosen of God, to rule his people.

Lastly, Let me assure you, under the word and oath of Jesus: Verily, verily,
except you be born again, you cannot see the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3.3. Except
you be born out of this earthly, sensual darkness, into heavenly light; out of
this heathenish or legal spirit, into the largeness of heaven; you cannot so
much as see the Kingdom of God, so long as you think that it consists in a
multitude of prayers, in the opening of Scriptures, in fleshly striving for
earthly liberty, and earthly power; you do not, you cannot see the Kingdom of
God: Alas, you admire your selves, your zeal and intentions, your gifts and
notions; But what are those to the Kingdom of Jesus Christ? which is over all
things in heaven, in earth, and under the earth: Over all things, first in
heaven, He employes innumerable Angels, and all their holiness, power and
light, in distinct ages and places: And brings them forth successively, to act
their parts, and to show the utmost of their strength and wisdom in governing
the world: And when he has done with them, folds them up as a vesture, lays
them aside, and changes them for others: Possibly all that you have attained
to, may not amount tb one Angel: Be it what it will, you cannot but confess,
one Angel may do as much and more, know as much and more, speak as much and
more, then all you have done: And that in greater holiness, purity, brightness
and majesty: And when he has done it, must bow down and be dismissed: Why then
should you be troubled at the fall of your works? Secondly, Christ's Kingdom
extends to all men, in all Nations: He has power to spirit and anoint all men,
with what spirit he please, to sanctify them and gift them; either as
heathens, so he did Cyrus and his Medes; or as Jews, so he did Saul; or as
Christians, so he did the Saints of old: And yet none of them must reign, only
minister, and serve in those spirits. He has laid infinite variety of gifts in
man's nature, and knows how to use them all, and will have a time for every
purpose: And as he will draw out the good of every man, of what degree soever;
so the evil of every man: All men's lusts and corruptions, must be drawn out and
judged: In one state of things, men's Religion and Gifts lie uppermost, and
cover their sins; that Religion must have a time to work, and have honor or
reward for that work; and when it is worn out, it must, as an old garment, be
laid aside. And then that evil that is under that form of Godliness, must be
seen, showed forth and punished: In another state, the good may lie under the
evil: God has a work and an object prepared for that evil; when its work is
done, then the good will rise, and have its time and place. Thirdly, As Christ
rules all Angels and men, so all Devils, all infernal spirits, and will bring
them forth, out of the bottomless pit, into his own House and City, and give
them their time and place, to show forth all the evil that is in them: And
thereby judge them, and then cast them into the Lake of fire for ever: And
there are various sorts and kinds of flesh, or humane weakness, for them to
feed upon, in the nature of man: What is theirs, they do challenge, and must
have; first for words and actions, and then for shame and punishment: And if we
do in the least, see the Kingdom of Christ; we shall be content to take our lot
in any of these, or in all of them, as it pleases God to dispose of us: If your
minds were enlarged into the sight and view of the greatness of the Kingdom of
God, and the continuance of it in all ages, everlastingly, you would, with
submission and joy consider, and behold the present works of God upon your
selves and upon the Nation: But so long as you are shut up in that narrow
spirit, and limit the Kingdom of Christ, to such a poor, inconsiderable,
temporary thing, as your present dispensation and service, you cannot
understand any thing of it: Therefore know, that you are in darkness, and know
not whither you go; you are quite out of the way to Christ's Kingdom.

SECT. XIII.
WE will suppose likewise, that you do desire holiness, and that your trouble
is, either that you, or the Nation is no more holy: And therefore in zeal for
reformation, you go forth against the present state of things, as unholy,
denouncing wrath against it, and seeking the destruction of it: Herein likewise
you are extremely blinded by enmity: For,

First, That holiness which you profess, and in which you live, is not the
holiness of Christ, you are not holy as he is holy; and therefore it cannot
stand before him: it neither is, nor shall be, accepted, to reign with him: It
may do him service, be a scourge in his hand; it may stand before men, before
worse men in the field; it may stand before men's worldly passions and lusts;
before the Laws of men, and their punishments: It may stand before prisons and
chains; yea before death it self: And so will the holiness of moral men,
heathens or Jews, and of all sorts of Christians: But it cannot, it shall not
stand before God: 1. It is impure: 2. It is imperfect in its kind: 3. It is
fleshly and fading: 4. It is not an holy nature: 5. It is not holiness that can
take away sin: 6. It is not holiness, that can take away the sins of the world:
And therefore not the holiness of God and Christ.

Secondly, As it is short in its kind, and insufficient to answer the perfect
and good will of God, either in your own souls, or upon the Nation; so it is
corrupted, openly defaced, and for guilt rejected: Because it is polluted, it
is not your rest: To abide and persist in a way and state disowned and refused
by God; is not only sloth and ignorance, but unbelief and disobedience: God
never pulls down one dispensation, but he provides another: If you were not
entangled in your self-righteousness, and your minds not captivated by Satan;
the very principles of holiness that are in you, would make you distaste your
present state, which has been proved to be vain and false, and full of
opposition and contradiction: There is in you a seed of truth, love, and
purity, which must make you loath that state that has been and is found by
constant experience, unclean, formal, and full of enmity to one another and all
men: However you judge of me, as unholy, I must te^l you, I have a long time,
not only witnessed against the corruption of it, but have turned from it; even
from the best of what is abroad, of every sect: And that in the sincerity of my
love and affection, to the pure and holy nature of Jesus Christ: And so far as
I have in any small measure partaked of his holy Spirit; I have born your
iniquities, and been pressed and burdened with them, grieved for them, and
shamed of them: I do not now blame you from a common or humane spirit, though
that also is able to find gross defects in you, and in the best of your way: It
is by it, men blame you: And you by it, blame one another: But from that
holiness, wherewith I stand before God for you; and in that love and pity to
you, wherein I intercede for you, and could lay down my life for you: I may say
more; For I know and find that none comes unto the Father to intercede for
sinners, but by the Son: both in the name and spirit of the Son: None minister
truly before God; but in that love of Christ, who can be accursed for Brethren.

From deep experience of God, of my own soul, and of your state, and from a
long and sore travel in all, do I write this to you: That whatever you account
of your selves, by comparing your selves with your selves; or with one another,
or with them that are visibly worse then you: Yet when you shall but strive to
enter into the strait gate, that you may indeed come into the Kingdom of God,
and his naked face and presence: I say, when you shall but seriously and in
truth desire it, and press after it: you will abhor your selves, and that kind
of holiness in which you now live: Yea I know in your approaches to God, which
are not spiritual, naked and heavenly, but earthly, fleshly, and in letter or
image only; yet in that presence of God, which you enjoy, you are full of
self-condemnings, and self-upbraidings: But that being but an out ward Court,
into which your Religion brings you; it may show you the outward spots and
blemishes of your Religion, but cannot discover to you, the root and bottom of
the evil that is in you.

Thirdly, You are now, in a zeal for your forms of worship, and for those gifts
and graces that attend them; opposing, condemning and reviling in words and
religious exercises (to what that tends, all men know) the persons, ministry
and worship, now set up in the Nation: Against these you run headily and
carnally; for consider what you oppose, not Satan in these persons, offices and
worship, but the things themselves: That which you oppose and sight against,
being outward and carnal, such is that also by which you do oppose them: So
that the business is, not to pull down sin and iniquity, and set up holiness;
but to pull down the outward power, means and ministry of the Bishop; and set
up the Pastor: In truth it is to pull down them, and set up your selves. This
being a carnal and fleshly contest, (though covered with the name of God.) 1.
It is unclean. 2. And being unclean, that which comes from it must needs be
unclean also: and thereby you promote, not holiness, but the contrary sin: For
contention and war have done, and still do, wound and slay the holy life, which
is pure and peaceable; and carnal strife wastes the meek and good spirit: If
you should attain what you aim at, and destroy again the whole outward frame of
Church and State, and set up your selves; except you had the holy and mighty
Spirit of God, to destroy the root and spirit, as well as the form, and to open
hell, and shut them up for ever, as the Spirit did Christ's enemies; they would
recover again, as they have done: But such a Spirit and such a Power you have
not; I suppose if you could damn them all to hell presently, you would not do
it; you have more mercy in you, as men to men, your Brethren: And I am sure,
when you have power to do it, you will not do it; because he that has power to
do it, will not, does not do it: And he will never give his power, but he will
give his goodness and mercy likewise.

Again, if you could thrust out them, and, exalt your selves and way in their
place, how would holiness be advanced? It would be but one thing removed, and
another of the same nature brought in: for it is of the same kind with theirs;
humane, earthly, and living in the same region, else it could not sight with
theirs: if it be but of the same earthly nature, it must needs be worse, not
better; because it rises by war, and contention: And therefore must needs be
harder, sharper, and more cruel; and thereby suppresses the softer; and attains
its place by force: And yet when you have done this, except you have a more
holy Spirit, to guide, lead and unite you; you will not be able to settle your
selves.

It is a tried and judged case* that this spirit in which you act, has not
that truth and power, that can wholly destroy what is; nor that love and light
that can reform it; nor yet that wisdom; that can provide a better: And
therefore, you did overturn this Government, throw it in the dirt, and leave
the Nation void, for more wickedness to enter: and then suffer the old to
recover, maimed and broken, into a fouler house then it was: Or else you must
go on to perpetuate and establish contention and confusion in the Nation: This
is both reason and experience; and may convince you, if any thing will.

If you have not a more holy, more true, and more excellent spirit, you can
never attain what you seek; either an extirpation of this Power and Government,
or establish a better: If you cannot effect this, you will but sill your
selves, your Religion and the Nation, with violence, fury and enmity, by all
your opposition you make: But raise a deal of dust, to blind your own eyes and
others: But stir and provoke black and malignant spirits, both in you and
against you, as you have done.

And if you had that holy Spirit, which only can prosper you in such an
undertaking: Then I am sure you would forbear this kind of carnal and wrathful
opposition: For the spirit of Christ is of the nature of Christ, most holy and
most gentle, gracious and merciful: He is so holy, pure and incorruptible, that
he can and does make these things, uphold them, and walk in them, and in all
the ways and forms of men; in the midst of all their vanity and iniquity; and
not be defiled with them: And this Spirit, when you are led by him, will enable
you to live, either above them, or besides them, or in the secret of his
Tabernacle, which is within all there forms; and that with purity, peace and
content: And this Spirit that upholds and gives being to all forms and persons;
does distinguish and perfectly judge, between the good and the evil of all
persons and things; and does eternally choose and gather unto himself, that
which is holy in all, and casts the chaff and dust to the Serpent, and him and
it, into the Lake of fire.

If therefore you have this Spirit, and will do that visibly, which he does
eternally; then you must by him first gather all these things, and all the
parts of the broken Church and Nation, under his wings; that he may do with our
Chaos, as he did when he made the world; first sustain, cherish, and brood upon
this desolate state, and then form a new one: For if you cannot receive all
into your hearts, and bowels of love, you will never renew, or reform any
thing: For love is the first moving cause of all good: It is love only that
has in it that mercy, that life, that goodness, that can heal and reform the
poor diseased and decayed state of man, and of the Church.

This excellent divine nature of God, Love, has rejected with indignation,
your harsh and severe spirit, of self-sasety and self-seeking, into confusion
and shame: And has taken the work out of your hands into his own; after you
have by violence and unskilfulness, spoiled, wasted and ruined, he will
himself, save and restore: And in order to it, takes the whole frame of things
in all its sin, death, curse and misery, both persons, parties, forms and
states, into the bowels of his most tender compassions; into himself and his
own nature, life and being, who is Emanuel, God with us: In our flesh, and so
in and under our sins and curse; bearing of them for us, and from us: He has
love to those persons that you would destroy, finding his own image in them;
for they are his own creatures and children; therefore he will save them; and
first pardon, and then remove their iniquities: In those offices, that you
would destroy, he knows there is good in them, and in the honor and riches
belonging to them; and therefore will take away the abuse and corruption of
them: And in that service that you so much vilify, there is heavenly
excellency, which must be preserved, purified, enlightened; and all the death,
darkness, and profaneness separated from it; The holy one of Israel will do
this.

Therefore to conclude this point of holiness, you may and must know, That you
were sanctified, with a measure of gifts, for a service for the execution of
Gods displeasure: Its work is finished, the gifts corrupted, and now as to
public work upon the Nation rejected; and under a judicial blindness and
confusion, because of an evil spirit that did and does still possess them: It
is the righteous judgment of the Spirit of God upon them: who has, though
your gifts and performances be many and solemn, cast them as dung in your
faces: If you will retreat with them, in humility and repentance, to attend the
purifying of your own souls, and the purging away your own sins, you will find
mercy to your selves. But if you think by them, to exalt your selves again,
into dominion and power in the Nation; you will but involve your selves in more
misery and wrath; and like a Bull in a net, entangle your souls in greater
errors and outward troubles: The holy Spirit (I know and have felt) did bear
you a long time, as a heavy burden; and at last eased himself of you, as a clog
and cumber to him: And now I with joy feel that he is free to exercise his own
power, to effect and perfect, what you have failed in: It will be your only
safety, now to retire, into deep silence and humility, and leave the Church and
Nation, to him that is Lord of both: who made both, and I can assure you, will
perfectly reform both.

SECT. XIV.
BEsides the two things mentioned of the Kingdom of God, and of holiness, there
are some other things, that you have sought in these late wars, which are still
in your minds: As common liberty, or the liberty of the people, and liberty of
conscience: But it is most certainly true, and by experience now manifested,
that these things are not in that spirit, in which you have acted and still
stand: Nor is this way of strife and contention, the way to obtain them., but
the contrary: For as war and enmity is against the Kingdom of Christ, which is
a Kingdom of peace: And as they harden, pollute, and vitiate the mind of man,
which is contrary to holiness: So they do naturally exalt will and force, rage
and jealousy, and so must necessarily eat up and devour all liberty; and turn
all into the worst kind of tyranny; if the Father of mercies, and Spirits,
does not enlarge, mollify, and sweeten the nature of man, which wrath and war,
does imbitter and harden.

It is true, common liberty is written, in the common nature of man, in some
degree; though it be very weak: This liberty came forth in you, in notion,
profession, and affection, beyond what it does in other people; and it has
been not only talked of, but desired by you; yet that spirit in which you rose,
and in which you seek it, has not any true liberty in it; And if it has not
liberty in it, it can neither attain it for you from others, nor give it by you
to others: it never could do either.

Mind well what I write, else you will not understand it: For it is, I know,
besides the common reason and apprehensions of men, and therefore seems to be,
and is, strange to the dark and private spirit of the world; but you and all
men must know, that there is a divine reason in these things; which ought to
be, and therefore shall be, the rule of man's Reason.

Know then first, That we began our wars upon this principle of delivering our
selves, from the yoke, of the Law and Government of the Church and Kingdom;
being of another spirit and way from them: And upon the same principle of
self-safety, and self-freedom, was the war carried on; and the whole business,
from step to step: This seemed to us very just and righteous, that we should
have liberty to serve God, according to what light and understanding he gave
us: And there is an undoubted right in it: Yet we see to what infinite
confusion, and strange enmity and division, this principle has brought us: And
therefore there is some notable evil, either in the principle, or in the
liberty, or in both: I think both will be found faulty: I shall only charge the
principle (that is) our seeking self liberty, or liberty for our selves.
Whatever good is in the thing, it does and will miscarry, so long as it is upon
this bottom self.

Such is the large and good nature of the God and Father of all, that he will
blast and wither every private and particular spirit. It is contrary to him,
has no root in him, and therefore though he do sometimes feed it awhile, and
make use of it, yet he will at last reject it; and never suffer it to stand up
with him in his Kingdom: He may and does admit it to work, and act, in some
low, remote, and dark state: But if he be true to his own Good nature, or to
the nature of his Son, the Savior of the world; he must not admit it to reign
with him, nor will he: Yea though it cloth it self with salvation, either of
our own, of others souls; which is a thing most agreeable to the mercy of God;
yet will he never save any in that spirit: But resist and oppose that
salvation, and all the graces and gifts whereby men seek it, till he kill that
root of self: For he has given it as a Law to Christ, and so by Christ to men;
he that will save his life shall lost it, and he only that will lose his life
shall save it: It was the great lesson he taught his Son, and the first that
Christ teaches his Disciples: Let him deny himself: If Christ and his
Disciples, must deny so excellent and holy life, and self, that they may ascend
unto the Father of all: If that holy and blessed state must be abjured and
renounced, and so come to the curse: What can you think of self-seeking, of an
out ward liberty and freedom, from outward sufferings? it is no wonder to see
tins brought to shame and confusion.

God has pursued this root of self-seeking, even in spiritual things, by many
sore and severe trials in my spirit: By which I came to understand what an
irreconcilable and desperate enemy it is to God, and what deadly poison there
is in the nature of it; and how dangerously it will corrupt the best things in
men: Where ever it is admitted, it will and does kill the life of Grace, if God
kill ^ot it: And though at first it seem zealous and holy, yet it will break
out into gross self-seeking: For he that prays, preaches, believes, studies,
and receives the promises of eternal life to himself, or to a party, which is
but a large self; will at last in all things, mind himself; and so will be
cruel, covetous, ambitious, and any thing that self suggests to him: And this I
find to be the root of all that narrowness that was in this Party, and of that
gross self-seeking, that all men take notice of: There is at the bottom of the
whole business, and at the root of all their Religion, a spirit to seek their
own salvation, liberty, exaltation and honor: And being fixed and bound to
this principle, they could never enlarge themselves to the good of the whole;
nor were they ever capable of any larger principles, nor can they be, till this
state be slain in them: And though they shift from one thing to another, they
will find no rest, till they subject this state to loss, and thereby come to
partake of the largeness of the love of God, and Christ: Who teaches us to
seek, not our own, but the things of others; not our own liberty or salvation,
but the liberty and salvation of others.

And therefore the Lord of all, that he might discover, judge and destroy this
principle, so contrary to his own love and life, has so ordered it: That he
that will not deny himself, his life, liberty and salvation, for the good of
others, in conformity unto Christ, and in obedience to his Gospel; They will be
found to be persecutors, cruel destroyers of others lives and liberties; and so
be brought to shame and destruction: They that will not suffer for, and from
others; others must suffer from them: And they that cannot give their life,
will take away others life: It is and will be resolved into this; that men must
either live in the merciful and saving spirit of Christ, or in the cruel spirit
of the Devil: And no show or form of godliness, nor pretense of right or
religion, can evade this judgment: For strong is the Lord that thus judges.

It is therefore evident, and God will make it good, that there is not common
salvation, nor good will to man, in any private spirit of any Party, but in the
Spirit of Christ, the Savior of the world: And that this true public spirit,
where ever it is, it shows it self by this, it will suffer for and from others,
and not make others suffer from it; it will and does give life and liberty, and
not take it away.

The first step into freedom, is out of our selves: and the beginning; of all
ingenuity, is to be able, to examine, try, and judge our selves: If by
experience, and by what is here written you attain, the least spark of true
freedom; and can but reflect upon your selves, and remember the first rise of
your work; that it was to deliver your selves; and that in the whole progress
of it* it was terminated and bounded in self, either in a finer or a grosser
way; and could do nothing but prefer or exalt your selves and Party, or them
that would confirm and strengthen your selves, by serving of you: And that all
the while you were busy in this work, you could not but oppress others; not
only your enemies, but the whole Nation: And that none of you could ever
produce any public ease, liberty, or advantage to the people; but on the
contrary, taxes and burdens: If you have but so much ingenuity, as to judge
your selves, state and spirit, and justify God and Christ, we shall soon
agree: If you do so, and come forth of that hole, that pit, of a narrow private
Religion, that self or party, holiness and salvation; which is really now a pit
and snare, whatever exaltation it has had: If you can now but look out of it,
and view things in the light of the universal goodness of God, your reason will
tell you.

That for you that are but a small part of the Nation; it may be a tenth;
either for number or quality; a tenth, that is, a more active, vigilant, more
spirited part of the whole: For you, in times of trouble, to get the sword into
your hands, and to overthrow the Government and Governors of the whole; which
the whole choose and rest satisfied in, and to seclude the nine parts of the
representative of the whole, and admit: of none to rule but your own tithe: To
subdue the civil Government, and exalt the sword: To depose one, natural,
chosen, beloved; and one in judgment and affection with the nine parts: And to
set up many, in many various ways and opinions, all strange to the whole
Nation, if not hated: And to impose your selves, your sense and reason, your
taxes and payments, with your religions and opinions, by force of arms upon the
people; under penalty of being malignants, the wicked, and so not worthy to
enjoy any privilege: If you have as much power in your reason now, as you had
once in your swords, to make this, common freedom, I must be your slave, and
the whole Nation with me.

Suppose you intended freedom; yet good meanings or intentions must not
justify ill actions: Good intentions will not avail in a man's own soul; much
less save a Nation: They are false intentions, if the thing it self intended,
be not in the intention: If the thing it self be there, it will wisely direct,
and strongly work, to bring forth it self, and will not miscarry: But that
which is a false and deceitful intention, may seem to aim at the end, but as a
broken bow, will carry the arrow to another mark, to a private advantage, and
not public freedom: But suppose that indeed you were public persons, and had
the good of the whole Nation in you, and knew it before you offered to stir;
which to this day, you cannot own: Yet would you think to beat this freedom
into the Nation by force? Freedom is not freedom, if we be compelled to it: You
never learned this, either of the Law or Gospel: God never would, nor did offer
to rule over any, but by their consent: The most glorious things, if the
subject be not disposed, prepared, and so opened to receive them; are and will
be a torment to minds averse from them: By how much more, any way seems to have
more light and strength then another; if it enforce it self upon that which is
weaker and darker, it is more injurious, then for the darker to impose it self
upon the stronger: Because, where there is light and strength, they are more
able to bear the infirmities and burdens of the weak, then the weak is able to
bear the strong: They that have light and strength, will shift well under the
darker power, and either evade the force, or live and thrive under it: But if a
weak dark people, come to be ruled by the force of a more knowing, they have
nothing to support them, but must sink under it: And either they must dissemble
and be hypocrites, or be sots and beaten like beasts, because they are not
better, or be other-wayes abused and enslaved.

People may set up notions of things to please their fancies, or to color and
paint a business: But for the Common People, either they are well pleased with
their Government and Governors, and so quietly rest under them; and then they
are as free, as they desire to be; and so they are, having liberty to buy and
sell, to purchase and enjoy their estates: Or if they are sensible that any
thing oppresses them, as the Government of England is by Parliaments, they have
power to free themselves, by choosing such Representatives as will take care of
them and their liberties: Liberty is for men, not beasts; beasts must be
yoaked: If liberty be only for men, then it must be a rational liberty, a
freedom for reason, and a freedom according to reason: And if according to
reason, then according to Law and by consent: And therefore the way to procure
such a liberty, is not by war, which exalts force, and deposes reason: It
exalts division, and destroys agreement: And there is no liberty, but where
there is a free exercise of reason, in order to consent: And that to my
knowledge, would never be admitted by the late power: For that which stands by
force, dares not submit to reason: But know certainly, that as you do see, war
provokes and exasperates men's minds into rage and jealousy, and pollutes the
streams of Justice, filling men's hearts with cruelty, partiality, hardness and
self-love: So the Spirit of God, in the shining forth of general love and
light, into all persons and things; will expel the darkness, and consequently
the cruelty and oppression: For the dark places of the earth, are full of the
habitations of cruelty, Psalm. 74.20. This spirit has sufficiency of light and
love, to expel the evil one, out of the whole body, out of Governors and
people jointly: And will not set up one against another: the people against the
Prince, or the Prince against the people: Such unskilful Surgeons, wound and
break, but heal not: The wisdom of God, which formed all out of himself, and
sustains them all in himself, has life, light, and liberty, for the whole in
himself, and will give it forth to all parts and parties.

SECT. XV.
LIberty of Conscience has been a great plea amongst us in these times; a very
busy body in our troubles: Whence he comes, and of what raze he is, I believe
no body knows: If he can avoid examination, I perceive he will; for he is very
nice and tender, and will suffer no body to come near him: I did think to have
let him pass, because as soon as he is touched, he will clamor: Therefore for
my credit, I thought to avoid him: But I consider again, that it is not just,
out of fear to fly any subject, in a man's discourse, if it lie in his way:
Therefore if I will be true to my own mind, I cannot wholly wave him: I must a
little try him; or at least examine how he has behaved himself in these times.

For my own self I profess, an universal Liberty for all forms and professions,
from the Papist to the Quaker, or Fifth-monarchy men: Because I know there is
some good in all, and therefore have a love to all, not only of pity, to the
worst and weakest; but of complacency: For I know, that although they are now
drawn out into an opposition one against another, yet truth, that is but one in
it self, is divided amongst them; and therefore there is a secret union betwixt
them: I know the widest meet, not only their persons in one life; but their
opinions in one reason also: And therefore it is no hard matter, I think, if
they were but tractable, to put them all in one circle; where the extreme parts
would meet: the beginning and end be the same: For certainly the Quaker, is a
kind of a Catholic, and the Fifth-monarchy man is a kind of a Papist.

Another reason, why I would that all might have all liberty of Conscience, is,
because I know there is that reason, and light in truth and power among us,
which is able both to subdue and unite all men's consciences: For conscience is
but one, and truth, the rule of conscience is one also. It is true, there is
great confusion among us, and therefore abundance of error; which shows there
is much distemper, blindness, and sickness of mind: Outward punishments enrage
and obdurate; and therefore are improper remedies for diseased minds: They
cannot heal the understanding; but they may, and do harden the heart, against
them that inflict them: and so confirm and strengthen the error and distemper,
and fill the mind with more enmity, and consequently with more blindness: How
much is poor man to be pitied, whose zeal for God and the worship of God, is
so miserably distracted and misled; as to be made use of, only to destroy one
another: And that Religion, which is the Law of love, peace, and salvation,
should become the great engine of death, wrath, and destruction; and no remedy
against it.

Sure it will be considered, That truth is one in Christ: That Jesus is the
head of man; and that man's nature, reason and understanding, is his own body
and spouse: That Religion unites and binds this head and body, in a Covenant of
marriage: That love, life and truth, are only in this union: And that therefore
truth, life, and love, are together, and they that leave one, they leave all:
If so, then they that love not, err from the truth, and they that by their
opinions, are taught to hate and kill, live neither in love nor truth, but in
death and darkness: Error and enmity do destroy, and they that do destroy, are
most in destruction; because to them may be applied that title given to Satan,
Heb. 2.4. he that had power of death; for they that in malice inflict it, have
power of it.

All truth is most beautiful and lovely, even unto the reason of man; and all
error is a lie, and monstrous, even to the mind of man: both in it self, and
in the foul and devilish effects of it: When the light shall shine forth to
manifest this, men will of themselves fly from error, avoid hatred, and love
the truth.

Satisfy your selves therefore, you that seem to be zealous for truth, of any
side or party; and know, That as men's souls and consciences are the body and
Spouse of Christ; so they are his care and charge: He has with him a Law
wherewith to govern this body; and power over all conscience, and severe
punishment, for them that are proud and rebellious: He has a spiritual Court,
and a spiritual Law, with power and authority, to execute Spiritual judgments:
And conscience is most sensible of his strokes, and most easily subjected to
him; and therefore will be ruled by him: To him it does belong to do it, and to
him alone, and he will do it.

Upon these grounds, I do in my spirit give liberty to all persuasions, having
a persuasion and reason that comprehends them all in one: And knowing that one
mercy and goodness, upholds, saves and forgives all; and that one truth, and
one Gospel, is under all, and in all: And being sensible, of that one enemy,
that does abuse all; by engaging them, in zeal for some part of truth, against
their brethren; knowing likewise that light, that will scattter this darkness,
and unite all in one, in one heart, and in one way: These things being true,
there is reason all should have liberty, to challenge and plead their right, in
order to agreement: Which must as certainly have its time, as confusion has
had his time.

There is order, in and under this confusion, and will arise out of it; yea
this confusion, is to this end, that a more large and excellent love and light
might come forth, to reduce all this into order and harmony: And when it does
manifest it self, it will not only join some parts, that are nearest one to
another; but will unite all: I absolutely think it impossible, to make any true
union betwixt any two or three parties or sects in the Nation, leaving out the
rest; as it is impossible to build an house, of some parts of the frame, of
some posts and pillars, excluding and denying other parts.

There is a Church of England, or in England (it is I think all one): If ever
there was one, there is still one (if there be among us the profession and
Faith of Jesus) Because the Church is built upon a rock, and the Gates of hell
cannot prevail against it: If hell should take it captive, and either carry the
Church into hell, or hell come forth and possess the Church, with all its
filthyness, wickedness, darkness, and confusion: Yet it would be still the body
of Christ, and therefore it still is, not only safe in all this; but beloved
and honored by him: Antichrist may and does sit in the Temple of God, and
defile this temple of God, but it is still the temple of God: And the Gentiles
may enter into the holy City, and trample it underfoot, but it is still, and
ever shall be, the holy City.

If we deny there is or was a Church, I am sure no man among us has power to
plant a Church: For no Church of God, was ever planted in the earth, but by
power and authority, from heaven, and by a pattern from the Mount. Men cannot
so much as repair a decayed Church, without an heavenly anointing: Therefore
if there was no Church there is none: For our new Churches challenge not from
heaven, but from the letter.

If there be a Church of England; then all English men that profess faith in
Jesus are members of it; Till this Church cast them out; till they be
judicially proceeded against; by the Church her self: Be they never so corrupt,
they are corrupt members, of her corrupt body; till she recover her power to
cast them out: And she and all her parts must own them, and bear them, and all
their filth and guilt, till they be cut off.

It is not in the power of any parts except they have the power of the whole,
to cast out any: It is much less in the power of any parts, to cast out the
whole Church, or to unchurch the Church: Nor is it in the power of any to
dismember himself: they may like froward children run away when they are ill
used, but that does not dissolve the relation betwixt parents and children; nor
acquit either from their duty: All the separations, and abjurations; of all the
Independants, Anabaptists, and Quakers, does not make them no members of the
Church of England: Neither are they thereby no children of the true Fathers of
the Church* Nor must we therefore cease loving of them instructing of them,
because they have like the prodigal got a portion, and gone from their Fathers
house: If the relation holds, the duties of that relation, will be required; of
Fathers, authority, wisdom, justice, and love; and of children, obedience, and
subjection; And no ill affection or desposition, can dissolve a relation; An
ignorant* weak, decayed old man, is a Father; and a forward, bold, rebellious
Son, is a Son.

The way to bring wandering sheep to the fold, is to seek them out. And the way
to reduce prodigals, is to suffer them to want: There are both these;
simplicity to be sought out: and conceited prodigality, and this will starve,
and come to great want: And then, if there be bread in our Fathers house, they
will be compelled to seek it: I know certainly, they will be in great
necessity, of spiritual food, that spend so prodigally, in harlots houses, in
boasting, glorying, and quarrelling: and then where bread is, they must bow for
it, and will: and then the Bishop and Shepherd that can feed them, will be
honored by them.

But if England be still a Church, or there be a Church in England, of old and
late, and all men professing faith in Christ, are members; and neither the
worst nor best, are dismembered, but all continue one body, though broken and
under confusion: Then as every particular member is apart; so parties united by
any bond of spirit, persuasion or opinion, must needs be a great part, an
integral part: And if so, there can be no peace, nor building, but of all these
parties: And it is easier, for a workman, to constitute a house of all, then
for another to make a shed, or hovel of some parts: But there will never be any
harmony nor health in the body, if every joint supply not its place: It is love
only can unite and heal, and only an entire love, or a love of the whole, to
the whole: If any part be rejected there is want of love, or love is not in
that agreement, that leaves out any part; and if love be not there; the
agreement will not hold: Love the more, the divisions, the wider, and greater
the distance; the more able it is to unite, and the more pleased to do it;
because it is infinite. And the greater the variety is, the more wisdom
delights to show its skill in ordering and composing of them into harmony; and
the more excellent will the music be, when composed.

It is not imaginable, that any one Party, can comprehend the whole: nor can
any one Party comprehend any other Party: And therefore every person and Party,
will in their divided state, think and conclude an union impossible: But as it
is impossible for any party, or few parties to agree or to think how to agree;
so it is impossible but the whole must agree; because she comprehends all the
parts; and they all do consist in her, and she consists only by and in all.
Therefore as the reason of any, or many parts, be they eminent parts, cannot
unite the whole; while they stand as parts, divided from any of the whole; So
the reason of the whole, cannot but comprehend and gather into it all the
parts, and consequently must unite all: For all do already meet in that
universal reason, wherein and whereby both all the parts, and the whole
subsist.

This is the reason of the liberty of conscience, that is in my mind: I would
that all may have liberty to come forth, to come together, and to agree: and to
agree first in this point of liberty: For it is impossible that ever we should
agree or consent by force: No man will agree to be beaten: If we give not
liberty to men to profess, enquire, and bring forth their minds, we deny them
liberty to consent: For there cannot be a free consent, till there be all
freedom to profess and to debate; and of all means, both of professing, and
trying all things: What is restrained and imprisoned by jealousy and enmity,
is thereby shut up in division, and denied both the first step to, and the
right means of agreement: And is thereby enforced to dwell in it self, and to
maintain its own private divided state; being thrust out from all fellowship
with the whole: The admitting all to come abroad, into open light and
profession, with liberty to try, is the beginning of peace and agreement.

But as I would give this liberty of conscience: so I expect, and may justly
challenge, a liberty to deal with this conscience, in the way of conscience:
For therefore would I that their consciences may come forth, that they may be
convinced and instructed: Sure then you will not deny me liberty to reprove,
and rebuke: and if I can, to wound and afflict your consciences, if they be
guilty; If they be not guilty, I cannot hurt them; if they be, it must be
known, felt, and discovered, else they cannot be healed: It is a freedom that
God has given me, to reprove and reform;I shall use it, and I hope so use it,
as not to be denied the exercise of it: At this time, I would examine, this
plea of liberty of conscience, as it has been urged all along in our late
troubles.

I do very much suspect this title and claim of conscience to liberty, or
liberty for conscience, as it has been, and still is promoted by many; that
there is some notable evil in it, more then has been yet discovered: For,

First, Where the whole is unsound, the parts must needs be so also: And
therefore if there has been deceit and hypocrisy, in the whole state and
spirit of this work, this of liberty of conscience being a great part of the
business, must necessarily partake of the corruption of the whole.

Secondly, I cannot derive it from any ancient and honorable root: The Jews
while they were in their own land, they needed not liberty, for they were under
a Law of necessity and duty; I do not remember that ever they desired it, when
they were in captivity: In Egypt they would not sacrifice, Lo, shall we
sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes, and will they
not stone us? Genesis 8.26. And in Babylon they said, How shall we sing the Lords
song in a strange land? Psalm. 137.4. I am sure if you had been as sensible of
your spiritual al captivity, as they were of their outward, you would not have
made such haste to sacrifice and set up so many notes or songs: When you feel
the confusion that is in your spirits, you will find you are still in Babylon,
and hang up your harps, and mourn instead of singing: I am most certain of
this, there has been a whorish impudency in the great liberty taken, to pray,
profess, build Churches, Ministries and Worship: And for this spiritual
whoredom is liberty pleaded, as well as for conscience.

Neither did the Apostles, or the Primitive Christians, seek for liberty of
conscience, from the Princes of the world: But having commission from Christ
the supreme Lord, to preach the Gospel, they executed it boldly and freely:
They were called both to preach and suffer, and therefore did not seek liberty
from the cross: A true spiritual Ministry derives it self immediately from the
person of Christ, who is exalted far above all principalities and powers: And
being far above them, they need not, cannot rightly seek for a license from
them, to obey the commands of a superior Lord. If the powers of the world be
only worldly, and the life and religion of the Saints heavenly: the heavenly is
above the earthly; and may justly bless, preserve and instruct the earthly: and
the earthly is to submit to the spiritual and heavenly: If the powers of the
world are, as they were then, in the wicked one, then it was not only in vain,
but a wicked thing, for the servants of Christ to seek to his enemy the devil,
and his enemies, wicked men, for an outward liberty: They would rather suffer
from them, then so acknowledge them: Therefore liberty of conscience, will be
found a new and upstart thing, born in this age, amongst many other weak
things, and that it is not of the old raze of the right, generous, and heavenly
Saints: It may be pitied and indulged, but cannot challenge much.

Thirdly, This liberty of conscience seeks earthly things, and outward freedom;
Which is not only for conscience, or but for an outward and earthly conscience;
and with that for worldly ease, honor, and advantage: For conscience, if the
Son make him free, and so he be free indeed; it can and does live with God, and
with men, in heaven and in earth, and under the earth; in bonds, chains, and
death: and is still free with God and Christ, and cannot be confined: It is
therefore some outward thing that is pleaded for, as well as, or more then,
liberty of conscience.

Fourthly, It is a common observation, that men while they have been under
their enemies, and in a low condition, then they cry up liberty of Conscience;
but when the same persons have attained power, they content not themselves then
with liberty, but set up their consciences; to be a Law to others: It has been
practiced by all sorts of people, as they have gotten power into their hands,
in some degree or other: They have all punished some, for Conscience: Let this
be well examined, and if we can, let us find out the reason of it; it will
enlighten men's minds, and clear the truth: Consider then,

First, Whether conscience receiving its Law and rule from God, the supreme
Lord, ought not to exalt that Law (as it has opportunity) and hold it forth as
a Law to all men: I believe it is so; and therefore conscience taught and
instituted of God, is truly royal and Princely in his nature, and both must and
will rule: Which is the reason why neither the Jews nor Christians would seek
to their enemies, or to the heathen States for liberty, but knowing and loving
the majesty of their Lord, they would either reign with him, or suffer with
him, and from him.

If this be the royal nature of truth, then it follows, 1. That whatever men
profess, when they are down and low, yet we must expect, that when they get up,
they will exalt, that which they hold to be truth, as high as they can, and
exalt themselves with it. And 2. If they pretend otherwise, they do either
weakly or deceitfully hide and cover their minds; or else basely stoop below
the majesty of truth, for present ease and advantage. And 3. If we our selves,
by the Law of our own life and religion, do exalt our religion as a Law; we
must not wonder if others do so also; but have reason to be content with it,
and submit to it. And 4. Knowing that the Law and Religion of our Lord Jesus,
must and will rule; if we have it with us, and in us, it will be sufficient, 1.
To uphold us in a low state. 2. To assure us, that whatever other persons or
spirits God sets up, they must come down with shame. 3. That when that Law
comes to rise, we shall rise and reign with it. And 4. In the mean time
suffering with it, will prepare us to reign with it, and him.

Secondly, If this be true, that conscience rightly taught and enlightened, is
and will be a Law to all men; then what a poor or false conscience is that,
which craves liberty of men? If it be only weak, it is to be pitied, if it be
an evil thing, it is to be judged: Be it one or other, we see by experience it
is to be suspected: For if it be carnal and naught, when it is low, it will be
certainly worse when it gets power: If it be base, subtle, and serpentine,
when it is poor; it will be cruel and tyrannical when it rises. Therefore
though there be a natural right to liberty of Conscience, yet it is just reason
it should be examined: For further,

Fifthly, They that profess much for liberty of Conscience, could never give it
to others; neither to their enemies, that first denied it to them, nor to them
that needed it from them: I do think they that contend for it, will never grant
it: That large and generous spirit, that shall he able to give it, will neither
need it, nor stoop so low as to ask it: And that narrow, low, fleshly mind,
that knows not how to bear the darkness and shortness of them that are above
him; I doubt would less bear the darkness and shortness of them that are under
him.

Sixthly, This liberty of Conscience, has brought forth to the Church, a very
strange brood of absurd opinions, loose practices, proud and rebellious
spirits, to the scorn of Religion, contempt of all kind of Government, breaking
of all relations, of all bonds, natural, civil and religious: Now that which is
a cause or occasion of so much ill, has certainly an evil thing in it: And
therefore is no clear nor strong ground to engage upon.

There is no question, but men in tenderness to their own flesh and bodies, do
when they are in danger of suffering, cry up liberty of Conscience, as a great
thing, and decry the contrary beyond measure: Passion, passion for self, for
self unmortified, to avoid the Cross, is not a proper judge of Laws, Liberties,
Religions and Kingdoms: It does likewise appear, from what has been said, that
this liberty contended for, is not according to the ancient Christian and
Apostolical spirit: But a carnal, impure and mixed thing: Yet on the other
side, I do acknowledge, there is a humane and natural right in it, which
although it be weak and low, ought to be considered and pitied: It being a
thing of natural and rational equity, if it be fairly and rationally demanded,
it may I suppose be had: His Majesty has in goodness and prudence graciously
promised and declared it: It is in it self a reasonable thing, and therefore if
reasonably claimed, the reason of man cannot justly deny it: And much less
reason of State, which is the reason of the Nation: Besides the natural reason
of it, the present state of the Nation gives it a great advantage, and makes it
even to reason of State, (which is the preservation of civil peace) necessary:
And therefore nothing so likely to endanger it, as men's irrational, heady and
violent opposing the Government of the Church and Kingdom.

And therefore I affirm, that for you to stand out, in open enmity to the
present Government, in attempting war and hostility, or in preaching and
praying against it, or cursing and reviling of it, as wicked or Antichristian
(which tends to the destruction of it, either by war or otherwise:) To continue
in this, is not the way to procure liberty of Conscience, but to overthrow and
destroy it.

This liberty of Conscience, must be had, either by an utter ruin of all that
is against it, and so of the present Government: Or else by a friendly
agreement, with these or any other Governors: If you resolve upon the first,
to destroy all that are not according to your conscience, that your conscience
may have liberty: Then you would destroy all men's consciences but your own, and
all men for their consciences; which is the most contrary to liberty of
Conscience that can be: Most contrary, because you will endure none but your
selves; and that you would raise a war, that you might establish a Law of
cruelty, which is a thousand times worse, then to persecute by an established
Law and Authority: That power that you would have, must be through the lives, of
thousands of your enemies; and after that, thousands of your friends; for they
that strive for a power, never did nor never will agree in the sharing or
administering of it: But when through blood and destruction of friends and foes,
you have gotten it: If you should prevail, and you in your own persons escape,
yet that power gotten by war, in that spirit, you and we in reason must expect,
that it will be most cruel, because raised and begotten by cruelty. Indeed it
is so horrid and irrational, that the bare proposing of it, will make
reasonable men abhor such a thought: For nothing but irrational and blind zeal,
with discontent and passion, can so much blind the nature of man, as to lead
him into such unnatural things.

If your spirits, do indeed drive to this, to the removing and destroying the
present state of things, as an accursed thing; then the ingenuous, and seek not
liberty from them, nor complain of them for not giving it: For every such
acknowledgement of them, does confirm them, and so contradict your prayers and
endeavors to destroy them: Sometimes secretly and cunningly to curse them, and
another time openly and for advantage to acknowledge them, is falsehood and
deceit: And will attain nothing but shame and confusion: For there is little
but shame and confusion in it: It is a vile thing, in private and secret to
pray, or warily to preach against a State, and openly to comply with it: in so
doing our lives contradict our prayers, or our prayers our lives.

But if this be the drift of your spirits, though never so warily carried; do
you think, it is not felt and understood by them that you so oppose? you cannot
conceal it from them: It is wise counsel Solomon gives, Curse not the King, no
not in thy thought, or conscience, for a bird of the air shall carry the voice,
and that which has wings shall tell the matter: It must be understood
spiritually, for it cannot be meant literally: Angels are intelligences and
intelligencers, they are principalities and powers, and attend both the Throne
and Altar; they are present in dominion at Court, and in your Closets at your
devotions: They are the birds, and that which has wings, that tell the matter:
Public authority, has public ears and eyes, and reach all corners: Spiritual
intelligencers, as well as outward informers.

If they know and feel, that you intend their destruction; must they not abhor
that spirit, that under pretense of liberty of Conscience, really endeavors
liberty of destroying, and of overthrowing Governments, to exalt themselves.

And if they understand any thing, they must think: These men seek our
destruction, and as they pray for it, and preach it, so they will, if they can
or dare, attempt it, as they have done: And therefore they having such a sense
of you, you cannot in reason expect but that they should labor to suppress
you: If they find rebellion, war, and wrath in the principles of it, though in
religious duties and conscience; will they not suppress both the rebellion, and
conscience, and the duties or worship in which it is? And shall they not be
justified in so doing? I am sure your Law and Practice will justify them: For
the same thing has been done often; and would be again, if you had power,
while you are in this spirit.

When you shall recover either your own nature and reason, or the nature of the
Lamb, out of this Spiritual drunkenness and cruel zeal; you will find,

First, That Antichrist, the great enemy of Christ, is also an enemy to man, to
his life, peace, civil order, Law, and to all humane Ordinances.

Secondly, That this enemy is a spirit, the Angel of the bottomless pit: And
therefore his chief seat and place is in spiritual things, in conscience, and
in the spirits of men, and in those things wherein spiritual men, or the
spirits of men, are exercised; in gifts, religion, and holy duties; and his
last and greatest strength is not in corrupt forms, but in those that are most
spiritual, most lively, zealous and gifted: Others are but the flesh, these the
horns of the beast.

Thirdly, And therefore conscience, and the spirits of men, even in Religion,
and in lively or spiritual Religion, is grievously polluted by him: This Templo
of God is defiled by him: You must come to know it and feel it, as I have done.

Fourthly, The nature of this beast is to destroy; whence he has his name
Apollyon, a destroyer: His highest place is conscience gifted, men's spirits
enlightened; and his highest work is to kill and destroy; and in order to that,
to curse and blaspheme with those spiritual gifts.

Fifthly, This spiritual beast, this destroyer, cannot but be seen and felt by
the common reason of men; although they cannot judge him, yet they must have a
sense of him, as an enemy to that life, and peace, in which they live; and to
that Authority and Government which is committed to them.

Sixthly, As they cannot but discern, and feel the horns of this beast, that
pushes them and wounds them; so they cannot but arm themselves, with such
weapons as they have against him: If it be a State, it will defend it self by
Laws, punishments, policies and power.

Seventhly, This self-defence, though it be earthly cannot be denied them; yea
they will be justified in it, so far as it is rational, humane and necessary,
and for the preservation of peace and common safety: Wherein any are cruel and
revengeful, that is devilish also; and then it is the beast, against the beast:
But an humane care to maintain Law, Authority and Peace (though it be no more)
yet it is good against a destroying spirit, that would bring in war and
confusion, under the highest notion of Religion and Reformation: The ordinary
and common Ordinances of man; are to be justified in acting against a Religion
and Zeal, that seeks the subverting of them: The first is useful, necessary and
profitable; the other is hurtful and destructive.

Eighthly, The Law and Authority of a Nation, defending it self from this
spirit, by its own weapons, being outward, must necessarily fall upon the
persons, lives and liberties of them that are ngaged in this spirit.

I am grieved in my soul for both, both wound my heart; both the agents and
patients: In love to mankind, I am afflicted for them, and feel the unhappiness
of them, that are under a Law and necessity of so acting; and them that are
under a Law and necessity of so suffering: If either my labor and pains, or my
knowledge and experience, yea or my life if self, may do any thing to cure this
evil, and quench this flame, I should gladly expend them all.

And for you my friends, to whom in love and mercy this is directed, I know it
will not only seem strange to you, but be very grievous to bear; to find so
great a spiritual enemy, in the midst of your spiritual gifts and enjoyments: I
know you little expected it, and as little thought to find me the discoverer of
it to you; whom you have so much slighted: But know, this is the fruit of my
long travels, and dangerous encounters with this enemy: With whom I have
endured a long and tedious warfare, with great expense of life and blood, even
in my soul and spirit; and have received many desperate wounds in my inward
man: while you lived at case, and in pleasure, both outward and inward: You now
have that cheap, which cost me dear: For alas, how much easier it is for you,
to receive this conviction, from the hand of a weak broken man, in love and
compassion to you: Then to receive it, as I have done, from an angry and
jealous God? How much easier, is it for you, to bear reproof from the
experience of a friend? then to conflict with this destroyer, hand to hand, and
to graple with all his malice, darkness and wrath, in your own naked souls and
spirits? which God knows I have done, again and again: I know you have had
strange thoughts of me, I forgive you; you might well think strangely of me,
when you beheld me encompassed with the darkness and smoke of this bottomless
pit: and sensibly lost and swallowed up by this enemy: But I have by the mighty
power and goodness of God, escaped through many deaths and dangers, and yet live
to communicate to you the benefit of my conflicts, sufferings and deliverance.

If you say, you intend not war and destruction to them which you oppose, but
their repentance: See that you be true to this: I do believe many are wholly
taken off from war, by the great experience we have had, of the beastly deceit,
the horrible cruelty and corruption that has attended it: And that the same
honesty that led them out at first to engage in it, leads them now to abhor it,
and to choose rather to suffer, then by war to seek a deliverance: For the
clearing and strengthening their spirits, in that way of peace, are these
things writ: And to inform and instruct others, that are yet unconvinced.

We will then suppose, that you intend not to get liberty of Conscience by
violence and war; which was our first branch, but by a friendly agreement, with
the present: Magistrates and Governors; this is our second branch.

If we desire liberty, first know, That it must be from the Magistrate; for all
liberty, Civil and Spiritual, is in his power, either to give or restrain:
Liberty is the fruit that grows only upon the tree of Government, Law and
Authority; or is enjoyed only under the protection of them: Take away Authority
and Magistracy, and all kind of liberty ceases; we are presently exposed to the
lusts of wild and brutish men: Therefore they that are truly conscientious,
are most faithful to Magistracy: 1. Because they are bound to obey, not only
for wrath, as others, but for conscience sake; in obedience to God, who has
instituted Magistracy, and ordained that power: And they know and feel the
Providence and goodness of God, in the Magistrate, as well as the weight of his
Scepter: 2. Because they may receive more benefit from him, then others;
liberty, not only for their outward man, but for their spiritual man also;
which others need not: 3. Because they being conscientious, are more tender
then others, and so more subject to injury, then those that are not bound by
conscience: The loose and profane, need the Magistrate, to restrain and subdue
their wills; the conscientious, is his own Law, as to restraint, and needs the
Magistrate only for his protection: So that indeed the sword of Authority, if
rightly understood, the edge of it is against the loose and lawless life, and
the peace and favor of it, is to the good and the godly.

The enemy of man, and author of confusion, has brought forth much mischief
amongst us; both to the Magistrate, and to the conscientious; in dividing one
from the other; and setting of them against each other, which have but one
root: For the Magistrate is the Minister of God for good, Romans 13.4. And
conscience binds a man to subject to all the words and works of God; and to all
things that are administered from him or by him: Upon a little sober
consideration, this mist of error and mistake will be scattered.

But if the Magistrate give us this liberty of Conscience; then in reason and
conscience we are bound to defend the Magistrate, that defends us in this
liberty: And if we desire liberty of him, it is but equal and reasonable, that
we should profess, that it is our judgments and consciences so to do: For we
cannot expect he should give liberty to a conscience, that would destroy him
and his Government. Wherefore when men have professed conscience, in destroying
and changing of Governments, there should be a Declaration and Profession
against it, answerable to the evil done by it; or sufficient to wipe off that
scandal.

Secondly, If we desire liberty of Conscience, from the Magistrate, it must be
either, in a way of Reason, or Religion, or both; if we seek it from him in a
way of reason, we must admit him a man, a reasonable creature, else it is in
vain to seek reason of him: If the Magistrate be man, he has the image of God
as man, and as Magistrate; which is to be beloved, honored, and defended by
us; not opposed, hated and destroyed: If there be man and reason, it is
possible and likely we may agree with and unite to man; because we also are men
of the same flesh and blood with him, and he with us: If we do not agree with
our own nature, though under many defects, there is something unnatural in us;
which we may call Spiritual, but if it be Spiritual, it is not divine nor
Christian; for God loves man, is reconciled to man, Christ is a man, and loves
his Brethren: If we confess them to be men, then we are to deal humanely with
them, and to exercise reason to them, openly, clearly, fairly: If we think they
err, we are in reason to go to them, and to inform them if we can, or to
receive information from them: If we need anything of them, we should
reasonably propound our request to them: If both parties be men, and will
exercise reason to each other, there will be an understanding and agreement;
for there is but one reason in all men.

If we seek liberty of Conscience, upon grounds of Conscience and Religion;
which is most proper, and most for the advantage of the Cause of Conscience,
who has most strength in his own Court; then we must conclude the Magistrate
has a Conscience: For if he have no conscience, he cannot consider conscience
to give it freedom: If the Magistrate have a conscience, then, 1. If we plead
liberty of Conscience, he must be himself free, to exercise that Conscience in
Religion and Worship: Can you then freely grant that to the Magistrate, which
you desire of him? And let him in his way be as free from your tongues and
pens, as you desire to be from his sword and officers: If so, then you must
cease all railing, reviling and reproaching; for that, from the subject to the
Magistrate, is persecution of the tongue, in name and dignity; as well
imprisonment, from the Magistrate to the subject, is persecution of the body.

Object. But ought we not to reprove evil, and testify against it?

Answ. Yea according to the Gospel; which is to reprove them as Brethren, with
meekness, long-suffering, love, gentleness; but to speak evil of their persons
and worship; not to them, but to others against them; is not to convince, but
to defame, which to a dignity is to oppose, and so to overthrow it, and to set
up your selves either against or above them: If so, you go beyond a
Gospel-rule, which forbids to speak evil of dignities, and commands to honor
all men: If it be not according to the Gospel of Peace and Love, then it is
carnal strife, and will bring forth fruits accordingly: And will stir up
answerable disaffection in the Magistrate: For him to restrain and imprison, is
the same thing, with your opposing them, whereby you would restrain them, from
setting up or practicing what their consciences lead them to.

Observe this well, If you expect liberty of Conscience to worship, you must
give liberty of Conscience to worship: And they that have liberty, to worship
God in Jesus Christ, are part of his House and Church: If you and others will
admit this, That men walking in different ways of worship, of one God, are all
servants of that God, whom they worship, and so members of the body and of the
Church, though under much darkness and many mistakes; ^his alone will kill all
enmity.

To enlarge your minds to this; do but consider, that which both your reason
and your wants, will necessarily lead you to: For can you ask liberty of
Conscience, of them that have no Conscience? If they have Conscience, they must
have liberty to worship God: If they be worshippers of God in the name of
Christ, they are Christians: And this they do; therefore they are members with
us, though dead or corrupt members.

And as our reason and wants will lead us to it, so our judgments may well
admit it: For the body of Christ, is this day most large; and the House of God,
is a House of prayer to all Nations: The name of Jesus Christ, is published,
received, and believed on in the world, and consequently called upon: And all
that call upon the name of the Lord are saved; that is, according to the degree
or measure of Faith, Religion, Obedience and Worship they exercise, so is their
salvation; either outward, temporary and worldly, or inward, spiritual and
eternal: For we plainly see that all men do worship God, and have some kind of
Communion with him; They give him some service, and receive some good from him;
life, and support, for that life, for the soul and body: Which does not deny
the exercise of justice, either to God or men; neither of temporary or eternal,
civil or ecclesiastical; but establishes all: For by admitting all, to this
common privilege, they are thereby subject to all divine, christian and humane
judgments.

And either we must admit all Parties to this privilege, or else we must admit
them to no outward, civil or natural privilege: For the House of God, and
visible body of Christ, is more large then any Nation; and the love of God to
man, in Christ, is larger then any other law or light, civil or natural: The
Spirit of Jesus is more merciful, longsuffering and gentle, then any other
spirit: And therefore if we cannot admit them, to be partakers of Gods goodness
in his House, we shall not allow them a place in the earth.

And they that pray against men, as enemies to God, as wicked and
Antichristian; they will also thrust them out of all rule and dominion; and
consequently, out of Possession in the earth; and either destroy them quite, or
reduce them to slavery: If this be considered, it is so vile a thing, that the
nature of man will abhor it: And if it abhor the effect, it must also abhor the
cause; that spirit and way, that produces such cruel things in the earth.

And as it is vile in it self, so it engages Party against Party, to their
utter destruction; and leaves no means of peace; which is most contrary, to all
the grace of God in Jesus Christ.

It further follows, if we allow the Magistrate a Conscience, and freedom for
his Conscience; we must allow him the Conscience, not of a private person only,
but of a Magistrate: If he have freedom of Conscience as a Magistrate, he has
not only liberty of worship; but liberty as a Magistrate; to countenance,
advance and promote that worship which he practices, and judges to be the
worship of God: For every one is bound, as to worship God, so to be zealous for
that worship, and to promote it: And every one in their place does it:
Ministers in their way, Magistrates in their way, and People in their way.

This then is the great difficulty, and the knot of the business, every
Conscience requires liberty, not only for their practice, but for their zeal,
to promote their particular way: This zeal wanting knowledge, and rule to walk
by, and therefore in confusion; makes men clash, oppose and quarrel one with
another.

It cannot be expected that I should at this time show, the place and duty of
all degrees and Parties, with their distinct bounds and limits; it would
require a Treatise by it self: I shall only say this at present: 1. I know,
there is a holy, righteous, and a good Law, for all men to walk by, in their
several orders and places, in the great House of God, without offense and hurt
one to another. 2. There is work and employment for all, both Magistrates,
Ministers and People; to exercise themselves, and all the power committed to
them, either civil or spiritual, against the common enemy of mankind,
wickedness, unrighteousness and unmercifulness: And the Church of God, and the
Nation, have both need of all their power and gifts, and of every good thing,
that God has made; and right to them all. 3. While they oppose one another,
the Church and Nation, does not only lose the benefit of all these parts; but
envy, strife confusion, and so every evil work is increased; and the poor
nature of man and the Church is neglected and spoiled. 4. As all these gifts
and Ordinances of God, are the right of the Church, so they all come from one
head, from Christ; of whom and by whom, are all powers, all gifts,
Magistratical and Ministerial. 5. There is one law, one way, for them all, to
employ all their power outward; and gifts inward jointly. 6. Herein only, can
they all have comfort and honor, because herein only they can do good, and
live in love and peace: And therefore, lastly it follows (which I shall ever
press) There is a necessity of a friendly treaty and agreement of all Parties,
of the ablest, largest and wisest of all Parties; to enquire for this excellent
and perfect way and Law of God; which certainly, is complete and sufficient,
and will be manifest, to them that seek it; and to this Church and Nation, if
they seek it as a Church and Nation, that is, jointly, all her parts and
parties together.

Till this can be obtained, or in order to this, let me desire you to consider;
The extremes of zeal in promoting, every Party their way of worship, are
visibly these two: First on the Magistrates part, by outward force and
punishments, to compel men's consciences to his way: This I hope is past and
gone: We have the word of a King for it; and if we thankfully and humbly
receive the favor of it, we may have it continued and confirmed: The second
is, on the gifted ministry or peoples side, their civil is, to promote their
way by anger, wrath and bitterness, in preaching, praying, and writing: which
are their weapons, as the Law and prisons are the Magistrates: And is the same
evil in a finer and more spiritual way, and therefore last discovered, and last
subdued.

If you should not be invited to peace by the clemency and mercy of the King,
in giving liberty; yet you ought first to cease from strife, and to seek peace;
because you were last in war. 2. You are under punishment for it. 3. Your
profession and gifts are graater: You seem to be nearer the Gospel, nearer to
Christ, and therefore should first lay down your weapons of wrath, and seek
peace: You should bear the evils and darkness, of them that you judge carnal
and worldly. In doing so, you will have most peace, and honor, and soonest
find deliverance.

I have been very large in this subject, much beyond the purpose of my mind,
when I began to write: I know not well the reason of it: Since I have writ it,
I am apt to think, there is need enough of it; I am not without fears, that the
great discontent and unmortified zeal of some, will put them upon foolish and
desperate courses, if more reason and religion do not bridle their passions:
Whether men are so mad or no, I know not, but this I am sure, that this way of
enmity and opposition, defiles and pollutes Religion: It feeds upon the peace
and comfort of men's souls: It fills the Nation with jealousies, and
consequently with violence, distraction, and unsettledness: And is most
prejudicial, to those honest, holy things, that your hearts are engaged to and
for.

And therefore this is the conclusion of this matter; I desire you and all men
would take notice of it.

That if you, or any men, have any designs, for public and Christian good; Or
any expectation of enjoying the blessing, favor and grace of God; either
outward or inward, for soul or body; either for your selves, or for the Church
of God: If you hope to have either peace in your souls, or peace and comfort in
your places, honors, families and relations: Then cease from strife, wrath and
revenge: For they that live in this fire of wrath, it will certainly consume
them: For it is the displeasure of God: And although you may be the rod in Gods
hand, to chasten and humble each other; yet the rod must to the fire: Ye may
thrive and prosper in it a while, but its end is to be destroyed: Cease to be a
rod, cease to officiate under that great enemy of Christ, of man, and of peace,
the destroyer.

Be warned by my experience: And know all men, That whatever you administer to
others, shall be administered to you: With what judgment you judge, ye shall be
judged: and what measure you mete, shall be measured to you again; If you
trouble and vex others, you shall be vexed and troubled: If you censure and
judge to hell, you must come to feel it your selves: All the evil that I have
spoken against any, even the worst of it, I have born it my self; and bless God
for it: Therefore if the same righteous God judge you, as he has done me, by
the same Law and Word of Christ, as I know he will, in some degree or other.
Then you must suffer upon your own souls, all those plagues and curses, that
you denounce against your brethren, as Antichristian, as wicked and ungodly
men: God did not spare his Son, but laid upon him that hell, and curse, and
those woes, that he threatened against his enemies.

I know but one of these two ways of administering the Law and Judgments of
God: Either we must be such, as are indeed one with them, and so love them, and
be willing our selves to suffer them: Or else such as do administer the same to
others, which God has first administered upon us; and do it, with the same love
and mercy, wherein he has done it to us.

For if we ease our selves, call off the curse and judgment to others, and
load others, to free our selves: This is contrary to Christ: and therefore it
shall not stand: For, 1. That life that so does, is not a true Christian life;
and therefore the curse that goes out from him, will return to him. And 2. That
against which the curse goes out, may bear it awhile; but there is something
also that is to be saved, though through suffering; and therefore that curse or
punishment, which is discharged by any man, at another; when that good that is
at the bottom arises, and comes forth, it will repel that curse, and then it
returns to him from whence it came: For an evil or curse, once born, must rest
somewhere; therefore if it find not rest, it will return to the first author of
it.

All sides must consider this, There is in your enemies, the Royal Party, a
Law, an Ordinance of God, a Providence, a humane nature, which is of God, and
though it lie in much weakness, it will stand as a rock: And therefore all the
arrows shot against them, in passion and anger, will certainly recoil and wound
the archers: And there is in you that now suffer, an innocence, an honesty,
though under much error and mistake; and therefore the wrath and revenge
administered against you, will return upon the souls, families and affairs of
them that persecute you.

The reason and experience of these things, brings that notable Scripture to my
mind, Psalm. 109.16, etc. Because he remembered not to show mercy, but persecuted
the poor and needy man, etc. As he loved cursing, so let it come unto him: As
he delighted not in blessing, so let it be far from: As he clothed himself
with cursing, as with a garment, so let it come into his bowels like water, and
like oil into his bones, etc. Let this be the reward of mine Adversaries, etc.
(Of the adversaries of Christ, and of the Lamb of God) of Antichrist, the beast
and the false Prophet: And of all that Kingdom of darkness; let that cursed
Kingdom, sink from man and the Church, into its own place; let all cursing fall
as water, into those bowels of hell, from whence they came; and so be swallowed
up, by him that first brought them forth: The Spirit of Christ, that said this
in David, will 1. Do it himself, he will take the curse upon himself, and
swallow it, and hell and death into victory. And 2. will require it of others
to do it; and will by his own power enable them to do it, or do it in them and
for them: And thereby destroy him that has destroyed the earth.

If we understand his holy and good will, we shall all learn to bear and digest
the curse, and not inflict it: According to that most excellent rule, Bless
them that persecute you, bless, and curse not, Rom 12.14. Learn this, bless,
and curse not; no not the worst, not persecutors; not them that persecute the
Saints. None but Saints can learn this; none are true Saints, but such as do
learn it: The persecutors of the Saints, must be blessed by the Saints; by an
holy, true, just, righteous mind; not feignedly and deceitfully, but really and
truly.

SECT. XVI.
YOu are now in a sad and suffering condition: With my soul I pity you, and
would gladly relieve you: It was my intent in my first, and is the same in
this; to show you the evil of that state and spirit, that does necessarily
bring you into these miseries: For truly I have a fellow-feeling, both of your
sins and sufferings, and of all men; but of yours especially, having formerly
been one with you: And therefore cannot but labor and travel to bring you
forth into a way and state of safety and of peace.

You are now in affliction; which brings forth in you, a Confession and a
Profession. 1. A Confession, that you are justly and righteously punished for
your sins. And 2. A Profession of suffering for Christ, and as Martyrs to the
truth: These two are very wide in their natures, suffering for sin, and
suffering for Christ: And therefore you should do well to consider, how they
come to meet together in your present state.

It is plain and visible to all men, and I suppose now to your selves, that
Babel or confusion, has been in, and upon all your wars, counsels and designs:
As it was in your active part, so it is in your passive part: The truth is, it
has and does overspread all the Nation, and all the affairs, ways and
actions of all Parties.

If there be Babylon, confusion, in your sufferings, the smoke of her torment
will more vex you, then the sufferings themselves: Because it is from the wrath
of God, and therefore does more torment then any thing: To be clear and clean
in any thing, is great ease to the soul of man; because the mind is of it self,
a pure and clean thing: Wherein it is true and resolved, it can bear any thing;
but the darkness of confusion, so distracts, perplexes and confounds it, that
it is not able to relieve or support it self: To be true and sound in the
lowest condition, is better far, then to be false in the highest: To be just,
humble, honest and resolved in the first; that is, in that which you confess,
that this, is a punishment of your iniquities; is much better then to form up
the second, and to conceit that you suffer for Christ: For if you once come to
be true, clean and right, in any one thing, you will by degrees be so in all
things: And this humble plainness, and honest truth, is the first step to
safety, peace and deliverance.

Therefore pray take heed how you confound these two: Your Confession of the
justice of the hand and rod, that is upon yo^ for sin; and your Profession of a
highe^ thing, suffering for Christ: I do the rathe^ desire you to beware of it,
because confounding these two, will not only entangle you minds, but continue
the affliction upon you and so involve you in it, that you cannon come forth of
it: For if this be a just correction for sin, as you confess it is; Then to
choose this and to glory in it, as if it were the Cross of Christ, must
necessarily fix it to you; as much as your own choice can do it; which
certainly is not nothing: And it will entangle you the longer; because one is
contrary to the other, and works contrarily: For if God chasten for sin, the
thing he intends is humiliation, and a sense of sin; which brings forth
repentance, prayers and tears, and they bring forth deliverance: But suffering
for Christ, is matter of great glory and rejoicing, and is a strong
justification of a person and state: And therefore works contrary to the
former: If when Go^ expects humiliation, there be exaltation, it does
ordinarily provoke more stripes: Therefore pray consider seriously what I say,
because it tends toward deliverance, which I do stil^ prosecute.

The sufferings of Christ, and of his body, which did all conform to him their
head, were of this nature: First, they suffered voluntarily, they offered
themselves a sacrifice, willingly and cheerfully; and not by constraint or
necessity: They did not first resist, oppose, war, and suppress others, and
then suffer, when they could fight no longer. Secondly, They were innocent as
Lambs, never attempted any evil upon any people. Thirdly, They loved their
enemies, and prayed for them; Christ began, Father forgive them, they know not
what they do: the first that followed him, Saint Stephen, did the like, Lord
lay not this sin to their charge. And so the rest: And this, in faith and in
truth, which made it effectual: They were very far from designing the ruin of
their enemies. Fourthly, They suffered all for one cause, for the Kingdom and
patience of Jesus: to witness, that this was the way to the Kingdom: That as
Christ died and rose again, so they should likewise rise, and reign with him,
if they suffered with him: I could say more, but I forbear: Consider your
selves, and compare your present sufferings with his and the Saints of old.

If you do profess the Cross of Christ, and to suffer with him, do you not then
desert, either all, or the chief of those things you call principles, upon
which you engaged: Is not this contray to fighting for the Parliament, or for
the liberties of the people? Is it not contrary, to your taking up the sword;
and to your right of conquest by the sword, to reigning and ruling by force?
They are surely most contrary; and therefore, Christ knowing he was to suffer,
commanded Peter to put up his sword, and gave this rule for ever: He that
takes up the sword (to defend himself from suffering, or to fight for Christ)
shall perish by the sword. Note, 1. We took up the sword at first to avoid
suffering, and to deliver our selves and Party. 2. We now perish by that sword,
3. If we now begin to learn, what we then refused, we go back and repent of all
these twenty years work: We may I think well do it, as it was our work; and
therein justify both the righteousness of God in his works, and our honesty
and innocence in serving of him.

This your Profession of suffering for Christ; will I think overthrow all your
active dispensation, and if you be true to it, it will lead you to an open
declaration, of the change of your minds, and to a faithful resolution wholly
to commit your cause to God, and never more take up arms to deliver your
selves, and destroy others: If you can do this; pluck up this root of
bitterness, and cut out this core, it will be a great ease, both to your selves
and the Nation: If you are able to pull it up, and remove it from you, by a
full, honest and clear demonstration of your hearts and minds, that may be
sufficient to satisfy the Magistrate: It will effect one of these two things;
Either it will overcome your enemies with love, and so heal all the
distractions of the Nation; Or if they continue to persecute, after such a
declaration of your minds, they will soon break themselves: For by love and
patience, Christ has and does overcome all enmity, and will do so for ever; it
is the most certain and invincible strength that ever was.

When you prosecuted the King and his Party, beyond bounds and measure, you
went into confusion; and there lost your selves: And if they should be guilty
of the same thing, and pursue a weak, fallen people, beyond the measure set by
God; the same confusion, will be in their affairs, that was in yours.

I think this of your present sufferings: That in a large and common sense,
they are the sufferings of Christ; as the sufferings of all men are his, so far
as they are humane, though weak: In all their afflictions he is afflicted: The
sins and sufferings of all are laid upon him: We all like sheep have gone
astray, and the Lord has laid upon him the iniquities of us all; and as our
sins, so our sorrows: Surely he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows:
Even of all Parties, and of the worst of all, not the godly only, but the
wicked; not the obedient only, but the rebels: He made his grave with the
wicked: Even for the rebellious, that the Lord God might dwell amongst them.

Therefore we do see, that all Parties are enabled to suffer for that Cause
they engage in: And do find mercy to pardon their sins, and strength to suffer
death: The common resolution of a man, strengthened with the common grace of
the Gospel, and with any measure of common honesty, or an opinion of the
justice and truth of their cause, do carry men off the stage of the world, into
death, handsomely and steadily: That some of you, that have suffered, have met
with more peace, and more innocence, in suffering, then in acting: And more
love, and comfort, in a prison and death, then in a corrupt, toylsom, and
sinful life, in war and contests; I do not wonder, and yet cannot magnify it
as Martyrdom.

This I am bold to affirm; That Christ has not yet in these times, so clearly
or visibly set up his standard, and gathered a people to it, into distinction
from other men; as to commit his name, truth, and cross, wholly and only to
them: Nor has he formed a body, by any law, rule, spirit, or ministry, into an
outward profession, under any visible charracters, as he did in the Primitive
times: And therefore there are none, whose sufferings can challenge this
peculiar honor, of fighting under this standard, the Cross of Christ.

Therefore I do much fear, that this profession, and glorying in the Cross,
will cost you dear, and involve you in deeper sufferings, then you are aware
of: You will sooner come to a true feeling of your selves, and a sober sense of
your condition, if you would sink down into your confession, and
acknowledgement of the righteous hand of God upon you for your sins: And alas,
not so much for your personal sins, as for the evil state and spirit, in which
you have acted: Against it has God very great indignation: I feel in my soul,
God has great pity to your persons as men, and as his creatures and servants:
And because as weak men, you have been deceived and misled: But that corrupt
state, and that spirit that misled you, is judged for ever, and never can, nor
shall recover.

It is not the lowness of a condition, that keeps a people down; but the
unsoundness of it: Were we once true and single, we should find rest and peace,
in the worst things, and deliverance out of them: The upright may and shall
rejoice, in the hottest fires, and soon come forth: But a false and unsound
state, must fall from heaven, though it be exalted thither.

To fall under sin and shame; to be humbled under the feet of the vilest
creatures in the world; to bear, first our own sins, and then the wrath, scorn,
and revenge of all the world: Is nearer to Christ, shows more of innocence then
t^ (...) our selves: For the first part of (...) Christian righteousness, is to
bear sin, to judge and condemn our selves, and to intercede for others: To
justify our selves, and condemn others, is very contrary to the Cross of
Christ: This may seem, and is strange to men, but the mystery of the Cross of
Christ, will open it to them that seek wisdom.

To conclude this point, I do judge, that as there was confusion in your
actings, so there is in your sufferings: And though you are much to be pitied,
yet not to be justified in them, or for them: There is much mixtures in them:
Engagements and necessity, make men stout in their way: Naturally, what men
cannot make good by wisdom and power, they will maintain by resolution in
suffering: It is easier far, for men to do so, and die, then to repent: A false
spirit and zeal will carry men out in suffering, even to death it self, as well
as a true: Yea the anguish and pain, of so great a disappointment, will make
men choose rather to die, then to live in the shame and disgrace of it: Shame is
the greatest affliction to some tempers: And therefore it is easier to die,
then to yield, confess, and give glory.

If there should be none of all this in your present sufferings, yet so long,
as there is bitter envying, and strife in your hearts, glory not, and lie not
against the truth, Jam. 3.14. So long as you suffer, to bring others to
suffering; and are willing to endure for a time, that others might utterly be
destroyed; So long as you pursue your old design, of destroying, though it be,
by and through this deep counsel of your own, suffering first; Glory not as if
it were the Gross of Christ: You lie against the truth; against the true and
meek suffering of the Lamb of God; which is not to destroy, but to save men's
lives: Therefore neither your life nor death is like his; neither your
Religion, Worship, nor suffering.

The rebuke of our Lord to his Disciples, is proper for you; when they would
have had fire from heaven to consume their enemies, the Samaritans, because
they opposed them, in their way; it is said, Luke 9.55. He turned and rebuked
them, and said, Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of: I am certain you
know not, what spirit it is, that leads you in all this. Therefore as I have
been and am against your actings; so I am against your sufferings, not only
because they are impure and not evangelical; but because I pi ty both you that
suffer, and them that inflict them: I know the nature of man, and of Christ, is
sorely and grievously injured in both. And therefore it concerns me, and every
good Christian, to do what we can, to deliver you, and them from this turmoyl:
It is my desire, and must be my endeavor.

SECT. XVII.
I Had now concluded with a proposal for peace, had not this late Insurrection
drawn forth my mind, to a consideration of it: Which although it be a very
monstrous and strange thing, yet it does so much agree, to what I have written
in this Treatise, that I cannot but animadvert upon it, and enquire into the
nature and reason of it.

I have largely discoursed of this spirit of wrath and opposition: And showed
the evil and danger of it: That if it be admitted into the mind, and into
Religious exercises, in deprecating, cursing and condemning; it will reign, and
not be confined; but will break out into war and open hostility, in page 162,
163. these words are opened, Out of the Serpents root, comes forth a Cock
trice, and his fruit is a fiery flying Serpent: The old Serpent, the Devil, is
the root of all malice: from him and his spawn, comes forth this hissing Adder
or Cockatrice, cursing: If this be hatched in Religion, and fed with zeal and
holy duties, it will soon get wings, and flame forth, in attempts to war: This
is, I think, a natural and true description on of this fiery flying Serpent,
that flamed out and flew abroad in this late Insurrection.

It seems, while I was writing against it, the thing was hatching: I was by a
secret spring in my mind, directed to write of that subject, not only beyond my
thoughts, when I began to write, but contrary to the disposition of my soul;
which did often turn away from the consideration of such black, dark, and
hellish spirits and practices: But though my mind be very averse from taking
pleasure, in raking in such filthy sores, yet I could not resist the power and
justice of that reason, that led me into a discourse of them: I see, there is a
secret intercourse betwixt reason, and the causes or principles of things: True
understanding knows things, as fully in their causes, as sense does in their
effects: There is nothing so deep or dark, but it is subject to be seen and
over-seen, by the light of right reason: True reason is the image of God, and
one with that supreme wisdom that rules all things: And therefore will be
justified and fulfilled, by him that is the head and Father of it.

This I write not in the subtilty of wit, and Philosophical observation, but in
authority: And do require of all men, not only consideration of, but subjection
to the righteousness and truth of what is written: I know I am alone in what I
write; and not only singular, but something strange and different, from all
men's present notion of things: I know also my person is mean and contemptible:
Yet there is that justice, and truth of reason, in what I write, that I dare
challenge, in the sight of God and man, that it should be considered.

What is truly reasonable or (...), is both humane and divine, and therefore
they that refuse it, must first, sin against their own mercy, their own life:
For the word or reason of God, is our life, and tha^ by which all men, Nations
and Kingdoms subsist: Therefore to depart from the rule and reason of our
beings, must necessarily be, the confusion and destruction of that life, and
being: And secondly, to refuse the truth of reason, is a sin against the most
high, who is Lord and Father of that reason: And therefore if he fulfill his
own image, his word and reason in man, then he must bow all states, and powers
to it: Which he will certainly do, in justice to his own mind and law, and in
mercy to men: For nothing is better for man, then that he should be ruled, by
the law of his own nature, and by his reason enlightened from, and in union
with, the divine and eternal mind.

I have some reason to urge this, because in the Inquisition I proposed unto
his Majesty, and desired a trial of men's opinions, spirits and principles; by
spiritual persons, and by the Law of God and reason; As the only way of curing
the distmpers of the Nation, which lie in the spirits and judgments of men:
And are the roots, that bring forth these ill fruits, of rebellion: But it
seems the proposal I made, was either unseasonable, or otherwise so weak and
obscure, (I would blame none but my self) that it was not considered, or if
considered, it was rejected by his Majesty: As it was neglected by his Majesty,
so the other side, did exceedingly scorn and revile it, and me for writing of
it: Whatever weakness there be in the things there written, for which it may
justly suffer, both neglect and contempt, yet there is that truth and reason in
it, as will stand before God, and must be acknowledged by men: For what is
reason and truth, agrees with the rule and Law of the most high God, and
therefore must sway and rule, all States and Kingdoms: And what is truth and
reason, and so one with the eternal mind, will be either more true, or more
evidently so, to morrow then to day: And consequently that which refuses it,
will be found weaker and worse by refusing of it: I sensibly find that both
Parties are farther from that great blessing of peace and happiness, then they
were before they refused it, and the Nation more disturbed: Let us enquire into
the reason on both sides, and then possibly another Proposition of peace may
find better acceptance: If reason be so weak, as not to prevail, it will be
confirmed and strengthened by experience: And so our losses will become our
advantage, if we be made wise by our failings.

Let us first observe the process of things.

After his Majesty's return, there was by the sweetness and gentleness of his
Government, a great calmness and stilness in the Nation; and in a degree, in
the most opposite: The trying, condemning, and executing of the prisoners, for
the death of his late Majesty, stirred a new passion in the spirits of many
people: And the execution, together with the resolution of the sufferers,
revived a zeal, confidence, and boasting of their cause, and an extraordinary
earnestness in their minds; which was expressed in incessant meetings,
discourses and prayers day and night: These passions and religious exercises,
boil up their minds, into new heats, which kindled this wildfire, and at last
blowed it up, into this open Insurrection.

That you may understand the reason of these things, let it be considered, what
I have expressed in this and the former Treatise.

1. That God had a controversy with this Church and Nation, because of its
sins, and its sinful state and standing; not with the things themselves, only
as they stood in darkness and weakenss.

2. God must have some to plead this controversy, with the Government and
Governors of Church and State.

3. Those that he called forth for that purpose, he inspires and impowers, with
spirit for that work.

4. The seat and subject of this spirit, and ministry, is the judgments and
consciences of men: For men, by being inspired, and led into opinions and
judgments, contrary to the received Law of the Church, are thereby fitted to
be instruments in Gods hand, of his displeasure, to the Church: For the Church
cannot be tried, but by such spirits and judgments, which differ from it, and
are contrary to it.

5. They that are thus empowered for such a service, so far as they do the will
of the most high Lord in it, are to be owned and justified: Though the office
be never so mean, and never so contrary to ^he honors, wills and ways of
States and Kingdoms; yet it is the rod of God, and must be kissed.

6. These ministers of this displeasure, have transgressed, exceeded ^he^r
Commission, and exalted themselves in their service: And so corrupted
themselves and defiled their work: This also is true.

Therefore there is, in them that have executed this displeasure, and in their
consciences and work, something that is just, and something that is unjust and
unrighteous: Till these are distinguished, there is no right judgment of them.

It must also be considered, and it is granted by all Divines, That the works
of divine Providence and Government, are executed, by the administration of
Angels: Both the standing and changing of Governments, is by the ministry of
these principalities and powers: Therefore in the great revolutions of this
Kingdom, both good and bad Angels have been employed: They being spirits, their
proper sphere in which they move, is the spirits and consciences of men.

Therefore it follows, that as there has been in these great Providence, a
righteous work of God, and with it much unrighteousness; so there are, both
Angels of light, and of darkness, inspiring the minds and consciences of men:
Now to administer justice upon men, that have acted in these things without any
judgment made, of the principles and spirits, that have moved in them, cannot
be thought to be perfect, nor a right way to cure our distractions: For outward
punishments upon the body, will not remove the evils, that are planted by
spirits in the consciences and judgments of men.

1. For all men know: First, That if there be but a little truth and
uprightness, in any conscience, it will bear up the person, in the greatest
outward suffering: Neither death, nor hell, are able to overpower, the least
grain of honesty, in the poorest wretch that ever lived: That which is sincere,
is able to live and triumph under many sins and sufferings: and will never
yield till right be done to it.

2. Men's spirits and consciences, and the spirits that inspire and lead them,
are above the reach of the secular sword, and only subject to the Scepter of
Christ, in his Church; to the sword of the Spirit.

3. Conscience, though erroneous and seduced, will enable men, to suffer bodily
punishment, imprisonment and death, with great cheerfulness: And if they are
laid upon men, without the means of conviction, they do harden men in error.

And therefore legal proceedings, only to bodily punishments, are not
sufficient remedies to cure these distempers: The case of the Nation, under its
present distempers, is certainly extraordinary, and far different from what it
was an hundred or fifty years since: Great variety of spirits are gone forth,
which have raised up the minds of men to a greater height of reason, religion
and resolution: And old ordinary remedies, will not cure, new and extraordinary
diseases.

If the Physic, be not proper to cure, and remove the disease, it will by
stirring the humors, and enraging of them, make dangerous commotions in the
body.

For if men, either from some measure of simplicity, be it in the least degree,
and much mixed; or from some spiritual operation, be it of what kind it will;
or from an erroneous conscience: If from any of these, the sufferer be able to
repel the Sentence of the Judge, and to glory in his suffering, and in a show
of righteousness, to triumph over death; he does notably affront and wound that
authority and judgment under which he suffers.

A man and his cause when he comes to judgment, is brought out into the open
view of all men, and not only made public, but he and his cause, is exalted,
to endure a conflict and trial with the Law: If the Law comes forth, with that
brightness and majesty (that it ought) the man is condemned in his own
conscience, and so justifies the Law, and submits to his sentence, and by this
the Law and Authority is honored: But if the person judged, stands clear in
his own conscience, upon any account, and acquits himself, in the face of dead)
(when all men ordinarily yield) such have a kind of conquest, and do seem to
overcome the sentence; which must needs have an effect upon the people.

For people do naturally mind dying men, death is King of terrors, and it is a
great thing to die, it raises men on high: And therefore in them that can die
comfortably, and confidently, there is a great appearance of righteousness and
worth; which does much affect the minds of people; some are moved to pity the
sufferer, and thereby his words and cause steals into their minds: Others are
convinced, and drawn to the Party; Others are hardened and strengthened by it:
For men think with themselves, I cannot live comfortably, bur here is that
which will make me able to die comfortably, and that is worth embracing.

That which makes the Magistrate to be feared and reverenced, is his power of
life and death: That which makes men able to overcome death, secretly overcomes
the Magistrate: For every one that goes out of the world glorying in his
righteousness, makes a breath, both in death, and in the authority that
inflicts it: And when it comes to be easy and familiar, as it will by a little
practice, Authority and Magistracy it self will be, by such despised.

I shall commend to the Magistrate an Observation of mine own, concerning the
nature of man: That he may consider what he governs, and how he ought to govern
him.

Man is a noble and stout creature: There is so much of the majesty of the
image of God in fallen man, that he retains much of the greatness, though he have
lost his goodness: There lies raked up in this dust, an invincible spirit, that
never will be subdued by force: God could never break the rebellion of the
Israelites, by all his punishments upon them: And therefore says, Why should
ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more, Isa. 1.5. All the
terrors of the Law, could never subject Paul, but he says himself, When the
commandment came, sin revived, and I died, Romans 7.9. When the law came, with
terror against him, then fin roused up it self unto a desperate opposition:
There being such stoutness in man's heart, that all the force of the Law could
not subdue, God sent his Son, in love to this stout creature, to take his
flesh, and so to soften and overcome it; and in it, to destroy both Law and
sin: This will show us what is in man.

There is as much of this courage and greatness of spirit, in the English, as
in any people under heaven; which is very much awakened in these times, both by
the wars, and by long liberty, and a free exercise of their minds in Religion.

For first, the people were inspired and empowered, to execute the determined
displeasure of God, upon the Church and Nation, which exalted them, and
subjected the Church and Nation under them: Having (as they think) judged the
former state of Religion, they have opportunity and liberty, to erect several
new forms of Religion, which is an act of spiritual principality and power, and
not without zeal for God, and obedience to his Law: By these things, the genius
of the Nation, and the natural stoutness of the people, is much lightened and
increased: And therefore to reduce them into that state, that they think they
have judged; and to destroy all their little principalities, set up in their
consciences; only by outward force, or by the mere letter of that Law, which
they have condemned; without a superior Law, that judges them and their work,
to my reason seems not only impossible, but dangerous.

Let the whole be considered, and it will be found; That mere legal and outward
punishments, upon such a people, so spirited and principled, so employed and
exercised; if their consciences and spirits be nor first fairly heard, judged,
and convinced, will inflame their minds into such a mad and desperate spirit,
as appeared in the late Insurrection into hardness and insensibility of death
and danger; which is the greatest enemy to Government that can be: For it turns
men into wild beasts, not to be ruled by humane Laws: And though they do attain
nothing to themselves, yet they may give disturbance; and force the Magistrate
from all humane and divine ways, of love and gentleness, into violence and
perpetual severity; and fill the whole Nation with continual troubles and
distractions.

It is true, the Magistrate is bound by all bonds of Law, of reason and nature,
to suppress and punish rebellion: But when the seeds of rebellion, lie in the
mind and conscience, the spiritual sword is as necessary as the secular; and
the one not effectual without the other: What is written in this Treatise, will
I hope satisfy, them that will read and consider, that there is with us, in
the Church, a spirit and understanding, that will reach the root of rebellion
in the mind, and fully convince the conscience: Which being joined to the civil
authority, is sufficient to cure and heal the Church and Nation.

On the other side, I must desire the present suffering Party, that were so
highly offended at my Book, and at my proposition for the trial of principles,
that they consider how much lower they are now fallen: There was certainly a
loftiness and unsubjection of mind, unsuitable to their condition, expressed in
a glorying and boasting, of their old cause and state, which has brought forth
this contempt and suffering upon them: I do believe, that this late
Insurrection, was the work of a few rash and unreasonable men: And do find,
that all sober men do express a great abhorrency of the act, with resolution to
wait patiently upon God for their deliverance: Which truly I rejoice in: Yet
the whole Party; lying under the shame of these men's folly and madness; they
must seriously and deeply consider, how far they yet stand, unhumbled, and
unconvinced, of those principles, that carried these men into this practice:
Principles lie deep, and when once they get rooting in the mind, they are like
ill weeds in a garden, not presently destroyed: Many times the judgment is
enlightened against them; yet they have a root in the heart, which will spring
up, if not quite eradicated: Their appearing in others, and the evil fruit they
bear, is a good means to beget an utter detestation of them: To make you
sensible of the hand of God upon you, and to help to clear your minds wholly of
them, I only propound these queries to you.

1. First, Whether those principles upon which they acted, of the Cause and
Kingdom of Christ, and the honor and privilege of the Saints, above and
against the world: Have not been received into the minds and spirits of most
men (more or less) that have erected new Churches, and new Governments in the
Nation?

Secondly, Whether the same principles, and the hopes of such things, be not
that which fills your heads and hearts, with multitude of prayers and great
confidences, that you shall yet prevail, and your enemies be destroyed? And so
though your understandings be more prudent then others, yet whether the same
things, be not yet in your faith, affections and duties?

Thirdly, Whether these spirits and principles, have not had a great influence,
upon the whole business a long time? If so, then if they be not rooted out, by
repentance and change of mind, they lie not still in the heart, though they
seem not to act and appear?

Fourthly, Whether men being upon an extraordinary bottom, as the Saints of
God, distinct from others; And exercising themselves in extraordinary duties;
with extraordinary hopes and confidences, of extraordinary deliverances; Are
not thereby disposed and prepared to attempt extraordinary things, to attain
these extraordinary ends? If so, then you are drinking the same wine, that
intoxicated their heads that rose; only they are weaker, and you more able to
bear it: Remember Solomon's counsel: Who has sorrow? who has contention? who
has babbling? who has wounds without cause? They that tarry long at the wine,
they that go to seck mixed wine.

Fifthly, Whether these high and great thoughts, upon future things, do not, 1.
Lift up the mind, into an unsubjection unto this Providence of God, that lays
you low, and exalts others? 2ly Alienate your minds from the present
Government? 3ly Unsettle your spirits, to an unwillingness to peace? 4ly Deny
you the use of your reason for your present safety? 5ly And draw your minds
from the present duties of love, forgiveness, subjection to authority, and to
such plain, honest things, ^^at the Law of God, and the moral reason of man
leads him to: I have found much evil in this false Prophet, who carrying out
the mind, by false representations of future things, and filling the head with
them, leave no room for the exercise of our Reason or Religion upon present
things.

I do hope, you do by experience see, how these high strains, swelling the mind
with spiritual pride, leads it into irrational and destructive ways: It has
done so from the beginning, and does so still: My only end in this, is to
improve this experience; to humble your minds, to take you off from these
deluding spirits; And to bring you to a sober sense of your selves, and of the
present state of things: And to prepare you, for a rational and Christian
proposition of peace, which I shall now commend to you, and to all the Nation.

Sect. XVIII.
THe Church and Nation is miserably broken and divided: Division is at first
into two parts; and where it begins it ends: I shall therefore consider but two
great parts of the Nation: First such as are for the present Government and
Governors of Church and State, as now it stands by Law. Secondly, Such as
differ from either, be it more or less: Presbyterians, Independants,
Anabaptists, Fifth-monarchy men, Quakers, or any others, I would refuse none to
treat with them: Peace is comprehensive, and in a plaster, as large as our
sores are or can be: I have already showed some reason, why peace, if it be
true, must comprehend all.

If there be a peace, it must be an agreement; There cannot be an agreement,
but by understanding of one another: There can never be an understanding one of
another, without a treaty, and a fair or friendly debate.

My Proposal in my former Book, was to his Majesty; this I direct immediately
to you, that are by your disaffection to the Government in affliction; possibly
the sense of your troubles, may make you willing, to seek to his Majesty for
peace, and in order to it, for a he^ring and treaty: which is the thing I move
^or.

First give me leave to suppose, that you are men, reasonable men; and
therefore able to give a reason of your way, and to receive and understand
reason, if it be offered to you: And being so, you are fit to treat, and sit
to be treated with: And you having reason, ought to exercise it in treaty; and
it is as due to you, that you should be reasonably treated, and used as men,
and not as beasts.

As I suppose you reasonable, so give me leave to suppose your adversaries
reasonable: And so able, both to give a reason of what they do, and to hear
reason against it.

It is a very small charity, that I beg of both sides, that you would think
your adversaries reasonable creatures, and to be treated accordingly: Yet if I
could obtain this, that you would so speak, think, and do; we should have one
stone laid of peace: And a good ground to begin upon.

Both Parties being admitted to be reasonble, which cannot be denied, without
great breach of that common charity, that is due betwixt men and men: This will
bring men, to exercise this reason, one toward another, and to lay aside
brutish rage, and womanish passions.

Consider in the next place, that the matters of difference, and to be agreed,
are things subject to reason: I intend to propound for the present, only civil
peace and agreement, laying aside matters of Religion, till this be attained:
Matters of Civil pe^ce, in order to mutual safety, are things, within the
compass of all men's reasons and natures: All Nations have and use this reason,
and by it attain peace both amongst themselves, and with other Nations: Nations
that are at the greatest distance, in their natures, tempers and religions, do
agree, and that merely by the use of that common reason that all men partake
of: And why Englishmen should not have so much reason, as to understand one
another, and agree together, I know not.

Let us therefore take as clear a view, of the divided Parties as we can, and
let both sides be reasonably considered: For it is the mist and cloud about us,
that confounds and disturbs us.

On the one side, there is his Majesty, Nobility, Clergy, and the people of the
Nation: And with them Authority, Government, and Magistracy, both of Church and
Commonwealth, which are great Ordinances of God: And these standing upon a
firm, stable foundation of Law, deeply rooted, in time, custom, and in the
minds of people: And all now restored and exalted by a mighty Providence, and
guarded, by the same hand that restored them.

And therefore in reason; First it is as impossible to remove them, as to
extirpate the English Nation: Reason and experience confirm it: And secondly,
it is an irrational and unsafe thing to attempt it: If it be irrational and
unsafe to attempt it, it is not rational to think or imagine it: Nay, it is not
honesty or truth of mind, to fancy or think, what is in it self unreasonable
and impracticable. practicable. If now men's minds depart from reason, into
persuasions or conceits of things, upon a divine account, for which they have
no certain, humane or spiritual ground, they will be deceived.

But this state of the Government is not represented only to deter from
attempting upon it; but to gather your minds toward it: The rest, safety, and
comfort of all mankind, is in Law, Authority, and Government: This Government
was of old, and is now restored in the Nation: In it, is your safety, peace,
and protection: It is there, and no where else, for you and all others: If you
reasonably and justly challenge it, you cannot be denied it: If there should be
found an evil spirit of revenge, that should refuse to give it to you, being
justly sought: That evil spirit, shall be discovered, and manifested to be the
spirit, not of the Government, nor Governors; but of some dark, envious,
peevish minds: And it shall appear to be, as contrary and destructive to the
Government and Governors, as it is to your safety: Therefore the reason why you
have not this peace and safety, is because you fly from the Government, and so
from your shelter and harbor; either ignorant of it; or jealous and fearful of
it.

This I think is a reasonable account of one Party, I would now represent the
other Party, as justly and rationally as I can: The many sects that stand out
against the present Government, at least of the Church, are, together with the
Presbyterians, who are engaged in an opposition, a large people, a great part
of the Nation: And very considerable, both for number, for their activity and
resolution; for their courage in military affairs; for their parts and
abilities in civil affairs; for their zeal and gifts in Religion: And now being
under one and the same dislike, disappointment and suffering, melting again
into union.

As the Law and Government of the one side, is so rooted in the earth, that it
is not to be removed, by any humane means; so these several sects are deeply
rooted in the judgment and conscience; and all of them are founded in some
spirit, that has authority from God, over the conscience; be that spirit or
authority true or false, I dispute not now: But they are, by some authority,
under the name of God, fixed and bound in their several ways: And therefore
not possibly to be removed by any secular or worldly power.

It is as irrational and impolitick, for a State, to seek by power, to
suppress, or wholly to extirpate such a people (fixed unto death, in their
judgments) as it is for those people to seek the overthrow of government; Not
only because it is against policy, interest or reason of State, to discommon
and cast out of protection, or otherwise to provoke into despair, so great and
mighty a people: But it is also against the very nature of man, and more
against the nature and being of Government and Governors, to seek the ruin of
so great a part of the body: and therefore it cannot be imagined to be in the
Magistrate: Neither can the Magistrate entertain such a thought, without
committing a greater absurdity, then for the common people to attempt the
overthrow of the Kingdom: For the undertaking of impossible things, and things
destructive to humane and civil peace, are much worse in public persons, then
in the people.

But as on the other side, I represented the state of the Government as
immovable, not only to deter from attempts against it, but to draw the people
to it; that they might be protected by it: So do I represent these dissatisfied
and divided people, strong and immovable, not only to dissuade from designs
against them, but also to incline the Magistrate to them: For as safety and
protection is by the Providence of God ordained in the hands of Governors and
Government: so the same mighty Providence, has disposed the peace, rest,
security, and strength of the Nation and Government, in the minds, affections
and spirits of such a people: It will be easily seen and understood, if it be
but considered; That there is this day, no rational or visible cause or danger
of disturbance, to the Nation, but our own divisions; neither from our selves,
nor from abroad: For as none can hurt us but our selves, so nothing amongst our
selves can hurt us, but our own divisions.

And therefore, as the safety and protection of the subject, is in the Law,
Government and Magistrate; so the rest, pea^^ and security, of the Government
and Nation, is to be had, from a union, of such a people, so divided and
disaffected as now they are.

It is clear then, that each of these Parties, as they are now disposed, are
able to confer upon each other, and upon the whole, the most excellent
blessings; On the one side, protection, safety, and subsistence; on the other
side, security, rest and settlement.

Let us now consider, Whether both these Parties are willing to give, and to
receive these things from each other: For if both be willing, both to give and
receive; then there is a foundation laid in them of peace.

In reason, both Parties must be willing to have these great blessings, because
neither can subsist without them, or not comfortably.

It is manifest his Majesty seeks security and peace, both by the imposing the
Oaths, which is but to oblige the people to quietness and obedience: And by
restraining and imprisoning, those that may be suspected, to make disturbance:
It is as manifest likewise, that he is willing to give safety, protection, and
liberty to these people; witness his gracious Declaration: But beyond all
these, the reason of State, and nature of Government, binds his Majesty, to be
willing, both to give safety, and receive security.

The question then is on the other side, Whether they are willing to give
security, and receive protection: I think, it is not to be questioned, but that
they will be glad of protection: And they cannot expect protection, where they
will not give reasonable security for their Allegiance: As reason, nature and
religion lead them to do it, so there does appear, in most of them, a readiness
to do it, if they knew how to do it.

Both Parties being willing to receive, and give these blessings, of safety and
security to each other: It is then to be enquired, Whether there be any thing,
in either Party, that may let or hinder them, from these mutual benefits? Two
things may be suspected.

First, That there may be some opinion or doctrine in Religion, that may
imbondage men's minds, and keep them from yielding or receiving this good: I do
hope and believe, that there is no opinion amongst us, so inhumane and absurd,
as to debar us, from the exercise and practice of natural and civil duties: If
any such be whispered, or privately suggested, there is enough in every man's
own reason, religion and nature, to teach him to abhor it: But if it should be,
in men's private fancies, I am sure if it come forth in any debate, it will
quickly be answered and rejected: An open treaty or conference will expel it.

Another thing that may hinder, is jealousy, prejudice, and enmity begotten by
these wars, by the different forms of worship, and the opposite tempers of
their minds and spirits: But these are all, a mist or dust, which only darken
at a distance: As soon as the Parties come near one another, their own natures
and reasons, together with the necessity and benefit of safety and peace, will
dissipate these clouds: Being weak, dark passions, they will vanish before the
strength of more solid and substantial things.

The lets being removed, there is no doubt of the sufficiency of reason, to
instruct both Parties in a way, how to communicate one with another, so that
they shall be understood, received and believed by each other: For if both
Parties are heartily willing, to do that for each other, which is proposed,
they are able to say, how, why, and upon what conditions, they think reason to
do it: And this being reasonably propounded, reason also will accept it: For
God never yet left man, so void of understanding, and knowledge one of another,
nor so void of confidence, and trust in one another, but they had power both to
consent and agree, and to gain belief and confidence one in another: Though the
envious man, has filled the Nation with great enmity and division, yet sure we
are men still; he has not robbed us of our nature; there is still with us, that
reason, prudence, and faith, that is common with the most heathenish or
barbarous Nations in the earth.

It may be thought rather, there is too much subtilty and policy, and that this
may hinder an accord: There is more danger of it: But surely, if there be much
Serpentine cunning, there is more true wisdom; for the good, is stronger then
the evil, and will prevail: I am sure there is more light and stronger reason
in love, then in hatred.

Thus far we are gone; Two opposite Parties in the Nation, both so firmly
rooted in the earth and in heaven; that it is an unreasonable thing to think,
that one should remove the other by force, without destroying the whole, and
themselves also: And these so considerable, that they may confer upon each
other, the greatest blessings that belong to humane society: Both want, what
each other have to give; neither can rationally have it elsewhere: Both willing
to communicate, and able to communicate; The question now is, how we shall
begin, and how manage this Treaty, so as to effect and perfect this
disposition.

I have hinted in the Inquisition, that the divided Parties of this Nation are
distinct bodies; The Presbyterian, Independent, Anabaptist, etc. these are
formed by distinct Laws and Doctrines: And have some principal men, that are
their heads and leaders; these do comprehend their several Parties: ( It was
ill taken, that I should mention them in my former: Alas, that divine justice,
which my soul would have prevented, has it self now hunted them, and they are
earthed now in holes) It is necessary that these should stand forth for
themselves and Party, to treat for them, and to bring forth the principles and
state of the Party for them: Consider now the equity and reason of this offer.

First, You that are the heads of the people, have led them into war, and
consequently into these miseries, in which now they lie: And by your evil
conduct, they and the business have miscarried: And therefore in reason and
conscience, you ought to appear for them: If there be any thing of courage,
justice, or love to the people, or any thing of a public spirit in you; you
are bound to do the utmost you can, to deliver the poor sheep out of these
brambles, into which you have led them.

Secondly, such is the state of things, that if there be any disturbance made
in the Nation, though you are not in it, yet you will be ever liable to be
suspected and imprisoned: Till you have done something toward peace, and
securing the Government, answerable to what you have formerly done against it.

Thirdly, His Majesty cannot have any rational security, either from particular
persons, or from broken pieces or Parties; but from the whole Party united; and
that cannot be rationally done, but by them that are the heads of those
Parties, who do probably contain the whole Party in them.

Fourthly, The people are certainly willing, both to receive protection, and to
acquiesce in the present Providence of God: And therefore there wants nothing,
but some prudent and public persons to form them, and lead them into it: And
if there be compassion in you to them, as I believe there is, that will put you
upon this honorable and Christian work.

We are now come, I think, by the conduct of honest and sound reason, to the
thing to be practiced, which I hope is safe and just, and every way rational
and Christian; It is but this.

If any two or three eminent and known men, of any Party, either from
conviction of what is here written, or from their own dispositions; and from a
knowledge of the minds of their Party, or a probability of their consent; shall
be willing, in order to their own safety, and the peace of the Nation, to
satisfy his Majesty concerning their intentions to live peaceably under his
Majesty's Government; They may in a Petition humbly represent it to his
Majesty, and may beg, that his Majesty would be pleased to appoint certain
Commissioners, and empower them, to treat with them, and with all others that
shall desire it, concerning these two things:

First, Upon a full consideration, of what has passed in the Nation, what
satisfaction or security his Majesty may rationally demand, and they as
rationally give, for their Allegiance, and peaceable subjection, unto his
Majesty and Government: and,

Secondly, Upon satisfaction and security given, how that liberty of conscience
graciously declared by his Majesty, may be stated and confirmed to them; that
so they may enjoy the benefit and comfort of it free from disturbance, from the
people, or inferior Officers.

Both these are honest, reasonable, and profitable things, and no man of truth
or integrity can be ashamed, or afraid to appear in them publicly: They carry
their justification in their face.

A Treaty betwixt opposite parties, after a long and great division and war is
ordinary: And if the difference be not only in affection, but judgment and
opinion, it is necessary: because otherwise, they cannot come to an
understanding of one another, and consequently never come to a hearty agreement.

It is also probable, that the desired end, peace and safety to both parties,
will be attained by it: For it is apparent, that his Majesty wants and seeks
security, and rest in his Government, after his long troubles, an sufferings:
And after so great wars made against him, and so great violence done to him, he
may justly require good security for the future: Nothing yet has been done
toward it, by the party that acted with vigor against him: But on the
contrary, have manifested great displeasure and dissatisfation at his return to
his Government.

As his Majesty cannot but seek security, so the ordinary old established way
of Oaths, enjoined by Law, and the penalties annexed, seem to be very
insufficient remedies: For they have been found by sad experience, too weak to
bind men to their allegiance: Oaths, though they are sacred in themselves, yet
we have found them very invalid in this Age, and strangely violated on all
sides: If they are not ligaments sufficiently strong, to bind the parts
together, and prevent a fraction; when the fraction is made, they are less able
to heal it: Besides at this time they are offensive to many, that are otherwise
willing to give full security and satisfaction for their subjection.

Neither can it be thought, that a bare verbal declaration for Magistracy,
though it be honest, and so accepted; that it alone, should be sufficient to
give full case to his Majesty's mind: Such confessions, I doubt are too weak to
heal wounds made by long wars and disaffections: To profess for Magistracy, is
not a sufficient satisfaction or reparation, for a war against a Magistrate,
because he is an enemy, or of another way of worship: For the question is not,
nor never was, Whether a Magistrate or no: But there is an enmity begotten, and
propagated by long war, which requires more then a verbal profession to heal it.

That his Majesty needs, and may justly require security, cannot be denied:
That no means sufficient, is yet used, is manifest: that the people are willing
to do it, has been proved; and that it is possible to do, in this case, what
men are ready to do, is not to be questioned: That this means propounded, by a
Treaty is probable: It will appear, if we consider, the advantage of a Treaty,
both as to right understanding, removing objections, and communicating
affections, whereby ordinarily enmity is expelled, good will, union and
agreement of hearts and minds is obtained; but besides these generals, this
main thing is to be considered.

That in such a Treaty, it will not be hard to bring forth the roots, seeds,
and principles of all the war and contention that has been; and consequently
of future rebellion, in the Nation; and to offer them up to his Majesty.

The reason, why it will not be hard to do this, is because: First, The
judgment decreed upon the Church and Nation, is executed, the ministry of
wrath and war is ceased: 2ly The state and spirit, in which, and by which it
was administered, is corrupted, and by spiritual men, loathed and abhorred: 3ly
And consequently, the enmity, at the root of it, is slain, though it still
disturbs; yet in the hearts and judgments of sober men, it has received a
deep and irrecoverable wound: Therefore it is very possible and easy, to
produce the cause and reason of the late war, with the righteousness and
unrighteousness of both sides? And with it, all the seeds and principles of
civil enmity, and division, which may possibly beget any disturbance for the
future.

If these roots of war, be pulled up, and sacrificed, it will be the best
bone-fire that ever was made in England: And will give the fullest satisfaction
to his Majesty that can be desired: For by it his Majesty will be secured of
the hearts and minds of his subjects.

If his Majesty shall be pleased to answer such a petition, and to appoint
certain moderate, and understanding persons, acceptable to these people, and so
apt to entertain a Treaty with them; We may in reason expect, that such a door
of safety being open, all parties will be glad to enter in at it: And if the
chief of them can gather up the rest of the people, into a consent and
agreement with them in this work; they will be able to offer a valuable
consideration, for their safety and protection: That may really deserve, both
liberty, and subsistence also out of their purchases.

If this be carried on by judgment and conscience, and from a mind enlightened
and convinced: We have no cause to fear, that it will not be understood,
received and believed by his Majesty: For what is done in light, is evident to
all: An Epistle seen and read of all men: When the mind is truly convinced, it
is easy for it, to give forth such a declaration of it, as is sufficient to
convince another, that it is convinced: And such a declaration coming from
reason and from the heart; his Majesty's heart cannot but feel it, and rejoice
in it: It being the only thing in the earth, wanting, to make his Government
fully happy.

Security being given, or ready to be given, by these people; the second thing,
their liberty and safety comes naturally: Indeed it is already granted, and
declared by his Majesty, it only wants to be (by such a Treaty, and some
Articles) so explained and confirmed, that the people may receive the benefit
of it.

If these two things, which are truly and really conceived, in the hearts and
natures of both sides, may be brought forth; it will be a blessed foundation,
of great good to the Nation and Church: And a present ease to the minds, of his
Majesty, and of his people; and will fill the whole Nation with pleasure and
content: For of all things, love and peace, have the greatest felicity in them
to a people: As discord betwixt brethren or relations, is most grievous, so
love that unites enemies is the most pleasant and contentful: Such a meeting of
hearts and minds in peace, will bring forth some more then ordinary good, to
the English Nation; which are from their own dispositions, inclined to love;
and to an increase of it, unto a kind of excess, when once they begin.

It is said, Isa. 9.5. Every battle of the warrior is with confused noise, and
garments rolled in blood: Such yet is the sta^e of the Nation, confused noise
there is, and garments rolled in blood: which do disturb the minds of men, and
makes them incapable of the government and peace of Christ's Kingdom: But if by
this means propounded, a civil peace may be obtained; it will be a beginning
and foundation, of a more heavenly and spiritual peace in the Church: It is
true, this seems to be first necessary, but if this were obtained, I could
demonstrate the other as rational and possible as this, and more: Because the
Law and reason of Religion is more large, more forgiving, healing and uniting,
then Civil Law or Reason: A union and peace in the Church, is promised and
commanded in the Scripture: Nothing is promised that we may not challenge and
expect; nothing commanded but what is practicable.

Something I may affirm upon my particular experience: For I have gone as far
in the way of separation, from the Church of England, I think, as most men; and
prosecuted it as heartily: And yet my mind is now, and has been long enlarged
to own and embrace the Church of England, and Episcopal government: I did not
alter as a knave, as a fool, nor as an enemy, to them that differ from me: Not
as a knave, for my mind altered, when Episcopacy was at lowest, and has so
continued ever since, in many troubles, without change: Nor as a fool, I
confess I have received it from heaven, yet so as is fully demonstrated to me,
from reason and Scripture: Nor as enemy; For Episcopacy, as I understand it, is
a tree so high and large, that all these birds, that now she from it, may make
their nests in the branches of it, and be nourished by the fruit of it: And
that, not by clipping the outward honor of it; but by enlarging and exalting
of it, into its own true heavenly light and glory. This I find and know by
experience; what several sects, seek in their private and divided ways, they
shall never enjoy, but in the Church; there only they will find rest for their
souls: But these things shall rest till their season be to come forth.

The thing that is here propounded to you, that are my Brethren, and now in
suffering; is so essentially necessary, in my judgment, for your safety, and
the peace of the Nation; that if I knew any thing that might hinder you, from
accepting and prosecuting it, as the means of your deliverance, I would remove
it: There are but two things that I suspect.

The first thing I doubt, is lest your high apprehensions of some extraordinary
matters promised in the Scriptures, and drunk into your thoughts, should cause
you to adhere to your former opposition, and so divert you from the plain path
of peace and safety: To answer you in this; Know 1. The things that you expect,
both are, and will be manifested; and far more, and greater then you imagine.
2. But never to be obtained by enmity and wrath, but by love, peace, and by the
good Spirit of Christ. 3. It is a false Prophet that holds forth greater and
future things, to restrain from an exercise, of present and plain duties. 4. I
desire you to consider and remember, that though these high strains have got up
into your prayers, and private discourses, yet they never were of any power, in
your great business: You will find, that the strength of your cause, as it was
urged by the Parliament, against the King; and the Army, against the
Parliament; lay in these low and common things, of safety, necessity, and the
interest of the honest Party; and at the highest, providence and success:
Consider now, Whether the same principles, do not now urge you to peace, that
carried you to war? and more strongly and justly?

For safety and necessity, it is both seen and felt; that if you persist in an
opposition, to the present Government, you will ruin your selves and families;
except a miracle appear for you: You have no true ground nor faith for
miracles, if you have any, you may sooner expect them in a Gospel way, of
peace, reconciliation and persuasion, then of war.

And for Providence, it now directs you to agree with his Majesty: For the
great Providence of his restoration, has eaten up, all your lesser
Providence; as Aarons rod, eat up the Egyptian Magicians rod: And all your
success, is now in the belly of this: If then, safety, necessity, interest and
providence, could then lead you to make war; and the same things cannot now
prevail with you, to seek peace; it will seem a dangerous and foul spirit: To
delight in war, that is bloody and spoiling, unclean and filthy, and to decline
the humble and meek way, of reason and treaty, is not Christian.

The second thing I doubt, is your confidence in the multitude, and earnestness
of your prayers: And to that, I propound the words of our Lord, which are of
eternal authority, Mat. 5.23, 24. If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and
there rememberest, that thy Brother has ought against thee; Leave there thy
gift, before the Altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and
then come and offer thy gift: The divine reason of it is this; God is the Lord
and Father of all men, they are all his family; if any one of his children or
servants, injure another, and the injured person cry to him, this cry comes up
to him, and is there put in, as a bar or plea, against that man's prayers, till
he make satisfaction: For God is just, and does right to all men. Now you know,
there is a cry gone up against you, for the oppression of the Nation: All
Parties, as well as your adversaries, have something, yea much against you: And
therefore, mark what I say, I speak it as a Priest unto God, that do minister
in his presence; and as a Minister of the Word of Jesus; till you can do these
two things; First, forgive your enemies, as heartily and truly, as you desire
God to forgive you. And secondly, ask forgiveness of them, wherein they have
ought against you. Till these two things be done, I put in a bar against all
your prayers; were they ten thousand times more then they are, they shall not
prevail.

Read but what follows, ver. 25, 26. Agree with thine adversary quickly, while
thou art in the way: Lest at any time the adversary deliver thee to the judge,
and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast in prison: Verily I
say unto thee, thou shall by no means come out thence, till thou have paid the
uttermost farthing: Your adversary is your judge; the more reason to agree with
him: You must either agree, and compound, or stand it out: If you stand out,
you must pay for all those years of trouble and vexation, that you inflicted
upon your enemies; for all the poverty, ruin and destruction, you laid upon
them and their families; If you stand upon your righteousness, all must be paid
to the utmost farthing: It is a great debt.

Except by forgiving, and seeking forgiveness you agree; troubles and
disturbance, will offend the Nation; and then jealousies, bonds and
imprisonments will attend you: Till satisfaction be made for former injuries,
to the last farthing.

If you desire peace and safety, read this last Section diligently, till you
have made it your own: If you desire either further satisfaction, or my
assistance, I am ready to serve you.

Reader,

I Promised thee, in the beginning of this Treatise, a discovery of my life and
state; Thou have some parts of it, scattered here and there: But the whole I
must reserve to some further opportunity: Because this has swelled into a
greater bigness, then I did at first intend it: And the matter of it is such,
that I judge it necessary to be first published.

FINIS.

