MOSES and AARON: A SERMON Preached before the KING At Saxham in the County of
Suffolk, April 17. 1670.

By GEORGE SEIGNIOR Fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge.

Printed by His Majesty's special Command.

printer's or publisher's device

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by John Hayes, Printer to the University, 1670.

Exodus 4.16. And he shall be thy Spokesman to the people: and he shall he,
even he shall be to thee instead of a Mouth; and thou shall be to him instead
of God.


UPon the first view of the Text and Context we find Moses the servant of the
Lord, and Aaron the man of God joined together in one and the same Commission;
both set over a Captived people, to deliver them unto a more glorious liberty;
and both sent unto an oppressing hard-hearted Tyrant to demand a speedy
restitution from slavery, and to require satisfaction for injuries done unto
the Son of God: ver. 22. Israel is my Son, even my Firstborn; he is now also
to be called, the Redeemed of the Lord; Let my Son go that he may serve me; and
if thou refuse to let him go, behold, I will slay thy Son, even thy Firstborn.

Moses, the meekest man in all the earth, does mistrust his own ability, who is
sufficient for these things? It is indeed the good will of him who dwells in
the Bush to send unto, and to work a deliverance for his people; But who am I,
that I should go in unto Pharaoh, or bring forth the children of Israel out of
Egypt? I am a man of slow speech, and of a slow tongue; Surely Moses does not
consider the great sight before him, the Bush burning, and not consumed; a
lively representation to him in the very figure of it, that the more the people
were afflicted, the more they did multiply and grow; notwithstanding the
Egyptians made their lives bitter to them with hard bondage in Mortar and in
Brick; all their service wherein they made them to serve was with rigor; yet
cap. 1.20. the people multiplied, and waxed very mighty, and the Egyptians were
grieved because of the children of Israel. And, does Moses know, and see all
this? the green tree before him encompassed with flames, and still alive? the
people laboring as it were in the fire, in the furnace of affliction, growing
out of weakness, and so from strength to strength under the weights of all
their pressures! and yet is he diffident and distrustful, because of some
personal infirmities, as if that God could not make his strength perfect in
weakness? Moses had best be careful lest his humility and meekness degenerate
into pusillanimity and fear, and so the Lord be provoked unto anger; for, God
will send by the hand of him, whom he will send, and that is, by the hand of
Moses; yea, though, he be a man of a slow speech, and of a stammering tongue,
even hence has God ordained, and perfected his praise, that he may still the
enemy and avenger: what though his lips are not touched with a coal from, yet
one that waits at the Altar shall be his Mouth? Is not Aaron the Levite, thy
Brother? I know that he can speak well, v. 14. and cap vii. 1. I have made thee
a God to Pharaoh; and Aaron thy brother shall be thy Prophet: So long as you
two keep together, lo I am with you Both, and that, to supply all manner of
defects in either of you; my word is a sure word of promise, if so be that you
two are as one; ye put your selves out of my protection, if in the least you
sever; but whilst Union is promoted, neither of you shall fail; and as a most
certain indication, that you are like to stand and fall together, lo this is my
everlasting ordinance betwixt you Both; v. praeced. Thou shall put words into
his mouth, which shall no longer be his Mouth, but thine; who has made it so?
have not I the Lord? And, lest his message should be despised; his person
hated, because of the truth which he is to speak; Lo, thou art to defend him,
to be on his side to withstand Pharaoh; see thou to that, have not I said it?
nay, I have set thee so, Thou art unto them both instead of God: Thou art as
God, to Aaron, to protect him; thou art as God to Pharaoh, to execute wrath and
vengeance upon him; and therefore upon this double account shall Aaron be thy
spokesman to the people; his office is again renewed upon, and confirmed unto
him; he shall be, even he shall be unto Thee instead of a Mouth; because that
thou, on all accounts and upon every occasion shall be to him instead of God.

The words, as you hear, having this relation to the Context, are in
themselves, an account given us of the two standing Ordinances of Magistracy
and Ministry; a King, as Supreme, and an High Priest both constituted by God
himself to live, to love and to rule together; and this institution confirmed
and settled by way of supply to something that was wanting, an amends made for
a personal insufficiency; whilst Moses out of a principle of selfdenial would
not ambire Magistratum, be too hasty in taking upon him (...) the burden of
this honor, since he was conscious to himself of his own inability, ver. 10. O
Lord my God, I am not eloquent, neither heretofore, nor since thou have spoken
to thy servant: This humility, and modesty in Moses at the first was
commendable; but, honor follows those who shun it, especially where so
exemplary a meekness goes before it; God therefore renews his command, with a
promise of affistance in the work drawn from his own omnipotence, ver. 11. who
has made man's Mouth? have not I the Lord? now therefore go, and I will be with
thy Mouth, and teach thee what thou shall say Yet, this would not do; the
meekness of Moses, has betrayed him to diffidence and distrust; fain would he
be rid of the employment, fearful he is that he shall not go through with it,
but sink under the weight of it, ver. 13. O my Lord, send I pray thee by the
hand of him whom thou will send: In which words, whether Moses requested, that
his brother Aaron might be joined as a fit companion with him; or, whether he
had an eye to the promised Messiah; -- Him whom thou will send, -- Christ in
the fullness of time to be sent to work a great Redemption, of which this
present Deliverance was to be but a Type; and therefore, none like Him, to
accomplish Type and Antitype at once; I say whether it were one, or other, is
not much to our purpose, further then the just naming of it to inquire: This we
are sure of, that Moses's unbelief was reproveable, his sin of distrust
aggravated, because he could not take heart from Gods express Promise;
Notwithstanding the wonderful sight which he saw, the gracious words which he
heard, still he was faithless and not believing; hence, ver. 14. the anger of
the Lord was kindled against Moses: However, to make way for an all sufficient
supply, both the Humility of Moses, and his Diffidence was not unfitly urged;
his Humility which God encourages, with a gracious Promise of a ready help
from himself; his Diffidence, which God convinces against all Objections, by
promising an assistance most effectual, even from his own experience of it,
ver. 14. Is not Aaron the Levite, thy Brother? I know, and so do thou, that
he can speak well; He will be glad to meet thee; and, thou must rejoice to go
with him; This is the supplement of all defects from you two, one with another;
and here is the Completion of your Commission, My assistance to you both. So
that the verse before the Text is a supply to both from God, which denotes to
us the Divine Ordinance and Institution; and that 1st. Verbal, Thou shall speak
unto him, and put words in his Mouth; and I will be with thy Mouth, and with
his mouth; 2dly Real, I will Teach you what you shall do. The Text is the
mutual supply, as consequential upon the Divine Institution, that one must make
for the other; This being the scope, and sum of the whole Paragraph; -- That,
Government both Civil and Ecclesiastical, was at first instituted and
established by God himself, over such a People, whom he would take and choose
to himself for his own inheritance; and these two instituted not only at one
Time; but, both in an Union, in a mutual relation and dependence one upon the
other: whether the Phrase in the Text, as spoken by God himself, He shall be;
and, Thou shall be, -- be by way of precept; then it denotes the necessity of
this mutual Union; Or, whether it be by way of Promise, referring to the
foregoing verse, then it denotes the Utility, and advantage of this Relation;
since there is no assurance of Gods Blessing, on which side soever the Division
or Separation be made.

It Is pity to divide the Text, when the words speak nothing but Union; I shall
endeavor to keep my self close to the scope of them, whilst I confine my
Discourse unto these Three Particulars;

1st. Here is the Promulgation of two great Authorities, and that made to those
who are subjects unto Both: the Promulgation is to be made by the High Priest;
who, while he speaks for his Prince unto the People, does at the same time
declare his own appointment to be of a Divine Right: He shall be thy Spokesman
unto the People; He shall be, even He shall be to thee instead of a Mouth.

2dly. Here is the due Execution, firm Establishment and sure Administration of
both these Authorities; whilst the Prince does defend the Priest; he does so
stand by himself; the Throne is thus established to him in Righteousness, the
Kingdom is confirmed in the hands of Moses, whilst he is unto Aaron instead of
God.

3dly. Here is a Promise of success to Both; an assurance that God will not be
wanting, where this Union is continued; and that taken from the Phrase, or
manner of expression in the Text, relating to the last words of the foregoing
verse, spoken by God himself by way of Promise, He shall be; and, Thou shall
be; and then, I will be with thy Mouth, and with his Mouth, and will teach you
what ye shall do: This is the sum of the Text, and the Design of what further
I have to say from it;

Of which that I may so speak, and you so Hear, that we may all of us profit,
Let us pray, Can. Eccl. Angl. 55.
etc. 1st. The Promulgation of two great Authorities, and that made to those
who are subjects unto Both; the Promulgation is from the High Priest, who while
he speaks for his Prince unto the People, does at the same time declare his own
appointment to be of a Divine Right: He shall be thy Spokesman unto the People;
He shall be, even He shall be to thee instead of a Mouth.

He shall be thy Spokesman;
Et loquetur ipse pro Te cum populo;
Targ. Onk. -- He shall speak for thee to the people; that so they may be
taught to obey not for wrath, but for conscience sake: and accidet ut sit ipse
Tibi in interpretem, Targ. Jonath. and he shall speak from thee to whomsoever
thou thy self shall go, or send him; He is to be no other then a voice crying,
whether it be in Egypt, or in a wilderness, to prepare thy way before thee, and
to make thy paths strait; quicquid Moses mandasset tanquam intellectus
concipiens; hoc Aaron loquetur, tanquam os exsequens, Tostat. Abul. in loc.
Whatsoever Moses, who reigned as King in Jeshurun did dictate out of the
abundance of his heart, whose wisdom was as the wisdom of an Angel of God, to
know all things to be done; that Aaron the High Priest was to declare and
publish, and to speak it (...) as the Oracles of God. Thus the Priest's lips
are to preserve and to proclaim knowledge; the people are to seek the laws of
God, and of the King at his Mouth; that is, so far the laws of Both, as their
salvation may be concerned in the cheerfulness of their obedience; and to tell
them, that if they do in the least resist they shall receive unto themselves
damnation; For, as the Priest is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts; so, not
unfitly is he also the messenger of the Lords Anointed.

And this may not improperly be the reason of the present Institution in the
Text; if the Prophet be the Mouth of God; well may he be so unto his Prince,
who is instead of God, Jer. 15.19. Thou shall be as my Mouth; (says God unto
his Prophet) even as the Mouth of God: The Law of God is dumb, it is as a dead
letter without a lively voice to publish it; how shall they believe, except
they hear? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? The Law of Man is dumb
too; Promulgatio est de essentia legis; Promulgation is of the very essence of
a law in order to its being observed; and great security there is unto the
subject, that the laws of God and Man do not thwart and contradict each other,
when the Trumpet is blowed in Sion, and the voice is from the Sanctuary that
bespeaks Obedience unto Both: It is not then absurd, that the Keeper of the
Kings Conscience should be His Confessor; he to tell, when commanded, unto the
people what are the thoughts of his heart; the Practice is as ancient, as the
present Institution in the Text; and perhaps as an intimation, how fit it is
that it should be still continued in those polities that are called Christian,
the office is again confirmed upon Aaron, by this Repetition of it, He shall
be; even, He shall be to Thee instead of a Mouth.

From all which I might raise and prosecute this Observation;

That the Ministerial Function is the most proper, certain, effectual and
perpetual Mouth of the Commonwealth; and that from the Chief Magistrate to the
People; and therefore is by no means to be excluded Senates: Aaron is to be the
Mouth of Moses, in every thing in which Moses ought to be his God, and that is,
reciprocally, and Universally upon all accounts, and at all aventures. They are
the words of him who was both a King and a Preacher, Eccles 12.9. The Preacher
must be wise to teach the people Knowledge; how can he find out acceptable
words, such words as may be as goods, or Nails fastened in a sure place, unless
he be permitted to converse with those that are the Masters of Assemblies, and
so may he speak such words, as are given from one Shepherd? But, I need not
magnify the Priest's Office in this particular; the happy temperament of the
Constitution under which we live is an abundant demonstration to us, that the
laws by which we are governed were instituted in the fear of God, and
consequently the Obligation is greater upon the subject to obey them, since the
Authority that confirms them is both Spiritual and Temporal.

I pass by this double honor (possibly some think it too much for those that
labor in the Word and Doctrine) and I follow that which is the great design
of the Text, the Union that is here fixed, and everlastingly to be promoted;
and therefore, the Word is singular, Regis and sacerdotis unum est Os; there is
but one Mouth assigned both to King and Priest; the one is to think, the other
to speak the same thing, Moses and Aaron to go hand in hand together: Hence it
is observable, that they were Both of the Tribe of Levi, ver. 14. is not Aaron
the Levite thy Brother? The Levite, and thy Brother; and his Mouth to be thy
Mouth; to speak the words which Thou shall put into it; Why then should there
be any difference betwixt Moses and Aaron, since they are Brethren? They are
Both of the same Tribe, which the Lord had chosen out of all the Tribes of
Israel to come and Minister before him; the One was to deliver, the Other to
teach and instruct, Both together to establish and confirm in a perpetual and
never ceasing Economy what are the judgments and the statutes of God and Man.

And, all this not to Jacob and Israel only; but, to Pharaoh and the Egyptians
also:

1. Aaron is the Mouth of Moses to the People; that is, to Israel; to tell them
that they are the Visited and Beloved of the Lord; to proclaim to them the
Royal Law of liberty out of the house of bondage from their slavery; to wish
them to follow the directions of their Law giver Moses, who will rule them
according to the integrity of his heart, and guide them with the skilfulness of
his hand: with the skilfulness of his hand; with great and wonderful
Dexterity, will he extricate them out of all their miseries, remove their
shoulders from the burdens, and their hands from making the pots.

2. And so Aaron to be the Mouth of Moses to Pharaoh and his servants; to
denounce and execute as many Plagues on him and his people as are the Tribes of
Israel, (if you reckon the plagues and signs together from first to last) a
Plague for each Tribe; because of the hard and cruel bondage wherein he made
each of them to serve; neither would he permit them to depart in peace from
amongst them, that they might worship the Lord their God.

And here by the way we may take notice, how necessary is this Union betwixt
King and Priest; how comfortable is their mutual assistance then especially,
when there is danger of a common enemy both to Church and State; when there are
a Generation of Men like Pharaoh, who will not permit the people to be at
quiet, only because Moses and Aaron would have them to serve the Lord; how
should Moses at such a time stand at the door of the Tabernacle with the Rod of
God in his hand for the defense of Aaron? and, how should Aaron lift up his
voice in the behalf of Moses, hold up his hands, lest that Amalech prevail? in
a word, The Commandment is to go forth from Both, to restore and to build the
Temple; the One must stand like stout Nehemiah with his sword in his hand, that
so the work be not hindered; the Other, not unlike holy Ezra, a Prophet of the
Lord, with the sword or the keys of the Kingdom in his Mouth, that so it may be
perfected in Righteousness; great is the care which Both together must take
for, many are the kindnesses which Both together must do unto the House of God,
and the Offices thereof.

O then! may Aarons Bells never ring backward! if ever, let it be to call the
people as One man, to the quenching of a common flame; let it be to stand
between the living and the dead, when a plague is begun, that it may be staid;
pro Te loquetur, He shall speak for Thee to the people; surely then he is not
so to speak, as to inveigh against him, to aggravate his failings, to
exasperate and calumniate his Person before the people; he may lift up his
Voice like a Trumpet, but it must not be the Trumpet of sedition, the Alarm of
War sounding to battle from the Pulpit; let him cry aloud, yea and he may not
spare to tell Judah and Israel of their sins, but it is not fitting to say to a
Prince that he is wicked; Such language as this does least of all become the
Mouth of Aaron; Much more unseemly is it for him to say before the People, (be
they Israel, it will increase their murmurings, be they Egyptians, it will add
to their hard-heartedness) that Moses is ungodly. God does hear the blasphemy
of those who do in the least, though it be but in a thought, slander the
footsteps of his Anointed: Aaron himself was too sad an instance of this, when
he murmured against Moses, saying, Number. 12.2. has the Lord indeed spoken only
by Moses? has he not also spoken by us? Yes, he has spoken by you Both; and
yet the Leprosy upon Miriam's forehead, may be an intimation unto Aaron that
he do cover his Mouth, and shut his lips, such language as this has defiled
them, Unclean, unclean. But the meekness of Moses was soon entreated, and the
God of mercy did accept of his intercession, so that immediately there was a
healing of this breach, and Aaron is still continued to be the Mouth of Moses
to the People.

To the people: if to Moses, surely much more to them; and the People are to
attend to him with reverence upon this treble account, because that he is the
Mouth of God, of the King, and also of the People; Heb. 5.1. Every High Priest
is Ordained for men, (that is) is set over men in things pertaining to God; the
manner of expression in the Original is the same with the Septuagint in my
Text, (...). Every High Priest is set over men, as concerning those things
which are to Godward, that is, (the interpretation may fairly be admitted
without any great stress upon the words) set over the ordinary sort of men to
tell them with Authority and with Power what is their duty either to God or his
Vicegerent, to the Lord of Lords, or to those who are instead of God; and they
who do resist or despise either One or the Other, do not despise or resist the
Man in either of them, but the God that is in them Both. And this brings me to
the

Second thing I observed from the Text, which is the due Execution, firm
Establishment and sure Administration of both these Authorities together, and
that no otherwise then by a Divine Dispensation; Whilst the Prince does defend
the Priests of the most High God, he does so stand by himself; the Throne is
thus established to him in Righteousness, the Kingdom confirmed in the hands of
Moses, whilst he is unto Aaron, and to his sons instead of God.

Instead of God; -- in his quae ad Deum, Vulg. That is, in the letter of the
Text, in those things which pertain to God; Tu eris illi in Principem
quaerentem Doctrinam a facie Domini, Targ. Jonath. Thou shall be a Prince to
him, a Prophet as well as he, yea and something more then a Prophet, he shall
seek the Word, which he is to speak, from Thee; and that, as it were from the
face of God, Numb. xii. 6, 9. If there be a Prophet among you, I the Lord will
make my self known to him in a Vision, or I will speak to him in a dream: but
my servant Moses is not so; this is the difference betwixt him and Aaron; with
him will I speak Mouth to Mouth, even apparently, not in dark speeches, and the
Similitude of the Lord, (that is of God-man to come in the flesh, this
Similitude of the Lord, as praelusory to the reality of his Incarnation) shall
he behold. So that, what was Jethro's counsel betwixt Moses and the People,
seems here to be Gods institution betwixt him and Aaron, cap. xviii. 19. Moses
was to be to Aaron to Godward, to bring the causes unto, and to receive the
Law from God; and Aaron being to be his Orator or his Herald was to make
Proclamation of the Divine Law unto the People, and upon all occasions to
consult the Face of Moses, the Face which did shine because of the Divine Glory
on it, and was therefore to be consulted as an oracle: This Paraphrase, though
it may be true in the Letter of the Text; yet to take in the scope of the whole
Paragraph, which is, a Union fixed by God himself betwixt these two, we must as
to this expression further improve our search:

Instead of God: -- that is, to defend him, that so he may speak boldly for
thee, as he ought to speak; that his Mouth, which is no longer his, but Thine,
may be opened for Thee in confidence. We find in this book of Exodus, that
Princes, and the chief Ministers of justice amongst men are first called Gods,
cap. xxi. 6. the servant that had a mind to continue with his Master for ever,
was to come unto the Judges; that is, unto the Gods (...) in the Original, and
before them was the perpetual service to be ratified; and again, cap. xxii. 8.
The thief was to be brought to the Judges, that is to the Gods (the same word
in the Original) to see whether he had put his hands to his neighbor's goods:
and v. 28. such Magistrates are secured from all manner of slander that may be
cast upon them by malice or evil speaking, Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor
speak evil of the Ruler of thy People.

They are called Gods upon several accounts; I briefly instance but in two; the
Ubiquity of their Presence, the Omniscience of their Knowledge.

1. The Ubiquity of their Presence, they are every where; their influence is
unlimited: the fancy is not new (ancienter then a modern Poet, and I hope may
now be better applied) that Kings and Princes do in this resemble the Deity,
being like a Circle whose center is every where, and whose circumference is no
where. God and the King can do no harm, the reason is, that Diffusive influence
that is from Both directing, managing, swaying and conveying all the good, and
all the happiness that is felt or enjoyed by the lower world, or the inferior
sort of mankind; all which is purely the product of Providence from the One,
and Government from the Other; and if the Sun shining upon a Dunghill does
exhale vapors that are offensive, it is not because there are spots in the Sun
in Heaven, but there is corruption in the Dunghill upon earth.

2. The Omniscience of their Knowledge; they do as it were know every thing,
Prove. xvi. 10. A Divine sentence is in the lips of the King, His Mouth erreth
not in judgment. Who could have thought, that the way to find out the bowels
of a Mother, was to make the Child a sacrifice, till King Solomon, as the first
effort of his Princely Spirit, tried the experiment? but, says the Text, 1 Kin.
iii. 28. The wisdom of God was in the King to do judgment: And this kind of
Omniscience is a gift bestowed upon Judges and other Ministers of Justice when
they execute the laws of God and the King upon Capital offenders, the
indictment against whom is, that they have not the fear of God before their
eyes, our Law taking special notice of the malice of the heart, and proving
that by some Overt Act; whilst many times the Judge upon the Bench, to the
admiration of the standers by, through a little, very little glimpse of a most
improbable circumstance does unravel a whole mystery of iniquity, so that on a
sudden the Prisoner stands self-condemned at the Bar; he might spare both Judge
and Jury the trouble of bringing in, and pronouncing their Verdict, since the
sentence of Death is to be read in his countenance, and his face gathers
blackness; what can all this be, but an immediate assistance, a special
illumination from God himself in the moment of judgment? Psalm. lxxxii. 1. God
stands in the Congregation of the Mighty, he judges among the Gods; v. 6. I
have said, ye are Gods.

Grotius, upon these and the like expressions in Scripture tells us, that
wherever the name of God is given unto men, significat judiciariam potestatem,
and jus vitae and necis, it implies a judiciary power, and that no less, then
of life and death: Our blessed Saviors Comment upon the compellation (which
certainly is the best) runs thus, Saint John x. 35. he called them Gods, D. Ham.
unto whom the Word of God came: it is observed by a learned Paraphrast of our
own, that the coming of the Word of the Lord; signifies, Gods appointing a Man
to some particular Office, and giving him power and ability for the performance
of that Office to which he is appointed; and so it is constantly used in the
writings of the Prophets, who do most of them begin their Prophecies with this
solemn form of Words, The Word of the Lord came unto me saying, which is no
more, then as it were, the Opening of their Commission, the Reading of their
Patent, the first showing and vouching of that Authority by which they act: all
which is an intimation unto us, that the Supreme Magistrate, and other
subordinate Rulers and Governors sent by Him for the punishment of wickedness
and vice, and the praise of those that do well, have (...) something of
Divinity stamped both on their Persons and their Office, and consequently that
Both are Sacred.

This account you have of the Compellation, as it may be applicable either to
King, Priest, or any Ministerial Dispensour of Public Justice: whence by the
way, it is again observable, That the Priest had all along from the beginning
his share in the Civil Government; if the Word of God came to Moses, in that he
was instead of God; yet it was to be spoken or published from the Mouth of
Aaron: and therefore S. Paul, when he had spoken less warily to the High
Priest, begs pardon, with an acknowledgement of his fault as a transgression of
that inhibition beforecited, Number. xxii. 28. Thou shall not revile the Gods: I
wist not brethren that he was the High Priest, for it is written, Thou shall
not speak evil of the Ruler of thy People; Act. xxiii. 5.

So then; if they Both act by one and the same Commission; he of the two that
has the Preeminence, (for a Supremacy and Subordination must be admitted, else
there could be no Government,) does no more then vindicate to himself his own
Royal Prerogative; whilst he secures, as firm and inviolable to the other, his
Priestly privileges and immunities: and in this sense most properly, and to
best purpose is Moses to be unto Aaron instead of God.

Instead of God; -- yea, and that in as many respects, as Aaron was to be to
him instead of a Mouth, the Relation being all along mutual and reciprocal.

Instead of God to Aaron; -- whether it be before the Israelites or the
Egyptians.

1. Before the Israelites; -- yea, though they be the two hundred and fifty
Princes of the Assembly, Number. xvi. 1. Men of renown, famous in the
Congregation, gathered together in a grand conspiracy to invade the Priesthood;
Moses must then speak as from God himself, and declare who it is that is holy
amongst them, whom the Lord has chosen to come nigh unto himself: v. 11. What
is Aaron, that ye murmr against him?

2. Before the Egyptians, -- Pharaoh, his servants, and his People: cap. vii.
1. I have set thee as a God to Pharaoh, and Aaron thy brother shall be thy
Prophet: -- Thou shall speak what I command, as from me to Aaron; and He shall
speak what Thou shall suggest, as from me to Pharaoh; and thus, Thou shall be
as God to them Both; Mine Oracle to the One, to reveal all my mind; my Rod and
Scourge upon the Other to execute all my wrath; though he will not as a man of
wisdom should, hear the Rod, and him that has appointed it; yet thou shall
multiply my signs and wonders in the land of Egypt; Jannes and Jambres, though
they may withstand, shall not altogether prevail; when they see the dust from
under them, to crawl up in Vermin on them, they shall lay their hands upon
their Mouths, and abhor themselves in that Dust, acknowledge this to be the
Finger of God; and throughout all, they shall confess, that the Rod in the hand
of Moses was guided by the Arm of the Almighty.

Thus God has fenced, against a common enemy, both King and Priest in a mutual
dependence; the One with Power sufficient, that he may uphold; the Other with a
sure defense that he may be sustained; and the interests of Both these are so
interwoven together, that wherever the Breach is made, the injury is alike
damage to Both. It is the same God, who has given commandment concerning
Princes, that they should not be touched by the hands of violence, Touch not
mine Anointed; as they are Anointed, they are Mine, they are as my self; who
has likewise in the very next words given it in charge, whether it be to
Prince or People, to Magistrate or Peasant concerning those who have a more
immediate attendance upon him, Do my Prophets no harm.

As therefore Aarons Divine Mouth must be opened for, not against Moses, he
must not traduce, speak evil of him before the People; So, Moses's God-like
Power must be exercised, and exerted for, not against Aaron, he must not suffer
him to be exposed to the scorn and reproach of a froward, and an untoward
generation.

In order to which Defense, that their persons may be Venerable whose office is
so sacred, the maintenance of whom in honor is so great a security unto
Majesty, to be sure Moses will be careful that Aaron and his sons have an
inheritance allotted to them in the Promised Land; and that, not apart or
distinct by themselves, but as a Blessing to whole Israel, dispersed amidst and
throughout all their Tribes: This was Moses's last Benediction upon the House
of Levi not long before his death, Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 11. Bless, Lord, his
substance, and accept the work of his hands; smite through the loins of them
that rise against him, and that hate him, that they rise not again. It is not
to be imagined, that Moses will take less care of Aaron, and the Levites, then
did Pharaoh of his Egyptian Priests, who in the days of famine had enough,
their portion of meat assigned to them from Pharaoh's Table; insomuch that when
all the land of Egypt was bought into the Crown, Genesis xlvii. 22. Only the
lands of the Priests were not sold. In this sense also is Moses to be to Aaron
in the stead of God, to secure unto him the Lord's inheritance, since dreadful
are like to be the effects of Sacrilege upon that Nation or People, amongst
whom it is an iniquity, though endeavored to be established by a Law; May the
King, and his Throne be guiltless, the Kingdom established unto him in
Righteousness, for He only is as God, who does preserve in the hollow of his
hand the Churches portion from the violence of such, who pant after nothing,
but the Dust of the Earth, upon the Head of the Poor.

One inference more.

The words of the Text are spoken Universally, and at large, without the least
limitation and restriction; which may be an intimation to us, That this labor
of love here required from one to the other must be reciprocal, the Union
preserved inviolable, whatsoever personal provocations may unhappily intervene
on either side. We do humbly crave pardon, whilst we do suppose that which we
need not fear, since we are assured that Moses was the most true hearted man in
all the earth, faithful in all the House of God; yet, should he refuse to be a
God to Aaron, withhold his protection from him; so put a veil over his face,
that he should not in the least behold his countenance; and then throw it off
again, only to terrify him with his frowns; for all this, the Obligation does
not cease on Aaron's side, he must still be the Mouth of Moses to the People
Again, should Aaron shut his own Mouth, not speak for Moses, when the sons of
Belial are against him; more out of policy then good honesty, keep silence at
such a time, because it is an evil time; for all this, Moses must still be unto
Aaron instead of God; -- instead of God, that is, as Supreme, and far above
him, he may visit upon, and punish him for his personal miscarriage;
nevertheless at the same time he is obliged to maintain and defend as sacred
the whole Order. Does Aaron make a calf in the absence of Moses? hearken to the
voice of an unruly people in their despite of Moses? As for this Moses, we wot
not what is become of him; (though they knew him to be in the Mount with God;)
and in the mean time, does Aaron make the people naked to their shame? upon
this, Moses was not so well advised when he brake the two Tables, of both which
he should have been the Keeper; and it was some aggravation of his Passion, in
that he brake them at no other place but the Mount of God; notwithstanding this
sore Provocation, he must be ready to defend Aaron against the Sedition of
Corah, and the Rebellion of the Congregation of Abiram.

We do not read that Moses did ever personally offend Aaron, we have heard
sufficiently both of his meekness and faithfulness; but alas! Aaron once and
again unhappily miscarried, both in the business of the Golden Calf, and in the
matter of Miriam; and, notwithstanding both these, the sin being justly
reproved, and in some sort punished, the Union in my Text was preserved: Aaron,
though the Saint of God, did not in one or two instances, as he should (Oh that
he had been careful!) rule his tongue; yet Moses must be cautious that he do
not shut his Mouth; he is still the Ordinance of God, and therefore not to be
infringed, the Order is to be secured setting aside all personal offenses; the
error was no sooner acknowledged, then forgiven and passed by, and all, that
God's Institution between Both might be observed inviolable; Aaron is still to
Moses instead of a Mouth before the People; and Moses in this, like unto God
that had appointed him, Merciful and Gracious, not easily provoked, nor long
angry; he is yet to Aaron instead of God: Si non errassent, fecissent minus;
upon a miscarriage humbly acknowledged, and the penalty obediently submitted to
on the one hand; and the same as frankly pardoned, as generously remitted on
the other, the Obligation is hence the stronger between Both; even thus much
good, out of what might have been so great an evil; a firmer reconciliation, a
surer establishment from a little shaking; whilst all animosities being laid
aside, the Unum necessarium, that One thing necessary, Union is preserved,
because in that Union is involved and wrapped up the security and safety of
Both. And so I pass to the

Third, and last observable in the Text, the utmost bounds of your Patience;
which is, A Promise of Success and Prosperity unto Both; an assurance that God
will not be wanting, where this Union is continued; and that taken from the
manner of expressing the Phrase in the Text, as it relates to the last words of
the foregoing ver. the words are spoken by God himself as a Precept, and a
Promise; -- the Precept, He shall be; and, Thou shall be; -- the Promise, I
will be with thy Mouth, and with his Mouth, and will teach you Both what you
shall do: Blessed of the Lord is that People; yea, Happy is the Nation which is
in such a Case; where Aaron is Spokesman for Moses, no other then his Mouth;
and Moses is to Aaron instead of God.

Aarons Mouth; -- that implies all manner of Gifts and Graces by which he is of
God duly furnished, and rightly qualified for his Office: Moses being as God;
that denotes the Highness of his Calling, the excellency of his Majesty, and
the Certainty of his Defense; he being thus the Signet upon the Arm, set there
to be a Protection to the Stars that are in the right hand of God, and through
the tender mercy of the Most Highest they shall none of them be removed, cap.
vii. 1. (to which I cannot too often recur, it being the Parallel to my Text)
the Promise which is here made, is there endowed; the Office which is here
designed, is there conferred; The Lord said unto Moses, See, I have made thee
to be as God; -- and Aaron thy Brother shall be thy Prophet; Nothing is in the
Text promised, or there performed; or, (if it be more agreeable to the scope in
both places,) nothing is commanded or required either in one, or in the other,
but reciprocally, and with a mutual respect; that so the supplement of all
defects in either Government, might be one of another in love and good will;
and the Complement of all from God himself, the merciful Maker and Appointer of
them Both, might be a Blessing of Peace, Plenty and Prosperity; I will teach
you, and so be with you in whatsoever ye shall do. The word in the Septuagint,
ver. 12, 15. is very Emphatical, (...). I will go along with you in every thing
that you shall speak, I will tread an even pace with you in every thing you
shall do; (...) Symach. I will be a Light, and so a sure Direction to you, that
you do not in the least miscarry. This is the sum of the whole; That the
Priests mouth shall be opened in Righteousness, because his words are given
forth from the King; The Mouth is but One and the same unto Both, because so is
the Ordinance of God; thereupon, this is the Blessing of Heaven for Both, that
the Word shall not return in vain, until it accomplish the Work, for which it
was sent; God will prosper the words of his Mouth to the One, the Work of his
Hands to the Other, he will establish the Work and the Word to them Both in
Righteousness.

The Mouth: that may imply Eloquence, as we may gather from the want of it, v.
18. Lord, I am not Eloquent: Being as God; that signifies Power and Dominion;
-- Te illi Praeficiam ut sis Princeps, and Judex, and Magistratus ejus, Fagius:
I have set thee above him as his Prince, whom he must honor before all the
people; as his Judge, and an upright Magistrate, for whom thou must do justice,
be sure to do him right in the sight of that People, whose honor he is to
bespeak for Thee: Now, what is Eloquence, without Authority to back it? it is
not a Word with Power! What is all Power and Dominion, without a Voice to
proclaim the Majesty as most excellent? it is at the best but a Dumb show! Both
these being upheld together as the Ordinance of God, no question that God will
secure a Blessing unto that which is his own appointment: He will be with the
Priest, because his Mouth is no other then the Mouth of God; He will be with
the Prince, because he has made him to be as himself, instead of God; but
still, his Presence with Both is the result of Union, because the God of
Israel, which is to be in subjection unto Both, has declared himself, that he
is but One God: how can Moses be the Fear and the Dread of Pharaoh, unless he
be the Love, the Choice and the Desire of Aaron? How can Aaron be (as he proved
afterward, cap. x. 7.) a Snare unto Pharaoh and his servants, at the opening
of whose Mouth Egypt was to be destroyed, unless he hang upon the lips, the
words which he speaks be a faithful and distinct Echo to the voice of Moses?
without Aaron's Mouth, the meekness of Moses will be soon despised; and without
the Arm of Moses stretched out in defense, the Voice of Aaron will be but
beating of, or speaking to the air; Unless that Aaron be the Mouth of Moses,
what though his face shine? the people will but the sooner turn away from him;
cum Jove Caesar; God and the King as to Government have alike prerogatives;
Thunder from above bespeaks the Deity as terrible; Thus the Highest does give
forth his Voice; -- Boanerges, a son of Thunder here below declares earthly
Majesty to be also dreadful! But unless Moses put words into the mouth of
Aaron, stands by him, and stands up to him while he speaks, stretches out his
Rod, whilst he lifts up his Voice; the Mouth of Aaron without this, will be Vox
and praeterea nihil; a Voice indeed, but nothing else, the noise no sooner
heard, but no where to be found: Whose Mouth is fittest to preserve knowledge,
and to proclaim Obedience, but his who is the Messenger of God, and of the
King; of the Lord of hosts, and of him who like unto God himself is mighty in
the battle? and whose Arm should be made bare in strength, but theirs who are
the Anointed of the Lord; Anointed in a great measure for this very thing, that
they should be a Guard and a Protection to all Gods Holy Ones, since they are
themselves not unfitly called Gods, being all of them children of the Most
Highest?

Shall I with all humility and due Reverence, speak the words of truth and
soberness? it is in the Cause of God, of the King, and also of his Priests!

As the happiness is great to that People where this Union is most religiously
observed, no other then as the result of the Divine Institution; so, sad is the
misery, deplorable is the calamity both to King, Priest, and People upon the
breach of it! I need go no farther for an instance then the story that is
before us.

Would Moses and Aaron bring the people from Egypt through a wilderness into
Canaan? This must be their March, Regular and solemn, Number. ii. 3. compared with
Number. iii. 38. Judah, the Princely Tribe must set up his Standard Eastward;
Moses and Aaron, Prince and Priest must keep the charge of the Sanctuary
Eastward; (and hence not improbably the ancient Ceremony of worshipping with
their faces thither-ward;) Judah sets up his Standard for the Laity: Moses and
Aaron theirs for the Clergy; and yet the latter to go along with Judah the
Prince, who was to protect them, when settled in the Land of Promise; and upon
the whole, whosoever he was, the stranger that came nigh to either of them, was
to be put to death: This was their March unto that Rest which God had prepared
for them: And yet notwithstanding their Station and Procession thus fixed by
the Almighty, do Moses and Aaron speak unadvisedly with their lips, either one
to another, one of another, or one against another at the waters of Massah and
Meribah, places that bore their names from those strivings and contentions? the
anger of the Lord is immediately kindled against them all; and it was so
enraged, that it was by no means to be appeased; Moses and Aaron must only see
that Land of Promise into which they are never like to come; it shall be their
punishment to behold, what they never shall enjoy; in the view of, but their
foot shall not tread upon the goodly Mountain, nor Lebanon; and then as for the
People, their Carcases must fall in the wilderness, this is a froward
Generation, it shall not enter into the Rest of God!

When once there be Divisions, many are the thoughts, many are the searchings
of heart! I would not be mistaken as an evil-speaker, or a fore-boder of evil
tidings, while I do thus mournfully, and with all lowly submission crave leave
to make out the Parallel.

Does the Civil Magistrate either needlessly contend with, or wilfully draw
back the secular Arm from the Defense of the Ministry? and does he think thus
to still the murmurings of the people? as the raging of the Sea, so is their
madness casting forth nothing but mire and dirt, foaming out their own shame;
and is there no way to lay the storm, but by mixing the waters with blood? has
the Pilot no means to secure the Ship, but by throwing the Prophet into the
waters, especially such a Prophet, as does not fly from, but is steadfastly bent
on his Course, to deliver and execute the Mesfage of his Master that sent him?
-- Again, is the Spiritual Mouth, either silent in the behalf of, or clamorous
and obstreperous against? does it either not speak at all, as it should in the
defense? or is it froward, malepert and peevish against the secular Arm? do
they, who should consult the stars of Heaven for direction in the voyage,
either withhold their advice from, or unreasonably quarrel with him that sits
Steersman at the Helm? This may be the dreadful consequence of such ill will
between Both, in Portu Naufragium! certain ruin, and destruction to the Ship,
and all that are in it; yea, and that in the Ken of the desired Haven; as an
aggravation to their Misery, in the very sight of Land; Virtutem videant,
intabescantque relicta! This is the sore calamity upon such sad animosities and
dissatisfactions on either hand; a strange kind of infatuation upon all manner
of counsels and designs, be they never so just and honorable! they may see
what is good, and yet it does escape them; a price put into their hand, and it
falls away from them, for want of a pious heart united to each other in Love
and Duty, and to God the maker of Both, in Fear and Reverence mutually to be
exercised in the using of it!

And here, by the way, let it be seriously considered, that the first Rejection
of Saul from being King over Israel was because he invaded the Priesthood; (let
our new Leviathan suggest what he pleases, that the Civil Magistrate may
reserve the exercise of the Ministerial Function to himself) yea, though there
might be some reasonable excuse for it; as, his enemies growing, and coming on
upon him; and, he was not willing to engage them, till he had made his
supplication before the Lord, 1 Samuel xiii. 11, 15. But, God had commanded the
contrary, he was not of himself to make a Virtue of that Necessity without an
express permission; therefore says Samuel, Thou have done foolishly; and thy
Kingdom shall not continue: whereupon, God chose to himself a Man after his own
heart, one who (to avoid such future presumption) should be a Prophet as well
as a Prince; and therefore the eating of the Shewbread upon an extreme
necessity, was not in him so notorious a violation of Sacred, and
Ecclesiastical Order.

This was that David, who called for his Sword, which hung behind the Ephod, 1 Samuel xxi. 9. Give it me, says he, for, there is none like that; he goes forth
with the Prayers, and the Blessing of the Priests to battle, 1 Samuel xxiii. 9.
[still I would urge a Testimony from Scripture, though it may be sadly
observed, a new way of spinning out discourses, without any the least regard
had to the Law and the Prophets:] Bring me hither the Ephod, says David; that
Ephod from behind which he took his Sword, and so it was consecrated for the
Lord's battles; thus does he enquire of the Lord upon every enterprise, and
that in no other way, then according to the Divine Institution, with a linen
Ephod: The answer from God to him was, either a speedy return of Peace and
safety; or else, a sure caution certainly to prevent and escape the Danger:
Upon this does Doeg, that wicked Edomite, put forth his hand to fall upon the
Priests of the Lord? kills them, only to take possession of their inheritance?
and is Abiathar escaped unto David with the Ephod in his hand? there was a
strange Providence in the escape, and a wonderful security unto Both in that
flight: 1 Samuel xxii. 23. Abide with me, says the King unto the Priest, and fear
not; for he that seeks my Life, seeks thy Life; but with me thou shall be
in safeguard: -- Both these for a while may be hunted after upon the Mountains
by the sons of violence; and yet they, travailing together in, yea and
persecuted through a wilderness, shall even there find a Sanctuary at the Mount
of God; and in God's due time, which is the best for Both, these Two keeping
still close together; the Consecrated Sword in the hand of the One, the linen
Ephod upon the breast of the Other; the Kingdom shall be established in the
hand of the One; the Priesthood shall be confirmed to the house of the Other;
these are the sure mercies of David, and of the Son of David, to them Both: --
But let not David in his prosperity forget the House of Abiathar, which was
afflicted with him in all his affliction; nor let Abiathar in his eminency and
prelacy be unmindful of the servants of David; so oversee them, as to overlook
them who were formerly a security to him when he fled from the face of Tyranny
and Oppression; let Both together live in that mutual Dependence in which God
has set them, carrying on the same design so advantageous to Both; keeping as
sacred this Union, which I must still reinforce to be the Divine Institution,
lest the last error prove worse then the first; and again, some rebellious
Sheba do blow the Trumpet, (God in his mercy prevent such doleful Alarms, that
they never more be heard amongst us!) To your Tents O Israel; we have no part
in David, nor inheritance in the son of Jess; Now see to thine own house David:
And would David look well to his own house, it must be by having a due regard
unto, and a tender care of the House of God: Thus Psalm. cxxxii. 1. God
remembers David and all his trouble; in that, this was his Oath unto the Lord;
this was his Vow unto the mighty God of Jacob; that he would not come within
the Tabernacle of his house, nor climb up unto his Bed; until he found out a
Place for the Lord; and, (with this most pathetick repetition of the words of
his vow) an Habitation for the mighty God of Jacob.

The instance in the Text is the conclusion of the whole matter. v. 27. Aaron
met Moses in the Mount of God, and kissed him: Oh happy interview! Moses and
Aaron mutually embracing! locus honestat; the very Place bespeaks both Love and
Honor; it was at the Mount of God; and then the Ceremony denotes both
Veneration and endearment; Osculum dignitatis; he kissed him as a Token of
subjection to him, thus acknowledging his Majesty and Supremacy; deosculatus
est ex amore; he rejoiced in his heart when he saw him, and because he loved
him, he gave the seal of his affections with his lips; an intimation at this
first greeting, that his Mouth joined unto those lips; quasi coalescebant in
Unum Os, was now become but One Mouth, with which he was resolved to proclaim
Liberty to the Captives; and after that, enjoin obedience to those ransomed
ones; This was Aarons promise unto Moses, and that because of the Divine
appointment, (the Brethren being doubly dear to each other both in the flesh
and in the Lord,) that, he would be Moses's Spokesman unto the People; he would
be, even he would be unto him instead of a Mouth. -- Moses embraces Aaron in
the Arms of Love and of Protection; the Rod in his hand is a Scepter of favor
held out, as a token of good will and kind acceptance to him; This is the Rod
which shall be stretched out, working wonders in the defense of the Priesthood:
Moses, embracing him in his Arms, assures him from his very heart to the heart
of his Brother, that they Two thus clasping together coalescebant in Unum
Hominem, became now but One Man; this being the Promise of Moses that he would
never be unmindful of the Word of the Lord, as an everlasting Command upon him,
That he should be unto Aaron instead of God.

Appl. Let it be known this day that there is a God in Israel; that this God is
to be worshipped; and that in the Administration of this worship, the
Priesthood is to be secured from Contempt, to be had in honor for the works
sake about which it does converse: I dare not in the least venture to give
directions here; he must not presume who is the meanest and unworthiest of all
the sons of Aaron, who has not been Eloquent neither heretofore, nor since the
Word of the Lord came unto him; but humbly beg we may, and heartily in all Duty
and Submission invoke we must the Assistance of the Secular Arm, lest both our
Message, and our Persons be altogether despised! Did I say, our Message, or our
Persons? alas! we can easily venture both these through a bad, or through a
good report, and be unconcerned; But, sad it is to behold, that amongst those
that are baptized Christians, Atheism and Profaneness should so strangely
overspread it self; yea and that notwithstanding so many popular Discourses
every where made about the reasonableness of Religion: hence it is that the
offerings of the Lord have been abhorred amongst us; whilst irreligion, and a
licentious Libertinisme does exalt it self above all that is called God, or
Good in the midst of us! what means else the bleating of the Oxen, of the
beasts of Bashan in our ears? the continued murmurings and gain-sayings of
Core? strange fire every where offered up, whilst the Lamp burning bright in
the Sanctuary is neglected! and all this mischief from some of the sons of
Levi, pretended ones at least, fomented by the dissentions of false Brethren,
men that cannot be contented with their present station, but they lead aside
the simple and the ignorant into Houses. Oh! may our new Laws (for which we
bless God, and have more and more cause to honor and obey Authority;) may
these be executed; and may our old Ones not quite antiquated, be seasonably
reinforced; and shall I humbly make one request, laying that, and my self at
the feet of Majesty, in the behalf of the place from whence I came, and for
which I now serve; Let not us the little children of the Prophets, in the very
Schools of the Prophets, be exposed to the obstinate perverseness of ignorance
and sedition. Aaron's Mouth is opened for Moses to the people, to declare his
Authority as from God to be Sacred and Inviolable; that he is not subject to
Man, nor the sons of Men for any of his actions; but to his own Master he must
stand or fall, even to God alone who has appointed him; it is yet open for
Moses at the Mercy-seat, before the holy Altar, that he may be filled with
Grace, Wisdom and Understanding in the execution of Justice and the maintenance
of Truth: And what may Aaron humbly expect in return from Moses? nay, what does
the Lord God require of him, but that Moses should be as God, to secure unto
God his Oblation, the Morning and the Evening Sacrifice never to cease? And is
not all this for the Lord's sake? for the Lord who has preserved the Rod of
Moses in strength and honor; who has confirmed his Blessing upon Aaron, in
that his Rod also has budded, and bloomed Blossoms, and brought forth Almonds,
the fruits of Joy and Peace: God has, as we do every day thankfully
Commemorate it, made the Horn of David, though once cut down, to flourish and
sprout forth again; he has ordained a Lamp and a Light for his Anointed, a
Lamp from out of the Sanctuary to guide him in the ways of Peace and Truth,
that so he dash not his foot against any stone of stumbling which Schism and
Rebellion may lay in his way; he has restored Majesty, the Excellency of
Majesty to his Prince; He has renewed Beauty, the Beauties of Holiness to his
Priests; and we hope and pray, that he has given, and will continue security,
the Certainty of Defense unto Both: Oh that the people therefore would in the
fear of God, Honor the King, and reverence his Priests! that so there may be a
further lengthning of our tranquillity, neither shall our iniquity, our froward
peevish iniquity be our utter ruin: in vain shall we pretend Loyalty to Moses
the servant of the Lord, if we vex Aaron the saint of God: What? shall we
quarrel at those who bring, and at that Administration which does dispense the
Gospel of everlasting Peace? How can we thus expect to be at peace amongst our
selves? May then the Throne be established in Righteousness, even upon the
Mount of God; and may the Mount of God be guarded by the glorious and sure
Defense of Angels, because of the Throne of him who is as God which is upon it;
thus as upon a Rock, the Rock of Ages, shall Church and Kingdom be built; * nec
Portae Gehennae nec Genevae, (as once by a happy mistake out of the vulgar that
Text was read) neither the Gates of Hell, nor the Dark close designs of Schism
and Sedition shall ever be able to prevail against them.

-- * In Gebennico lacu,
(Mendum Typographi est) in Gehennico lacu;
Namque a Gehenna quid Gebenna dissidet?
Pia Hilaria Angel. Gaz.
impres. Land. page 68.
I conclude all, with those Pathetical Petitions which our holy Church has put
into our Mouths; (for better I cannot use) and God accept them from the bottom
of all our hearts.

O Lord Save the King; And mercifully hear us when we call upon thee.

Endue thy Ministers, whether of Justice in the State or Holiness in the
Church, with Righteousness;

And so shall thou make thy chosen people joyful. Da pacem in diebus nostris;
Give Peace in our time O Lord;

For, whether it be against open violence and force offered from abroad, or
against secret Treachery and privy Conspiracy fomented at home; whether against
professed Enemies, or merely pretending Friends, the worst of Enemies, there is
no other that fights for us, but only Thou O God.

To this only wise God who is alone able to make us understand our own
happiness, by keeping us in the strict and solemn observance of Uniformity, at
Unity amongst our selves; that so to Prince, Priests and People there may be
but One heart and One mind in the Fear of him, in Love and Duty to one another;
To the Author of our Peace, and of every good and perfect gift amongst us; To
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, Three Persons, and One God, be ascribed of us, of
all Angels, and all men, The Kingdom, the Power and the Glory; Dominion and
Adoration, world without end, Amen.

FINIS.

