THE Secret History OF K. JAMES I. AND K. CHARLES I. Completing the Reigns OF
THE Four last Monarchs.

By the Author of the Secret History of K. Charles II. and K. James II.

Printed in the Year 1690.

THE PREFACE.
THOUGH we ought not rashly to rake into the Ashes of Princes, and expose either
their Personal Miscarriages, or their Failures, in Management of the
Government; yet, no doubt, but the making them Public, may sometimes
contribute, not a little, to the General Good: This is evident, from the
Effects of our Secret History of the* Two last Monarchs; since by it, the most
wilfully Blind may be convinced how infinitely Happy we are, under their
present Majesty's Government; beyond what we were, in the late Reigns; which
were but a very inconsiderable matter (if any thing) below the French Tyranny;
and by setting the unparalled Virtues, that are so Resplendent in our
Gracious Sovereigns, in opposition to those Ignominious Vices that reigned in
the Other, we may, with all the reason in the World, assure our selves of a
lasting Peace; and as much Happiness under Them Now, as we had Troubles and
Confusions under the Former: For Their Religion, Integrity, and Moderation,
(which must always be in conjunction with Princes, that are truly Patres
Patriae,) are as Notorious to the World, (so that Their greatest Enemies cannot
deny them) as were the Atheism, and furious Bigottism of the Two former Reigns;
Vices much of the same pernicious Consequences to a Kingdom, if the latter be
not the more dangerous; since the greatest Villainies, that ever were
perpetrated in the World, have been Masqued with seeming Zeal for Religion.

But since there are not a few, who, though they seem to decry the Tyrannies of
the Two late Kings, yet approve of much the same Actions of the Two that
Preceded Them, (One of whom, some Men have Vainly, if not Blasphemously,
compared to the King of Kings.) I thought it not amiss, to Communicate a few
Passages of Their Reigns, that do not so commonly occur; especially since they
laid the Foundations of that Tyranny, which the Others brought to so great a
Perfection. As to the former of Them, viz. K. James I. it will easily appear,
from this following History, what great steps He made toward Tyranny: It is
certain, That the reason He gave for setting up Episcopacy in Scotland was,
That He might have so many Friends to rely upon in Parliament, i. e. That by
them, as the Dead-Weight, He might the better carry on His Designs there: And
herein His Politics did not deceive Him; for, by their Means, He and his
Successors, found it no hard matter to reduce that Kingdom to as great Slavery,
as any Europe has groaned under of late Years. How great a Proficient He was,
in the Art of Dissimulation, or King-Craft, will be no less apparent: I shall
only insert one Instance of it Here, which I omitted in the History,
especially, because I think it may not be ungrateful to the Reader, viz. That
after His return from Denmark to Scotland, seeming mightily satisfied with the
Care the Kirk-Party had taken to preserve the Kingdom in Peace, during his
Absence; He was pleased to express himself thus, in a general Assembly, That He
blessed God, that He was Born at sike a Time of the Gospel, and to be King of
sike a Kirk, the purest Kirk in the World: The Kirk of Geneva, says He, keep
Yeul and Pasch; What have they from the Word of God for that? And for our
Neighbor Kirk of England, What is their Service, but an ill said Mass in
English? And concluded with the Solemnest Promises, to Maintain and Preserve
the Kirk; when (in the mean while) He was taking all underhand Methods to
Supplant it, as He did a few Years after.

And as to His Successor, though a Kalender'd Saint; yet after all the lying
Insinuations of Self-designing, and -- ridden Persons, of that Princes singular
Religion, that very Act of Instituting Plays and Sports on the Lord's Day, is
no extraordinary Proof of it. Nay, it would be as easy to persuade a Person of
any Religion, to believe, that the Alcharon is the Word of God, as that a
Prince, of any Religion, could be guilty of so Irreligious an Act, as that was*
But I will not weary the Reader's Patience with a large Preface, since the very
Subject of the following History will recommend it self sufficiently to the
Perusal of all Lovers of ou^ English Liberties.

THE Secret History, etc.
QUEEN Elizabeth, of Glorious and Happy Memory, Dying the 24th of March, 1602,
about Three in the Morning, to the great grief of all Her loving Subjects in
general: About Nine in the Morning of the same day, was Proclaimed King James,
by the Name of JAMES the First: And now many post into Scotland, for to get
Preferment, by ^urchasing Friends with their Purses, (Gold and Silver being a
precious Commodity in that Climate, and would obtain any thing) which did
^rocure Suits, Honors, and Offices* ^o any that first came.

And now all Preparations was made to meet the KING in York, that he might, in
that Northern Metropolis, appear like a King of England, and take that State on
him there, which was not known in Scotland: There met Him all the Lords of the
Council, and there did they all make Court to the Scotch-Men, that were most in
Favor with the King; and there did the Scotch Courtiers lay the first
Foundation of their English Fortunes; the chief of them was Sir George Hewme, a
kind of Favorite; but not such as after appeared, with young Faces and smooth
Chins; but one that for his Wisdom and Gravity had been in some Secret Counsels
with his Master, which created that dearness between them; and the chief of
those Secrets, was that of Gowry's Conspiracy, though that Nation gave little
credit to the Story, but would speak both slightly and despitefully of it; and
those, the Wisest of that Nation; knowing indeed there was no such Conspiracy;
yet, that the World might be still abused, they continued to Mock Almighty GOD,
by a Weekly Commemoration in the Tuesday's Sermon, and an Anniversary-Feast, as
great as it was possible, for the Kings Preservation, ever on the Fifth of
August: And I wish the effects of those Sermons in the Father's time, were not
one cause of God's Anger toward the Son.

Sir Robert Cecil, by the means of Sir George Hewme (the Favorite,) contrary to
most Peoples expectations, not only gets into the Favor of King James, but in
such dearness and privacy with the King, as if he had been his Faithful Servant
for many Years; his Friends, Wit, or Wealth, did not raise him so much (as some
believed) as the ill Offices done by him to this Nation, in discovering the
Nature of the People, and showing the King the way how to enhance his
Prerogative so above the Laws, that he might Enslave the Nation; which, though
it took well then, yet it has been of sad and dangerous consequence in
aftertimes; for, first, he caused great numbers of Parliament Precedents,
concerning the Liberties of the Subject, to be burnt; next, raising Two Hundred
Thousand Pounds, for making Two Hundred Baronets; telling the King, He should
find his English Subjects like Asses, on whom he might lay any Burden; but
this Statesman died soon after very Miserable, coming from Bath, and was Buried
on the top of a Molehill, near Marleboroug^.

The principal Managers of the English Affairs, were Salisbury, Suffolk,
Northampton, Buckhurst, Egerton, Lord Keeper, Worcester, and the Old Admiral:
For the Scots, Sir George Hewme, now Earl of Dunbar, Secretary Elfeston, and
the Lord of Kinloss. Salisbury had now shaken off all those that were great
with him in Queen Elizabeth's days; as Sir Walter Rawleigh, Sir G. Carew, the
Lord Gray, and the Lord Cobham.

Now begins Ambassadors to appear from diverse Princes; the chief was Roney,
Duke of Sullia, from the French King; the Constable of Castile, from the
Spanish King; the Count Arremburgh, from the Archduke: To bring these
Ambassadors over, were appointed Sir Robert Mansel, being Admiral, and Sir J.
Turner, his Vice Admiral, to bring over the French and Spanish Ambassadors, in
which happened some Dispute.

The Constable of Castile so plied his Masters business, (in which he spared
for no cost) that he procured a Peace, so advantageous for Spain, and so
disadvantageous for England, that It and all Christendom have since both seen
and felt the lamentable effects thereof: There was not one Courtier of note,
that tasted not of Spain's Bounty, either in Gold or Jewels; and among them,
not any in so large a proportion, as the Countess of Suffolk, who shared in her
Lords Interest* that in truth Audley-end, that Famou^ Structure, had its
Foundation of Spanish-Gold.

GOD, for some secret Intent, (bes^ known to himself) laid the Foundation of
this King's Reign with the greatest Plague or Mortality, ever before heard of
in this Kingdom; and some by that judged what his futur^ Reign would be: He was
forced b^ that Contagion to leave the Metropolis* and go into a by-corner in
Wilt-shire* in which time of his Abode there, ^ kind of Treason broke forth;
but wha^ it was, as no Man then could tell, so* it is left with so dark a
Comment* that Posterity will never understand the Text, or remember any such
Treason: This pretended Plot consisted of Protestants, Puritans, Papists* and
Atheists; a strange medly, you will say, to meet in one and the same Treason,
and keep Counsel, which surely they did, because they knew not of any: The
Protestants were, the Lord Cobham, and George Brook his Brother; the one very
Learned and Wise, the other a most silly Lord: The Puritan, the Lord Gray of
Walton, a very hopeful Gentleman: The Papists, Watson and Clark, Priests; and
Parham, a Gentleman: The Atheist, Sir W. Rawleigh, then generally so believed,
though after brought by Affliction (the best School-Mistress) to be (and so
Died) a most Religious Gentleman. This Sham-Plot was chiefly designed by
Salisbury, in which he has a double benefit; first, in riding himself of such
as he feared would have been Thorns in his sides; secondly, by endearing
himself to the King, by showing his diligence and vigilance for his Safety.

They were all Araigned of Treason at Winchester; whither the King sent some
secretly to observe all Passages; upon whose true and faithful Relations of the
Innocence of the Persons Arraigned, and slight proof upon which they were
Condemned, he would not be drawn to Sign any Warrant for the Execution of
Rawleigh, Cobham, and Gray: For Rawleigh's defense, it was so brave and just,
as (had he not wilfully Cast himself, out of very weariness, as unwilling to
detain the Company any longer) no Jury could ever have Cast him.

Yet Sir W. Rawleigh was Executed many years after for the same Treason, as
much against all Justice, as beyond all Reason and Precedent. Yea, after he had
been a General by the Kings Commission, and had, by that, Power of the Lives of
many others, utterly against the Civil Law, which says, He that has Power of
the Lives of others, ought to be Master of his Own. But the Spaniard was so
Powerful at that time at Court, as that Faction could command the Life of any
Man, that might prove dangerous to their Designs: His Death was by him managed
with so High, Generous, and Religious a Resolution, as if a Roman had acted a
Christian, or rather a Christian a Roman. During his Imprisonment, he was
Delivered of that Minerva, The History of the World.

Now did the great Mannagers of the State (of which Salisbury was Chief,) after
they had Packed the Cards, begin to deal the Government of the Kingdom among
themselves; yet, for all their setting their Cards, and playing their Games to
their own advantages, there was one Knave in the Pack would cousen their
designs, and Trump in their way, if he might not share with them in their
winning; and that was one Lake, a Clerk of the Signet, afterward made
Secretary, and after that turned out in disgrace* This Lake was a fellow of
mean Birth, and meaner Breeding, being an under Servant to make Fires in
Secretary Walsingham's Chamber; and there got some experience; which
afterward, in this King's Time, made him appear an able Man, which in Q. Eliz.
Time, when there was none in Court but Men of Eminency, made him an
inconsiderable Fellow: This Lake had linked himself with the Scotch Nation,
helping them ( per fas aut nefas) to fill their Purses, etc. For his good
Service of abusing his Country and Countrymen, he was made Clerk of the Signet,
to wait on the King in his Hunting Journies; and in these Journies got all the
Bills Signed, even for the greatest Lords, (all Packets being addressed to
him,) so that Salisbury, and Northampton, and the greatest Lords, made Court to
him: By this means did he raise himself from a mean, to a great Fortune; but
much overawed by his Wife, which after proved his overthrow; besides, he would
tell Tales, and let the King know the passages at Court, and great Men; as who
was Salisbury's Mistress, and who governed all; who governed Northampton; and
discovered the Bawdery, which did infinitely please the King's Humor; and in
truth, had so much Craft, as he served his turn upon all, but was Engrossed by
none, but by the Bedchamber; who stuck so close to him, that they could not
yet remove him. And now do the English Faction (seeing they could not sever the
Scots from him) endeavor to raise a Mutiny against the Scots that were his
Supporters; their Agents divulging every where, The Scots would get all, and
would Beggar the Kingdom: The Scots, on the other side complain to the King,
they were so poor they under-went the byword of Beggarly-Scots: To which the
King returned this Answer, Content your selves, I will shortly make the English
as Beggarly as you, and so ended that Controversy: This is as true, as he
truly performed it; for however he enriched many, in particular, as Salisbury,
Suffolk, Northampton, Worcester, Lake, etc. yet he did beggar Himself, and the
Nation in general.

But they that lived at Court, and were curious Observers of every Man's
Actions, could have then affirmed, That Salisbury, Suffolk, and Northampton,
and their Friends, did get more than the whole Nation of Scotland, (Dunbar
excepted;) for whatever others got, they spent here, only Dunbar laid a
Foundation of a great Family.

To take off the Subjects Eyes from observing the Indulgency used by K. James,
in behalf of the Papists (whom, though he had no cause to Love, he thought he
found reason enough to Fear) a Quarrel was revived (now almost asleep, because
it had long escaped Persecution, the Bellows of Schism) with a People styled
Puritans, who meeting no nearer a definition than the Name, all the
conscientious Men in the Nation shared the Contempt; neither was any charged
with it, though in the best relation thought competent for Preserment in Church
or State; which made the Bad glory in their Impiety: Court-Sermons were fraught
with bitter Invectives against these People, whom they seated in a Class far
nearer the Confines of Hell, than Papists: And to avoid the very Imputation of
Puritanism (a greater rub in the way of Preferment than Vice) our Divines, for
the generality, did Sacrifice more time to Bacchus, than Minerva; and for their
ordinary Studies, they were School Points and Passionate Expressions, as more
conversant with the F -- than the Fathers; scoffing in their ordinary Discourse
at Luther and Calvin, but especially at the last; so as a certain Bishop
thanked God he never (though a good Poet himself) had read a Line in him or
Chaucer. The same used this simile at Court, That our Religion, like the
Kings-Arms, stood between Two Beasts, the Puritans and Papists. Nor did the
Extravagancy of many of the Episcopal Clergy add a little to the Rent, much
augmented by the Scottish Propensity to Presbytery; nor did the often and sudden
Translation of Bishops, from less to greater Sees, give time to visit
sufficiently their respective Charges; being more intent upon the Receipt of
such Taxes, as a long abused custom had estated them in, than upon Reformation.
The Court-Sermons informing His Majesty, He might, as Christ's Vicegerent,
command all; and that the People, if they denied him Supplement, or enquired
after the disposure of it, were Presumptuous Peepers into the Sacred Ark of the
State; not to be done, but under the severest Curse, though it appeared likely
to fall, through the falsehood or folly of those at the Helm: But on the contrary,
other qualified Preachers did fulminate against Non-Residency, Profanation of
the Lord's Day, Connivance at Popery, Persecution of God's People, etc.

Now, by this time, the Nation grew Feeble, and over-opprest with Impositions,
Monopolies, Aids, Privy-Seals, Concealments, Pretermitted Customs, etc. besides
all Forfeitures upon Penal Statutes, with a multitude of more Tricks, to cheat
the Subject (the most, if not all, unheard of in Q. Elizabeth's days) all spent
on Favorites, and other Fooleries: True it is, all Kings castaway Money the
Day of their Enthronement, but King James did it all his Life.

In this place my Memory presents me with Sir Robert Cecil, after Earl of
Salisbury, famed for a grand Seducer of the King, by persuading him, This
Nation was so Rich, it could neither be Exhausted, nor Provoked; a Saying
generally laid to his Charge, yet contradicted in this Practice of his; for the
Earl of Somerset, being in the flower of his Favor, had got a peremptory
Warrant to the Treasurer for 20000 l. who, in this his Executive Prudence,
finding that not only the Exchecquer, but the Indies themselves, would in time
want Fluency to feed so immense a Prodigality; and not without reason,
apprehending the King as Ignorant in the value of what was demanded, as the
desert of the Person that begged it; and knowing a Pound, upon the Scotch
Account* would not pay for the Shooing of an Horse, he laid the forementioned
Sum upon the ground, in a Room through which the King was to pass; who, amazed
at the quantity, asked the Treasurer, whose Money it was* who answered, Yours,
before your Majesty gave it away; whereupon the King fell into a Passion,
protesting he was abused, and never intended any such Gift; and casting himself
upon the heap, scrabled out the quantity o^ Two or Three Hundred Pounds, an^
^wore he should have no more.

The palpable Partiality that descended from the Father to the Scots, did
estate the whole Love of the English on his Son Henry, whom they engaged by so
much Expectation, as it may be doubted, whether it ever lay ^n the Power of any
Prince, merely Human, to bring so much Felicity in^o a Nation, as they did all
his Life promise to themselves at the Death of King James: The Government of
the Princes House was with much Discre^ion, Modesty, Sobriety, and (which was
looked upon as too great an up^raiding, the contrary Proceedings of his Father)
in an high reverence to Piety, not Swearing himself, or keeping any that did;
through* which, he came to be advanced, beyond an ordinary measure, in the
Affections of the City; to whom he was not only Plau^ible in his Carriage, but
Just in Payments, so far, as his Credit out-reached ^he Kings, both in the
Exchange, and the Church; in which the Son could not take so much Felicity, as
the Father did Discontent, to find all the Worth he imagined in himself wholly
lost in the hopes the People had of this Young Gentleman: From whence Kings may
be concluded far more unhappy than ordinary Men; for, though whilst Children are
Young, they may afford them safety, yet, when arrived at that Age, which uses
to bring Comfort to other Parents, they produce only Jealousies and Fears.

And, if common Fame did not outstrip Truth, King James was by Fear led into
great Extremes, (finding his Son Henry not only averse to any Popish Match, but
saluted by the Puritans, as one prefigured in the Apocalypse, for Rome's
Destruction) insinuating, as if the Prince was not kindly dealt withal at his
Death; but it is so common with Report to rate the Sickness or Death of
Princes, at the price of Poison; as I should quite have omitted this
conjecture, or left it wholly to the decision of the great Tribunal, was it not
certain, that his Father did dread him, and that the King, though he would not
deny him any thing he plainly desired, yet, it appeared rather the result of
Fear and outward Compliance, than Love and Natural Affection, being harder
drawn to confer an Honor or Pardon, in cases of Desert, upon a Retainer to the
Prince, than a Stranger: From whence might be calculated a Malignity conceived
in his Heart against the Splendour of his Sons Retinue. One day he was called to
a remarkable Observation of his Sons Grandeur, by Archee his Jester, on the
Plains about New Market, when He and the Prince parted, few being left with the
Father, and those mean Persons, which drew Tears from him.

One Reason King James was so poorly followed, especially in his Journies, was
his Partiality used toward the Scots; which hung like Horse-leeches on him,
till they could get no more, falling then off, by retiring into their own
Country, or living at ease, leaving all chargable attendance to the English:
The Harvest of the Love and Honor he reaped, being suitable to the ill
Husbandry he used in the unadvised distribution of his Favors; for of a number
of empty Vessels, he filled to complete the measure of our Infelicity, unless
such as by reason of their vast runnings out, had need daily of a new supply;
and amongst these, the Earl of Carlisle was one of the Quorum, that brought in
the vanity of Anti-Suppers, not heard of in our Forefathers time; and for
ought I have read, or at least remember, unpractised by the luxurious Tyrants.
The manner of which was, to have the Board covered at the first entrance of
the Guests, with Dishes as high as a tall Man could well reach, filled with the
choicest and dearest Viands Sea or Land could afford; and all this once seen,
and having feasted the Eyes of the Invited, was in a manner thrown away, and
fresh set on to the same height; having only this advantage of the other, that
it was hot. I cannot forget one of the Attendance of the King, that at a Feast
made by this Monster in Excess, eat to his single share a whole Pie, reckoned
to my Lord at Ten Pounds, being composed of Ambergrease, Magesterial of Pearl,
Musk, etc. And after such Suppers, huge Banquets no less profuse, a Waiter
returning his Servant home with a Cloak-Bag full of dried Sweat-Meats and
Confects, valued to his Lordship at more than Ten Shillings the Pound. This
Lord lay always under the comfortable Aspect of King James's favor, though he
was never found in his Bosom, a place reserved for younger Men, and of more
endearing Countenances, and these went under the appellation of his Favorites
or Minions; who, like Burning-Glasses, were daily interposed between Him and
the Subject, multiplying the heat of Oppressions in the general opinion, tho,
in his own, he thought they screened them from reflecting on the Crown. Now, as
no other reason appeared in his choice but handsomness; so the love the King
showed, was as amorously conveyed, as if he had mistaken their Sex, and thought
them Ladies; which Somerset and Buckingham did labor to resemble in the
Effeminateness of their Dressings; though in W -- * looks, and wanton gestures,
they exceeded any part of Womankind. Nor was his Love, or what else the World
will please to call it, carried on with a discretion sufficient to cover a less
scandalous Behavior; for the King kissing them after so lascivious a Mode in
Public, and upon the Theater (as it were) of the World, prompted many to
imagine things done in the Tiring-House, that exceed my Expressions, no less
than they do my Experience, and therefore left floating upon the Waves of
Conjecture, which has tossed them from one side to another. It Is generally
said, That the Earl of Holland, and some others, refused his Majesty's favor
upon those conditions They subscribed to, who filled that place in his
Affections: Holland losing that opportunity his curious Face and complexion
afforded him, by turning aside, and spitting after the King had slab^^red his
Mouth; who, though numbered among the Gods upon Earth, yet any that will be so
inquisitive, as to ^ake in his Dust, may find as many ^railties as ever Man
stood charged with, of which this was none of the ^east, doubling the weight of
his Oppression; for the setting up of these Golden Calves, cost England more
than Queen Elizabeth spent in all her Wars.

Nor will the Story of the Lord Treasurer Buckhurst fall in improperly here;
who, being a very corrupt Man* or much abused, did lay claim to some part of
the Kentish Lucy's Lands, tha^ lay contiguous to his own; and mistrusting the
Integrity of any other, o^ more legal Trial, did, by the highnes^ of his Hand,
bring it to the Council^ Table, (where, about that time, many Causes were
shamefully carried, an^ from whence the most excellent Chancellor for parts,
that ever sat in tha^ Court, might derive the most Capita^ of his faults,) and
after some Debat^ the Treasurer standing up, and offering to pull out of his
Bosom, Paper^ that were pretended for their Lordships full and final
satisfaction, he fe^ down Dead, as called to Answer at ^ Higher Tribunal.
Neither has any since ever questioned Lucy's Land, i^ the quiet Possession* of
which, he wa^ thus miraculously Estated. The Treasurer was much given to
Bribery an^ Women, in the general Opinion, afte^ whom these Verses were sent;
it being the fashion of the Poets in those days, to sum up great Men's Virtues
or Vices on their Graves: These, with many more to a like sense belonged to
this Gentleman.

Discourteous Death, that would not once confer,
Or daign to Parley with our Treasurer;
Had he been Thee, or of thy fatal Tribe,
He would have spared a Life to gain a Bribe.
Another.

Here lies a Lord, that Wenching thought no Sin,
And bought his Flesh, by selling of our Skin;
His Name was Sackvile; and so void of Pity,
As he did Rob the Country with the City.
The Match King James made between* Elizabeth his Eldest Daughter, and the
Elector of the Rhyne, contrary to the grain of many, and the particular desires
of her Mother; who looked upon it so much below her, as she could not refrain
to call her Good Wife Palsgrave, before she had put off her Wedding Shoes. Now,
whether it was hope or fear, according to the Opinion of the Catholics and
Politicians, or a supine carelessness and desire to be rid of her with the least
Expense, as all the Ladies Friends suggested, or pure Zeal to Religion, as some
simple people thought, or, what was most probable, a Composition of all the
three first mentioned Passions, induced the King to accept of such mean
Conditions, I leave the Reader to Judge; and only observe, that although in
Relation to Person and Virtue, she might deservedly hold a Room in the greatest
Princes Bed in Europe; yet God was not pleased to afford her any outward
Blessing, but a multitude of Children, of which the Eldest was unfortunately
Drowned, not without some reproach to the Father, and a diminution of the rest
in the opinion of the People; that do, though not seldom without a cause,
overvalue any thing irrecoverably lost; and at last cast her into an Ocean of
Calamities, in which she remained a floating Example to other Princes of the
instability of Fortune; as she did in Prosperity, for Civility and Goodness.
And though none need seek for Reasons, why Judgments should fall upon the
Children of Princes, yet her Behavior was throughout so blameless, as amongst
the worst Reports the Papists could raise, nothing appeared to prove her so
great an Actor in Ill, as she was ^ound a Patient in Misery; which makes me in
Charity think it came rather by Descent, than Purchase.

It was the Opinion of those Times, that the Elector might have sped better,
had he not Matched with England; whose King was so timorous, as he ^uffered all
to Perish for want of seasonable supply, that relied upon his Power; for had
his Consort been of weaker Alliance, he had refused the Crown of Bohemia, when
it was offered, or upon acceptance, been more Cordially assisted by his fellow
Princes, already wearied by the Emperors Oppressions, no less than terrified
by an expectation of worse.

It was generally thought, and that not without good reason, That Prince Henry
gave the first encouragement to the Prince Elector to attempt his Sister,
desiring more to Head an Army in Germany, than he durst make show of, and would
no doubt have been bravely followed. That his thoughts flew high, hundreds of
his Servants could witness, together with the Love he seemed to bear his
Sister, before his Brother Charles; whom he would often Taunt till he made him
Weep, telling him, He should be ^ Bishop, a Gown being fittest to hide hi^
Legs, subject in his Childhood to be Crooked: Nor did all this put together,
lengthen his Life in the desires of many. Besides, Sir Walter Rawleigh did
mediate his Favor, by a Discourse he sent him, proving no War could be so
necessary or advantageous for England, as one with Spain; alleging many
Reasons and Examples, as well out of the Practice of Queen Elizabeth, as his
own Experience; no Prince else then, being able to pay for, or bear the Expense
of a Royal Navy, which once in a Year he would without question accomplish by
our intercepting some or most of the Plate-Fleet, all Nations besides (at that
time) being but Sea-Pedlars: Wherefore, if Philip the Second cut off his own
hopeful and only Son Charles, for but pitying the People of Flanders; it can
be no wonder, He should promote the destruction of a Stranger, that did so far
applaud the advice of Rawleigh, as to say, No King but his Father, would keep
such a Bird in a Cage. But, to leave this to the Faith of Posterity, the
Actions of Kings being written in such dark Characters, and relating to so many
several ends, as they are not easily deciphered, I shall return to the German
Affairs; toward which, had England contributed proportionably to the Head of a
Union, it may be presumed (from the King of Sweeden's Success, who had at the
beginning no such advantages to rely on) that the Eclipsing, if not the Ruin of
the House of Austria, had not been adjourned to so long a day. And he that
shall turn over the Adviso's of those Times, may (without danger, or much
trouble) find what Opinion the Germans had of Us, and in how great a dismay it
cast their Proceedings, when the smallness of the Lord Vere's Forces were
known; but when they read a Commission (only enabling him to do nothing,) they
apprehended themselves, some out of Malice Betrayed; others, that knew the
temper of King James better, were so Charitable, as to impute it to the true
Cause, which was his Fear; upon whose Altar he was not only ready to Sacrifice
his present Honor and future Safety, but the Blood of those he styles, in all
his Manifesto's, His dearest Children.

For after his Daughter, and the Elector, were Crowned King and Queen of
Bohemia, they lost, together with this Shadow, all her Substance, and what he
was, for so many Descents, Born to; the Palatinate at the Battle of Prague,
(where few blows were dealt on the Electors side) reported to be so Mad, as to
think the Soldier would venture his Life in a Cause, where he to whom it most
concerned was afraid to venture his Money. It being then too late to spare,
when Honor and Fortune lay at the Stake: By which this miserable Prince did
not only lose what he might possibly have gained, but most of the Wealth he
desired to save.

The Earl of Portland, Lord Treasurer, was sent by King James (when they looked
for an Army) to Mediate a Peace: By whose help (though a Roman Catholic) the
Elector and his Lady found means, though with much difficulty, to Escape to the
Hague with their new assumed empty Titles, having nothing else to support them
but Patience and Hope, the only and ordinary Comfort of those deprived of all
help besides: yet it was gerally reported by the Roman Catholics, That
Portland was too far engaged to their Party, to be the Author of so ungrateful
a Service: But this being his first Employment, no less than a desire in the
Pope to see the Power of the Emperor moderated, (who began to Incroach upon
the pretended Immunities of the Church) he might probably take this advantage,
to render his Embassy the more acceptable, upon his return, to the People of
England, if not to the King: Persons of their Quality falling seldom by the
Sword; and therefore thought perhaps better Thrift, to maintain them at
Liberty, than in Restraint, or Redeem them at such a Ransom as a Victorious
Prince might Impose; to the Payment of which, his Majesty was engaged in Honor
and Nature.

However, I am more charitable than to conclude all Papists employed by this
King, so dishonest as to falsi^ie their Trust; for if that followed as a
necessary consequence, God help this poor Nation, that had before then, and
long after, few Commissioned in any affair of Importance, but such as were that
way affected, or wholly indifferent. It being the intent of Providence to use
his help, it may be, as he did of Pharoah's Daughter, to preserve this Virtuous
Lady out of danger, whose Misfortunes kindled such a Fire in Germany, as
(before it was extinguished) licked up the choicest Blood in the Austrian
Family; some one or other prosecuting the like Attempt, amongst whom was Count
Mansfield, that had little else than his own Fortune and Valor to carry him so
far as he went; but what he punctually did, or promised to do, was at too great
a distance to be certainly known, more than could be Learned from the Echo it
made at Court, which sounded diversely, according to the Inclinations and
hollowness of their Hearts that made the Reverberation. This is certain, That
Mansfield was in appearance well received at Court; but how King James could
like a Man that labored to bring in so Anti-Monarchial a Precedent, as to
struggle for Liberty with his Native Prince, I cannot but question, who himself
daily inculcate into the People, through the Mediation of his Divines, and by
the Terror of his Laws, That no other Refuge was left in any saving Experiment,
during the unjustest and most cruel Tyranny, but Prayers and Tears; a Tenet, if
he had believed himself, or thought such as owned either Prudence or Power did,
he would doubtless have Governed much better, or (if possible) abused the
Nation, and debauched his Succession much worse. Yet to give a countenance to a
Business he had so shamefully disparaged before, he sent for the Count over in
one of his Royal Ships, which was cast away upon the English Coast; an Example,
almost as remote from a Precedent, as for a Mighty Prince to be a quiet
Spectator of the Ruin of his Family.

Such as were of the Spanish Faction spoke most disgracefully of Count
Mansfield, for getting the lower footing they assigned for his Rise, they
admirably Proclaimed his dexterity in Mounting himself so High; who, at his
going from hence, was furnished with Men and Money, the most of them lost
before their Landing: Such Proceedings being much in use with King James; who,
like a ready Horse, did often seem to the World, as if he meant to run, yet did
little more in effect than stand still.

And here we shall give a brief Account of the Poisoning business of Sir T.
Overbury; on which account King James made so many dreadful Imprecations
against himself and Posterity, on his Knees, and in the presence of his Judges,
If he should spare any that were found Guilty in that affair; but how he
failed, the ensuing Relation will inform.

Montgomery being in the Wain of his Favor, as given more to his own
Pleasures, than to observe the King: Then was a young Gentleman Mr. R. Carr,
one that was very handsome and well bred, who, by the Interest of the Scots,
had a Grooms place of the Bedchamber; he did more than any other, associate
himself with Sir Thomas Overbury, a Man of excellent parts, but those made him
Proud and Insolent.

Now was Carr Knighted, and made Gentleman of the Bedchamber, and Overburies
Pride rose with the others Honors; then was the strife between Salisbury and
Suffolk, who should ingross this great Favorite Pythias Overbury, and make him
their Monopoly; each presenting, proffering, and accumulating favors on
Overbury's Kindred; the Father made a Judge in Wales, and himself offered an
Office; but being naturally of an insolent Temper, which was elevated by being
so intimate with a Favorite, and wholly having engrossed that Commodity, which
could not be retailed but by him and his Creatures, with a kind of Scorn,
neglected their Friendships, yet made use of both.

Northampton finding himself neglected by so mean a fellow, (as he thought)
cast about another way, and followed Balaam's Counsel, by sending a Moabitish
Woman unto him, in which he made use of one Coppinger, a Gentleman, who had
spent a fair Fortune left him by his Ancestors; and now, for Maintenance, was
forced to lead the life of a Serving-man, (that formerly kept many to serve
him,) and as an addition, the worst of that kind, a slat Bawd.

This Gentleman had lived a scandalous Life, by keeping a Whore of his own,
therefore was fittest to trade in that commodity for another; and in truth, was
fit to take any Impression, Baseness could stamp on him, as the sequel of this
Story will manifest: This Moabitish Woman was a Daughter of the Earl of
Suffolks, Married to a young Noble Gentleman, the Earl of Essex.

This Train took, and the first private meeting was at Coppingers House, and
himself Bawd to their Lust, which put him into a far greater Bravery for a
time, than when he was Master of his own; but it had bitterness on all hands in
the end: This Privacy in their stolen Pleasures, made Coppinger a Friend to
Northampton and Suffolk, though but a Servant to Viscount Rochester, (for so
was our new Favorite Carr made;) and now had they linked him so close, as no
breaking from them.

Overbury was that John Baptist that reproved the Lord, for the Sin of using
the Lady, and abusing the young Earl of Essex; he would call her Strumpet, her
Mother and Brother Bawds; and used them with so much Scorn, as in truth was not
to be endured by one of his Rank, to persons of that Quality, how faulty soever
otherwise they were.

Then to satisfy Overbury, and blot out the name of Sin, his Love led him into
a more desperate way, by a resolution to Marry another Man's Wife; against this
then did Overbury Bellow louder, and in it showed himself more like an
affectionate, than a discreet and moderate Friend; had he compounded one dram
of Discretion, with an* ounce of Affection, he might with such a Receipt have
preserved his own Life, and their Fortunes and Honors.

For those that infinitely hated that Family, did as infinitely condemn his
Insolent carriage and behavior toward them; so that had any of those Brothers
or Name killed Overbury, either by picking a Quarrel with him, or Pistolling
him, or any other desperate way, or bravely in a Duel, upon some other ground
of a Quarrel, than blemishing their Sister, the World would have justified the
Action, however he had stood with God; but Buchanan's Character of that Family,
bars all expectation of so much bravery of Spirit; but a Council must be held
to put him to Death by some Baser means.

The Plot then must be, he must be sent a Leidger Ambassador into France;
which, by Obeying, they should be rid of so great an Eyesore; by Disobeying,
he incurred the displeasure of his Prince, a Contempt that he could not expect
less than Imprisonment for, and by that Means be Sequestered from his Friends.

And thus far I do believe the Earl of Somerset, (for so was he now made) was
consenting; this Stratagem took, and Overbury might truly say, ( Video meliora,
deteriora sequar,) for he indeed made the worst choice; it could not be
thought, but such an Employment was far above his Desert, and much better for
him to have accepted, than to be confined to a loathsome Prison; and for want
of Judgment, had his Sufferings been less than loss of Life, he had not been
worthy of Pity; but, Jupiter quos vult perdere hos dementat; he would go to the
Tower, from whence he never returned, rather than accept of an honorable
Employment; from whence he might not only have returned, but done his Friends
acceptable Service, either in Private, or in Public.

In his mannaging of this Business, (that Wisdom which formerly he had been
esteemed for) suffered under the censure of Wise Men, as well as Fools. Having
him now fast in Prison, Herodias by pleasing her Herod, must also ask, and have
his Life; for, Per scelus ad scelera, tutior est via; to that end, they
prefered Emposides, to be Servant to Sir Gervas Elwayes then Lieutenant of the
Tower: This Gentleman was ever held Wise and Honest, but Unfortunate, in having
that place thrust upon him without his thought; he was also so Religious, that
few in the Court did equal him; so Wise, as he obtained the Character of Wise
Sir Gervas Elwayes; yet, neither could his Wisdom, nor the opinion of his
Religion and Honesty, prevent that Fate; he was so ignorant of the Plot, as he
never Dreamt of any such matter, until one day (as it should seem) Weston being
told, Elwayes did know wherefore he was preferred unto him to wait on Overbury;
he asked the Lieutenant, whether he should now do it, Elwayes asked him what?
Weston at that being somewhat abashed, which Elwayes quickly apprehended,
replied, No, not yet; for he did believe there was something known to Weston;
instantly he hasted away, (being a little before Dinner) and went into his
Study, and sent for Weston to come unto him, examining him the meaning of that
question; at last, between sair means and threatening, persuaded him to confess
the Truth; then Elwayes, as he well could, said before Weston the horridness of
the Fact, the torments of Hell, and the uncertainty of his momentary enjoying
of either Reward or Favor, after the Fact done, but that it must necessarily
follow, so many Personages of Honor, would never Cabinet such a Secret in
their Breast, that might ruin them; at last, made him so sensible of his Danger
in this life, and more sensible of Torments in the other, that Weston falling
on his knees, said, O Lord! how good and gracious art Thou, and thy Mercy is
above all thy Works; for this day is Salvation come to my Soul, and I would not
for all the World have had such a Sin upon me. He gave the Lieutenant humble
thanks, for that he had been Instrumental in saving his Soul, by putting him
off from so foul Intentions: The Lieutenant having thus renewed Grace in him,
by making him (as he thought) a new Man; said thus to him, You and I have a
dangerous part to Act; but if you will be true and honest to me, I doubt not
(with Gods help) but we shall perform it well, both before God and the World:
Weston faithfully promised him, and for a long, time as faithfully performed
with him. The Lieutenant willed him, to bring all such things as was sent to
give Overbury unto him, which he accordingly did; the Lieutenant ever gave them
to Dogs and Cats, which he had always ready in his Study for that purpose; some
died presently, others lay lingering a longer time; all which, with the Jellies
and Tarts sent to Overbury, he cast into his Privy, they staining the very
Dishes.

This continued long, the Earl ever sending to visit Overbury, assuring him he
did not forget his Release, which would not be long deferred; wherein most Men
did verily believe, he did mean both Nobly and Truly, though others conjectured
his meaning was a Dissolution: At last, the Countess sent for Weston, Reviling
him, and calling him Treacherous Villain; for had he given those things sent,
Overbury had not been now alive, vowing she would be revenged on him; upon the
very fear whereof, he after gave those Poisons sent him, without acquainting
the Lieutenant; yet, for all this schooling of Weston, and his assurance given
of his future Fidelity to the Countess, she would not trust him any more, but
put another Co-adjutor to him, one Franklin, a greater Villain than Weston; and
truly they may be deemed very ill, that could seek out such Instruments.

These two Villains came into Overbury's Chamber, and found him in infinite
Torment, with contention between Strength of Nature, and the working of the
Poison; and it being very like, Nature had got the better of it in that
contention, by the thrusting out of Boyls, Botches, and Blains, they fearing it
might come to light, upon the judgment of Physicians, that foul Play had been
offered him, consented to stifle him with the Bedcloaths, which accordingly was
performed, and so ended his miserable Life with the assurance of the
Conspirators, that he Died by Poison; none thinking otherwise but these two
Murderers.

Now was all, as they believed, quiet, and in the depth of security, and the
Earl and Countess began to ^arry their Loves more openly and ^mpudently; so
that the World did ^alk very loudly and broadly of this Adulterous Meeting; it
must from that ground proceed to an Adulterous Marriage; as well to the
wronging of a Young Nobleman, as to the dishonor and shame of themselves; But
^hey must needs go, whom the Devil drives; yet know not how handsomely ^o effect
this, but by making the King ^ Party in this Bawdy business, which ^as no hard
matter to effect; for the King's Eye began to wander after a ^ew Favorite,
being satiated with the old; therefore, for the bringing this Bawdery to a
Marriage, the Bishops must be principal Actors, and the Bishop of Winchester,
an excellent Civilian, and a very great Scholar, must ^e the Principal; for
which his Son was Knighted, and did never lose that Title of Sir Nullity Bilson.

For by a Nullity of the first Marriage, must this second take place* many
Meetings of the Bishops, and the prime Civilians, in which there wanted no
Bribes from the Lord and Lady, and their Friends, to have this Nullity brought
to pass, wherein the Discourse would have better befitte^ the Mouths of Bawds
and Ruffians than the Grave Divines; among them Bishop Neal, Bishop of
Rochester, ^ Creature and Favorite of the House of Suffolk, took up a Learned
Discours^ in the Science of Bawdry, how many degrees in that Science must
produc^ a Nullity; wherein were so many Beastly Expressions, as for Modesty
sake I will not recite them, being o^ fensive to my very Thoughts and Memory:
Aristotle's Problems was a Modest Discourse to his; and he appeare^ to be
better Studied in that, than i^ Divinity; and to wind up this Learned
Discourse, concluded, That a^ those met in this Lord and Lady.

The Arch - Bishop of Canterbury, Abbot, to his everlasting Fame, mainly
opposed all the Proceedings, and protested against them; for which he ever
after lived in Disgrace, excluded from the Council Table, and Died in
disrespect of the King on Earth, though in favor of the King of Kings.

Yet, forsooth, to make up the full measure of Bawdery, and to justify Neal's
Discourse, That all things in the former Marriage conduced to be a Nullity; a
search must be made, to find whether there had been a Penetration, and a Jury
of Grave Matrons were found fit for that purpose; who, with their Spectacles
ground to lessen, not to make the Letter larger, after their Inspection, gave
Verdict, She was, intacta Virgo, which was thought very strange; for the World
took notice that her way was very near beaten so plain, as if Regia Via; and,
in truth, was a common way, before Somerset did ever Travel that way; besides,
the World took notice, they Two had long lived together in Adultery; yet had
Old Kettle a trick for that also. The Lady of Essex, for Modesty sake, makes
humble Suit to the Bawdy Bishops, (who were also Plotters in this Stratagem*)
that she might not appear Barefaced, for Blushing; but desired to come Veiled,
with a Taffety over her Face; this* by all means, was thought so reasonable for
a pretty Modest Lady, that the Bawdy Bishops and Pur-blind Ladies, which had
forgotten Modesty themselves, could not think it worthy the denial: One Mrs.
Fines, near Kinswoman to Old Kettle, was dressed up in the Countesses Clothes,
and that time too Young to be other than Virgo intacta; though, in Two Years
after, had the Old Ladies made their Inspection, the Orifice would not have
appeared so small, to have delivered such a Verdict as they did and a just one
upon their Views; tho upon some of their Knowledges, it was not that Lady they
were to give Verdict upon.

Now is the Nullity pronounced, and the Marriage with Somerset speedily
Solemnized; for which they, and the whole Family of Suffolk, paid dear in after
time, and had sour Sauce to that sweet Meat, of their great Sonin-Law.

And surely, he was the most unfortunate in that Marriage; being as generally
Beloved, as for himself and Disposition, as Hated afterward for his linking
himself in that Family: For in all the time of this Man's Favor, before this
Marriage, he did nothing obnoxious to the State, or any base thing for his
private gain; but whether this was his own Nature that curbed him, or that
there was then a Brave Prince living, and a Noble Queen that did awe him, we
cannot so easily judge; because, after this Marriage, and their Death, he did
many ill things.

Now began to appear a glimmering of a new Favorite, one Mr. George Villers, a
younger Son, by a second Venture, of an Ancient Knight in Leichestershire; his
Father of an Ancient Family; his Mother of a Mean, and a Waiting-Gentlewoman;
whom the Old Man fell in Love with, and Married; by whom he had Three Sons* all
raised to the Nobility, by mean^ of their Brother Favorite. This Gentleman was
come but newly from Travel, and did believe it a great Fortune to Marry a
Daughter of Sir Roger Aston's; and, in truth, 'twas the height of his Ambition;
and for that only end was a hanger upon the Court* The Gentlewoman loved him so
well* as could all his Friends have made her^ great Fortune but an hundred
Mark^ Joynter, she had Married him presently, in despite of all of them.

But before the closing up of this Match, the King cast a glancing Ey^ toward
him; which was easily observed, by such as minded their Princes Humor, and then
the Match was said aside; some assuring him a greater Fortune was coming unto
him: Then one gave him his place of Cup^earer, that he might be in the King's
Eye; another sent to his Mercer and Tailor, to put good Clothes on him; a third
to his Sempster, for curious Linen; and all as In-comes, to obtain Offices on
his future rise: Then others took upon them to be his Bravo's, to undertake his
Quarrels, upon Affronts put upon him by Somerset's Faction; so all hands helped
to the piecing up this new Favorite.

Then began the King to Eat abroad, who formerly used to Eat in his
Bedchamber; or, if by chance, Supped in his Bed - Chamber, would come forth to
see Pastimes and Fooleries; in which Sir Edward Souch, Sir George Goring, and
Sir J. Finet, were the chief, and Master Fools: and surely, this Fooling got
them more than any others Wisdom, far above them in Desert: Souch's part was to
Sing Bawdy Songs, and to tell Bawdy Tales: Finet to compose these Songs: The^
were a Set of Fiddlers, brought up on purpose for this Fooling: And Goring was
Master of the Game for Fooleries; sometimes presenting David Droman; and Archee
Armstrong the King's Fool, on the back of the other Fools, to Tilt at one
another, till they fell together by the Ears; sometimes Antic Dances; but Sir
John Millisent, who was never known before, was commended for a notable Fool;
With this Jollity was this new Favorite ushered in. This made the House of
Suffolk fret; and Somerset carried himself more proudly; and his Bravado's ever
quarrelling with the others; which, by his Office of Lord-Chamberlain, for a
while carried it; but Somerset using of Sir Ralph Wynwoo^ (whom himself brought
in for Secretary of State) in so scornful a manner (he having only the Title,
the Earl himself keeping the Seals, and doing the Business) made Wynwood
endeavor to ruin him; who soon got an opportunity, by frequenting the Countess
of Shrewsburies, then Prisoner in the Tower; who told Wynwood, on a time, That
Overbury was Poisoned, which she understood from Sir Gervase Elwayes; who did
labor, by her means, to deal with her Two Sons-in-Law, Arundel and Pembroke,
(Winwood being also great with that ^action) that when it came into question,
he might save his own Stake; who, truly, was no otherwise Guilty, but that he
did not discover it at Weston's first disclosing it (he being Keeper of the
Prison) so by In^erence, his not disclosing it, was Overbury's Death; and had
he revealed it then, he certainly had been brought into the Star Chamber for
it, and undone (for it was not the Time fit for discovery.) Winwood, it was
thought, acquainted the King with it, knowing how willingly he would have been
rid of Somerset; yet the King durst not bring it in question; nor any Doubt
ever would have been, had not Somerset sought to cross him in his Passion of
Love, to his new Favorite; in which the King was more impatient, than any Woman
to enjoy her Love.

Not long after, Thrumbal, Agent at Bruxels, had (by an Apothecaries Boy, one
Reeve, after an Apothecary himself, in London, who lived sometime after) gotten
hold of this Poisoning business; for Reeve having, under his Master, made some
of these desperate Medicines, either run away, or else his Master sent him out
of the way, and fell in Company with Thrumbal's Servants at Bruxels, to whom he
revealed it; and they to their Master, who Examining the Boy, discovered the
Truth: Thrumbal presently wrote to Secretary Wynwood, he had business of
consequence to discover, but would not send it; therefore desired License to
come over. The King would not yield to his Return, but willed him to send an
Express: That Thrumbal utterly refused, and very wisely, for letting any thing
appear under his Hand, le^t the Boy should Die, or run away, and then himself
made the Author of that, which the Courtesy of another must have justified.

The King being of a longing Disposition, rather than he would not know,
admitted Thrumbal's Return; and now had they good Testimony, by the Apothecary,
who revealed Weston, Mrs. Turner, and Franklin, to be the principal Agents; yet
this (being now the time of Progress) was not stired till about Michaelmas: But
still Wynwood now carry himself in a kind of braving way of Contestation
against Somerset, struck in with the Faction of Villers's: And now on Progress,
the King went Westward; where, at the several places as he came, he was highly
Treated.

After all his Feastings, homewards came the King, who desired, by all means,
to reconcile this Clashing between his declining and rising Favorite; to which
end, at Lulworth, the King employed Sir Humphry May, a great Servant to
Somerset, and a wise Servant to Villers; but with such Instructions, as if it
came from himself; and Villers had order, presently after Sir Humphry May's
return, to present himself and Service to Somerset.

My Lord, said he, Sir George Villers will come to you, to offer his Service,
and desire to be your Creature; and therefore refuse him not, Embrace him, and
your Lordship shall still stand a great Man; though not the sole Favorite. My
Lord seemed averse: Sir Humphry then told him, in plain terms, That he was sent
by the King to advise it; and that Villers would come to him, to cast himself
into his Protection; to take his Rise, under the shadow of his Wings. Sir
Humphry May was not parted from my Lord half an hour, but in comes Sir George
Villers, and used these very words: My Lord, I desire to be your Servant, and
your Creature; and shall desire to take my Court-Preferment under your Favor;
and your Lordship shall find me as faithful a Servant unto you, as ever did
Serve you. My Lord returned this quick and short Answer; I will none of your
Service, nor you shall none of my Favor; I will, if I can, break your Neck,
and of that be confident. This was but a harsh Complement, and favored more of
Spirit, than Wisdom; and since that time, breaking each others Necks was their
aims: And it is verily believed, had Somerset complied with Villers, Overbury's
Death had still lain reaked up in his own Ashes; but God, who will never suffer
Murder to go unpunished, will have what He will, maugre all the Wisdom of the
World.

To Windsor does the King return, to end his Progress; from thence to
Hampton Court, then to White Hall, and shortly after to Royston, to begin his
Winter-Journey. And now begins the Game to be played, in which Somerset must be
the Loser, the Cards being shuffled, cut and dealt, between the King and Sir
Edward Coke Chief Justice, (whose Daughter Purbeck Villers had Married, and
therefore a fit Instrument to ruin Somerset) and Secretary Wynwood: These all
played the Stake, Somerset's Life and his Lady's, their Fortunes, and the
Family of Suffolk; some of them played Booty; and in truth, the Game was not
played above-board. The Day the King went from White Hall to Theobalds, and so
to Royston, He sent for all the Judges, (his Lords and Servants encircling
him;) where kneeling down in the midst, he used these Words:

My Lords, the Judges, It is lately come to my hearing, that you have now in
examination a business of Poisoning; Lord! in what a most miserable Condition
shall this Kingdom be, (the only famous Nation for Hospitality in the World,)
if our Tables should become such a Snare, as none could eat without danger of
Life, and the Italian Custom should be introduced among us: Therefore, my
Lords, I charge you, as you will answer it at the great and dreadful Day of
Judgment, that you examine it strickly, without Favor, Affection, or
Partiality; and if you shall spare any guilty of this Crime, God's Curse light
on you and your Posterity: And if I spare any that are found guilty, God's
Curse light on Me, and my Posterity for ever.

But how this dreadful Thunder-Curse or Imprecation was performed, shall be
showed hereafter.

The King with this took his Farewell for a time of London, and was accompanied
with Somerset to Royston, (where no sooner he brought him) but instantly took
leave, little imagining what Viper lay amongst the Herbs: Nor must I forget to
let you know, how perfect the King was in the Art of Dissimulation, or to give
it his own Phrase, King-Craft. The Earl of Somerset never parted from him with
more seeming Affection than at this time, when he knew Somerset should never
see him more* The Earl when he kissed his Hand* the King hanged about his Neck,
flabbering his Cheeks; saying, When shall I see you again? On my Soul, I shall
neither eat nor sleep until you^ come again: The Earl told him on Monday, (this
being on the Friday;) For God's-sake let me, said the King, Shall I, shall I?
Then lolled about his Neck; Then for God's-sake, give thy Lady this Kiss for
me: In the same manner, at the Stairs-head, at the middle of the Stairs, and at
the Stairs-foot; the Earl was scarcely in his Coach, when the King used these
very words (in the hearing of four Servants, of whom one was Somerset's great
Creature, and of the Bedchamber, who reported it afterward to many about the
Court,) I shall never see his Face more. I appeal to the Reader, whether this
Motto, of Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit regnare, was not as well performed in
this Passage, as his Beati Pacifici, in the whole course of his Life; and his
Love to the latter, made him be beaten with his own Weapon in the other, by all
Princes and States that had to do with him. But before Somerset's Approach to
London, his Countess was apprehended; at his Arrival, himself: And the King
being that Night at Supper, said to Sir Thomas Morson, My Lord Chief Justice
has sent for you: He asked the King, when he should wait on him again; who
replied, You may come when you can. And (as in the Story* of Byron, and many
others,) there have been many foolish Observations, as presage, so was there in
this Gentleman, who was the King's Master* Faulconer; and in truth, for his
extraordinary Dexterity and Skill, no Prince in Christendom ever had the like.

So, that you see, the Plot was so well laid, as they could be all within the
Toil at one instant, not knowing of each other.

Now are in Hold the Earl, his Countess, Sir Thomas Monson, Mistress Turner, (a
very lewd and infamous Woman of life) Weston and Franklin, with some others of
less Note; of which one Simon a Servant of Sir Thomas Monson's, who was
employed in carrying Jelly and Tart to the Tower; who upon his Examination* for
his pleasant Answer, was instantly dismissed. My Lord told him, Simon, you have
had a hand in this Poisoning Business: No, my good Lord, I had but one Finger
in it, which almost cost me my Life; and, at the best, cost me all my Hair and
Nails; for the truth was, Simon was somewhat liquorish, and finding the Syrrup
swim from the top of a Tart as he carried it, he did with his Finger skim it
off; and it was to be believed, had he known what it had been, he would not
have been his Taster at so dear a Rate. And now poor Mrs. Turner, Weston and
Franklin, began the Tragedy; Mrs. Turner's Day of Mourning being better than
the Day of her Birth; for she died very penitently, and showed much modesty in
her last Act, which is to be hoped, was accepted of with God; after that died
Weston, then was Franklin Arraigned, who confessed that Overbury was smoothered
to Death, not poisoned to Death, though he had Poison given him.

In the next place came the Countess to her Trial, at whose Arraignment, as
also at Mrs. Turner's before, were showed many Pictures, poppe^^* with some
Exrocism and Magi^^ Spells, which made them appear more odious, as being known
to converse with Witches and Wizards.

The next that came on the Stage was Sir Thomas Monson; but the Night before he
was to come to his Trial, the King being at the Game of Maw, said, To Morrow
comes Tom Monson to his Trial: Yea, said the King's Card-holder, where, if he
do not play his Masters Prize, your Majesty shall never trust me: This so run
in the King's Mind, as the next Game, he said, He was sleepy* and would play
out that Set the next Night; the Gentlemen departed to his Lodging, but was no
sooner gone, but the King sent for him; what Communication they had was not
known; but is most certain, next under God, that Gentleman saved his Life; for
the King sent a Post presently to London, to let the Lord Chief Justice know,
he would see Monson's Examination and Confession, to see if it were worthy to
touch his Life, for so small a matter: Monson was too wise to set any thing but
fair in his Confession; what he would have stabbed with, should have been (
viva voce) at his Arraignment. The King sent word, He saw nothing worthy of
Death, or of Bonds, in his Accusation or Examination: And now for the last Act,
enters Somerset himself on the Stage, who (being told, as ^^e manner is, by the
Lieutenant, That he must provide to go the next Day to his Trial,) did
absolutely refuse it, and said, 'They should carry him in his 'Bed; that the
King had assured him, 'he should not come to any Trial, 'neither durst the King
bring him to 'any Trial: This was in an high Strain, and in a Language not well
understood by George Moore (Lieutenant in Elwayes's room;) that made Moor
quiver and shake; and however, he was accounted a Wise Man, yet he was near at
his Wits-end.

Yet away goes Moor to Greenwich, as late as it was, (being Twelve at Night)
bounceth at the Back-stairs, as if Mad; to whom came J. Loveston, one of the
Grooms, out of his Bed, enqui^es the reason of that Disturbance at so late a
Season; Moor tells him, He must speak with the King; Loveston replies, He is
quiet (which, in the Scottish Dialect, is, Fast asleep,) Moor says, You must
awake him: Moor being called in, (the Chamber left to the King and Moor) he
tells the King those Passages, and desires to be directed by the King, for he
was gone beyond his own reason, to here such bold and undutiful Expressions
from a faulty subject against his Sovereign. The King falls into a Passion of
Tears; On my Soul, Moor, I wot not what to do; thou art a Wiseman, help me in
this great straight, and thou shall find, thou do it for a thankful Master,
with other sad Expressions: Moor leaves the King in that Passion; but assures
him, he will try the utmost of his Wit to serve his Majesty; and was really
rewarded with 1500 l.

Sir George Moor returns to Somerset, about Three the next Morning, of that day
he was to come to his Trial, enters Somerset's Chamber, tells him, He had been
with the King, found him a most affectionate Master unto him, and full of Grace
in his intentions toward him; but (said he) to satisfy Justice, you must
Appear, although return instantly again, without any further proceeding; only
you shall know your Enemies, and their Malice; though they shall have no Power
over you. With this trick of Wit, he allayed his Fury, and got him quietly,
about Eight in the Morning, to the Hall; yet feared his former bold Lauguage
might revert again; and being brought by this Trick into the Toil, might have
more enraged him to fly out into some strange Discovery; he had Two Servants
placed on each side of him* with a Cloak on their Arms, giving them a
peremptory Order, if that Somerset did any way fly out on the King, they should
instantly Hoodwink him with that Cloak, and take him violently from the Bar,
and carry him away; for which he would secure them from any danger; and they
should not want also a bountiful Reward: But the Earl finding himself
overreached, recollected a better Temper, and went on calmly in his Trial;
where he held the Company until Seven at Night: But whoever had seen the King's
restless motion, all that Day, sending to every Boat he see Landing at the
Bridge, Cursing all that came without Tidings, would have easily judged all was
not right, and there had been some grounds for his Fears of Somerset's
Boldness: But, at last, one brings him word, he was Condemned, and the Passages
all was quiet. This is the very Relation, from Moor's own Mouth, told to
several of undoubted Credit.

And there were other strong inducements to believe Somerset knew, that (by
him) he desired none other should be partaker of; and that all was not Peace
with him in the Peacemaker himself; for he ever Courted Somerset to his
Dying-day; and gave him 4000l. per annum, for Fee Farm-Rents, after he was
Condemned; which he took in his Servants Names, not his own (as then being
Condemned, not capable of) and he then resolved never to have Pardon. It is
credibly reported, he was told by a Wizzard, That could he but come to see the
King's Face again, he should be re-invested in his former dearness: This had
been no hard Experiment; but, belike, he had too much Religion to trust to
Wizzards; or else some Friends of his had trusted them, an^ been deceived by
them, that he had little reason to put confidence in them The King kept
correspondence Weekly with him, by Letters, to his Dying-Day.

And here we have brought this great Man to his End, with his Countess, Mrs.
Turner, Weston, Franklin and Elways Died in the Tower; and here Died this great
Business: Weston ever saying, It never troubled him t^ Die with so many
Blue-Ribbons: And some, in those times, verily thought more would have
Suffered, had it not been for an unhappy Expression of Sir Edward Cook, the
Lord Chief Justice; who, in a Vainglorious Speech, to show his vigilance,
enters into a Rapture, as he sat on the Bench, saying, God knows what became
of that sweet Babe, Prince Henry; but I know somewhat: and surely, in searching
the Cabinets, he lighted on some Papers, that spoke plain, in that which was
ever Whispered; which, had he gone on in a gentle way, would have fallen in of
themselves, not to have been prevented; but this folly of his Tongue stopped the
Breath of the discovery of that so foul a Murder; which, I fear, cries still
for Vengeance.

And now begins the new Favorite to Reign, without any controulment; now he
rises in Honor, as well as swells with Pride, being broken out of the modest
bounds (formerly had impailed him) to the Highway of Pride and Scorn;
turning-out, and putting-in all he pleased: First, He gets the Lord-Admiral
turned out, and himself made Lord High-Admiral: Next, He procured the Seal to
be taken from Egerton, Lord Keeper, and procures the Place for Bacon, gratis;
for he neither paid any thing, neither was he able: For now was there a new
Trick to put in Dishonest and Necessitous Men, to serve such Turns, as Men of
plentiful Fortunes, and fair Reputations would not accept of: And this filled
the Church and Commonwealth full of beggarly Fellows, (such daring to venture
or any thing, having nothing to lose for it is Riches makes Men Cowards
Poverty, Daring and Valiant, to adventure at any thing, to get something;) yet
did not Buckingham d^ things wholly for nothing; but what their Purses could
not stretch unto they paid in Pensions out of their Place; all which went to
maintain his numerous* Beggarly Kindred* Bacon, paid a Pension; Heath,
Attorney, paid a Pension; Bargrave, Dean paid a Pension; with multitudes o^
others: Fotherby, made Bishop o^ Salisbury, paid down 3500 l. for hi^
Bishopric. There were Books of Rates, on all Offices, Bishoprics Deaneries,
in England, that could te^^ you what Fines, what Pensions; otherwise had it
been impossible, such a numerous Kindred could have been maintained (as
Buckingham's was) with Three Kingdoms Revenue.

And now Buckingham having the Chancellor, Treasurer, and all great Officers,
his very Slaves, swells in the height of Pride, summons up all his Country
Kindred; the Old Countess providing a place for them, to learn to carry
themselves in a Court-like Garb.

Then must these Women-Kindred be Married to Earls, Earls Eldest Sons, Barons,
or chief Gentlemen of greatest Estates; insomuch that the very Female Kindred
were so numerous, as sufficient to have Peopled any Plantation: Nay, very
Kitchin-Wenches were Married to Knights Eldest Sons.

Then was there a Parliament Summoned; in which, Bacon, for his Injustice, was
thrust out; being closely Prosecuted by one Morby, a Woodmonger, and one
Wreham; and was, by the said Parliament, justly put out of his Place.

In Bacon's place comes Williams, a man on purpose brought in at first to serve
turns; but in this place to do that, which none of the Laiety could be found
bad enough to undertake. This Williams, though he wanted much of his
Predecessors* Abilities for the Law, yet he equaled him for Learning and
Pride, and beyond him in the way of Bribery: This man answering by Petitions, a
new way, in which his Servants had one Part, himself another; and so was
calculated to be worth to Himself and Servants, Three thousand Pounds per Annum.

And now being come to the height of his Preserment, he did estrange himself
from the Company of the old Countess, having much younger Ware, who had Keys to
his Chamber to come to him; yet was there a Necessity of keeping him in this
Place for a time, the Spanish Match being yet in Chase; and, if it succeeded,
this Man was to clap the Great Seal, (through his Ignorance in the Laws) to
such Things, that none that understood the Danger by knowing the Laws, would
venture upon; and for this Design he was at first brought in; (no Prince living
knowing how to make use of Men better than King James.)

The Spanish Match having been long in Treaty, and it being suspected now, that
the Spaniard did juggle with the State in this, as they formerly did in a Match
with that brave Prince Henry; and in truth, in all other Things, wherein any
Negotiation had been, only feeding the King with fair Hopes, and fair Words,
yet foul Deeds. Whether the King suspected any such Matters, or any Whimsie
came in the Brain of the great Favorite and Prince, to imitate the old Stories
of the Knights-Errand; but agreed it was, (it should seem) between the
Favorite and the Prince only, (no one other so much as dreaming of any such
Adventure) except Cottington, which also accompanied them, that the Prince must
go himself into Spain. Away they went under the borrowed Names of Jack and Tom
Smith, to the amazement of all wise Men, only accompanied with Three more
Persons, taking their way by France; had the Ports laid so, that* none should
follow them, or give any Notice to the French-Court, till they might get the
start, etc. Yet their Wisdoms made them adventure to stay in the French-Court,
and look on that Lady whom he after Married: And there did this Mars imitate
one of Prince Arthur's Knights, in seeking Adventures in foreign Princes
Territories. First beheld this French Beauty, Mars visemque cupit, patiturque
cupita; as in our Discourse will afterward appear: From thence away to Spain;
but as the Journey was only plotted by young Heads; it was so childishly
carried, that they escaped the French-King's Curriers very narrowly; but escape
they did, and arrived safely in Spain, their wished Port, before either welcome
or expected by our Ambassadors, or that State.

Yet now must the best Face be put on, at all hands; that put their Grandees to
new Shifts, and our Ambassador, the Earl of Bristol, to try his Wit: For at
that time Sir W. Aston was also Ambassador at Spain, in all Occurrences. Aston
complied with the Prince and Duke; Bristol rancounter; and the Duke and Bristol
hated each other mortally.

Bristol had the advantage of them there, as having the much better Headpiece,
and being more conversant and dear to that State, wholly complying with them;
and surely had done them very acceptable Services, (and in this very Treaty,
was of the Pack;) Buckingham had the advantage of him in England, (for,
although the King did not hate Buckingham, yet was so awed, that he durst not
discover it.) Then Buckingham had all Interest in his Successor by this
Journey, so that he laid a present and future Foundation for his succeeding
Greatness.

For all his Power and Greatness, Bristol did not forbear to put all Scorns,
Affronts, and Tricks on him; and Buckingham lay so open, as gave the other
advantage enough by his Lascivious Carriage and Miscarriage. Amongst all his
Tricks, he played One so cunningly, that it cost him all the Hair on his Head,
and put him to the Diet; for it should seem, he made court to Conde Oliv^res's
Lady, who was very handsome: But it was so plotted betwixt the Lady, her
Husband, and Bristol, that instead of that Beauty, he had a Notorious Stew sent
to him; and surely, his Carriage there was so Lascivious, that had ever the
Match been really intended for our Prince; yet such a Companion or Guardian,
was, enough to have made them believe, that he was that way inclined; and so
have frustrated the Marriage, that being a grave and sober Nation: Bucking.
being of a light and loose Behavior; and had not the Prince himself been of an
extraordinary staid Temper, the other had been a very ill Guardian unto him.

But now many Lords flock over, and many Servants, that he might appear the
Prince of Great Britain, and like himself, though he came thither like a
private Person: Many Treaties were; sometimes Hope, sometimes Fear; sometimes
great Assurance; then all dashed again; and however, his Entertainment was as
great as possible that State could afford; yet was his Addresses to, and with
the Lady such, as rendered him mean and a private Person, rather than a Prince
of that State, that formerly had made Spain feel the Weight of their Anger and
Power, and was like a Servant, not a Suitor; for he never was admitted but to
stand bare-head in her Presence, nor to talk with her, but in a full Audience
with much Company.

At last, after many Heats and Cools, many Hopes and Despairs, the Prince wrote
a Letter to his Father of a desperate Despair, not only of not enjoying his
Lady, but of never more returning; with this Passage; You must now, Sir, look
upon my Sister and her Children, forgetting ever you had such a Son, and never
thinking more of Me.

Now the Folly of this Voyage, plotted only by green Heads, began to appear,
many showing much Sorrow, many smiling at their Follies, (and, in truth, glad
in their Hearts;) and however the King was a cunning Dissembler, and showed
much outward Sorrow, as he did for Prince Henry's Death; yet something was
discerned, which made his Court believe little Grief came near his Heart; for
that Hatred he bore to Buckingham long, (as being Satiated with him) and his
Adoring the Rising-Sun, not looking after the Sunsetting, made the World
believe, he would think it no ill Bargain, to lose his Son, so Buckingham might
be lost also.

The Reason the King so hated Buckingham, was, (besides his being weary of Him,
and his Marriage, after which the King's Edge was ever taken off from all
Favorites; yet this had so much the over-awing Power of Him, that He durst not
make Show to affect any other:) There was one Inniossa, a Spanish Ambassador
extraordinary, being an old Soldier, and a Gallant Fellow, thought that
Buckingham did not give that Respect to Him, which was due to his own Person,
or to the Person of so Great a King, whose Person He represented.

This Inniosa being a daring Gentleman, used some Speeches in Derogation of the
Prince and Buckingham, as if they were dangerous to the old King: Nay, Inniosa
sent one Padro Mecestria, (a Spanish Jesuit, and a great Statesman) to King
James, to let Him know, that He, under Confession, had found the King was by
Buckingham, or by his Procurement, to be Killed; but whether by Poison, Pistol,
Dagger, etc. he could not tell.

The King, after the Hearing of this, was extremely Melancholy; and in that
Passion was found by Buckingham, at his return to Him: The King, as soon as
ever He espied him, said, Ah, Stenny, Stenny (for so He ever called him in
familiarity.) Will Thou kill Me? At which, Buckingham started, and said; Who,
Sir, has so abused You? At which the King sat Silent; Out went Buckingham,
Fretting and Fuming; asked, Who had been with the King in his Absence? It was
told him, Padro Mecestria: Then Buckingham went immediately and questioned
Padro Mecestria; Which Quarrel Inni^ssa undertook, and told him, He would
maintain him a Traitor; and, wear his Master's Person off him, He was a
Chivalier, and better Born than Himself, and would make it Good on Him with his
Sword.

Buckingham being fully Satisfied on several Accounts, of the great Hatred the
King now bare unto him, He turned as great an Hater of the King; and though the
King had more Power to Revenge, He had less Courage; and Buckingham less Power,
and more Courage, sharpened with Revenge: And however the World did believe the
King's Inclination was out of a Religious Ground that He might not Revenge; yet
it was no other but a Cowardly Disposition, that durst not adventure. But
although the King lost his Opportunity on Buckingham; yet the Black Plaster
and Powder did show, Buckingham lost not his on the King; and that it was no
Fiction, but a Reality, that Padro Mecestria had formerly told the King.

And now to return from this Digression, (which is not impertinent, besides a
great Secret;) The Prince returns from Spain, contrary to Expectation, in which
the Wisdom and Gravity of the Spaniard failed him; especially if they did
believe Padro Mecestria, (besides, Nature could not long Support the old King;)
and then the Spaniard might have made no little Advantage, by enjoying such a
Pledge.

Now is all the Fault (of the Match not succeeding) laid on Digby's False Play,
and Unfaithfulness to his Master, and Combining with the Spaniard for his own
Ends: And Buckingham, the most Hated Man then living, from an Accused Man in
the former Parliament, came to be the very Darling of this Parliament.

In the Banquetting-Hhouse, before both Houses of Parliament, does Buckingham
give an Account at large of his Spanish-Voyage; and to every full Point, (as a
further Attestation) he says, How say You, Sir? To which the Prince answered,
I, Yea, or Yes; and thorough all his Discourse, labored to make Bristol as
hateful to this Parliament, as Himself had been to the Former: Bristol having
some Friends that sent him Advice of All into Spain, He immediately Posts for
England, makes Buckingham's Relation and Accusation wholly Scandalous and
False, and becomes a great Favorite to King James.

In this Place, I hold it not unfit to show the Reader, how the King has ever
been Abused, and would be abused, by overmuch Credulity in the Treaty of Spain
for Marriages, as well as in all other Negotiations.

You shall now perceive, how the King was Abused in this Treaty; which was an
Error inexcusable in Himself, and whole Council. The Italians having a Proverb,
He that Deceives me Once, it is his Fault; but if Twice, it is my Fault: This
second time could not but be the only Fault of the King and Council.

In Prince Henry's Lifetime, the King had a little Man, but a very great and
wise Councellor, little Salisbury, his Secretary of State, that great
Statesman, who did Inherit all his Fathers Wisdom, as well as his Offices.

There was a Treaty, in the like case, for Prince Henry; Salisbury instantly
discovered the Juggling, before any other did think of any; for although it went
forward cunningly, yet did Salisbury so put the Duke of Lerma unto it, that
either it must be, or they must confess their Juggling.

The Duke of Lerma denied, that ever there had been any Treaty, or any
Intention from that State: Salisbury sent for the Ambassador to a full Council,
and told him, How he had abused the King and State, about a Treaty for
Marriage, which he had no Commission for; that therefore he was liable to the
Laws of our Kingdom: For when any Servant does abuse a State by their Master's
Commission, then that Servant was freed; but, without Commission, was culpable,
and liable to be Punished, by the Laws of that State; as being disavowed to be
Servant to the King his Master. The Ambassador answered gravely* He did not
understand the cause of his coming; therefore was then unprepared to give any
Answer; but, on Monday, he would again come, and give his Answer. On Monday he
comes, begins with these words; My Soul, is my God's; my Life, my Master's; my
Reputation, my Own: I will not forfeit my First and Last, to preserve the
Second: Then lays down his Commission, and Letters of Instruction, under the
Duke of Lerma's own Hand. He acquitted himself Honestly in this State, yet lost
his own; being instantly sent for Home, where he lived and dyed in Disgrace;
here was, Legatus vir bonus peregre missus sed non ad mentiendum reipublicae
causa.

By this you see the advantage and benefit of one Wise Counselor in a whole
State; and although Solomon says, By the multitude of Counselors, does a
Kingdom Flourish; yet, surely, he intended they should be Wise Men, that are
Counselors: for we had such a multitude of Counselors, that a longer Table,
and a larger Council Chamger was provided; yet our State was so far from
Flourishing, that it had been almost utterly destroyed.

I shall now bring my Story to an end, as I shall this King's Life; although I
have made some Digressions, yet all pertinent to the Secret Intreagues of this
King's Reign.

He now goes to his last Hunting-Journey, (I mean, the last of the Year, as
well as his Life) which He ever ended in Lent, and was seized on by an
extraordinary Tertian Ague; which, at that Season, according to the Proverb,
was Physic for a King; but King James did not find it so; and, poor King* what
was but Physic to any other, was made Mortal to him: Yet 'twas not the Ague,
as himself Confessed to many of his Servants; one of which crying, Courage,
Sir, this is but a small Fit, the next will be none at all: At which he most
earnestly looked, and said, Ah! it is not the Ague afflicts me; but the black
Plaster and Powder given me, and laid to my Stomach: and, in truth, the Plaster
so troubled him, that he was glad to have it pulled off, and, with it, the Skin
also: Nor was it fair Dealing, if he had sair Play, (which himself suspected,
often saying to Montgomery, whom he trusted, above all Men, in his Sickness,
For God's sake, look I have fair Play) to bring in an Emperick, to apply any
Medicines, whilst those Physicians, appointed to attend him, were at Dinner;
nor could any but Buckingham Answer it, with less than his Life. Buckingham
coming into the King's Chamber, even when He was at the point of Death, an
honest Servant of the King's, crying, Ah! my Lord, you have Undone us, all his
poor Servants; although you are so well provided, you need not care: At which
Buckingham kicked at him, who caught his Foot, and made his Head first come to
the Ground; where Buckingham presently rising, run to the Dying-King's
Bedside, and cried, Justice, Sir, I am abused by your Servant, and wrongfully
Accused: At which the poor King Mournfully fixed his Eyes on him; as who would
have said, Not wrongfully; yet without Speech or Sense.

It were worth the knowledge, what his Confessions was, or what other
Expressions he made of himself, or any other; but that was only known to the
dead Archbishop Abbot, and the then living Bishop Williams, and the
Lord Keeper; and, it was thought, Williams had blabbed something, which
incensed the King's Anger, and Buckingham's Hatred, so much against him, that
the loss of his Place could not be expiatory sufficient, but his utter ruin
must be determined, and that for the great Crime of Lapsus Linguae.

Now having brought this King (who was styled the King of Peace) to rest in all
Peace; the 27th of March, his Son, by Sound of the Trumpet, was Proclaimed
King, by the Name of CHARLES the First.

His Father's Reign began with a great Plague, and we have showed what his
Reign was: His Son's, with a greater Plague, (the greatest that ever had been
in these parts): We come now to show what his Reign was, in the ensuing
Discourse.

FINIS.
THE Secret History, etc.
THE Misfortunes of this Monarch, Son to King James, with the uncouth, dismal,
and unexpressible Calamities that happened thereupon, appear yet so great a
Sacrifice in the Opinions of all, Interested by the Loss, or Suborned by that
natural Propensity, inherent in the most, to expunge or palliate the Lapses of
unhappy Princes (whose Indulgence is not seldom so defensive, as to expiate for
the Faults of those standing in a far remoter Relation, than that of a Father)
that they have hitherto stoped my Pen, from making any farther Progress that
way; till, led on by a Zeal to Truth, and illuminated from the brighter
Judgments of others, I found not only the Imprudent Commissions, but voluntary
Omissions of King James, so much instrumental in the promotion of our late
Unnatural Wars: As it may justly be said, He, like Adam, by bringing the Crown
into so great a Necessity, through profuse Prodigality, became the Original of
his Son's Fall: who was, in a manner, compelled to stretch out his Hands
toward such Gatherings and Taxes, as were contrary to Law; by which He fell
from the Paradise of a Prince, to wit, The Hearts of his People; though the
best Politicians extant, might miscarry in their Calculation of a Civil-War,
immediately to follow, upon the Death of Queen Elizabeth, in Vindication of the
number of Titles and Opinions, then current: Yet the Beggarly Rabble attending
King James, not only at his first coming out of Scotland, but through his whole
Reign, (like a fluent Spring) found still crossing the River Tweed, did so far
justify the former Conjecture, as it was only thought mistaken, in relation to
Time.

King James departing this Life, at Theobald's, the 27th day of March, 1625. in
the Fifty Ninth Year of his Age, when He had Reigned Twenty Two Years complete:
In the Afternoon, of the same day, Charles, Prince of Wales, his only Son then
living, was Proclaimed King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland.

The first thing He did, was performing the Ceremonies of his Father's Funeral;
in which the King himself, in Person, followed as Chief Mourner. He then
proceeded to consummate the Marriage with Hentietta Maria, Younger Daughter of
the great Henry the Fourth, King of France, whom He had formerly seen in his
Journey, through that Country* into Spain.

The King then called a Parliament* which Assembled the 18th of June following;
to whom He represented* in a short Speech, The urgent necessity of raising a
Subsidy, since it would not agree with his Kingly Honor to shrink from the War
with Spain, which his Father, upon solid Consideration, had, by consent of Both
Houses, undertake^; although prevented, by Death, from putting it in Execution,
etc.

The Parliament would not resolve on raising of Money, till they had first
presented their Two Petitions* concerning, Reasons of Religion, and Complaint
of their Sufferings; which Points had been offered to his Father, King James,
in the close of his last Parliament; and, by his Death, were left hitherto
unanswered: In Both which, they received satisfaction; and likewise an account
of the Arrears which were due to the Forces, by Sea and Land; together with an
estimate of the future Charge and Expense of the Spanish War: Upon which, the
King obtained, of the Laiety, Two Subsidies to be paid by Protestants, and Four
from Papists; and Three Subsidies from the Clergy. In this Parliament, Dr.
Montague, the King's Chaplain, was questioned for certain Tenets, in his Answer
to a Book, called the Romish Dagger. Diverse Laws were Enacted in this
Parliament; as one about the Observation of the Lord's Day; and another, for
Restraint of Tippling in Inns and Alehouses.

On the 11th of July, 1629. the Parliament, by reason of the great Plague or
Sickness, that then raged, Adjourned till August the 1st; where the King, first
by Himself, and next by his Secretaries, the Lord Conway, and Sir J. Cook,
declared to them the necessity of setting forth a Fleet, for the Recovery of
the Palatinate: The Lord Treasurer likewise Instanced the several Sums of
Money, which King James Died Indepted to the City of London. This occasioned
very warm Debates in the House of Commons; who alleged, That Evil Counsels
guided the King's Designs: That the Treasury was misimployed: That our
Necessities arose through Improvidence: That it would be necessary to Petition
the King, for a stricter Hand, and abler Council, to manage his Affairs: That
though a former Parliament engaged the King in a War; yet, if things were
managed with contrary Designs, and the Treasury were misimployed, this
Parliament was not bound to be carried blindfold in Designs, not guided by
sound Counsel: That it was not usual to grant Subsidies upon Subsidies in one
Parliament, and no Grievances Redressed: with many other Passages of the like
nature. They likewise very much reflected on the Miscarriages of the Duke of
Buckingham, who was then a Person of a very Considerable Trust: They presented
the King with a Petition against Popish Recusants, etc. Unto which, a
Satisfactory Answer was returned: And thereupon there followed a Debate about
Supplies; Some were for Contributing presently, Others Demurred, as disliking
the Design in Hand; and, in Conclusion, the Major-part agreed not to give: And
then being Incensed against the Duke of Buckingham* they began to think of
Divesting Him of his Offices, and to require an Account of the Public Money,
etc. To prevent which, the King Dissolved the Parliament.

Now the War with Spain being intended, both for the Recovery of the
Palatinate, and to prevent Disturbances in our Civil State; but by reason of
the Dissolving of the Parliament, the King was Necessitated to take up Money
upon Loan, of such Persons as were of Ability to Lend: And to that end, he
Directed his Letters to the Lord Lieutenants of the several Counties; To return
the Names of those Men they thought most Sufficient; the Places of their
Abodes, and what Sums each might be judged able to Lend. And to the Persons
returned, Letters were Issued forth in the King's Name, showing;

That His Majesty, having Observed, in the Precedents and Customs of former
Times, That all the Kings and Queens of this Realm, upon Extraordinary
Occasions, have used either to Resort to those Contributions, which arise from
the Generality of the Subjects, or to the Private Helps of some Wellaffected in
that Particular, by way of Loan: With many Cogent Reasons, showing, How His
present pressing Emergencies required His having Recourse to the Method of
Raising Moneys.

Upon the Second of February, was the Coronation; at which the King did not
pass through the City in State from the Tower, as was usual; but went by Water
from White Hall to Westminster, for fear of the Danger of the Concourse of
People; the Pestilence which Raged the Year before, not being quite ceased.

The King Summons a Parliament to Sit February the Sixth; And being Met
accordingly, the King Chose Sir H. Finch for their Speaker: Then they fell upon
Debate of the Public Grievances; viz. The Miscarrying of the Fleet at Cadiz;
the Evil Counselors about the King, mis-employing the King's Revenue, on
account of the Subsidies, and Three Fifteens, Granted in the One and twentieth
Year of King James.

Then the House of Commons were very busy in Searching the Signet-Office, for
the Original of a Letter under the Signet, Written to the Mayor of York, for
Reprieving diverse Priests and Jesuits. This was Reported by Pim, Chairman to
the Committee for Religion; but their Proceedings therein was interrupted, by a
Message from the King, sent by Sir R. Weston, demanding a Supply for the
English and Irish Forces. This was so highly resented, that one Sir Clement
Cook, one of the Members, openly Protested; That it was better to Dye by a
Foreign Enemy, than to be Destroyed at Home. And Doctor Turner, one of the
House, Seconded him, with many Bold Expressions: Which so Provoked the King,
that He immediately sent Sir R. Weston, to demand Satisfaction of the House of
Commons: Whereupon Dr. Turner presently after, made a Speech in Vindication,
and for Explaining himself; which was Seconded by Sir W. Waller, Sir J. Elliot,
and many other Members of the House.

But, notwithstanding these Discourses, the Commons taking the King's
Necessities into Consideration, Voted Three Subsidies, and Three Fifteens; and
the Bill should be brought in as soon as the Grievances, which were
Represented, were Redressed. But the King Observing they did not make as much
Have as He expected, to answer His last Message, Summons both Houses together;
and, by the Lord Keeper, Complains to them, For not punishing Dr. Turner, and
C. Cook; and likewise, for Searching his Signet-Office; and also Justified the
Duke of Buckingham to have Acted nothing of Public Employment, without His
Special Warrant: He blamed them for being too Sparing in the matter of Supply;
and for Ordering the Bill not to be brought in, till their Grievances were
Heard and Answered, which He would not Admit of.

But the Commons, in Answer, present a Remonstrance, and justify Themselves.

The King again Earnestly pressed the House of Commons, for a speedy Supply, by
their Speaker Sir H. Finch; giving them to understand, That if they did not
pass the Bill of Subsidy by the end of the Week following, it would enforce Him
to take other Resolutions; and if, by their Denial, or Delay, any thing of ill
Consequences should fall out, either at Home, or Abroad, He called God and Man
to Witness, That He had done his Part to prevent it, by Calling his People
together, to Advise with Him; whose Sitting (if they dispatched This, according
to his Desire) He resolved to continue, for the Dispatch of other Affairs; and
after their Recess, to bring Them again together the next Winter.

Before the Commons sent an Answer, they drew up a Petition to His Majesty;
That He would be pleased to Remove from all Places of Trust and Authority, all
such Persons as were either Popish Recusants, or, according to the Directions
of former Acts of State, justly to be suspected to be such.

And herewith they likewise sent a large Scroul, of the Names of all such
Noblemen and others, as continued in Places of High Trust in the several
Counties of England.

Presently after the Commons drew up another Declaration of Grievances against
the Duke of Buckingham, whom they Resolved utterly to Overthrow, though much
contrary to the Inclination of the King; who being thereat Incensed, Dissolved
the Parliament the very next Day, June 15th, 1626. After which, the King
Published a Declaration, showing the Grounds and Reasons of his Dissolving
this, and the former Parliament. Then several ways were Resolved on, for
Advancing the King's Revenue: First, Levying of Customs and Impost on all
Merchandise, (supposed to be settled to the King by the Two last Parliaments.)
Privy Seals also were Issued out, and Benevolence proposed; and, at length, a
Commission for a General Loan was Resolved on. Sir Randolph Crew, for not
appearing Vigorous in promoting the Loan, was Displaced from being
Lord-Chief-Justice; the Bishop of Lincoln was likewise Informed against in the
Star Chamber, by Sir J. Lamb, and Dr. Sibthorp, for speaking against the Loan,
and seeming to Favor the Puritans and Non-Conformists.

The Assessment of the Loan, was generally Opposed; whereupon the People of the
lower Rank, were ordered to Appear in the Millitary-Yard, next St. Martins in
the Fields, before the Lieutenant of the Tower, to be Listed for Soldiers; it
being thought Necessary, that those which refused to Assist with their Purses
in Common Defense, should be forced to Serve in their Persons; Others of better
Quality, were bound to Appear at the Council Table; several of whom were
Committed Prisoners to the Fleet, Marshalsea, Gate House, etc. and among
others, Sir J. Elliot, who Petitioned His Majesty, and repeated many
Precedents; That all manner of Taxes, in former King's Reigns, were never
Levied, but by the General Consent of the Nobility and Commons, Assembled in
Parliament. However, he was Committed Prisoner to the Gate House; and upon the
same account, Sir P. Haymon was Commanded to Serve the King in the Palatinate;
which he did accordingly.

Doctor Sibthorp and Dr. Maynwaring, two Eminent Preachers at Court, about this
time, Preached up the Necessity and Duty of the Loan; One of them Asserting,
That the Prince had Power to Direct his Council, and make Laws; and that
Subjects, if they cannot exhibit Active Obedience, in case the Thing commanded
should be against the Law of God, or Nature, or more impossible; yet
nevertheless, they ought to yield Passive Obedience; and, in all other Cases,
they were bound to Active Obedience. The other Affirmed, That the King's Royal
Command, in Imposing of Laws and Taxes, though without Common Consent in
Parliament, did Oblige the Subject's Conscience, upon Pain of Eternal Damnation.

Which Position being entertained by the Court with Applause, the Sermon of Dr.
Sibthorp's, called, Apostolic Obedience, was Licensed by Doctor Laud, Bishop
of London; And an express Command was sent from the King to Archbishop Abbot,
to License it, which he refused: Whereupon he was Suspended from his
Archiepiscopal-Sea.

In 1627. (being the Third Year of His Majesty's Reign) the Duke of Buckingham,
to clear his Reputation, as to the Charge of Negligence in his Admiralship,
with much ado Completed his Naval Forces, consisting of Six thousand Horse and
Foot, in Ten Ships Royal, and Ninety Merchantmen; with which he set Sail from
Portsmouth, June 27th, and Published a Manifesto, of the K.'s Affections to the
Reformed Churches in France: But by several Accidents, this Great Design
miscarried. At this Time the Exchequer was very low; and several late
Enterprises having miscarried, it was Resolved, That a Parliament should be
immediately Called, and Writs were accordingly Issued out: A Commission
likewise passed under the Great Seal, for raising Moneys through the Kingdom,
in nature of an Excise: There was some Discourse of Levying of Ship Money; but
it was declined at that Time, because of the Parliament's approaching.

Upon the 17th of March, 1627, the Parliament Assembled; and the King, with the
Lord Keeper, in two Speeches, earnestly Pressed them to Consider of some speedy
way, for Supplying His Majesty's Necessities. The first Thing taken into
Consideration, by the Commons, was the Grievance of the Kingdom; and the first
Thing insisted on, was the Case of those Gentlemen, for refusing the Loan; and
who, notwithstanding their Habeas Corpus, were remanded to Prison; and it was
Resolved in the House, Nemine contradicente, That no Man ought to be Restrained
by the King, or Privy Council, without some Cause of the Commitment. Secondly,
That the Writ of Habeas Corpus, ought to be Granted upon Request to every Man
that is Restrained, though by the Command of the King and Privy Council, or any
other. Thirdly, That if a Freeman be Imprisoned by the Command of the King,
etc. and no Cause of such Commitment expressed, and the same be Returned upon
an Habeas Corpus granted for the said Party, then he ought to be Delivered, or
Bailed.

Then the Parliament proceeded to draw up a Petition against Popish Recusants;
to which the King gave them a Satisfactory Answer: After which, Five Subsidies
were granted to the K. which gave so great Satisfaction to His Majesty, that He
sent them word, He would deny them nothing of their Liberties, which any of his
Predecessors had granted: Whereupon the Commons fell upon the Memorable
Petition of Right, and was afterward agreed to by both Houses, that it should
be settled to the King. And when the Petition was Presented to His Majesty, the
Answer following was quickly returned: The King wills that Right be done
according to Law and Customs of the Realm, and the Statutes be put in due
Execution; that His Subjects may have no Cause to complain of any Wrongs or
Oppressions contrary to their just Rights and Liberties; to the Preservation
whereof, He holds Himself in Conscience as well Obliged, as to that of his
Prerogative.

This Answer being read in the House of Commons, was not judged Satisfactory;
and therefore, upon their humble Petition, His Majesty, to show how Free and
Candid His Concessions were to His Subjects, sent them this short, but full
Answer; Soit Droit Fait come il est desire; Let it be done according to your
Desire: Which Answer mightily pleased both Houses; and His Majesty, for further
Satisfaction, suffered the Commission of Loan and Excise to be Cancelled, and
received Abbot and Williams into his Favor again; so that all Discontents, on
every side, seemed to be Banished.

In 1628. (the Fourth Year of His Majesty's Reign) the Parliament drew up a
Remonstrance against Buckingham, and against Bishop Neal, and Bishop Laud;
which they Presented to the King, with the Bill of Subsidies; His Majesty
telling them, That He expected not such a Return, for His favorable Answer to
the Petition of Right; and as for the Grievances, He would take time to
Consider.

An Information being likewise exhibited against the Duke, in the Star Chamber;
an Order was made in that Court, That all Proceedings thereupon should be taken
off the File, by the King's express Will and Pleasure: And the King being
resolved to hold up the Duke, sent so brisk an Answer to their Remonstrances,
as provoked the Commons, to question his taking Tunnage and Poundage; which
being of too valuable a consideration to be hazarded, His Majesty Obviated, by
Adjourning the Parliament to the 20. of October. following. The Earl of Danby
having Sailed with Fifty Ships, to the Relief of Rochel, was repelled with much
Loss; so that despairing of Success, he returned back to Plymouth: Whereupon
another Expedition was resolved on, with a more considerable Navy, and the Duke
of Buckingham was designed Admiral; who going to Portsmouth, in order to
hastening of Business, one John Felton, a Lieutenant, Stabbed him to the Heart
with a Knife; Felton, after he had committed the Fact, did not Fly, but
voluntary acknowledged he was the Person; and being asked, What inclined him to
commit so Barbarous an Act? he boldly answered, He Killed him for the Cause of
God, and his Country.

The Parliament was to have met in October; but, by reason of some ill News,
during this Expedition, they were Adjourned to January 20. In which time, the
Merchants refusing to pay Custom, had their Goods seized: Complaint thereof
being made to the Parliament; the King Summons the Two Houses, to the
Banqueting House at White Hall, and requires them to Pass the promised Bill of
Tonnage and Poundage, for ending all Differences; since it was too precious a
Jewel of the Crown, to be so lightly forgone.

But the Commons answered, That God's Cause was to be prefered, before the
King's; and that they would therefore, in the first place, consult about
Religion: And therefore, they appointed one Committee for Religion, and another
for Civil Matters: In the last, was a Complaint, about the Customs; and the
Farmers of the Customs were Challenged; but the King excused them, as acting by
His Command: Yet this being not clear to the Parliament, they would have
proceeded against them, as Delinquents: Whereupon the King sent them word, That
in Honor he could not, nor would give way thereunto: which so incensed the
Parliament, that they Adjourned themselves for some Days; and then Meeting
again, the King Adjourned them till March 10. The Commons enraged thereat,
blamed their Speaker, for admitting the Message; and ordered Sir J. Elliot to
draw up their Remonstrance; which was in very high terms, about the Tonnage and
Poundage.

The Commons having prepared their Remonstrance, about the Bill of Tonnage and
Poundage, they required their Speaker to put it to the Vote, whether it should
be Presented to the King or not, but the Speaker refused it; and, according to
the King's Order, would have gone away; but Mr. Hollis would not suffer him to
stir, till himself had read the Protestation of the House, consisting of Three
Heads.

I. Whosoever shall bring in any Innovation of Religion; or, by Favor, seek to
introduce Popery, or Arminianism, or other Opinions, disagreeing to the
Orthodox Church, shall be reputed a Capital Enemy to this Kingdom, and
Commonwealth. II. Whosoever shall Counsel or Advise, the Taking or Levying the
Subsidies of Tonnage and Poundage, without being granted by Parliament, or
shall be an Actor, or Instrument therein, shall be likewise reputed a Capital
Enemy to the Commonwealth. III. If any shall yield voluntary, or Pay the same,
not being granted by Parliament, he shall be reputed a Betraver of the
Liberties of England, and an Enemy to the Commonwealth.
These were so much disliked by the King, that he immediately sent for the
Sergeant of Mace out of the House of Commons; but Sir M. Hobart took the Key
from him, and locking the Door, would not suffer him to go forth: At which the
King being very much offended, sends the Usher of the Black-Rod to Dissolve
Them, who was not admitted in: Whereupon the King, with his Guard of
Pensioners, were resolved to force their Entrance; which the Commons having
notice of, they suddenly went all out of the House: And this was the End of
this Parliament.

After their Dissolution, the King Published a Declaration, setting forth the
Cause thereof; notwithstanding which, it procured great Animosities in the
People, against the Prime Ministers of State, which occasioned diverse Libels to
be dispersed abroad; whereof one against Bishop Laud, was found in the Dean of
St. Paul's Yard, to this effect; Laud, look to thy self, to be sure thy Life is
sought; as thou art the Fountain of Wickedness, Repent of thy Monstrous Sin,
before thou be taken out of the World: And assure thy self, that neither God,
nor the World, can endure such a vile Whisperer and Councellor.

Some, considering the unsuccessfulness of This, and the Two former
Parliaments, advised the King never to Call any more: And, to that end, the
famous Book of Projects was Published, and Addressed to the King; proposing some
Methods, to prevent the Impertinency of Parliaments (as he called them) from
time to time, by the Example of Lewis XI. of France; who pretending that the
Commons, or Third part, did encroach too much on the Nobility and Clergy,
Dissolved it; and never after suffered the People freely to Elect their
Representatives, but nominated certain Eminent Persons himself, instead
thereof; which is called, L' Assembly des Notabiles, or the Assembly of the
Chief or Principal Men.

Upon May 29. 1630. the Queen was Delivered of a Son, at St. James's, who was
Christened Charles; who afterward Succeeded his Father in these Kingdoms, by
the Name of CHARLES the Second.

In the Year 1633. (and the Ninth of His Majesty's Reign) the King made a
Journey into Scotland, and was Solemnly Crowned at Edinborough, June 18. And
then the King Calls a Parliament, and passed an Act, for the Ratification of
the Old Acts. In this Scottish Parliament, that Nation showed some sign of
Disaffection to the King: And the generality of the Common People would not
suffer the Bishop of Dumblaine, Dean of the King's private Chapple there, to
perform Prayers twice a day, after the English manner: Neither durst they
receive the Communion on their Knees; nor wear a Surplice upon Sundays and
Holy Days.

In the Year 1634. the design of Ship Money was first set on foot; and
Attorney General Noy being consulted about it, he pretends, out of some Old
Records, to find an Ancient Precedent of raising a Tax on the Nation, by the
Authority of the King alone, for setting out a Navy, in case of Danger; which
was thereupon put in Execution: And, by this Tax, the King raised (by Writ)
above Twenty Thousand Pounds per Month, though not without great Discontent,
both among the Clergy and Laiety.

The Discontent in Scotland began farther to increase; and a Book was
Published, charging the King with indirect Proceedings in the last Parliament,
and a tendency to the Romish Belief. And now, to blow up these Scotch Sparks to
a Flame, Cardinal Richlieu sent over his Chaplain, and another Gentleman, to
heighten their Discontents. The Author of that Book was Seized, and found to be
abetted by the Lord Balmerino; who was thereupon Arraigned by his Peers, and
Sentenced to Death; but Pardoned by the King.

The latter end of the Year, 1635. great Differences arose about Church
Matters, chiefly occasioned by Archbishop Laud's strict and zealous enjoining
Ceremonies; as placing the Communion Table at the East End of the Church, upon
an Ascent with Rails, Altar-fashion; with many other things, not formerly
insisted on; and now vehemently opposed, by those who were formerly called
Puritans and Non-Conformists; which caused them to be charged with Faction: Yet
some of the Episcopal Party asserted, That the Communion Table ought to stand
in the middle of the Quire, according to the Primitive Example: And a Book,
supposed to be Written by Dr. Williams, Bishop of Lincoln, was Published, to
this purpose.

Several Gentlemen of Quality had refused to Pay the Ship Money; and among the
rest, Mr. Hamden of Buckingham-shire; upon which, the King refers the whole
Business to the Twelve Judges, in Michaelmas-Term, 1636. Ten of whom, that is,
Brampton, Finch, Davenport, Denham, Jones, Trever, Vernon, Berkly, Crowly,
Weston, gave their Judgments against Hamden; but Hutton and Crook refused it.

His Majesty desiring an Uniformity in England and Scotland; in pursuance
thereof, enjoined the Scots the use of the English Liturgy, the Surplice, and
other Habiliments; and began first in his own Chapple: And in this Year, 1637.
Proclamation was made, That the same should be used throughout all Churches,
wherewith the Bishops were contented; but not the Kirk, nor the People; who
were so enraged thereat, that in Edinborough, and diverse other Parts of that
Kingdom, where the Liturgy was begun to be read, committed very great Outrages
and Violences, against the Persons that read it; and could not be appeased, by
the Power of the Magistrate: And some time after, the Scots entered into a
solemn League and Covenant, to preserve the Religion there Professed. This
Covenant the Scots were resolved to maintain; and, to that purpose, they sent
for General Lesly, and other great Officers, from beyond Sea, providing
themselves likewise with Arms and Ammunition. After this, they Elect
Commissioners for the general Assembly; whom they cite to move the Archbishops
and Bishops to appear there, as Guilty Persons; which being refused, the People
present a Bill of Complaint against them, to the Presbitery at Edinbrough; who
accordingly warned them to appear at the next General Assembly: At their
Meeting, the Bishops sent in a Protestation against their Assembly, which the
Covenanters would not vouchsafe to read: And soon after they abolished
Episcopacy; and then prepared for a War.

On which, the King of England prepares an Army for Scotland; with which, in
the Year, 1639. He Marched in Person into the North; but, by the Mediation of
some Persons, a Treaty of Peace was begun, and soon finished; but a while after
broke by the Scots. The King therefore resolved, since fair means would not
prevail, to force the Scots to Reason: And, to that end, considers how to make
Provisions for Men and Money; and calling a Secret Cabinet Council, consisting
only of Archbishop Laud, the Earl of Strafford, and Duke Hamilton; it was
concluded, That for the King's Supply, a Parliament must be called in England,
and another in Ireland; but because the Debates of Parliament would take up
some time, it was resolved, That the Lords should Subscribe to Lend the King
Money: The Earl of Strafford Subscribed 20000 l. the Duke of Richmond, as much:
The rest of the Lords, Judges, and Gentry, contributed according to their
Ability,

The Scots, on the other side, foreseeing the Storm, prepared for their own
Defense; making Treaties in Sweeden, Denmark, Holland, and Poland: And the
Jesuits, who are never Idle, endeavor to Foment the Differences; to which end,
Con, the Pope's Nuncio, Sir Tob. Matthews, Read, and Maxwel, Two Scots,
endeavored to persuade the Discontented People, That the King designed to
Enslave them to his Will and Pleasure.

In the Year 1640. (and the Sixteenth of the King's Reign) a Parliament was
called at Westminster, April 13. In which, the King presses them for a speedy
Supply, to Suppress the Violences of the Scots. But whilst the Parliament were
Debating, whether the Grievances of the People, or the King's Supply should be
first considered, and Matters were in some hopeful Posture, Secretary Vane,
either accidentally, or on purpose, overthrew all at once; by declaring, That
the King required Twelve Subsidies; whereas, at that time, he only desired Six:
which so enraged the House, and made things so ill, that, by the advice of the
Juncto, the Parliament was Dissolved, having only Sat Twenty Two Days.

Archbishop Laud, by his earnest Proceedings against the Puritans, and by his
strict enjoining of Ceremonies, especially reviving Old Ceremonies, (which had
not been lately observed) procured, to himself, much Hatred from the People;
That upon May 9. 1640. a Paper was fixed on the Gate of the Royal Exchange,
inciting the Prentices to go and Sack his House at Lambeth, the Monday after;
but the Archbishop had notice of their Design, and provided accordingly; that
at the time when they came, endeavoring to enter his House, they were Repulsed.

The King grew daily more offended against the Scots, and calls a Select
Juncto, to consult about them; where the Earl of Strafford delivered his Mind
in such terms as were afterward made use of to his Destruction. War against
them was resolved on, and Money was to be procured one way or other: The City
was Invited to Lend, but refused: The Gentry contributed indifferent freely: So
that with their Assistance, the Army was completed: The King himself being
Generalissimo; the Earl of Northumberland, and the Earl of Strafford,
Lieutenant-Generals: And Marching the Army into the North, between New Castle
and Berwick, there was some Action between the Two Armies; in which, the Scots
had the Better: A Treaty is then set on Foot; and, to that end, the King
receives a Petition from the Scots, complaining of their Grievances: To which
He Answers, by his Secretary of Scotland, That he expects their particular
Demands, which he receives in Three days, all tending to Call a Parliament in
England; without which, there could be no Redress for them: They had likewise,
before their March into England, Published a Declaration, called, The
Intentions of the Army, viz. Not to lay down Arms, till the Reformed Religion
were settled in both Nations, upon sure grounds; and the Causers and Abettors
of their present Troubles, (that is, Archbishop Laud, and the Earl of
Strafford) were brought to Public Justice in Parliament. At the same time,
Twelve English Peers drew up a Petition, which they delivered to the King, for
the Sitting of the Parliament.

To which the King condescends: And now the time approaching for the Sitting of
the Parliament, who accordingly Met, November. 3. 1640. Mr. W. Lenthal was Chosen
Speaker of the House of Commons: And the King, in a Speech, tells them, That
the Scottish Troubles were the cause of their Meeting; and therefore requires
them to consider of the most expedient Means for casting them out; and desired
a Supply from them, for the maintaining of his Army.

The Commons began with the Voting down all Monopolies; and all such Members as
had any Benefit by them, were Vottd out of the House: They then Voted down
Ship Money, with the Opinion of the Judges thereupon, to be Illegal; and a
Charge of High Treason was ordered to be Drawn up against Eight of them; and
they resolved to begin with the Lord Keeper Finch. December 11th, Alderman
Pennington, and some hundreds of Citizens, presented a Petition, Subscribed by
Fifteen thousand Hands, against Church Discipline, and Ceremonies; and a while
after the House of Commons Voted, That the Clergy in a Synod or Convocation,
have no Power to make Canons or Laws, without Parliaments; and that the Canons
are against the Fundamental Laws of this Realm, the King's Prerogative, and the
Property of the Subject, the Right of Parliaments; and tend to Faction and
Sedition.

In pursuance hereof, a Charge was ordered to be drawn up against Archbishop
Laud, as the Principal Framer of those Canons, and other Delinquencies; which
Impeachment was Seconded by another from the Scotch Commissioners: Upon which
he was Committed to the Black-Rod; and Ten Weeks after Voted Guilty of
High Treason, and sent to the Tower. The Scots likewise preferred a Charge
against the Earl of Strafford, then in Custody, requiring Justice against them
both, as the great Incendiaries and Disturbers both of Church and State.

The Lord Keeper Finch was the next Person designed to be Censured; and
notwithstanding a Speech made in his own Vindication, He was Voted a Traitor
upon several Accounts: But he foresaw the Storm, and went over into Holland.

Upon Monday, March 26. 1640, the Earl of Strafford's Trial began in
Westminster Hall, the King, Queen, and Prince, being present; and the Commons,
being there likewise as a Committee, at the managing their Accusation: The Earl
of Strafford, though he had but short Warning, yet made a Noble Defense. The
Accusation was managed by Mr. Pym, consisting of Twenty eight Articles; to most
of which, the Earl made particular Replies.

But the Commons were resolved to Prosecute him to Death; and had therefore
(not only procured the Parliament of Ireland to Prosecute him there as Guilty
of High Treason) but resolved to proceed against him by Bill of Attainder,
which they proceeded to dispatch: And April 19. 1641. they Voted the Earl
Guilty of High Treason, upon the Evidence of Secretary Vane, and his Notes: And
upon the 25th, they passed the Bill, and sent it to the Lords, for their
Concurrence; who a few Days after, likewise agreed to it.

The Bill being finished, and the K. fearing the Conclusion, and being willing
to do some good Office to the Earl, His Majesty, May 1. 1641, Calls both Honses
together, and in a Speech, tells them; That he had been present at the Hearing
that great Cause; and that in his Conscience, possitively he could not Condemn
him of High Treason, and yet could not clear him of Misdemeanors; but hoped a
way might be found out to Satisfy Justice, and their Fears, without oppressing
his Conscience. And so dismissed them, to their great Discontent: Which was
propogated so far, that May 3. were One thousand Citizens, most of them Armed,
came thronging down to Westminster, crying out for Justice against the Earl of
Strafford. The Commons had now finished a Bill, for the Continuance of the
Parliament; which having passed the Lords, was tendered to the King to be
Signed; together with the Bill for the Attainder of the E. of Strafford: His
Majesty Answered; That on Monday following He would Satisfy them; and on the
Sunday, the King spent the whole Day with the Judges and Bishops, in
Consulting: The Judges told him; That in Point of Law, (according to the Oath
made by Sir Henry Vane) he was Guilty of Treason. The Bishops all agreed; That
the King might show Mercy without Scruple; and that he could not Condemn the
Earl, if he did not think him Guilty. This was to matter of Fact; but as to
matter of Law, He was to rest in the Opinion of the Judges.

Monday, May 10. the King gives Commission to several Lords to Pass two Bills;
One, The Bill of Attainder against the Earl of Strafford. The Other, F^r
continuing the Parliament during the pleasure of both Houses. Which last Act
was occasioned, for Satisfying the Scots.

The next Day the King being troubled about the Earl, writes a Letter to the
House of Lords, telling them; That whereas Justice had been satisfied in his
Condemnation, an intermixture of Mercy would not now be unseasonable; and
therefore He desired them, that if it might be done without any Discontent to
the People, the Earl might be permitted to fulfill the Natural Course of his
Life in close Imprisonment, Sequestered from all Public Affairs; provided he
never attempted to make an Escape: However He thought it a Work of Charity, to
Reprieve him till Saturday. But nothing could be Obtained in Favor of him.

The Fall of this Powerful Man, so startled other great Officers of State* that
several Resigned their Places.

July 5. A Charge was brought into the House of Commons, against Dr. Wren
Bishop of Ely, being Accused of Treasonable Misdemeanors in his Diocese.

August 6. Both the English and Scotch Armies were Disbanded; and Four Days
after the King went toward Scotland, and was Entertained with great
Demonstrations of Affection by that Nation, and Conferred several Places of
Honor and Power upon diverse of them: He Confirmed likewise the Treaty between
the Two Nations, by Act of Parliament.

October 23, 1641. A Horrid and Notorious Rebellion broke out in Ireland, which
was in diverse Places managed with such Secrecy, that it was not Discovered at
Dublin till the Night before it was to be put in Execution; but, in most other
Places of the Kingdom, it was carried on with such Fury, That two hundred
thousand English Men, Women, and Children, were in a short Space barbarously
Murdered.

The Irish to Dishearten the English from any Resistance, bragged, That the
Queen was with their Army; That the King would come amongst them also, and
Assist them: That they did but maintain His Cause against the Puritans: That
they had the King's Com-Commission for what they did. The Lords Justices sent
Sir H. Spotswood to the King, then in Scotland, with an Account of all that
happened: He dispatched Sir J. Stuart, with Instructions to the Lords of the
Privy Council in Ireland; and to carry all the Money, his present Stores would
supply. He likewise sent an Express to the Parliament of England, (as being
near) for their Assistance; but they excused it: And indeed, the Irish
pretended that the Scots were in Confederacy with them; and to seem to Confirm
it, they abstained, for some time, from destroying the Estates, or Murdering
any of that Nation. And on the other-side, to Encourage the Irish, they
produced pretended Letters; wherein they said, They were Informed from England;
That the Parliament had passed an Act, that all the Irish should be Compelled
to the Protestant Worship; and for the First Offense in refusing, to Forfeit
all their Goods; for the Second, their Estates; and for the Third, their Lives:
And besides this, they presented them with the Hopes of Liberty: That the
English Yoke should be shaken off: That they should have a King of their own
Nation; and that then all the Goods and Estates of the English should be
divided amongst them. With these Motives of Spoil and Liberty, which were
strengthened by the Former, of Religion, the Rebellion was carried on throughout
the whole Kingdom.

The King being returned out of Scotland, December 2d. Summoned both Houses
together, and tells them; That he had staid in Scotland longer than He
expected, yet not fruitlesly; for He had given full Satisfaction to the Nation;
but cannot choose but take Notice of, and Wonder at the unexpected Distractions
He finds at Home; and then Commends to them the State of Ireland.

After which, the Commons Ordered a Select Committee to draw up a Petition and
Remonstrance to the King: The One was against the Bishops, and Oppressions in
Church Government; and for Punishing the Authors of it. In the Other was
Contained all the Miscarriages and Misfortunes, since the beginning of His
Majesty's Reign.

The King Issued out a Declaration, in Answer to the Remonstrance; the Sum of
which was; That He thought He had given sufficient Satisfaction to his People's
Fears and Jealousies, concerning Religion, Liberties, and Civil Interests; by
the Bills which He has Passed this Parliament: Desiring the Misunderstandings
might be removed on either Side; and that the Bleeding Condition of Ireland
might persuade them to Unity, for the Relief of that Unhappy Kingdom.

Not long after happened the Insolent Tumults of the London Apprentices at
White Hall, and Westminster. December 28. the King sends a Message to the
Lords; That He would raise ten Thousand Volunteers for Ireland, if the Commons
would undertake to Pay them.

Sometime after, the King, upon Information, that the Lord Kimbolton, and Five
of the House of Commons, viz. Hollis, Sir Arthur Haslerig, Mr. Pim, Mr.
Hambden, and Mr. Stroud, had Correspondence with the Scots, and Countenanced
the late City-Tumults; He thereupon Ordered their Trunks, Studies, and Chambers
to be Sealed up, and their Persons Seized; the Former of which was done, but
having timely Notice, they went aside: Upon which the Commons, the same Day,
Voted high against these Actions of the King. Hereupon the King Charges the
Lord Kimbolton, and the Five Members, with several Articles; and Acquaints both
Houses, That He did intend to Prosecute them for High Treason,; and required
that their Persons might be Secured: And the next Day, the King, Attended with
His Guard of Pensioners, and some Hundreds of Gentlemen, went to the House of
Commons; and the Guard staying without, the King, with the Palsgrave, entered
the House; at whose Entrance, the Speaker rises out of the Chair, and the King
sitting down therein, views the Houses round, and perceives the Birds He aimed
at were flown; whereupon He tells them, That He came to look for those Five
Members, whom He had Accused of High Treason; and was resolved to have them,
wherever He found them; and expected to have them sent to Him, as soon as
they should come to the House; but would not have them think, that this Act of
His was any Violation of Parliament.

This Act of the King's was so highly resented by the House, that the next day,
Jan. 5. the Commons Voted it a Breach of Privilege: And Reports were raised in
the City, That He intended Violence against the House of Commons; and came
thither with Force, to Murder several Members; and used threatening Speeches
against the Parliament; with which the City was so possessed, that the Guards
and Watches were Set, as if some desperate Assault were to be made upon the
City: And Both Houses Adjourned till the Tuesday following; appointing a
Committee, in the mean time, to sit at Guild Hall, to consider of the most
effectual Means for their Security. And then they Published a Declaration, That
whosoever shall Arrest any Member of Parliament, by Warrant from the King only,
is guilty of the Breach of Privileges of Parliament: And likewise, That all
those who Attended the King, when He came to Demand the Five Members, were
guilty of a Traitorous Design against the King and Parliament: That the
Proclamation for Apprehending and Imprisoning the said Members, was False,
Scandalous, and Illegal; and not of Validity enough to hinder them from
Attending the House: Wherefore, They entreat His Majesty to discover the Names
of those Informers, and Evil Counselors; declaring all such Persons to be
Public Enemies to the State.

In the mean time, the Londoners came thronging to Westminster, with Petitions,
inveighing Bitterly against some of the Peers; but especially the Bishops, whom
they Affronted as they went to the House: Upon which they were so affrighted,
that Twelve Bishops absent themselves from the House of Lords, drawing up a
Protestation against all Laws, Orders, Votes, Resolutions and Determinations,
as in themselves Null, and of none Effect, which had Passed, or should Pass,
during their forced Absence. Presently after which, at a Conference between
Both Houses, it was agreed, That this Protestation of the Twelve Bishops, did
extend to the deep intrenching on the Fundamental Privileges, and Being of
Parliaments: And, in a short time, they were Accused of High Treason, Seized,
and brought on their Knees at the Lords-Bar: Ten of whom were Committed to the
Tower; and the other Two, in regard of their Age, to the Black-Rod.

The King, at this Time, thinking Himself unsafe without a Guard, accepted of
the offer of some Gentlemen of the Inns of Court, to be a Guard to Him; which,
instead of Security, was (by Subtle Men) made more prejudicial to the King; by
taking this occasion, to raise the Rage and Jealousy of the City against Him:
For, at Midnight, there were cries made in the Streets of London, That all the
People should rise to their Defense; for the King, with His Papists, were come
to Fire the City, and Cut their Throats in their Beds: The People, by often
receiving such Alarms, being terrified from Sleep, the Impressions of those
Night-fears lay long upon their Spirits in the Day, and filled them almost with
Madness; of which the King Complained to the Common Council of London.

But the Commons, to obviate this, upon Suspicion of some Design upon their
Persons, Petition the King for a Guard, to be Commanded by the Earl of Essex;
of whose Fidelity to the King and State, no question was ever made. This
Petition was denied by the King, as not willing to have them too strong; yet
promised to take such Care for their Security from Violence, as He would for
the Preservation of Himself and Children.

This Answer being unsatisfactory, the City joins with them; and in their
Common Council, drew up a Petition, complaining, That the Trade of the City was
decayed, to the utter Ruin of the Protestant Religion, and the Lives and
Liberties of the Subjects, by the Design of Papists, Foreigners, and Domestics
( more particularly their fomenting the Irish Rebellion) by changing the
Constable of the Tower, and making Preparation there; by the Fortifying of
White Hall; and the King's late Invasion of the House of Commons: Whereupon
they Pray, That, by the Parliament's Advice, the Protestants in Ireland may be
Relieved: The Tower to be put into the Hands of Persons of Trust: A Guard
appointed for the Safety of the Parliament: And that the Five Members may not
be Restrained, nor Proceeded against, but by the Privileges of Parliament.

To their Petition the King returned Answer, That He could not Express a
greater sense of Ireland, than He had done: That, merely to satisfy the City,
He had removed a Worthy Person from the Charge of the Tower: And that the
Tumults had caused Him to Fortify White Hall, for the Security of His own
Person: That His going to the House of Commons, was to Apprehend those Five
Members for Treason, to which the Privileges of Parliament could not extend;
and that He would proceed against them no otherwise than Legally.

And now such numbers of ordinary People daily gathered about Westminster and
White Hall, that the King (doubting of their Intentions) thought fit to
withdraw to Hampton Court; taking with Him, the Queen, Prince, and Duke of
York; where He and his Retinue, and Guard quickly increased, by accession of
diverse of the Gentry. But the next day, the Five Members were Triumphantly
Guarded to Westminster, by a great number of Citizens and Seamen; with
Hundreds of Boats and Barges, with Guns in them, shouting and hallowing as they
passed by White Hall; and making large Protestations at Westminster, of their
constant Adherence and Fidelity to the Parliament. About this time, the
Parliament had notice, that the Lord Digby, and Col. Lunsford, were raising
Troops of Horse at Kingston, where the County Magazine was lodged: Whereupon
they order, That the County Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, and the Trained-Bands,
shall take care to secure the Countries, and their Magazines. Lunsford was
Seized, and sent to the Tower; but Digby escaped beyond Sea.

The King removed to Royston; at which time, Sir E. Herbert, Attorny-General,
is questioned at the Lords-Bar, to Answer concerning the Articles against the
Five Members; where it had gone hard with him, if the King (at his earnest
Supplication) had not taken him off, by a Letter to the Lord Keeper Littleton;
wherein the King clears the Attorny-General, and takes the whole Business upon
Himself; yet concludes, That finding Cause, wholly to desist from Proceeding
against the Persons Accused, He had Commanded his Attorny-General to proceed no
farther therein, nor to produce nor discover any Proof concerning the same.

Jan. 20. The King sends a Message to the Parliament, proposing the Security of
his own just Rights, and Royal Authority; and, That since particular Grievances
and Distractions were too many, and would be too great to be Presented by
themselves, that They would Comprize and Digest them into one entire Body, and
send them to Him: And it should then appear, how ready He would be, to equal or
exceed the greatest Examples of the most Indulgent Princes, in their Acts of
Grace and Favor to the People.

After this, the Commons move the Lords to join with them, in Petitioning for
the Militia, and the Command of the Tower; but They not complying, the House of
Commons singly of themselves, importune the King, to put those things into the
Hands of the Parliament; as the only available Means, for the removal of their
Fears and Jealousies. But the King not willing to part with the Principal
Jewels of his Crown, signified to them, That He thought the Militia to be
lawfully subject to no Comm^nd but his Own; and therefore would not let it go
out of his Hands: That he had preferred to the Lieutenancy of the Tower, a
Person of known Fortune, and unquestionable Reputation; and that he would
Prefer none but such, to the Command of his Forts and Castles: Yet would not
entrust the Power of Conferring those Places and Dignities from Himself; it
being derived to Him, from his Ancestors, by the Fundamental Laws of the
Kingdom. Yet the Commons would not desist, but again Petitioned; and were again
refused. Soon after, diverse Petitions were delivered to the Parliament, against
the Votes of Popish Lords and Bishops in the House of Peers; as One from
Suffolk, with 1500 Hands; Another from London, with 2000 Hands; and a Third
from the City-Dames: To all which were Answered, That the Commons had already
endeavored Relief from the Lords, in their Requests; and should so continue
till Redress were obtained. And shortly after, the Lords Passed the Bill, For
disabling all Persons in Holy-Orders, to have any place or Vote in Parliament;
or to exercise any Temporal Jurisdiction. At the same time, they Petition the
King again for the Militia, and for clearing Kimbolton, and the Five Members:
By his Answer to Both, they understood his Resolution; Not to trust the Militia
out of Himself; nor to clear the Members, but only by a general Pardon; which
was unsatisfactory.

The King now at Hampton Court, thought fit to send for all his Domestic
Servants of either Houses of Parliament; and particularly, the Earls of Essex
and Holland; but they refused to come.

In the mean time, Mr. Pym, at a Conference, complaining of the general
flocking of Papists into Ireland* affirmed, That since the Lieutenant had
ordered a stop upon the Ports, against all Irish Papists, many of the chief
Commanders, now in the head of the Rebels, had been licensed to pass thither,
by his Majesty's immediate Warrant. The King was highly offended at this
Speech, which He signified to the House; who, in their Answer to his Message,
justify Mr. Pym's words to be the Sense of the House; and that they had yet in
safe Custody, the Lord Delvin, Sir G. Hamilton, Col. Butler, Brother to the
Lord Miniard, now in Rebellion, and one of the Lord Nettervil's Sons: To which
the King replies, That he thought Mr. Pym's Speech was not so well grounded, as
it ought to have been; and that the aforementioned Persons had their Passages
granted, before he knew of the Parliaments Order of Restraint; and therefore
expected their Declaration for his Vindication from that odious Calumny of
Conniving, or underhand Favoring that Horrid Rebellion.

But the King's Desire proved fruitless; for they next moved to have Sir J.
Byron turned out, from being Lieutenant of the Tower; and, at their nomination,
Sir J. Coniers Succeeded.

They then proceeded to Name fit Persons, for Trust of the Militia, of the
several Counties: And, by Act of Parliament, disabled all Clergymen from
exercising Temporal Jurisdiction: The Commons then drew up a Petition, for
Vindicating their Five Members; wherein they desire the King to send them the
Informers against the said Members; or otherwise, to desert their Prosecution
would not suffice; because the whole Parliament was concerned in the Charge.
And then they proceeded to settle the Militia, for the defense of the
Parliament, Tower, and City of London, under the Command of Maj. General
Skipton, who had formerly been an experienced Soldier in the Low Countries. The
King had deferred* His Answer to their Petition, for settling the Militia of
the Counties, according to their nomination, till His Return from Dover; where
He took leave of his Wife and Daughter; and so returned to Greenwich; from
whence He sent to Hampton Court, for his Two Eldest Sons to come to him; though
contrary to the Mind of the Parliament, who would have dissuaded Him from it.

The King being now at Greenwich, sends this Answer to the Petition, about the
Militia; That he is willing to condescend to all the Proposals about the
Militia of the Counties, and the Persons mentioned, but not of London, and
other Corporations; whose Government, in that particular, he thought it neither
Justice nor Policy to alter; but would not consent to divest Himself of the
Power of the County Militia, for an indesinite Time, but for some limited
Space. This Answer did not satisfy; so that the Breach growing every day
wider, the King declined these Parts, and the Parliament, and removed to
Theobald's; taking with Him, the Prince, and Duke of York.

About the beginning of March, He receives a Petition from the Parliament;
wherein they require the Militia more resolutely than before; affirming, That
in case of denial, the Eminent Dangers would constrain them to dispose of it by
the Authority of Parliament; desiring also, That he would make his Abode near
London, and the Parliament; and continue the Prince at some of his Houses near
the City, for the better carrying on of Affairs, and preventing the Peoples
Jealousies and Fears. All which being refused; They presently Order, That the
Kingdom be put into a posture of Defense, in such a way as was agreed upon by
Parliament; and a Committee to prepare a public Declaration from these Heads.
1. The Just Causes of the Fears and Jealousies given to the Parliament; at the
same time clearing themselves from any Jealousies conceived against Himself. 2.
To Consider of all Matters arising from his Majesty's Message, and what was fit
to be done.

And now began our Troubles, and all the Miseries of a Civil-War: The
Parliament every day entertaining new Jealousies and Suspicions of the King's
Actions; which, howsoever in Complement, they made show of imputing only to his
Evil Council; yet obliquely had too great a Reflection on his Person. They now
proceed, on a sudden, to make great Preparations both by Sea and Land: And the
Earl of Northumberland, Admiral of England, is commanded to Rig the King's
Ships, and fit them for Sea: And likewise all Masters and Owners of Ships, were
persuaded to do the like. The Beacons were prepared, Sea-Marks set up, and
extraordinary Postings up and down with Pacquets; All sad Prognostics of the
Calamities ensuing.

August 22. 1642. The King comes to Nottingham, and there Erects His Standard;
to which, some Numbers resorted; but far short of what was Expected: And three
Days after, the King sends a Message to the Parliament, to propose a Treaty:
The Messengers were, the Earls of Southampton and Dorset, Sir John Culpeper,
and Sir W. Udal: None of which were suffered to Set in the House, to deliver
their Errand; therefore it was sent in by the Usher of the Black-Rod; to which
the Parliament Answered: That until His Majesty shall recall His Proclamations
and Declarations of Treason, against the Earl of Essex, and Them, and their
Adherents: And unless the King's Standard, now Set up in pursuance thereof, be
taken down, They cannot, by the Fundamental Privileges of Parliament, give His
Majesty another Answer.

The King Replies, That He never intended to Declare the Parliament. Traitors,
or Set up his Standard against them; but if they Resolve to Treat, either Party
shall Revoke their Declarations against all persons as Traitors; and the same
Day to take down his Standard.

To this they Answer; That the Difference could not any ways be concluded,
unless He would forsake his Evil Counselors, and return to his Parliament. And
accordingly, September 6th, They Order and Declare, That the Armswhich they
have, or shall take up for the Parliament, Religion, Laws, and Liberties of the
Kingdom, shall not be laid down, until the King withdraw his Protection from
such Persons as are, or shall be Voted Delinquents, and shall leave them to
Justice.

The War being now begun, the New-raised Soldiers committed many Outrages upon
the Country People; which both King and Parliament, upon Complaint, endeavor
to Rectify. The King Himself was now Generalissimo over his Own; His
Captain General was first, the Marquess of Hartford, and afterward the Earl of
Lindsey; and the Earl of Essex for the Parliament: The King's Forces received
the first Repulse at Hull, by Sir John Hotham, and Sir John Meldrum; and the
King takes up his Quarters at Shrewsbury: Portsmouth was next Surrendered to the
Parliament; and presently after, Sir John Byron takes Worcester for the King:
In September, the two Princes Palatines, Rupert and Maurice, Arrived in
England; who were presently Entertained, and put into Command by the King.

This uncivil Civil-War was carried on in General, with all the Ruins and
Desolations imaginable; wherein all Bonds of Religion, Alliance, and
Friendship, were utterly destroyed: Wherein Fathers and Children, Kindred and
Acquaintances, became unnatural Enemies to each other. In which miserable
Condition, this Nation continued for near Four Years; viz. From August the 22d,
1642. (the Time the King Set up his Standard at Nottingham) to May the 6th,
1646. (the time when the King, quitting all Hopes, put Himself into the
Protection of the Scotch-Army at Newark:) During this process of Time, several
Messages past, diverse Treaties set on foot, and other Overtures of
Accommodation; but all came to no Effect. The War in England being now (after
so much Bloodshed and Ruin) brought to some End; the Parliament were at
leisure to Dispute with the Scots, concerning the Keeping of the King; who
fearing lest Fairfax should fall upon them, and compel them to Deliver Him up,
Retreated further Northwards, toward New Castle: The Parliament sent an
Invitation to the Prince of Wales, to come to London, with promise of Honor
and Safety; but He did not think fit to venture.

The King sends from New Castle to the Army, about a Treaty; and the House of
Commons Vote, That the King' s Person should be demanded of the Scots; and that
their whole Army return home, upon Receipt of part of their Arrears; the rest
to be sent after them: And a Committee is appointed to Treat with the Scotch
Commissioners, about drawing up Propositions to be sent to the King; wherein
much Time was spent in Wrangling; whilst the English deny the Scots to have any
Right in the Disposal of the King of England; and the Scots as stiffly alleged,
He was their King, as much as of the English; and they had as good Right to
Dispose of the King in England, as the English could Challenge in Scotland: But
at last they agreed on Sixteen General Propositions, which were presented to
the King at New Castle, July the 27. 1646. But these Propositions were such,
that the King did not think fit to Comply withal.

The Scots General Assembly sent a Remonstrance to the King, Desiring Him to
settle Matters in England, according to the Covenant, etc. But all this could
not prevail; and therefore the Scots, who had hitherto so sharply Disputed
about the Disposal of the King's Person, are Content upon the Receipt of Two
hundred thousand Pounds, to depart Home, and leave the King in the Power of the
Parliament; who Voted Him to Holmby-House, and sent their Commissioners to
receive Him from the Scots at Newcastle: To whom, February the 8th, 1646* He
was accordingly Delivered; and the Scots returned home.

Feb. the 8th, the King sets forward with the Commissioners for Holmby, and
after a Fortnight, came to His Journeys-end; being met by the way by General
Fairfax, and many of his Officers.

Some Petitions from Essex, and other Places, are Presented to the Parliament;
inveighing against the Proceedings of the Army, which much vexed the Soldiers,
who sharply Apologize for themselves.

And now the Army, to the great Terror of the Parliament, March toward London,
and came as far as St. Alban's; notwithstanding a Message from Both Houses, not
to come within Twenty Five Miles of the City; which the General excused,
saying, That the Army was come thither before they received the Parliament's
Desire: And here he obtains a Month's Pay: The Parliament Vote, That the
General be required to deliver the Person of the King to the former
Commissioners, who were to bring him to Richmond, that Propositions of Peace
might be speedily Presented to His Majesty; and that Colonel Rossiter, and his
Regiment, might Guard His Person.

The Army being much* behindhand in Arrears, Petition the Parliament; who, upon
consideration, order them some Money, at the present; and then drew up
Propositions of Peace to be sent to the King at Hampton Court; the same in
substance with those offered at New Castle, and had the like effect: The
business of Episcopacy being always the main Objection, which the Parliament
were resolved to Abolish; and the King preferring That, before all other
Respects, would rather lose All, than consent thereunto.

The Scots Commissioners send a Letter, November. 6. 1647. to the Speaker of the
House of Commons, and require, That the KING may be admitted to a Personal
Treaty; or at least, That He should not be carried from Hampton Court
violently, but that Commissioners of Both Parliaments may freely pass to and
from Him, to Treat for the Settlement of the Kingdom.

After which, diverse Messages past between the King and the Parliament; and
several Conferences and Treaties were set on Foot, particularly that of
Heuderson's; but they proving fruitless, the Parliament, with most of the
Officers of the Army, that joined with them, brought the KING to Trial, by a
Judicature of their own setting-up, which proved His Ruin.

FINIS.

