The Sad and Dreadful RELATION OF A Bloody and Cruel MURDER COMMITTED BY Mr.
Thomas, Low A MINISTER, in Heart-Street, Covent Garden, Upon his own Person, On
the 29th. or 30th. of March. 1684.
Together with the circumstances that attended it, as they appeared before the
Coroners Inquest, who Sat upon the Dead Corpse on the 30th. of the aforesaid
Month, and what else happened Remarkable thereupon.
STrange and Amazing will this Relation appear to the Reader, being as most
conjecture the sad effects of dire Despair, the Narration of which take as
follows.

One Thomas Low Aged about 30 years, said to be a Cheshire Man descended of
good Parentage, and known by many Gentlemen of Repute, to be some time past, a
Man much Reserved, and of such Esteem, that he had the Honor of being Chaplain
to diverse Persons of Quality; but of late being either Dismissed, or for some
consideration best known to himself, retireing, he took a Lodging up three pair
of Stairs, at one Mr. Huberts in Heart-street in Covent Garden, where he
behaved himself very Civilly for the space of three weeks, or thereabouts, but
for some days past was perceived to be very Melancholy, seeming much
Discontented, but made not known the cause thereof, (though it was demanded)
when on Saturday last, in the Evening coming in, as his usual manner was, after
some discourse, he desired Mrs. Hubert his Landlady to lend him a Bible, and so
went into his Chamber, (as she and the rest of the Family supposed) to Read or
Meditate; So that that Night he was seen no more, nor heard, unless as usually
to walk about his Room, the next Morning the aforesaid Gentlewoman wanting her
Book to carry to Church, sent her Servant to require it, but knocking at the
Door, had no reply, nor heard any noise; wherefore supposing he might not be
Stirring at that time, no further Inquiry was made, but after a while much
wondering that according to his custom he came not down, they beginning to
suspect something more then ordinary had befallen him, and upon observation,
perceiving some Signs of violence in the Chamber, The Door was upon Mature
deliberation broken open, where they to their great consternation found the
aforesaid Mr. Low Murdered, being undressed, and as some affirm, a Napkin
about his Head, having bedewed the Floor and Bedcloaths with streams of Blood,
and by him a Raizor with which the violence had been done, according to all
conjecture.

The wound was in his Throat, where there appeared to be two Gashes, one a
little under his Chin, which as it was supposed striking upon the Jaw, stayed
the further proceeding of that Mischievous Instrument; but the second Gash was
prosecuted with such Violence as by the wound appears, that it cut the
Jugulars, Windpipe, Wezand, and all the Ligaments to the Neck-bone on either
side, being the depth of three Inches, the length of five, and the breadth of
four: This fatal Accident being noised abroad, the Corroners Inquest on the
30th of March after Sermon sat on the Corpse, and upon Inquiry, finding the
circumstance to be as Aforesaid, or to the same effect, and having debated
thereon, and seriously considered the whole matter, they returned their Verdict
Felo de se, viz. That he had laid violent hands upon himself, occasioned
through Discontent or Despair.

Though great Search was made to know whether he had left any Papers behind
him, Importing the cause or Incitement to such violence, yet we do not
understand any paper was found, whereupon orders was gvien for his Interment in
the Burying-Ground of St. Paul's Covent Garden, having been till that time
exposed to the veiw of such as desired to see him.

This sad Disaster may well serve as a Sea-mark to prevent others from
Ship-wracking themselves upon those dangerous Shoals that the Power of Darkness
has contracted for the ruin of such as are not secured by the Anchor of Faith,
steadfastly fixed on the Rock of Salvation.

Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Langley Curtis, 1684.


