THE SPEECH OF Sir CHARLES SIDLEY IN THE House of Commons.
WE have provided for the Navy, we have provided for the Army, and now at the
latter End of a Sessions here is a new Reckoning brought us, we must provide
likewise for the Civil List: Truly, Mr. Speaker, it is a sad Reflection that
some Men should wallow in Wealth and Places, whilst others pay away in Taxes
the fourth part of their Yearly Revenue for the Support of the same Government;
we are not upon equal Terms for his Majesty's Service, the Courtiers and great
Officers Charge as it were in Armor, they feel not the Taxes by Reason of
their Places, while the Country Gentlemen are shot through and through with
them.

The King is pleased to lay his Wants before us, and I am confident expects our
Advice upon it: We ought therefore to tell him what Pensions are too great,
what Places may be extinguished during this Time of War and Public Calamities.
His Majesty is encompassed with, and sees nothing but, Plenty, great Tables,
Coaches and six Horses, and all things suitable; and therefore cannot imagine
the Want and Misery of the rest of his Subjects: He Is a Wise and Virtuous
Prince, but he is but a Young King, encompassed and hemmed in among a Company
of Crafty old Courtiers, to say no more of them, with Places, some of three
thousand, some of six, and some of eleven thousand: I am told the Commissioners
of the Treasury have three thousand Pound a Year a Piece: Certainly such
Pensions, whatever they may have been formerly, are much too great in the
present Want and Calamities that reigns every where else, and it is a general
Scandal, That a Government, so sick at Heart as ours, should look so well in
the Face. We must save the King Money where ever we can, for I am afraid our
Work is too big for our Purses, if things be not managed wi^ Thrift
imaginable. When the People of England see that all is saved that can be saved,
that there are no exorbitant Pensions nor unnecessary Sallaries, that all is
applved to the Use for which it was given, we shall give and they will
cheerfully pay whatever his Majesty can want to secure the Protestant Religion,
to keep out the King of France, I, and King James too: Whom, by the way, I have
not heard named this Session, wheter out of Fear, Respect or Discretion I
cannot tell. I conclude, Mr. Speaker, Let us save the King what we can, and
then let us proceed to give him what we are able.

LONDON, Printed for L. C. near Fleet-bridge. 1691.


