NATURAL HISTORY OF THE PASSIONS.

Mihi creed, qui nihil agere videntur, Majora agunt; humana divinaque simul
tractant. Seneca Epist. 8. In the SAVOY, Printed by T. N. for James Magnes in
Russell-Street, near the Piazza in Convent-Garden, 1674.

EPISTLE PREFATORY, To a Person of Honor, Friend to the Author.
(...), exercetur ad virtutem in solitudine anima; was the the saying of a
Bragman or Indian Philosopher to Alexander the the Great: and how memorable it
is, you may perhaps collect from this diversion. For, the imperfect Discourse I
herewith send to you, my dear Friend, concerning the PASSIONS, is the product
of my late ten weeks solitude in the Country. Where being remote from my
Library, and wanting conversation with Learned Men; I knew not how more
innocently to shorten the winter evenings, than by spending them in revising
some Philosophical papers of my own, wherein among other things, I had
formerly, out of the best Authors, made certain Collections concerning the
divine art of acquiring constant Tranquillity of Mind, by Wisdom or the right
use of Reason. And of this serious Diversion I then made choice, both because I
well understood the best part of Human Science to be that which teaches us how
to moderate our Affections to the deceiptfull and transitory things of this
life, and so to regulate our Actions, as to reap from them, whatever their
Events may be, the happy fruit of internal Acquiescence and Satisfaction: and
because my accumulated Misfortunes had at that time reduced me to a necessity
of consulting that part of Philosophy, about the most effectual Remedies
against Discontent.

In this state and resolution then, first I remembered, that Nature has made
Man subject to no other real Evil, but only pain of the Body; all Grief or pain
of the Mind, though many times more sharp and intolerable, being created by
our own false Opinion, that we stand in want of things that are in truth
without the circle of ourselves, and therefore not absolutely necessary to our
wel-being.

Then I considered, that most commonly false Opinions are occasioned, and so
exorbitant Desires suggested to us by our Passions; upon which all the Good and
Evil incident to us in this life, seems to depend: as Joy and Grief are the
two points in which all Human actions end. For, though it be undoubtedly true,
that the Reasonable Soul has her intellectual Delights and Disquiets apart,
such as are proper to her simple and spiritual nature: yet is it no less true,
that those other Delights and Disquiets that are common to her with the Body,
depend entirely upon the Affections. Which when regular, that is, moderated and
directed by reason, are indeed of good use to the Soul, in that they serve to
incite her to desire such objects which she well know's to be pleasant and
beneficial to her, and to persist in that desire: but when irregular, by
representing as realy good, things that are so only in appearance, provoke her
to erroneous Desires, and in persuit of them, to Actions also repugnant to the
dictates of right Reason, and consequently to peace and tranquillity of Mind.

From these Cogitations it was not difficult for me to infer, that the whole
art of attaining unto that internal serenity after which I was seeking,
consists principaly in Directing our Desires aright, that is, to things which
we clearly and distinctly know to be realy Good: and that the only way so to
direct our Desires, is to employ our Understanding or Faculty of Discerning,
which God has to that end given us, strictly and attentively to examine and
consider the goodness of things recommended to us by our Passions, before we
determine our Will to affect and pursue them. For, most certain it is, that as
our faculty of Discerning, that is our Intellect, cannot naturaly tend to
falsity: so neither can our faculty of Assenting, that is our Will, be
deceived, when it is determined only upon objects which we clearly and
distinctly understand; and where our Will is not misplaced, there can be no
just cause of Perturbation of mind.

Being soon convinced of this no less evident than important verity, in the
next place I considered, that if our inordinate Affections be the bitter
fountain from whence the greatest part of, if not all our practical Errors, and
by consequence most of the Evils we suffer, flow; and if as the diseases of the
Body, so likewise those of the Mind may be more easily cured, when their nature
and causes are understood: then would it be requisite for me first to inquire
as far as I should be able, into the nature, causes, motions, etc. of the
Passions, before I proceeded further in my research after the most powerful
Remedies against their Excesses.

To this inquiry therefore I diligently applied myself, both by reading and
meditation; by Reading, that I might recall into my memory what I had long
before transcribed out of the books of such Authors who had written judiciously
and laudably of the Passions: by Meditation, that I might examine the weight of
what I read, by comparing it with what I daily observed within the theater of
my own breast; every Man living being naturaly so sensible of the various
Commotions happening in various Passions, especialy more violent ones, that some
have held, the knowledge of their nature and causes may be without much of
difficulty derived from thence alone, without any help from foreign
observations. And while I proceeded in this course, I digested my Collections
and private Sentiments into such an order or Method which seemed to me most
convenient, as well to show their genuin succession, and mutual dependence, as
to make the Antecedents support the Consequents, and both to illustrate each
other reciprocaly. I put them also into a dress of Language so plain and
familiar, as may alone evince, my design was to write of this Argument, neither
as an Orator, nor as a Moral Philosopher, but only as a Natural one conversant
in Pathology, and that too more for his own private satisfaction, than the
instruction of others. And thus have I succinctly acquainted you with the
Occasion, Subject, Scope and Style of the Treatise that accompanies this
Epistle.

But this, Noble Sir is not all whereof I ought to advertise you, before you
come to open the Treatise itself. There remain yet two or three things more,
which it imports me to offer to your notice, as Preparatives against prejudice.

ONE is, that if in the preliminary part of the Discourse, where it was
necessary for me to investigate the Subjectum Primarium of the Passions, I have
declared my assent to their opinion, who hold that in every individual Man,
there are two distinct Souls, coexistent, conjoined, and cooperating; one, only
Rational, by which he is made a Reasonable creature; the other, Sensitive, by
virtue whereof he participateth also of Life and Sense: I did so chiefly for
these two reasons.

First, it seemed to me unintelligible, how an Agent incorporeal, but not
infinite, such as the Rational Soul by her excellent faculties and proper acts
appears to be, can act physicaly in and upon a gross and ponderous body, such
as ours are, immediately or without the mediation of a third thing; which
though corporeal too, may yet be of a substance so refined and subtle, as to
approach somewhat nearer to the nature of a pure Spirit, than the body itself
does: and therefore for the more probable explication of the Phenomena of the
Passions which are not raised in the Rational Soul, I found myself obliged to
admit her to have a Sensitive one conjoined with her, to receive her immediate
suggestions, and to actuate the body according to her sovereign will and
pleasure; there being less of disparity betwixt the most thin and subtle bodies
of Light and Flame (whereof many eminent Philosophers have conceived a
Sensitive Soul to consist) and a substance purely Spiritual, than between a
pure spirit and a gross, heavy body, as ours is.

Secondly it seemed to me no less unconceivable, whence that dismal (...) or
intestin war which every Man too frequently feels within himself, and whereof
even St. Paul himself so sadly complained, when ( in Epist. ad Roman. cap. 3.)
he cries out, video aliam legem in membris meis repugnantem legi mentis meae;
should arise, if not from a Duumvirate as it were of Rulers contending for
superiority within us, and inclining us two contrary ways at once. For, to
conceive that one and the. same Simple thing, such as the Reasonable Soul is
rightly presumed to be, can be repugnant to itself, or at one and the same time
be possessed with opposite affections; is manifestly absurd. There are indeed,
who to evade this absurdity, imagine it possible, that of one and the same
Rational, simple Soul, there may be two distinct Faculties or powers opposite
each to other, from whose clashings and contrary inclinations this civil war
may proceed. But to oblige us to swallow this palpable contradiction, these Men
ought to have reconciled those two repugnant notions of Simple and Compound;
and to have told us, why in the same simple substance of fire there cannot
likewise be two mutualy repugnant faculties, heat and cold. In a Mixed body
there may be, I confess, opposite faculties; and therefore the like may be
imagined also in the Rational Soul, if she be conceived to be of a mixed or
compound nature: but this is against their own supposition, and destructive to
the natural immortality of the Soul. What then can remain to cause this dire
war daily observed within us, betwixt the allurements of our Sense, on one
side, and the grave dictates of our Mind, on the other; but two distinct
Agents, the Rational Soul and the Sensitive, coexistent within us, and hotly
contending about the conduct of our Will?

But You, Sir, will perhaps tell me, there may another, and that a more
probable cause be given of this hostility; and that the searching wit of
Monsieur des Carts has been so happy to discover what it is, in libr. de
Passion. part. 1. art. 47. where he thus reasons. In no other thing (says
he) but in the repugnancy that is between the motions which the Body by its
spirits, and those which the Soul by her will, do at the same time endeavor to
excite in the Glandula Pinealis in the brain, consist all the Conflicts which
Men commonly imagine betwixt the inferior part of the Soul, which is named the
Sensitive, and the Superior, which is called the Rational, or betwixt the
appetites natural and the will. For, in us there is only one Soul, which has
in her no variety of parts: the same that is Sensitive, is also Rational, and
all the appetites thereof are volitions. The Error by which diverse persons as
it were, that are for the most part mutualy contrary, come to be imposed upon
her; has proceeded only from hence, that hitherto her functions have not been
sufficiently distinguished from the functions of the Body; to which alone is to
be ascribed all that can be observed in us to be repugnant to our reason. So
that here is no other Contrast, but that when the Glandule seated in the middle
of the brain, is impelled on one part by the Soul, and on the other by the
Spirits Animal, which are nothing but bodies, as I have before declared: it
often happens, that those two impulses or impressions are contrary each to
other, and that the strongger hinders the effect of the weaker. Now there may
be distinguished two kinds of motions excited in the Glandule by the spirits:
some represent to the Soul objects that move the Senses, or impressions found
in the brain, and use no force upon the will; others use force, namely those
that make the Passions, or the motions of the body that accompany them. And as
for the first; though they often hinder the actions of the Soul, or be hindered
by them; yet because they are not directly contrary, there is no strife or
contention observed in them: but only betwixt the last and the Wills that are
repugnant to them; for Example, betwixt the endeavor by which the spirits
impell the Glandule to induce upon the Soul a desire of some one thing, and
that by which the Soul repells the same Glandule by her will to avoid it. And
this chiefly demonstrateth this strife, that since the will has not power (as
has been already shown) to excite Passions directly, the Soul is therefore
compelled to use art, and to apply herself to the consideration of various
things successively. Whence if it happen that any one of those various things
has the force of changing for a moment the course of the spirits; it may so
fall out, that the next thing that occurs to be considered, may want the like
force, and the spirits may resume their former course, because the precedent
disposition in the nerves, in the heart, and in the blood, has not been
changed: whereby it comes to pass, that the Soul almost in the same moment
feels herself impelled to desire and decline the same thing. And this has
given Men occasion of imagining in the Soul two powers mutualy repugnant. But
yet there may be conceived a certain Conflict in this, that oftentimes the same
cause that exciteth some Passion in the Soul, exciteth also in the Body some
certain motions, whereunto the Soul contributeth nothing at all, and which she
stops, or endeavors to stop, so soon as she observes them: as is manifest from
experience, when that which exciteth Fear, causes also the spirits to flow
into the Muscles that serve to move the legs to flight; and occasioneth the
will of exercising Courage to stop them.

To this Objection therefore I answer (1.) that had this excellent Man,
Monsieur des Carts been but half as conversant in Anatomy, as he seems to have
been in Geometry, doubtless he would never have lodged so noble a guest as the
Rational Soul, in so incommodious a closet of the brain, as the Glandula
Pincalis is; that use whereof has been demonstrated to be no other but to
receive into its spongy cavities, from two little nerves, a certain serous
Excrement, and to exonerate the same again into its vein, which nature has
therefore made much larger than the artery that accompanies it; and which
having no Communication with the external organs of the Senses, cannot with any
color of reason be thought the part of the brain, wherein the Soul exercises
her principal faculties of judging and commanding. (2.) This Glandule which he
supposes to be so easily flexible and yielding to contrary impulses, is not
loosely suspended, but fixed: so that whoever has once beheld the solid basis,
strong consistence, and firm connection thereof, will hardly ever be brought to
allow it capable of any impulse to either side, though by the greatest
Hurricano of spirits imaginable; much less by every light motion of them
excited by external objects affecting the senses. (3) Though we should grant
this Gland to be both the Throne of the Soul, and most easily flexible every
way: yet has Des Carts left it still unconceivable, how an Immaterial Agent,
not infinite, comes to move by impuls a solid body, without the mediation of a
third thing that is less disparil or disproportionate to both. Now these things
duly considered, you will (I presume) no longer imagine the Conflicts or
Combats that frequently happen within us betwixt the Rational and Sensitive
Appetites, to consist only in the repugnancy of the impulses of this little
Glandule by the Spirits on one side, to those of the same Glandule by the Soul
on the other. Besides, that the Soul has power to excite Corporeal Passions
directly, that is, without considering successively various things; is manifest
from her soveraignity over the body, which in all voluntary actions is absolute
and uncontrollable; and in the very instance of Fear alleged by our Author,
where she determines her Will to Courage to oppose the danger suggested,
instantly and without running through a long series of various considerations,
for which she then has not time sufficient. However, evident enough it is,
that this conceit of repugnant impulses of this Gland in the brain, is so far
from giving light to the reason of the Conflict here considered, that it rather
augmenteth the obscurity thereof, by implying two contrary Appetites or Wills
in one and the same Soul, at one and the same time: Whereas the supposition of
two Souls mutually opposing each others Appetites, does render the same
intelligible.

Against this opinion of a Duality of Souls in one Man, some have (I well know)
with not a little confidence urged the Sentence of some of the Fathers, yea and
of whole Councils condemning all who should assert it; and more particularly
Council. 8. act. 10. Vienn. in Clem. VII. and Lateran. 3. sess. 8.

But this, Sir, is Brutum fulmen, dangerous to none, terrible only to the
Unlearned. For, to any understanding reader of those decrees, it is clearly
manifest, that the edge of them is turned against first the doctrine of the
Maniches holding two human Souls in every individual Man; one polluted with the
stain of vices, and derived from an evil principle; the other incontaminate,
and proceeding immediately from God, yea more, a particle of the Divine Essence
itself; then the Platonics also, and Averrhoists, teaching that the Rational
Soul is not man's forma informans, but part of the Anima Mundi or Universal
Soul: but not against the asserters of two Souls coexistent, one simply
Reasonable, the other merely Sensitive, in every single person, in that
innocent sense I deliver it. And thus have the same Decrees been judiciously
interpreted by the religious Philosophers of the Colleague of Conimbra; who as
of all Men they have discoursed most acutely and profoundly of this Argument;
so have they with greatest moderation treated the Defendents of this opinion by
me here embraced. For ( in 1. de Generat. cap. 4. quaest. 21. art. 2.) though
they expressly avow their adherence rather to the common belief of the
singularity of the Human Soul, as most consentaneous to the sense of the
Church: yet they declare also, that the contrary opinion ought not to be
censured as heretical or erroneous.

Why therefore should I fear to espouse it? especially if to the reasons here
urged, and others no less considerable alleged by me in the third Section of
the Treatise to which this Epistle invites you, be added for confirmation, that
so celebrated text of St. Paul (ad Thessal. 1. cap. 5. verse. 23.) (...),
integer vester Spiritus, and anima, and corpus, etc. Where our most learned Dr.
Hammond of pious memory (in his Annotations on the place) conceives the Apostle
to divide the whole Man into three constituent parts, viz. the Body, which
comprehends the flesh and members; the Vital Soul, which being also Animal or
Sensitive, is common likewise to Brutes; and the Spirit, by which is denoted
the Reasonable Soul originally created by God, infused into the body, and from
thence after death to return to God; and this genuin exposition of his he
confirms by agreeing testimonies both of Ethnic Philosophers, and some ancient
Fathers.

To these give me leave to super-add (ex abundanti) the concordant suffrages of
three eminent Philosophers of our own age; namely the Lord Chancellor Bacon,
who (in his 4 Book of the Advancement of Learning, chap. 3.) gravely
discoursing of the parts of Knowledge concerning the Mind or Soul of Man,
divides it into that which declares the nature of the Reasonable Soul, which
is a thing Divine; and that which treats of the Unreasonable Soul, which is
common to us with Beasts: and then proceeds to affirm at large, that the former
has its original from the inspiration or breath of God; the later, from the
matrices of the Elements: the immortal Gassendus, de Physiologia Epicuri, cap.
de Animae sede, Passionibms Animi, etc. and the now flourishing Dr. Willis, in
libr. de Anima Brutorum cap. 7. whose words I forbear to transcribe, out of
design to increase your satisfaction, by obliging you to read them at your
leisure in the places cited. Now if solid Reasons, Authority Divine, and the
judgment of many sublime Wits and profound Philosophers, as well Ancient as
Modern, be of any weight to recommend this neither heretical, nor improbable
opinion to me; certainly I need not blush to incline thereunto. Notwithstanding
this, I recount the same tanquam in Hypothesi, only as a supposition convenient
to solve the Phenomena of the Passions; not as an article of my faith: nor had
I so importunely insisted thus long upon arguments to justify my approbation
thereof, in this Letter; had I not, through want of Books, omitted to do it
where I ought, in the III. Section of the Discourse itself.

The SECOND advertisement I owe you, Friend, is this, that the greatest part of
what is delivered in the same Discourse, concerning the nature, substance,
faculties, Knowledge, etc. of a Sensitive Soul, has been borrowed from that
elaborate work of our Learned Dr. Willis de Anima Brutorum, lately published.
Which I hold my self bound here ingeniously to acknowledge left otherwise you
might justly condemn me as a Plagiary, and that I may invite you also to the
pleasure of attentively reading that useful Book. Wherein I found great part of
what I had formerly read of that subject in various Authors, so well collected,
digested and explained; that I chose from thence to copy an image of the
Sensitive Soul of Man, whereupon I was often to reflect my thoughts, while I
fate to describe the most remarkable of the Passions to which it is liable: and
this I did the rather, because at that time I had by me no other Book of the
same subject.

You are not therefore to look upon the Description of the nature and
affections of a Sensitive Soul therein delivered, as a supposition newly
excogitated, and unheard of by former ages. For to Men conversant in the
Theories of Physiologists concerning that Subject, it is well known, that all
the Ancients were so far from holding the Soul of a Brute to be other than
Corporeal, that they for the most part taught their Disciples, that the Soul of
Man was so too: except a few of them, namely Pythagoras, Plato, and in some
favorable sense Aristotle (when he defined the Soul by that enigmatical term
(...)) and his Sectators, Aristoxenus and Dicaearchus, when they called it a
Harmony. True it is indeed, they were much divided in their opinions about the
Substance or Matter of a Soul; some imagining it to be of Fire, as Heraclitus,
Democritus, Hipparchus, and the Stoics; some conceiving it to be on the
contrary, of a Watery nature, as Hippon, and Thales; others fancying it to be
composed of Water and Earth, as Xenophanes; others, of Earth and Fire, as
Parmenides; others again, of all the four Elements, as Empedocles: and yet
notwithstanding they unanimously consented in these points, that this Corporeal
Soul is divisible; composed of particles extremely small, subtle and active;
diffused through or coextens to the whole body wherein it is contained;
produced at first by generation out of the seed of the parents; perpetualy
recruited or regenerated out of the purest and most spirituous part of the
nourishment; subject to Contraction and Expansion in passions; and finally
dissolved or extinguished by death. If you doubt of the truth of what I here
say, I know not how more easily to convince you, than by referring you to the
incomparable Gassendus in Lib. 10. Diogen. Laert. cap. de natura, contexturaque
Animae ad mentem Epicuri: where you find the same more amply delivered.

Meanwhile suffer me to recite a pertinent and memorable text of the Lord
Verulam's (of the Advancement of Learning Book 4. Chap. 3.) that now comes into
my head. The Sensible Soul (says he) must needs be granted to be a Corporeal
substance, attenuated by heat and made invisible. I say, a thin, gentle gale of
wind swelled and blown up from some flamy and and airy nature; endued with the
softness of air to receive impression, and with the vigor of fire to embrace
action; nourished partly by an oily, partly by a watery substance; spread over
the body; residing (in perfect creatures) chiefly in the head; running through
the nerves; refreshed and repaired by the spirituous part of the blood of the
arteries: as Bernardinus Telesius (de rerum natura lib. 5.) and his Scholar
Augustinus Donius have delivered it.

And as for the Bipartition of this Sensitive Soul into two principle members
as it were, or active sourses; vix. the Fiery part, upon which Life depends;
and the Lucid, from whence all the faculties Animal are, like so many distinct
rays of light, derived: I will not affirm it to be very ancient: but yet
methinks, I discern more than a shadow thereof in some lines of the same most
acute Lord Bacon (de vita and morte, explicatione canonis quartae) which are
these.

Spiritus vitalis omnis sibi continuatur, per quosdam canales, per quos
permeat, nec totaliter intercipitur. Atque hic Spiritus etiam duplex est: alter
ramosus tantum, permeans per parvos ductus, and tanquam lineas; alter habet
etiam cellam, ut non tantum sibi continuetur, sed etiam congregetur in spatio
aliquo cavo, in been magna quantitate, pro analogia corporis; atque in illa
cella est fons rivulorum, qui inde deducantur. Ea cella praecipue est in
ventriculis cerebri, qui in animalibus magis ignobilioribus angusti sunt; adeo
ut videantur spiritus per universum corpus fusi, potius quam cellulati: ut
cernere est in Serpentibus, Anguillis, Muscis, quorum singulae portiones
abscissae moventur diu: etiam Aves diutius, capitibus avulsis, subsultant;
quoniam parva habeant capita, and parvas cellas. At animalia nobiliora
ventriculos eos habent ampliores; and maxim omnium Homo. Alterum discrimen
inter spiritus est, quod spiritus Vitalis nonnullam habeat incensionem, atque
sit tanquam aura composita ex flamma, and aere; quemadmodum succi animalium
habeant and oleum, and aquam. At illa incensio peculiares praebet motus, and
facultates. Etenim and fumus inflammabilis, etiam ante flammam conceptam,
calidus est, tenuis, mobilis: and tamen alia res est, postquam facta sit
flamma: at incensio spirituum vitalium, multis partibus lenior est, quam
mollissima flamma ex spiritu vini, aut alias; atque insuper mixta est magna ex
part, cum substantia aerea; ut sit and flammeae, and aereae naturae mysterium.

This place of that Prince of Modern Philosophers, the Lord St. Albans,
conjoined to that other of his immediately precedent, seems to me to contain a
pourtraiture of the Sensitive Soul, drawn indeed as in perspective, in colors
somewhat faint, and not accurately ground; yet with good judgment, and bold
strokes of the pencill, such as give it no obscure resemblance of the original.
And if you (Sir) please to compare it with the more ample description of the
same Sensitive Soul, lately set forth by Dr. Willis: it will not be difficult
to you, to observe, in how many things they agree.

The THIRD and last thing whereof I am here to advertise you, is, that in the
description of many of the Passions likewise, I have interwoven some threads
taken from the webbs of those three excellent Men, Gassendus, Des Carts, and
our Mr. Hobbes; who have all written most judiciously of that obstruse theme.
Nor will I otherwise excuse myself for being so liberal to you, of what I owe
to the bounty of those richer Wits; than by reciting what your beloved Seneca
said to his dear Lucilius, in defense of his adopting for his own so many wise
and memorable sentences of his, and our Oracle, Epicurus: adhuc de alieno
liberalis sum. Quare autem alienum dixi? quicquid been dictum est ab ullo, meum
est. Epist. 16. I will only add, as a reason of my so frank communication of
these unpolished papers to you, who are my Lucilius, what the same Latin Stoic
most affectionately p^ofessed to his, on the like occasion: Ego vero cupio ista
omnia in te transfundere, and in hoc gaudeo aliquid discere, ut doceam. Nec me
ulla res delectabit, licet eximia sit and salutaris, quam mihi uni sciturus
sim. Si cum hac exceptione detur Sapientia, ut illam inclusam teneam, nec
enunciem, rejiciam. Epist. 6.

INDEX OF THE CONTENTS.
SECTION. I.
INtroduction, Page 2.
SECT. II.
Article 1 WHat kind of Substance a Sensitive Soul may be conceived to be. page
5. 2. Two Reasons of that Supposition. p. 6. 3. Second Supposition that the
substance of a Sensitive Soul is fiery: p. 9. 4. Because Life is seated
principaly in the blood; and can no more than fire itself, subsi^t without
aliment and ventilation, p. 9. 5. And because a Sensitive Soul seems to be
first formed of the most Spirituous particles of the same seminal matter,
whereof the body itself is made. p. 12. 6. A Sensitive Soul imagined to be also
of the same figure with the body it animates. p. 13. 7. That the Existence of a
Sensitive Soul does, ^s that of flame, depend entirely upon motion. p. 14. 8.
That the first Operation of a Sensitive Soul, is the Formation of the body,
according to the model preordained by nature. p. 16. 9. Recapitulation of the
premises. p. 19. 10. The Faculties and Organs of a Sensitive Soul, reciprocaly
inservient each to other. p. 20. 11. A twofold desire or inclination congenial
to a Sensitive Soul; viz. of Self-preservation, and Propagation of her kind. p.
22. 12. To what various Mutations and irregular Commotions a Sensitive Soul is
subject, from her own Passions; p. 24. 13. From the temperament and diseases of
the body; p. 26. 14. From various impressions of external objects; and
exorbitant motions of the Animal Spirits. p. 27. 15. The various Gestures of a
Sensitive Soul, respective to the impressions of external objects variously
affecting her. p. 28. 16. An inquiry concerning the Knowledge whereby Brutes
are directed in actions voluntary. p. 30. 17. The Knowledge of Brutes, either
innate, or acquired. p. 39. 18. That Brutes are directed only by natural
instinct, in all actions conducing either to their own preservation, or to the
propagation of their species: not by Reason; p. 41. 19. Nor Material Necessity,
p. 43.
SECT. III.
1. THe Excellency of a Rational Soul. Page 46. 2. Manifest from her proper
Objects, p. 47. 3. And Acts. p. 48. 4. Life and Sense depend not on the
Rational Soul of Man, and p. 51. 5. Therefore he seems to have also a Sensitive
Soul. p. 53. 6. The same inferred from the civil war betwixt the Rational and
Sensitive Souls. p. 54. 7. The Causes of that war. p. 55. 8. Wherein sometimes
the Sensitive Appetite prevails: and p. 57. 9. Sometimes the Rational. p. 59.
10. That the Rational Soul is created immediately by God. p. 60 11. The
Resemblance betwixt Father and Son, ascribed to the Sensitive Soul. p. 61. 12.
The Rational Soul seated in that part of the brain which serves to Imagination:
and p. 61. 13. There connexed to the Sensitive, by the will of her Creator. p.
64. 14. Where the manner how she judges of the images of things formed in the
Imagination. seems to be inexplicable. p. 65.
SECT. IV. Of the Passions of the Mind in general.
1. A Twofold state of the Sensitive Soul; viz. of Tranquillity, and p. 68. 2.
Of Perturbation. p. 69. 3. The first, most observable in sleep, and when
objects appear indifferent: p. 70. 4. The other, manifest in all Passions.
ibidem. 5. That in the state of Perturbation, the Sensisitive Soul varieth her
Gestures, by Contraction or Expansion. p. 72. 6. We are not moved to Passion by
Good or Evil, but only when we conceive ourselves particularly concerned
therein. p. 73. 7. All Passions distinguished into Physical, Metaphysical, and
Moral. p. 74. 8. What are Passions Physical, p. 75. 9. What Metaphysical, p.
77. 10. And what Moral, p. 81. 11. All Passions referred to Pleasure or Pain:
and p. 82. 12. All their Motions, to Contraction and Effusion. p. 83. 13.
Wherein consist Pleasure and Displeasure of Sense. p. 83. 14. Rehearsal of the
heads handled in this Section. p. 85.
SECT. V. Of the Passions in particular.
1. WHy Men have not been able to observe all Passions incident to the
Sensitive Soul. p. 85. 2. The Passions best distinguished by having respect to
the differences of Time. p. 86. 3. Admiration, p. 87. 4. Which causes no
Commotion in the heart and blood: and p. 89. 5. Yet is dangerous, when
immoderate. p. 90. 6. Estimation and Contempt, p. 91. 7. Both Consequents of
Admiration. p. 92. 8. No just cause of Self-esteem, but the right use our free
will. p. 92. 9. Pride. p. 93. 10. Humility, virtuous; and p. 90. 11. Vicious,
or Dejection of Spirit. p. 96. 12. Shame and Impudence. p. 97. 13. That Pride,
and its contrary, Abjectness of Spirit, are not only Vices, but Passions also.
p. 99. 14. Love and Hatred, p. 100. 15. Defined. p. 101. 16. Love not well
distinguished into Benevolence and Concupiscence; p. 101. 17. But by the
various degrees of Estimation, p. 103. 18. That there are not so many distinct
sorts of Love, as of Objects to excite it. p. 104, 19. Hatred, less various
than Love. p. 106. 20. Desire, always a consequent of Love: but p. 106. 21.
Not always a Concomitant of it. p. 106. 22. The Motions of the Soul and
Spirits in Love; and their Symptoms. p. 107. 23. The Motions of the Soul and
Spirits in Desire. p. 109. 24. The Motions of the spirits and blood in Hatred.
p. 111. 25. Hate, always accompanied with Sadness. p. 114. 26. Hope and Fear.
p. 115. 27. Pusillanimity and Courage. p. 116, 28. Emulation, a sort of
Magnanimity. p. 117. 29. Confidence and Despair. p. 117. 30. Doubting. p. 118.
31. Remorse and Acquiescence. p. 119. 32. The Motions of the Soul and Spirits
in Hope. p. 121. 33. The Motions of the Soul and spirits in Fear: and p. 122.
34. In Desperation. p. 124. 35. Joy. p. 126. 36. The various Degrees of Joy,
and their Names. p. 127. 37. The various Degrees of Grief, and their distinct
Appellations. p. 127. 38. Envy and Pity. p. 128. 39. Generous Men most inclined
to Commiseration; and why. p. 129. 40. Commiseration, a species of Grief mixed
with Benevolence. p. 131. 41. Envy, a sort of Grief mixed with Hate. p. 131.
42. Acquiescence of mind, a kind of Joy. p. 132. 43. Repentance, a species of
Grief, but allayd with a touch of Joy. p. 133. 44. Favor. p. 134. 45.
Gratitude. p. 135. 46. Indignation* p. 136. 47. Anger. p. 137. 48. Two sorts of
Anger; one Harmless, the other Revengeful. p. 138. 49. Glory and Shame. p. 140.
50. The Motions of the Soul and Spirits in Joy. p. 141. 51. Laughter. p. 144.
52. The Occasions of Laughter. p. 145. 53. Laughter from Indignation. p. 146.
54. A rare Example of involuntary Laughter. p. 147. 55. Conjecture concerning
the Cause thereof. p. 148. 56. The Motions and Effects of Sorrow. p. 150. 57.
Sighs and Tears. p. 152. 58. Whence Tears flow: and p. 154. 59. How they are
expressed. p. 155. 60. The reason of weeping for Joy. p. 157. 61. Why Infants
and Old Men are more prone to shed tears. p. 158. 62. The reason of Sighing and
Sobbing. ibid. 63. The Motions and Symptoms of Anger. p. 159. 64. Excess of
Anger, to be avoided; and that chiefly by the help of Generosity. p. 163. 65.
Of all Passions hitherto considered, only six are Simple: the rest Mixed. p.
164. 66. Reasons against publication of this Discourse. p. 165.
SECT. VI. Conclusion.
1. THat all the Good and Evil of this life, depends upon our Passions, p. 168.
2. Which yet were instituted by Nature, as incitements to the Soul. ibid. 3.
That we are liable to Errors, not from want of an Omniscious Understanding; p.
170. 4. But from our ill use of that finite Understanding we have, in the
conduct of our desires suggested by Passions. p. 172. 5. That all Errors to
which such Desires expose us, arise from hence; that we do not sufficiently
distinguish things that depend entirely upon ourselves, from those that depend
upon others. p. 173. 6. Which may be obviated by two General Remedies; viz.
Generosity, and p. 175. 7. Dependence upon Providence Divine, p. 177. 8. Which
utterly excluding Fortune, does yet leave us at liberty to direct our Desires.
p. 178. 9. How we may extricate ourselves from the Difficulties that seem to
make the decrees of Providence Divine, irreconcilable to the Liberty of our
Will. p. 179. 10. Whence it is, that we are often deceived by our Will, though
never with our Will. p. 180. 11. A third General Remedy against Error
occasioned by our inordinate Passions; viz. Premeditation and Deliberation. p.
182. 82. A fourth Universal Preservative; viz. the stant Exercise of Virtue. p.
185. 13. Toward the acquisition whereof, the Study of Epicurus's Morals is
recommended. p. 187.
Errors of this Impression to be by the Reader thus Corrected.
Page 1. l. 5. read (...). page 15. lin. 18. read viviparous. page 69. l. 6.
read investing. page 76. lin. 16. read detests. page 180. lin. 8. read
undetermined. page 185. lin. 2. read thoughts.

SUMMARY OF THE CONTENTS.
Marcus Antoninus Philosophus Libr. (...) 2. Sect. 2. O, (...), etc. Quicquid
sum, constat id omne caruncula, ammula, and part principante. Proinde mitte
libros. Nec distrahere amplius: (nihil obstat, quo minus hoc facias) sed
tanquam qui jam statim moriturus sis, carnes istas ^^ntemnas. Cruor est, and
ossicula, and reticulum ex nervis, venulis arteriisque contextum. Quin and
Animam considera, qualis sit. spiritus est, sive aer, nec is semper idem, sed
qui jugiter efflatus denuo resorbetur. Tertium restat, pars illa principatum
gerens. Tu ergo sic tecum: Senex es: partem tui principem servire ulterius ne
siveris; sed nec motibus a communione humana alienis raptari. Nec quicquam quod
fato destinatum tibi fuerit, vel jam ascitum aversari, vel futurum pavere.

NATURAL HISTORY Of the Passions.
SECTION I. INTRODUCTION.
THe Reasonable Soul of Man seems to be of a Nature so Divine and Excellent,
that it is capable of Understanding all things that are in this life
intelligible: but yet so reserved and abstruse withal, that it cannot
understand itself; as many most sublime Wits, who had long exercised and
perplexed themselves in enquiries into the hidden and mysterious Essence
thereof, have at length ingenuously confessed.

Well therefore may we without blushing, own our ignorance of this noblest part
of our selves, from which we derive all our Knowledge. Well may we without
regret content our Curiosity with those faint glimmerings of light, which shine
through the Operations of this Celestial guest in our frail and darksom
Tabernacles of Flesh; and which are reflected upon our Understanding, only from
the illustrious Effects of its proper Powers and Acts.

What these Powers and Acts are, and how vastly they transcend the energie of a
Sensitive Soul, how perfect soever in its kind; as also in what exercises of
the Mind they are chiefly observable; has been by Sir Kenelm Digby in his Book
of the Rational Soul, copiously declared. So that here they need not to be
repeated. Nor indeed would such a prolix research be consistent with my present
design; which principally aim's at a recollection of some notions, that have
partly in reading, partly in meditation, occurred to me, concerning the various
Passions of the Mind, their Genealogy, their first sourses and resorts, their
most remarkable Differences, Motions, and Forces, and in fine, by what kind of
Connection and intercourse betwixt two so disparate Natures, the one
Incorporeal, the other Corporeal, it is, that the Rational Soul is respectively
coaffected by them. And this with as much brevity, as the amplitude of the
Subject can admit; with as much perspicuity, as my weak reason can attain unto,
in an argument so sublime and difficult.

That I may then effect this my Design, if not so happily, as in the end to
arrive at the certain and demonstrative Knowledge of the truth I seek; yet so
plausibly at least, as to form an Hypothesis by which the Nature and Reasons of
the principal, and most predominant of our Passions, may be congruously and
with probability explained: it is requisite I begin with these few
Preliminaries.

1. What kind of thing I suppose the Sensitive Soul to be, as well in Man, as
in Brutes.

2. What seems to me most consentaneous concerning the Original, Nature, and
royal Seat of the Rational Soul.

3. How, and after what manner I conceive both Souls to be connexed in Man,
during this shadow of life.

4. How the Rational Soul may come to be affected by the motions of the
Sensitive, in some Passions; and this, by predominion of that, in others; and
whence their mutual consent, and dissent.

For, my present Conceptions concerning these things, though I foresee, I shall
not be able to establish them all upon Reasons irrefutable and cogent: are yet
nevertheless to be here premised, as Postulates or Fundamentals, for
introduction and support of the following Theory about the Passions. These
therefore I shall in their order, and concisely, and in a plain familiar Style,
(such with which I am always best pleased, especially in Discourses
Philosophical) set down, tanquam praecognoscenda.

SECT II. What kind of Substance the Sensitive Soul may be conceived to be.
AS for the FIRST Postulatum; Article 1. First Supposition, that a Sensitive
Soul is Corporeal.
the Sensitive Soul of a Brute Animal, I conceive to be Corporeal, and
consequently Divisible, Coextense to the whole Body; of a Substance either
Fiery, or merely resembling Fire; of a consistence most thin and subtle, not
much unlike the flame of of pure spirit of Wine, burning in a paper Lantern, or
other the like close place.

Art. 2. Two reasons of that supposition.
First, I think it to be Corporeal, Divisible, and Coextense to the whole Body;
and that for two reasons, among many others not the least considerable.

One is this; that many, and diverse Animal actions are daily observed to be, at
one and the same time, performed by diverse Parts and Members of the Body: for
instance, the Eye sees, the Ear hears, the Nostrils smell, the Tongue tastes,
and all exterior Members exercise their Sense and Motion, all at once. For as
much then as betwixt the Body and Soul of a Brute, there is no Medium (both
being intimately connexed) but the Members and Parts of the Body are
Instruments framed for the use of the Soul: what else can be imagined, but that
many and distinct portions of the Soul so extended, do inform and actuate the
distinct Organs and Members of the Body; each in a peculiar manner, respective
to the peculiar Constitution, Fabrique, and Office thereof?

The Other this; it is observed also, that Vipers, Eels, Earthworms, and most
other Reptils being cut into many pieces; all pieces for a good while after
retain a manifest Motion, and no obscure sense; for, being pricked, they
contract and shrink up themselves, as sensible of the Hurt, and striving to
avoid it. And this probably from hence, that these less perfect Animals having
their liquors, both Vital and Animal, of a consistence viscous, and not easily
dissoluble or dissipable; and having their Soul, if not equally, yet
universally diffused, and all its parts subsisting immediately in those
liquors: cannot suffer a division of their Body, without division of their Soul
also; the parts whereof residing for some time after, in the segments of the
Body, may perhaps for that time continue to actuate them to Motion and Sense.
It has been more then once unhappily Experimented, that the Head of a Viper
has bitten a Man's Finger, and Poisoned him too, above an hour after it had
been cut off. Not by involuntary convulsion of the Nerves and Muscles of the
Vipers Jaws, such as not rarely happen to Animals, in the torments of Death;
for those probably could neither last so long, nor so regularly open and shut
the mouth, and extend the two fang teeth, by contraction of their erecting
Muscles: but certainly by an action voluntary, regular and suggested by sense,
and perhaps revenge too. Whence I am apt to suspect, that not only part of the
Vipers Soul, but Anger and Revenge also survived in the divided head. For, it
is well known, the bite of a Viper is never Venomous, but when he is enraged:
the Chrystalline liquor contained in the two little Glandules at the roots of
his fang teeth, being then by a copious afflux of Spirits from the Brain, and
other brisk motions thereupon impressed, in anger (of all passions the most
violent and impetuous) so altered, and exalted, as to become highly active and
venenate; whereas at other times, when a Viper is not offended and provoked,
the same Liquor is found to be as harmless as the spittle of a Man in perfect
health. But whether from the dangerous effects of this biting, the dire
Symptoms that thereupon ensued, it be inferrible, or not, that in the abscinded
head of the beast there remained anything of Anger and Revenge: in my poor
judgment it is very evident from the very act of biting, there still remained
somewhat of life, sense, and voluntary motion. Which is sufficient to verify my
present supposition, that a Sensitive Soul is divisible and coextense to the
whole body it animates.

Secondly, Art. 3. Second Supposition, that the substance of a sensitive Soul
is fiery.
I think the same Sensitive Soul to consist of Fire, or some matter analogous
to Fire: and the Reasons inducing me to be of this opinion, are many. Some I
have formerly alleged, where I discourse of the Flame of life perpetually
arising from accension of the Sulphurous and inflammable parts of the blood,
while circulated through the heart and lungs: which therefore I abstain from
reciting in this place. Others, that have since occurred to my consideration, I
am obliged here to expose to yours.

That the Life, Art. 4. Because life is s^ated principaly in the blood; and can
no more than fire subsist without perpetual aliment and ventilation^
or Soul of Brute Animals, is seated principally in their Blood; we are plainly
taught even by the Oracle of truth itself, the dictates of the Divine Wisdom
that created them: and that Blood, and Fire subsist by the same principles,
viz. Aliment and Ventilation; is evident from hence, that a defect of either of
these, does equally destroy both the one and the other.

Should you here exact from me some description of the Essence of Fire, I
should adventure to tell you, that it seems to be only a multitude of most
minute and subtle particles, mutually touching each other, put into a most
rapid motion, and by continual succession of some parts, and decession of
others, renewed: which conserves its motion, and subsistence, by preying upon,
and consuming the Sulphurous parts of its subject matter, or fuel, and the
Nitrous parts of the ambient aer. For, even our sense bears witness, that from
the particles of this twofold aliment, Sulphurous and Nitrous, resolved to the
last degree of smalness, and by a most violent and rapid motion agitated, the
forms of Fire and Flame (which differ only in degrees of density, and velocity
of motion) do wholly result.

Nor does the image I find drawn in my brain of the Soul of a Brute, much
differ from this description of the nature of Fire. I conceive it to be no
other than a certain congregation of most minute, subtle and agile particles,
corpuscles or atoms (call them what you please) crowded together; which being,
in the very first moment of life, put into brisk and most rapid motion, like
that of the particles of Fire when first kindled; do so long conserve that
motion, and their own subsistence, as they have a continued supply of
convenient nutriment; sulphurous from the blood within, Nitrous from the aer
without; and no longer. For we cannot but observe, that the Souls of all Brute
Animals, of what kind soever, stand perpetually in need of a fresh supply of
those two sorts of aliment; insomuch that so soon as the recruit fails, they
languish and dye: no otherwise than the flame of a lamp grows weak and dim, and
is extinguished, for want of oil or air. But (what is very remarkable) besides
fire and life, there is not to be found in all nature any other thing
whatsoever, to whose act and subsistence such a supply of Sulphurous and
Nitrous matter is necessary. Nor is any other motion in the World, whether it
be of fermentation, ebullition, vegetation, or other whatever, besides that of
Fire and Life, subject to be arrested and suppressed immediately from defect of
aer. It was not then without very great reason, that our Master Hippocrates
affirmed, (...), that the Soul is perpetually generated, or made anew: and that
Aristotle held, (...), life it self to subsist by respiration.

This you perhaps may judge to be but a faint and imperfect representation of
the nature of a Sensitive Soul. And therefore it is requisite I endeavor to
render it more lively, by adding a few touches more concerning the Hypostasis
or Subsistence of such a Soul; the Life, or Act; and the principal Functions,
or Operations of it.

Art. 5. Because it seems to be first formed of the most spiritual particles of
the same seminal matter, of which the Body it self is made.
For the First of these three considerables, viz. the Subsistence of a Sensitive
Soul; it seems not unreasonable to conceive, that the Soul of a Brute does
consist of the very same Matter, of which the organical Body is formed: but of
such particles of it as are select, most subtle, and active in the highest
degree. Which, as the flower of the whole matter, in the formation of the
Embrion, emerging out of the grosser mass, and mutually uniting; first force
passages convenient for themselves through the whole compage of the Body, and
then constitute one continued, thin, and as it were spirituous Hypostasis,
adequate and coextense to the same. For, so soon as any matter is disposed
toward animation; by the law of the Creation (not by Epicurus's fortuitous
concurse of Atoms) the Soul at the same time, which is called the Form, and the
Body, which is called the Matter, begin to be formed together, under a certain
species, according to the model or Character impressed upon them. When the
more agile, and spirituous particles of the seminal matter, having freed
themselves from the other parts of it, quickly assemble together; and by little
and little raising a commotion, stir up, and agitate the grosser particles, and
by degrees dispose them into fit postures and places, where they ought to
remain and cohere; and so form the body according to the figure or shape
preordained by the Creator. Mean while this congregation of subtle and active
Particles, or the Soul, which by expansion enlarges it self, and insinuating
her particles among others more gross, and as it were interweaving them, frames
the body, is it self exactly conformed to the figure and dimensions of the same
body, coextended and adapted to it, as to a case or sheath, does actuate,
enliven, and inspire all and all parts thereof. While on the other side, the
same Soul, apt and prone of it self to be dissolved, and vanish into aer, is by
the Body containing it, conserved in its act and subsistence.

Now according to this notion, Art. 6. A Sensitive Soul imagined to be of the
same Figure also with the Body wherein it is contained.
a Sensitive Soul may be conceived to be a most subtle body contained in a
gross one, and in all points, of the same Figure with it; or as it were a
Spectre made up of exhalations, such as some vain, or superstitious heads have
sometimes imagined to ascend from, and hover over the graves of the dead, and
called them Ghosts. For, arising together with the body, out of the material
principles of Generation rightly disposed; it does, as well as the body,
receive its determinate subsistence, conform to the idea or Type consigned to
it by the Law of Nature. But though the same be intimately united to the body,
and every where closely intertexd with all parts of it; as the warp and woof
are interwoven in cloth: yet so fine and subtle are the threads of which it
does consist, that it cannot possibly by our senses be discerned, nor indeed be
known, otherwise than by its own Effects and Operations. Moreover, when by any
violence done either to itself, or its Copartner, the Body, the life of this
Soul is destroyed; instantly the particles of which it was composed, their
mutual cohesion being dissolved, disperse themselves, and fly away, not leaving
any the least print or mark of their late subsistence: and the Body now
destitute of its conserving inmate, the Soul, speedily tends to corruption;
which sooner or later, according to the less or greater compactness of the
parts of the body, dissolves that likewise into its first Principles, or
Elements.

Art. 7. That the Existence of a Sensitive Soul does, as that of Flame, depend
entirely upon Motion.
For the Second; it is not obscure, that the Existence of this Corporeal Soul
depends entirely upon the Act, or Life of it: and in this very respect, seems
exactly like to common Flame, and to that alone; inasmuch as the substance of
both ceases to be, in the very instant it cease from Motion, wherein the very
life of both does consist; nor can either of the two be, by any means whatever,
redintegrated, so as to be numerically the same thing it was. From whence it
seems a genuine consequence, that the Essence, or Being of a Sensitive Soul,
has its beginning wholly from life, as from the accension or kindling of a
certain subtle and inflammable matter. To render this yet more plain; when in
the Genital matter, swarms of active, and spirituous, chiefly Sulphurous
particles, predisposed to animation, have met with a less number of Saline
particles, in a convenient focus; being as it were kindled, sometimes by
another Soul (as in all Vivaparous Animals) viz. of the Generant, sometimes by
their own rapid motion (as it happens in Oviparous) they conceive life, or
break forth into a kind of flame, which thenceforth continues to burn so long
as it is constantly fed with sulphurous fuel from within, and nitrous from
without; but instantly perishes, when either through defect of such aliment,
or violence from external agents, it comes once to be extinct. This Act of the
Corporeal Soul, or enkindling of the vital matter, is in more perfect Animals,
such as are furnished with hot blood, so manifestly accompanied with great
heat, fuliginous exhalations, and other effects of fire, or flame; that it is
difficult for even the most Skeptical person in the World to doubt, that the
blood is really in a continual burning, and that life is rather Flame it self,
than only like it. But in other Animals less perfect, and endowed with blood
less hot; though we cannot say their Soul is properly Flame: yet we may say, it
is somewhat very like it, namely a swarm of most subtle, active and as it were
fiery particles, or a spirituous Halitus: which included in the body, does move
and agitate the denser mass thereof, and inspire the whole, and actuate all the
members, and in some with admirable agility, even beyond that of more perfect
Animals; as may be observed in some Reptils and Insects. And that even in these
there is a fiery vigor or force constantly acting, may naturaly be inferred
from hence; that while they remain not unactive and drowsy (as in winter
usually they do) they can no more want the aliments of life, a perpetual supply
of blood and aer, than Animals of a hotter constitution; as we shall soon
declare. *

Art. 8. That the first operation of a Sensitive
As for the Third and last considerable, viz. the Faculties and Operations of a
Corporeal or Sensitive Soul; I shall only in the general observe, Soul, is the
Formation of the Body, according to the model preordained by Nature.
that so soon as she begin's actually to exist, she first frames for herself a
convenient seat wherein to reside, the body; and then organizeth the same body,
making it (according to the platform or model preordained, and intimated by
secret instinct) in all parts sit and commodious for all uses necessary, as
well to the propagation of the Species (for still Nature does, though the Soul
it self may not, aim at Eternity) as to the conservation of the individual. For
which uses she is furnished with many and various Faculties or Powers; all
which she duly exercises, according to the various instincts, and intimate
suggestions of her Governess, Nature, in acts of several sorts; though all
performed in almost one and the same manner, and as it were by the conduct of
Fate, or eternal decree of Divinity congenial to her very Essence. To
enumerate, and particularly recount all the natural Faculties with which the
Souls of Brutes are endowed; all the various Habits resulting from practice and
long exercise of those Faculties; is neither pertinent to my present institute,
nor easy to be done: because of their almost infinite diversity, respective to
the immense diversity of kinds of sensitive creatures. For, as some Animals are
of a more, others of a less perfect order; and as they are diversely
configurated, according to the several places in this great Theater of the
World, in which they are consigned to live and act their several parts: so we
see their Souls are, by the wise bounty of the Creator, instructed with diverse
inclinations, faculties, and appeties, directive to the ends to which they were
predestined. In a word; since there ought to be an exact proportion and
congruity betwixt every organical Body, and the Soul that informs and animates
it; and that for that reason, Nature seems to have diversified and
distinguished the various Kinds of Brute Animals, by an equal diversity of
their bodily structures and configurations, easily discernable by the sight: we
may even from thence alone conclude, that their Corporeal Souls likewise are no
less various, and endowed with Faculties and Proprieties answerably different.

Whoever then shall attempt to enrich Philosophy with a perfect Catalogue of
these so different Faculties and Proprieties observable among Brutal Souls;
will find himself obliged, first to compose a better Natural History of all
sorts of Animals, than any we yet have, and then to deliver also a true and
full account of the various Structures of their Bodies, from a Comparative
Anatome of them. A work indeed most desirable and highly delightful, but
equally difficult, and laborious; nor to be performed, I fear, by any single
hand. But were it much less difficult; sure I am, you know my incapacity too
well, ever to expect it from mine: and what has been already said by me here,
in the general, touching the nature of a Sensitive Soul; is enough to render my
First Preliminary probable.

For, from thence it may, Art. 9. A recapitulation of the premises.
without contradiction to either reason, or observations Anatomical, be
conceived (1) in what manner the Soul of a Brute may be at first produced by
accension of the most spirituous particles of the Seminal humor, in the womb of
the Parent, as one flame is kindled by another: (2) how the same Soul then
form's the Organical Body out of the grosser parts of the same seed, after the
figure or type predesign'd by the Divine Protoplast at the Creation, whose
wisdom directs and regulates it in that admirable work: (3) How it afterward
comes to conserve, expand and augment itself, as the dimensions of the body are
by degrees enlarged, until it arrive at its perfection or standard of growth;
by accension of more and more of the inflammable parts of the Nourishment daily
renewed, and converted into laudable blood; as the flame of a lamp is kept
alive by a perpetual accension of fresh parts of oil; (4) How the Duration of
the Body depends entirely upon the subsistence, or perpetual renovation or
regeneration of the Soul; and how immediately upon the Souls Extinction, the
body submits to corruption; no otherwise than as Wine dies, and degenerates
into a Vappa, so soon as the spirit that preserved it in vigor and generosity,
is evaporated, or suppressed.

Art. 10. The Faculties and Organs of a Sensitive Soul, reciprocaly inservient
each to other.
Now to the end this Corporeal Soul, or invisible Flame, may the better thus
animate the Body, and actuate it to sense and voluntary motion; Nature has
most wisely instituted, that her Organs, and Faculties should all of them be
reciprocaly inservient or official each to other, in their acts and operations.
For, as out of the grosser parts of the Nutritive juice, prepared and elaborate
in the Stomach and other instruments of concoction, the decays of the solid
parts of the Body are daily repaired: so are the decays of the Soul itself
likewise repaired out of the more subtle and spirituous particles of the same
juice: which continualy brought afresh to the blood, as oil to a Lamp, and
kindled therein, restore both the Flame and Light of the Soul, which would
otherwise quickly be consumed, and perish. More expressly; while the purer part
of the Nutritive liquor feeds and renews the Lamp of life, or flame of the
blood; the most active, and most spirituous particles discharged from that
flame, are carried up, and insinuated into the Brain: and there recruite or
regenerate the other part of the Soul, viz. the Sensitive. And so the
conversion of Chyle into blood, is an operation not only consequent to, but in
some sort also dependent upon the conversion of meat and drink into Chyle: and
on the other side, the Animal faculty gratefully requites the good offices of
the Vital, and both as amply recompense the services of the faculty of
Chylification; in that the Animal spirit confers the pulsific power, by which
the heart and arteries drive the current of the blood in a perpetual round, for
the reaccension of its inflammable parts; and the Bowels ordaind for concoction
of the aliment, at the same time borrow, as their enlivening heat from the
flame of the blood, so their virtue both motive and sensitive, from the
constant afflux of Animal spirits, without out which they cannot duly do their
offices. Thus you see the brain is beholden to the heart, both to the stomach;
and reciprocally the stomach is assisted by them: and all parts conspire, by
contributary helps, to continue the Soul in its subsistence, as that again acts
perpetualy to the conversation of herself and them.

Art. 11. A two fold desire or inclination congenial to a Sensitive Soul; viz.
of self preservation, and Propagation of her kind.
To this, the Sensitive Soul, or (...) (as Aristotle not improperly calls it) is
strictly obliged by a twofold inclination or desire, innate or congenial to
her. One is that of self-preservation, which she endeavors constantly to
effect by being sollicitous for convenient food, out of whose inflammable parts
actually incensed, she may every minute redintegrate her own flame. The other,
that of Propagating her Species, or producing, by the same way of accension,
other Sensitive Souls of the same kind; that so by an uninterrupted succession
of her like, she may attain to that perpetuity, which is denied to her single
or individual self. And to this end, she carefully selects out of her stock of
aliment, matter fit for generation, stores it up in the Genital parts, and is
possessed with an earnest longing to transmit the same into a place most
commodious for its accension into new Souls.

For, as it is by natural instinct, that every living creature is from its very
^irth, directed to choose food most agreeable to its nature, and daily to feed
thereupon; as well that the grosser web of the body may from thence, by
insensible addition and assimilation of new parts, be augmented more and more,
until it attain to due magnitude, or perfection of stature: as that the finer
intertexture of the Soul may be, by continualy repeted supplies of Spirits,
rendered equal and coextense to the body, and enabled to execute all her
functions vigorously and effectualy: So it is also from the same natural
instinct, that when by that gradual amplification of all lineaments of both
body and Soul, the living creature has at length arrived at its full strength
and growth, the Animal Spirits then begin to abound, and swarm in greater
multitudes than is necessary to the uses of the individual; and the luxuriant
or superfluous troops of them, together with a certain refined and generous
Humor derived from the whole body, are daily transferred into the Genitals
(natures both Laboratory, and Magazin for propagation of the Species) there to
be further prepared, and formed into the Idea of an Animal exactly like to the
first Generant, which afterward is in the amorous congress of male and femal,
transmitted into the womb, therein to receive its accomplishment.

Having thus lightly described the principal Faculties, and innate Dispositions
of a Sensitive Soul, as also the fundamental laws of her Economy; it remains
only, that we consider the various Mutations, and irregular Commotions to which
she is liable.

Art. 12. To what various Mutations and irregular Commotions a Sensitive Soul
is subject from her own Passions*
That the Corporeal Soul, while as a Flame burning within her organical body,
she on every side diffuseth heat and light, is herself subject to various
Tremblings, noddings, Eclipses, inequalities, and disorderly Commotions, as all
Flame is observed to be; this (I say) is not obscurely discernable, in the
Effects of those alterations, which happen chiefly in her more violent
Passions: though indeed not so clearly and distinctly discernable in Brutes, as
in Men; in respect they are subject to fewer passions than Man is, and want the
faculty of speech to express any one of those few they feel in themselves.
Wherefore that we may in some order briefly recount the most remarkable at
least of these turbulent Affections incident to the Sensitive Soul; we shall
show what Alterations she may suffer (1) from her own proper Passions; (2) from
the temperament and diseases of the Body; (3) from various impressions of
sensible Objects; and (4) from exorbitant motions of the Animal Spirits.

Most certain it is, that the Flame of the Soul does not always burn equaly, or
at one constant rate; but now more, now less; sometimes briskly and clearly,
sometimes dully and dimly. For, it is not only enlarged, or contracted,
according as the fuel brought to feed it, is more or less in quantity, and
more or less sulphurous in quality: but the very accension of it in the heart,
though of itself moderate and equal, is yet sometimes so varied by the fannings
as it were of the Passions; that one while it blazeth up to a dangerous excess,
as it usualy happens in great Anger and Indignation; another while it is in
danger of being blown out, by sudden and surprising Joy; or almost suffocated,
by unexpected Terror, or astonishing Grief. The like may be said of the rest of
the Passions, or strong Affects, by whose various motions the Flame of life,
like the flame of a candle exposed to the winds, is variously agitated and
changed: as will more clearly appear from our ensuing discourse of the Passions
in particular.

Art. 13. From the temperament and diseases of the Body.
Nor is it* from the sudden puffs, or impulses of Passions alone, that such
immutations and inequalities as these proceed. Sometimes it comes to pass, that
the Vital Flame by slow degrees, and as it were Hecticaly diminished, becomes
little, pale, faint and half-extinct; as may be observed in colder
temperaments, in Leucophlegmatic bodies, in Hydropic persons, in Virgins
troubled with the Green Sickness, and other the like chronic diseases. In which
the blood being more serous or watery than it ought to be, yields but little
flame, and that too inconstant, and beclouded with fume and vapor; like that
which arises from wet and green wood. On the contrary, it sometimes happens,
that the blood being immoderately sulphurous, is almost wholly put into a
conflagration; as is frequently observed in Choleric constitutions, and
feverish distempers, and great debauches with Wine. And as by these and such
like disorders of the blood, the accension of the Vital Flame is with
respective variety altered: so likewise do the Lucid particles that arise to
the brain from thence, and constitute the beamy web of Animal Spirits, become
more, or less luminous, and regular, or irregular in their motions. For
instance; From the diminished or restrained accension of the blood, the sphere
of the Sensitive Soul is contracted into less compass than that of the body,
and reduced to such narrowness, that it cannot re-expand itself so as to
illustrate all the brain, and actuate the whole contexture of the nerves, with
requisite brightness and vigor. And on the other side, when the flame of life
is much intended or increased (provided it blaze not to the hight of a fever)
then the whole system of Animal spirits thence deradiated, being proportionably
augmented, swells to an expansion beyond the limits of the body; insomuch that
a Man transported and exu^^ing for great Joy, or puffed up with Pride, seems to
be inflated above measure, and hardly able to contain himself within the modest
bounds of his own dimensions.

Besides these Alterations which the Sensitive or Lucid part of the Soul
suffers from the various changes of the Vital; Art. 14. From various
imp^essions of s^^sible object^, and exorbitant motions of the Animal spirits.
there are others, and those very many, which it receives immediately both from
affections of the Brain, and Nerves, and from External objects making
impressions thereupon: which perturb the consistence, and usual order of its
parts. For example; at night, the Brain itself, from a too plentiful infusion
of the Nutrive liquor, as from a gloomy cloud overcast, seems replete with
vapors; so that in sleep, the Lucid part of the Soul is wholly obscured, and
envellopped as it were with darkness. Nor is it rare to have Eclipses of one,
or more of the Faculties Animal, merely from some morbisic matter, or gross
humor fixed somwhere in the brain, and obstructing the ways of the Animal
spirits. Sometimes these Animal spirits are not themselves sufficieiently pure,
clear and bright; but infected and beclouded with incongruous steams, saline,
vitriolic, nitrous, and other the like darksom exhalations; which deform the
images of things drawn in the brain, change them into false and chimerical
representations, and raise exorbitant motions of the spirits. Whence it
sometimes comes to pass, that the whole Soul undergoes various metamorphoses,
and is invested in strange apparitions, and confused with delusory whimzies: as
it too frequently happens to Men in Hypochondriacal Melancholy, and madness;
and likewise in drunken fits.

Art. 15. The various Gestures of a Sensi^ive Soul, respective to the
impressions of external objects variously affecting her.
And as for the various Gestures of the Soul, by which respectively to the
various impressions of sensible objects, she expresses one while Gladness and
Pleasure; another, Aversion and Offense: it is worthy our observation, that
sometimes she is allured outwardly into the organ of some one of the senses,
and that she occasionaly crowds herself into the Eye, Ear, Palate, or other
instrument of sense, there more nearly to approach and entertain the pleasing
object; sometimes on the contrary, to avoid an Evil she apprehends, and decline
an encontre with an ungrateful object, she retreats inwardly, and leaving her
watches, shrinks up herself, as if she labourd to hide her head from the danger
threatened. So that we can scarcely perceive, or imagine any thing without
disquiet and commotion: and at the apprehension of almost any object
whatsoever, the whole Soul is moved, and put into a trembling, and the
substance of it variously agitated, as a field of corn is waved to and fro by
contrary gusts of winds.

Nor do these agitations, especially if they be any whit violent, stop at the
Sensitive part of the Soul, or spirits Animal (which I imagine to make a kind
of lucid Fluidum, subject to Undulations or waving motions throughout, upon
either external, or internal impulses) but, as waves roll on till they arrive
at the shore, are carried on, by an Undulating motion, even to the Vital part
glowing in the blood; and impelling the flame thereof hither and thither, make
it to burn unequaly. For, so soon as an object is either by the sense, or by
the Memory, represented to the Imagination, under the appearance of Good, or
Evil; in the very same instant it affects, and commoves the Animal Spirits
destined to maintain the Pulse of the heart: and by their influx, causing the
heart to be variously contracted, or dilated; consequently renders the motion,
and accension of the blood variously irregular and unequal. And thus you see in
what manner the two parts of the Sensitive Soul, the Vital flame, and the
Animal spirits reciprocally affect each other with their accidental
alterations. But this you may understand more clearly and fully from the
following Theory of the Passions, where we shall enquire into the reasons and
motions of them more particularly.

Art. 16. An Enquiry concerning the Knowledge whereby Brutes are directed ^^
actions vol^ntary.
Mean while I find my self in this place arrested by a certain mighty
Difficulty, which though perhaps I shall not be able to overcome, ought
nevertheless to be attempted; not only for its own grand importance, but
because without some plausible Explication of it at least, all our precedent
speculations concerning the nature and proprieties of a Sensitive Soul, will
fall to the ground; as an arch that wants a key, or middle-stone to support all
the rest.

It is concerning the Knowledge of Brutes, by which they are directed in
actions voluntary.

For, supposing all we have hitherto been discoursing of the Origin, Substance,
Subsistence, Parts, Faculties, Inclinations, Passions and Alterations of a
Corporeal Soul, to be true and evident (which is more than I dare assume) yet
does it not from thence appear, what such a Soul can by her own proper virtue
do more than a Machine artificialy framed and put into motion. To speak more
plainly; tho it be granted; that first the impression made by an external
object upon the instrument of sense, does by impelling the Animal Spirits
inwards, and by disposing them into a certain peculiar figure, or mode (as the
Cartesians speak) cause the act of Sensation, or simple Perception; and that
then the same spirits rebounding, as it were by a reflex undulation, outward
from the brain into the nerves and muscles, produce local motions: granting
this, I say, yet still we are to seek, How this Soul, or any one part of it,
comes to be conscious of Sensation, or how it can, by a reflex act (as the
Schools phrase it) perceive that it does perceive, and according to that
perception, is impelled to diverse acts, directed to an appetite of this, or
that good, and sometimes in prosecution of the good desired, to perform actions
that seem to be the results of counsel and deliberation, such as are daily
observed to be done by several sorts of Beasts, as well wild as domestic. In
Man indeed, it seems not difficult to conceive, that the Rational Soul, as
president of all th^inferiour faculties, and constantly speculating the
impressions, or images represented to her by the Sensitive, as by a mirror;
does first form to herself conceptions and notions correspondent to their
nature, and then proceed to acts of reason, judgment and will. But as for
Brutes that are irrational; in what manner the perception, distinction,
appetite, memory of objects, and other acts resulting from an inferior kind of
reason, are in them performd: this, I confess, is more than I can yet
understand. Some there are, I know, who rather then acknowledge their
insufficiency to solve this Problem; have attributed to Brutes also Souls
immaterial, and subsistent after separation from their bodies. But these
considered not, that the Soul of a Brute, however docil and apprehensive, and
using organs in their structure very little (if at all) different from those in
the head of Man, can yet have no capacity of Arts and Sciences, nor raise it
self up to any objects, or acts, but what are Material: and that by
consequence, the same is different from, and inferior to the Rational Soul of
Man, and material. So that instead of solving the Doubt, by teaching us, how
from a certain Modification of subtle matter, there may result such Power,
which residing in the brain of a Brute, may there receive without confusion all
impressions or images brought in by the Senses, distinctly speculate, judge and
know them, and then raise appetites, and employ the other faculties in acts
respective to that knowledge, and to those appetites: instead of this, I say,
they have entangled themselves in an absurd Error, ascribing to a thing merely
material, a capacity of knowing objects immaterial, and performing actions
proper only to immaterial Beings.

We are therefore to search for this Power of a Sensitive Soul, by which she is
conscious of her own perception, only in Matter in a peculiar manner so, or so
disposed or modified. But in what matter? this of the Soul, or that of the
Body? Truly, if you shall distinctly examine either the Soul or the Body of a
Brute, as not conjoined and united into one Compositum; you will have a hard
task of it, to find in either of them, or indeed in any other material subject
whatever, any thing to which you may reasonably attribute such an Energetic and
self-moving Power. But if you consider the whole Brute, as a Body animated, and
by divine art of an infinite wisdom designed, framed and qualified for certain
ends and uses: then you may safely conclude, that a Brute is, by the law of the
Creation, or institute of Almighty God, so comparated, as that from Soul and
body united, such a confluence of Faculties should result, as are necessary to
the ends and uses for which it was made. Do but convert your thoughts awhile
upon Mechanic Engines, and seriously contemplate the motions, powers and
effects of them. They are all composed indeed of gross, solid and ponderous
Materials: and yet such is the design, contrivance and artifice of their
various parts, as that from the figures and motions of them, there result
certain and constant operations, answerable to the intent of the Artist, and
far transcending the forces of their divided ingredients. Before the invention
of Clocks and Watches, who could expect, that of iron and brass, dull and heavy
metalls, a machine should be framed; which consisting of a few wheels endented,
and a spring regularly disposed, should in its motions rival the celestial
orbs, and without the help or direction of any external Mover, by repeted
revolutions measure the successive spaces of time even to minutes and seconds,
as exactly almost as the diurnal revolutions of the Terrestrial globe itself?
and yet now such Machins are commonly made even by some Blacksmiths, and men's
admiration of their pretty artifice long since ceased. If then in vulgar
Mechanics, the contrivance and advantageous disposition of matter, be more
noble and efficacious than matter itself: certainly in a Living Creature, in a
Body animate, the Powers emergent from a conspiracy and cooperation of so many,
so various organs, and all so admirably formed, ought to be acknowledged
incomparably more noble, and more Energetic. If the art of Man, weak and
ignorant Man, can give to bodies, of themselves weighty, sluggish and unactive,
figure, connection and motion fit to produce effects beyond the capacity of
their single natures: what ought we to think of the divine art of the Creator,
whose Power is infinite, because his wisdom is so? Could not He, think you,
who by the voice of his Will called the World out of Chaos, and made so many
myriads of different Beings out of one and the same universal matter; could not
He, when He created Brutes, so fashion and organize the various parts and
members of their Bodies * thereto so adjust the finer and more active
contexture of their spirituous Souls, and impress such motions upon them, as
that from the union and cooperation of both, a Syndrome or conspiracy of
Faculties or Powers should arise, by which they might be qualified and enabled
to live, move and act respectively to the proper uses and ends of their
Creation? Undoubtedly He could; and it is part of my belief, that He did. Nor do
I more wonder at the Knowledge of Beasts, by which they are directed in the
election of objects, and in the prosecution or avoidance of them; than I do at
their simple Perception of them by their outward senses: since I conceive the
one to be as much Mechanical, as the other, though perhaps the reason of the
one, is of more difficult explication than that of the other.

When you hear the Music of a Church Organ, is it not as pleasant to your
mind, as the Music is to your ear, to consider how so many grateful notes, and
consonances that compose the charming Harmony, do all arise only from wind
blown into a set of pipes gradualy different in length and bore, and
successively let into them by the apertures of their valves? and do you not
then observe the Effect of this so artificial instrument highly to excel both
the Materials of it, and the hand of the Organist that plays upon it? the like
Harmony you have perhaps sometimes heard from a Musical Water-work, as the
vulgar calls it; an Organ that played of itself, without the hands of a
Musician to press the jacks, merely by the force of a stream of Water opening
and shuting the valves alternately, and in an order predesign'd to produce the
harmonical sounds, consonances and modes requisite to the composition, to which
it had been set.

Now, to the first of these Organs you may compare a Man; in whom the Rational
Soul seems to perform the office of the Organist, while governing and directing
the Animal Spirits in all their motions, she disposes and orders all
Faculties of the inferior, or Sensitive Soul, according to her will and
pleasure: and so makes a kind of Harmony of Reason, Sense, and Motion.

And to the Other, or Hydraulic Organ you may compare a Brute, whose Sensitive
Soul being scarcely moderatrix of of herself, and her Faculties, does indeed in
order to certain ends necessary to her nature, perform many trains of actions;
but such as are (like the various parts of an Harmonical Composition) regularly
prescribed (as the notes of a Tune are prickd down) by the law of her creation,
and determined for the most part to the same thing; viz. the Conservation of
herself. So that she seems to produce an Harmony of Life, Sense and Motion.

But this Analogy seems to be much greater in Brutes of the lowest order, such
upon whose Souls or natures there are not many Types or Notes of actions to be
done by them, imprinted; and which according to that common saying of the
Schools, non tam agunt, quam aguntur, act rather by necessary impulse, or
constraint, than freely; and of their own accord: than in more perfect Animals,
whose actions are ordained to more, and more considerable uses; and upon whose
Souls therefore more original lessons are as it were pricked, down; and to
which we cannot justly deny a power of both varying those innate prints, and
compounding them one with another occasionaly. Which Power seems to be
radicated in the Corporeal Soul, by nature so constituted, as to be knowing and
active in some certain things necessary to it; and capable also of being
afterward taught, by various accidents usually affecting it, both to know other
things, and to do far more, and more intricate actions.

All the Knowledge therefore these more perfect Brutes are observed to have,
Art. 17. The Knowledge of Brutes, either Innate or Acquired.
must be either Innate or Adventitious. The Former is commonly named Natural
Instinct; which being by the Omnipotent Creator, in the very act of their
Formation, infused, and as an indelible Character impressed upon their very
principles or natures; both urges them to, and directs them in certain actions
necessary to the prorogation of their life, and to the propagation of their
kind. The Other is by little and little acquired, by the daily perception of
new objects, by imitation, by experience, by man's teaching, and by some other
ways: and in some Brutes, is advanced to a higher degree than in others.
Nevertheless this same acquired cognition and Cunning also (how great soever)
does in some of them depend altogether upon instinct natural, and the frequent
use of it.

Here it would not perhaps be very difficult for me to recount, what sorts of
actions done by more perfect Beasts, are referrible to their Congenite
Knowledge alone; what to their acquired alone; and what to a combination of
both. I could also show how their acquired knowledge arises by degrees from
impressions of new objects, from examples, or imitation, from experience and
other adventitious helps just now mentioned. I might moreover explain in what
manner the direct images of things brought into the common Sensory, produce
first Imagination, and then Memory; how the same images reflex'd, instantly
raise Appetite, if they appear good and agreeable; or Aversion, if displeasing
and hurtful; and how thereupon in the same instant Local Motions succeed, for
prosecution, or avoidance of the things themselves. All these, I say, I might
deduce from notions competent to a Corporeal Soul, and from the powers of a
Body informed and actuated thereby, both being comparated for such determinate
actions by artifice Divine; without bringing into to the scene any immaterial
natures (as some have done) to solve the difficulties concerning the science or
knowledge of Brutes. But because these arguments have been already handled by
many excellent Men, and curious wits, Sir Kenelm Digby, Monsieur des Carts,
Mr. Hobbes, etc. and most accurately by Dr. Willis, in his late Book de Anima
Brutorum, and because a further inquisition into them is not absolutely
necessary to my design of explicating the reasons of the Passions: I therefore
shall ad no more concerning them; but contenting myself with the hints I have
given, conclude this Section with two pertinent and remarkable clauses.

Manifest it is, Art. 18. That Brutes are directed only by natural instinct, in
all actions that conduce either to their own preservation, or to the
propagation of their species: not by Reason.
that all Brute Animals of what kind soever, are by natural instinct alone, as
by an eternal rule, or law engraven upon their hearts, urged and directed to do
all things that conduce either to their own defense and conservation, or to the
propagation of their species. And hence it is necessarily consequent, that in
order to their observance of this congenite law, or accomplishment of these two
grand Ends of their Creation, they must all, by the dictates of the same
natural instinct, both know, whatever things are convenient and beneficial,
whatever are inconvenient, hurtful and destructive to them; and according to
this knowledge, prosecute these with hatred and aversation, those with love and
delight. When therefore we observe Brutes to distinguish betwixt wholesome and
venomous plants, to seek for convenient food, cunningly to hunt after prey,
retreat from injuries of weather, provide themselves denns and other secret
places for rest and security, travel from one Climate to another, and change
their stations at certain periods and seasons of the year, to love their
benefactors, and fly from their enemies, to court their mates, build nests and
other nurseries for their young, to suckle, feed, cherish, protect and teach
them, to use a thousand pretty shifts and artifices to elude their persuers, in
fine, to manage all their affairs regularly and prudently, as it were by
counsel and deliberation, in order to the two principal ends preordained by the
Divine Wisdom: when we (I say) observe all these their actions, we are not to
refer them to a principle of Reason, or any free and self-governing Faculty
(like the Rational Soul of Man) wherewith they are endowed; but only to Natural
Instinct, by which they are incited and directed.

Neither are we to give credit to their opinion who hold, Art. 19. Nor Material
Necessity.
that all such actions arise from a kind of Material Necessity (such as
Democritus fancied) and without any intention, or Scope aimed at by the Beasts
themselves; merely from the congruity or incongruity of images impressed upon
the organ of the sense affected: as if Brute Animals were as little conscious
of their own actings, as artificial Engines are of their motions, and the
reasons of them. For we cannot but observe, that Brutes, by virtue of natural
instinct, perform not only simple acts excited by some one single impression
made upon this or that Sensory, by an external agent, or object; as when the
scorching heat of the Sun in summer beating upon them, makes them to retire to
cool and shady places for refuge: but also many other Compound actions, such to
which a long series, or chain of subservient acts is required. For instance; in
the Spring, when Birds feeling the warmth and invigorating (I had almost called
it also the prolific) influence of the approaching Sun (that Universal Adjutant
of Generation) find themselves pleasantly instigated to their duty of
Propagation; then, without any other impulse, or direction, but that of natural
instinct, they dexterously, and as it were with counsel and deliberation,
address themselves chiefly to that most delightful work. First, with a kind of
cheerful Solemnity they choose, and espouse their Mates, all their Femals
bringing love, obsequiousness, diligence and feather-beds for their dowry. Then
they seek for places convenient to reside in, and there with skill and art
exceeding the proudest of humane Architecture, they build their Nests. Which
are no sooner finished, than they lay their Eggs therein. Upon these in the
next place they sit with admirable constancy and patience* until they have
hatched them. And that great work done, they in fine with exemplary tenderness
and care feed, cherish and protect their young, till they are able to live of
themselves. Now here, you see, is a multiplicity of actions regularly and with
design done in order to one grand scope, or end: such as cannot possibly
proceed from simple impressions of external objects. 'Twere easy for me here to
invite you to reflect on the admirable Republics of Bees and Pismires, in which
all the constitutions of a most perfect Government are exemplified: yet without
written laws or promulgation of Right: but the former example is sufficient. I
conclude then, that since in all these, the affairs or businesses of Brutes are
managed and administered always after one and the same manner, without any
variety: that is a convincing argument, that the enterprises and works of
Brutes of this sort, are excited neither by external objects, whose impulse is
ever various; nor by any internal purpose of mind, which is more mutable than
the wind; but by a principle more certain and fixed, and always determined to
one thing; which can be nothing else but Natural instinct.

And how far the power and influence of this instinct may extend toward the
excitation of the various Passions to which the Sensitive Soul is of her own
nature subject and prone; will appear more clearly from our subsequent Enquiry
into their proper causes and motions: to which I now hasten; having thus long
detained you in hearing what seems to me most probable and consentaneous to
reason, concerning the substance, original, proprieties and faculties of the
Sensitive Soul, common to Man with Brutes. Which was my first Preliminary.

SECT. III. Of the Nature Origin, and principal Seat of the Rational Soul in
Man.
Art^. 1. The Excellency of a Rational Soul.
HOw near so ever Brute Beasts may be allowed to approach to the Divine faculty
of Reason, or Discourse: yet most certain it is, no one of them has ever been
observed to attain thereunto. For, if we with all favor and partiality
imaginable, examine the Effects of either their innate, or acquired Knowledge,
or of both conjoined, and improved into Habits by long practice and experience:
yet in the end we shall be forced to confess, that even the most intricate, and
most cunning of all their actions, come far short of those that are ordinarily
done by Man, by virtue of the Reasonable Soul, wherewith he is by the immense
bounty of his Creator, endowed.

This is a Verity so obvious to every Man of common sense and understanding* so
evident by its own splendour; that it needs neither Arguments drawn from reason
to establish, nor Examples drawn from frequent observations to illustrate it:
especially now after the many excellent discourses thereupon written by Learned
Men of almost all ages, all nations, all professions. It being therefore
unnecessary for me by prolix reasoning to evince, and superfluous by
multiplicity of instances to elucidate the vast disparity betwixt the proper
Acts and Operations of a Reasonable Soul, and those inferior ones of a
Sensitive: I shall only in brief, and analytically recount to you a few of
those many Excellencies and Prerogatives essential to the former, and by the
law of nature incommunicable to the later.

The Preeminence then of Man's Reasonable Soul is undeniably manifest from both
her Objects, and her Acts.

Her Objects are all things whatsoever, Art. 2. Manifest from her proper
Objects.
true or false, real or imaginary, within or without the World, sensible or
insensible, infinite or finite: for, to all these can she extend her unconfined
power of speculation. I doubt indeed, whether it be possible for her in this
life, while she is obliged to speculate all things by the help of images, or
corporeal representations, to have an adequate, and full cognition of the
superexcellent nature of God: but yet it cannot be denied, that she is capable
of knowing for certain, that there is such an incomprehensible Being as God,
and that He is infinite and Eternal. I doubt also, whether the mind of Man be
capable of any true notion of an Angel, Spirit, Demon or other the like
Beings which the Schools commonly (how intelligibly, let others dispute) call
immaterial Substances; because I myself can represent to my thoughts nothing
but under some certain figure and quantity, which are inseparable from body:
and yet who dares deny the Existence of such Beings in the World? To speculate
such objects then, as fall not under the perception of any of the senses, is
the prerogative of a Rational Soul: nor can a Sensitive possibly have any
knowledge of things above the sphere of her own nature; all her faculties being
corporeal, and by consequence limited to corporeal objects, and those too no
other than what are perceptible by the senses.

Art. 3. And Acts.
Her Acts also equaly declare her transcendent Powers. That act of simple
apprehension, which in Brutes is Imagination, is in Man Intellection: and the
intellect presides over imagination, discerning the Errors of it occasioned by
the senses, and correcting them; yea subliming the notions thereof into true
and useful ones. And as for forming of Propositions, by compounding or
dividing the simple notions of sensible things; that power is indeed common to
the Sensitive Soul also, and usualy exercised by her, when an image of some
object newly admitted, meets with one or more images either f^^merly stored up
in the Memory, or at that instant suggested by natural instinct; and is found
associable, or repugnant to them: but yet the same falls incomparably short of
that which belongs to the Human Intellect. Which does not only review all
propositions conceived from the Phantasy; but judges also whether they be true
or false, congruous or incongruous; and then orders and disposes them
accordingly into trains of notions convenient either to Speculation, or to
practice. Moreover, it restrains the Phantasy, of itself instable and prone to
ramble through various phantasms; calls it away from extravagant and useless
conceptions, directs it to others more conform to reason, and at pleasure
confines it within certain bounds, that it may not divert, or range too wide
from the purpose. All which Acts give clear evidence, that there is in Man a
Soul superior to the sensitive, and which moderates and governs all the
faculties and operations of it: yea, more yet, which from representations
sensible deduces many other notions of things altogether unknown to sense, and
which the Phantasy is of itself wholly incapable to imagine. For, it
understands Axioms, or first principles, and that by its own power alone,
without recourse to corporeal species: and (what is yet more noble and sublime)
by a reflex act views itself, thinks that it thinks, from thence certainly
knowing its' own Existence, which cannot be either perceived by sense, or
imagined by Phantasy. Whereas neither the Sense, nor Imagination (for of these
there are no images extant) can perceive that they perceive, or imagine. To
these royal prerogatives of Man's Rational Soul, let us subjoyn the native right
she has to the whole Encyclopaedia or Zodiac of Arts and Sciences; Theology,
Logic, Physic, Metaphysics, Mathematics, Algebra, Geometry, Astronomy,
Mechanics: which being all ( Theology alone excepted) the products or creatures
of Man's Mind, sufficiently attest their Author to be an Agent Spiritual,
admirably intelligent, immaterial, and therefore immortal.

Now if this be true (as most certainly it is) then one of these two
Assumptions must be so too. Either the Rational Soul of man does alone perform
all offices not only of Understanding and discourse, but of sense also, and
life; and so administer the whole oeconony of Human nature. Or else there are
in every individual Man two distinct Souls conjoined, and acting together: one,
only Rational; the other merely Sensitive; that as Queen regent, this as inferior
and subordinate.

The FIRST seems to me not a little improbable. Art. 4* Life and Sense depend
not on the the Rational Soul of man.


For, (1) all acts of the Senses, and animal Motions, as likewise the Passions,
are corporeal, divided and extended, to various parts: and therefore the
Rational Soul, which we conceive to be incorporeal, indivisible and finite,
seems incapable to cause or impress those motions immediately, or by herself.
To me (I confess) it seems Unintelligible, how an incorporeal Agent, not
infinite, can physically act in, and upon a gross body immediately, or without
the intervention of a third thing; which though corporeal too, is yet
notwithstanding of parts so spirituous, and of a constitution so subtle, as to
approach somewhat nearer to the nature of a pure Spirit, than solid and
ponderous body does. Flame, and light I acknowledge to be bodies; but yet
methinks there is less of disproportion, or disparity betwixt them and a
substance purely spiritual, than is betwixt a pure Spirit and a gross, heavy
body, such as ours is. And therefore in my weak judgment, it is more
conceivable that the Reasonable Soul should have some spirituous, and subtle
thing as flame, or light is, viz. the Sensitive Soul, conjoined with her, to be
a convenient Medium betwixt herself and the gross body, to receive her
immediate influence, and actuate the body according to her will and pleasure:
than it is, that she should immediately move and actuate the body, betwixt
whose nature and her own there is great disparity.

(2) As for that nice and amusing doctrine of the Schoolmen* that in Man the
Sensitive Soul is eminently contained in, and (to use their very term) as it
were absorpt by the Rational; so that what is a Soul in Brutes, becomes a mere
Power or quality in Man: this I think (as many other of their superfine
distinctions do) sounds like nothing put into hard words. For, how can it be
imagined possible, the eternal law of nature should be so far violated, as that
a substance should be changed into an accident? that the Sensitive Soul which
is Corporeal and extense, and which they themselves allow to be actually
existent in the body, before the infusion of the Rational; should upon
accession of the Rational, lose its former essence, and degenerate into a naked
Quality? This is (I profess) a Mystery much above my comprehension.

(3) If it be affirmed, that the Rational Soul does, at her entrance into the
body, introduce life also, and sense; and so there is no need of any other
principle of life and sense, where she is: then must it be granted, that Man
does not generate a Man animated, or endowed with life and sense; but only an
inform body, or rude mass of flesh. And how absurd that would be, I leave to
your judgment.

These Reasons discovering the improbability of the first Assumption; Art. 5.
And therefore he (...) to have also a Sensitive Soul.
what can remain to hinder us from embracing the OTHER, viz. that there are in
every individual Man, two distinct Souls, coexistent, and conjoined; one by
which he is made a Reasonable creature, another by which he becomes also a
living, and Sensitive one? Especially since the truth of this seems
sufficiently evident even from that (...), or civil war too frequently happening
betwixt these twins, which every Man sometimes feels in his own breast, and
whereof the holy Apostle himself so sadly complained. For, this intestine War,
seeing it cannot arise from one and the same thing possessed with affections
mutually repugnant, and inclining us two contrary ways at once; argues a
Duumvirate of Rulers reciprocaly clashing, and contending for superiority; and
such too that are as remote in their natures, as different in the modes of
their subsistence.

Art. 6. That there are in every individual Man two distinct Souls coexistent,
argued from the civil war observed betwixt them.
Upon this War depend all the Passions by which the restless Mind of Man is so
variously, and many times also violently agitated, to his almost perpetual
disquiet and vexation: and upon the success of it depends all the happiness, or
misery of not only his present life, but that which is to come. To enquire
therefore awhile into the grounds and reasons of this fatal discord; will be
neither loss of time, nor digression from our purpose.

Art. 7. The Causes of that war.
That Man then is endowed, as with two distinct faculties of Knowing, viz.
Understanding, and Imagination; that proper to his Rational, this to his
Sensitive soul: so likewise with a twofold Appetite, viz. Will, which
proceeding from his Intellect, is immediate attendant of the Rational soul; and
appetite Sensitive, which cohering to the Imagination, is as it were the factor
or procurer to the Corporeal Soul: is the common doctrine of Plato and
Aristotle, to this day read and asserted in the Schools; nor ought it to be
rejected. But then it must not be so understood, as if the Rational soul
herself, which seems to be immaterial, and consequently exempt from passion,
were upon every appulse of good or evil objects, subject to all the turbulent
affections of desire or aversation: for, this would be manifestly repugnant to
the excellency of her spiritual nature, and inconsistent with her dignity and
superintendency over the inferior powers. Affections she has indeed of her
own, such as are competent and proper to her semidivine Essence. It is not to
be doubted, but that in the contemplation of true and good, and chiefly of what
is supremely both true and good, the Deity; as likewise in works of
beneficence, in the cognition of things by their causes, in the exercises of
her habits as well the contemplative, as the practical; and in all other her
proper acts, the Reasonable Soul feels in herself a very great Complacency: as
on the contrary, the want of these does affect her with as great Displeasure.
Nor is it to be doubted, but our love of God, and all other real goods; and our
detestation of vices and vicious Men; as also all other pure and simple affects
arising and continuing without perturbation or disquiet: belong only to the
Reasonable Soul, which (to use the elegant simile of Plato) seated in a higher
sphere of impassibility, like the top of mount Olympus, enjoys perpetual
serenity: looking down the while upon all tumults, commotions and disorders
happening in the inferior part of man; as that does upon the clouds, winds,
thunders and other tempests raised in the air below it. But as for all vehement
affections, or perturbations of the Mind, by which it is usualy commoved, and
inclined to this or that side, for prosecution of good, or avoidance of evil:
these certainly ought all to be ascribed to the Corporeal Soul; and seem to
have their original in the seat of the Imagination, probably the middle of the
brain. Nevertheless, for that the Intellect, as it reviews all Phantasms formed
by imagination, and at pleasure regulates and disposes them; so it not only
perceives all concupiscences, and tempests of passions used to be stirred up in
the imagination, but also (while it freely exercises its native power and
jurisdiction) moderates, governs, and gives law to them: for these reasons,
when the Rational Soul approves some, and rejects others; raises some, and
composes others of those passions, and directs them to right ends; she may also
be said, by such her dictates, to exercise acts of Will, as Arbiter, and to
will or nill those things, which the Sensitive Appetite desires or abhors by
her permission or command.

But yet this empire of the Rational Soul is not so absolute over the
Sensitive, Art. 8. wherein sometimes the Sensitive appetite prevails.
when this proceeds to Appetite, as when it is employed about the discernment
and Knowledge of sensible objects. For, the Sensitive being much nearer allied
to the body, and immediate Guardian thereof; is by that affinity and relation
obliged to addict itself altogether to the gratification, welfare and
conservation of the same. And that this province may be more grateful and
agreeable to so delicate a Governess, she is continualy courted and presented
by all the Senses with variety of blandishments and tempting delights. So that
charmed by those powerful enchantments of sensible objects, and entirely taken
up with care of the body, and in that respect prone to pursue pleasures: she
too often proves deaf to the voice of Reason advising the contrary, and refuses
to be diverted from her sensual to nobler affections.

Yea sometimes grown weary of subjection, she takes occasion to cast off her
yoke of allegiance, and like a proud and insolent Rebel, aspires to unbounded
license and dominion. And then, then it is we feel those Twins struggling within
us, that intestine war betwixt the Flesh and the Spirit, that dire conflict of
the Sensitive Appetite with Reason; which distracts one Man into two Duellists,
and which cease not, till one of the Combatants has overcome and brought the
other to submission. And (what is yet more deplorable) the event of this combat
is often so unhappy, that the nobler part is subdued and led captive by the
ignoble: the forces of sensual allurements then proving too strong for all the
guards of Reason, though assisted by the auxiliary troops of Moral precepts,
and the sacred institutes of Religion. When the divine Polity of the Rational
Soul being subverted, the whole unhappy man is furiously carried away to serve
the brutish lusts of the insolent usurper, and augment the triumphs of
libidinous carnality: which degrades him from the dignity of his nature, and
cassating all his royal prerogatives, debases him to a parity with beasts, if
not below them; for, Reason once debauched so as to become brutal, leads to all
sorts of excess; whereof beasts are seldom guilty.

Yet this is not always the issue of the war. Art. 9. And sometimes the
Rational.
Sometimes it happens that the victory falls to the right side; and the
Princess overpowring the Rebel, reduces her to due submission and conformity.
Nay sometimes Reason, after she has been long held captive, breaks off her
fetters; and remembering her native Sovereignty, grows conscious and ashamed of
her former lapses: and thereupon with fresh courage and vigor renewing the
conflict, vanquishes and deposes the Sensitive Soul with all its legions of
lusts, and gloriously re-establishes herself in the throne. Yea more, at once
to secure her empire for the future, and expiate the faults of her
maladministration in times past; she by bitter remorse, severe contrition,
and sharp penance, punishes herself, and humbles her traitorous enemy the
Flesh. And as the war itself, so this act of Conscience, this self-chastising
affection, being proper to Man alone; does clearly show, that in Man there are
either two Souls, one Subordinate to the other; or two parts of the same Soul,
one opposing the other, and contending about the government of him and his
affections. But which of these two consequents is most likely to be true, you
may have already collected from my discourse precedent.

It remains then, that I give you some account of the Opinions, or rather
Conjectures of Men (for they can be no other) which seem to me most probable,
concerning the Origin of the Reasonable Soul; concerning the principle seat of
it in the body; concerning its connection with the Sensitive Soul; and
concerning the manner of its Understanding.

Art 10. That the Rational Soul is created* immediately by God.
For the First; if the Rational Soul be a pure Spirit. i. e. a simple or
incompound substance; as I have already shown her proper acts, affections and
objects seem to infer, and as most wise men, ancient and modern, Ethnics and
Christians, Philosophers and Theologues have unanimously held her to be: and if
it seem inconsistent with the purity and simplicity of such a Being, to be
generated by the Parents, who are compound Beings, as reason teaches us it is:
granting this, I say, nothing can remain to divorce me from that common opinion
which holds, that she is created immediately by God, and infused into the body
of a human Embryon, so soon as that is organized, formed and prepared to
receive her.

For, as to that grand Objection, Art. 11. The resemblance betwixt Father and
Son, imputed to the Sensitive Soul.
that the Son oftentimes most exactly resembles the Father, not only in
temperament, shape, stature, features and all other things discernable in the
body; but in disposition also, wit, affections, and the rest of the Animal
faculties: and therefore it must needs be, that the Father begets the Rational
Soul, as well as the body: it is easy to detect the weakness thereof, in the
violence of the illation. Since all those endowments and faculties wherein the
chief similitude does consist, proceed immediately from the Corporeal Soul,
which I grant to be indeed Ex traduce, or propagated by the Father; but not the
Rational, which is of Divine Original.

For the Second, Art. 12. The Rational Soul seated in that part of the brain
which serves to Imagination.
viz. the Rational Souls chief seat or Mansion in the body, tho I cannot
conceive how, or in what manner an immaterial can reside in a material, because
I can have no representation or idea in my mind of any such thing: yet
nevertheless when I consider that all impressions of sensible objects, whereof
we are any ways conscious, are carried immediately to the Imagination; and that
there likewise all Appetites, or spontaneous conceptions and intentions of
actions are excited: I am very apt to judge the Imagination to be the Es^urial,
or imperial palace of the Rational Soul, where she may most conveniently both
receive all intelligences, from her Emissaries the senses, and give forth
orders for government of the whole state of Man. That the whole Corporeal soul
should be possessed by the Rational, seems neither competent to her Spiritual
nature, which is above Extensibility; nor necessary to her Empire over all: no
more than it is necessary for a King to be present in all parts of his
dominions at the same time. And if she be as it were inthroned in any one part
thereof; what part so convenient, so advantageous as the Phantasy, where she
may immediately be informed of all occurrents in the whole body, and whence she
may issue forth mandates for all she would have done by the whole or any member
thereof? I think therefore, I may affirm it to be probable, that this Queen of
the Isle of Man has her Court, and Tribunal in the noblest part of the
Sensitive Soul, the Imagination, made up of a select assembly of the most
subtle Spirits Animal, and placed in the middle of the Brain. As for the
Conarion, or Glandula pinealis seated near the center of the brain, wherein
Monsieur Des Carts took such pains to lodge this Celestial ghest; all our most
curious Anatomists will demonstrate that Glandule to be ordained for another,
and that a far less noble use, which here I need not mention.

For the Third, to wit, Art. 13. And there connexed to the Sensitive by the
will of her Creator.
what obliges the Rational Soul to continue resident in the Imagination during
this life; truly I cannot think either that she is capable of, or that she
needs any other ligament or tie, than the infringible law of nature, or Will of
her Divine Creator: who makes and destines her to reside in the body of man, to
be his Forma informans; and gives her therefore a strong inclination to inhabit
that her inn or lodging: ordaining her to have a certain dependence, as to her
operation, upon the Phantasy, so that without the help and subserviency
thereof, she can know or understand little, or nothing at all. For, it is from
the Imagination alone that she takes all the representations of things, and the
fundamental ideas, upon which she afterward builds up all her Science, all her
wisdom. And therefore though the Mind of one man understands more, and
reasons better than another; it does not thence follow, that their Rational
Souls are unequal in their natural capacity of understanding and discourse:
because the disparity proceeds immediately from difference of Imagination,
mediately and principally from the various dispositions of the Brain. For, when
the Animal Spirits, being either of themselves less pure, subtle and active
than is requisite, or hinderd in their expansion and motions, are not able
duly to irradiate and actuate the Brain affected with some distemper, or
originally formed amiss: in such case, the Phatasms created in the Imagination,
must be either deficient, or distorted; and the Intellect being obliged to
judge of them accordingly, must be misinformed. Hence it often happens, that by
reason of some wound, contusion, or other great hurt done to the brain, men who
formerly were of acute wit, and excellent understanding, are more or less
deprived of those noble Faculties, and degenerate into mere fools or idiots.
For, the acquiring, and loseing the habit of intellection and ratiocination,
depends totally upon the Brain and Imagination, the corporeal subject thereof:
but the Intellect it self, since it has no parts, cannot be perfected by
parts; being from the beginning, and of its own nature, a full and perfect
power of Understanding. Nor does it, by accession of any whatever Habit,
understand more: but is it self rather a Habit always comparated to
understand. And in truth the principal Function of the human Intellect seems to
be this, that it be of its own nature merely intelligent, that is knowing
things, not by ratiocination, but by simple intuition. But during its
confinement within the body, it is surrounded with that darkness, that it does
not simply, nakedly, and as it were by way of intuition perceive all things
which it understands; but attains to most of its knowledge by reasoning, that
is, successively, and by proceeding as it were by degrees. If therefore the
Organ or instrument, by the help of which the Intellect is obliged to
ratiocinate, or gradualy to attain to the knowledge of things, be unfit, or out
of tune: no wonder if it be not able to make good Music thereupon.

Concerning the Fourth and last thing therefore, Art. 14. Where how she
exercises her faculty of judging of the images of things formed in the
Imagination, seems to be inexplicable.
namely the Manner how this Unintelligible Intellect of man comes to know,
speculate and judge of all Phantasms or images pourtraid in the Imagination: I
can much more easily guess what it is not, than what it is. I am not inclined
to espouse their conceit, who tell us, that the Rational Soul sitting in the
brain, somewhere near the original of the nerves belonging to the Senses (as a
Spider sits watching in the center of her net) and feeling all strokes made
upon them by the Species of sensible objects, distinguishes and judges of their
several qualities and proprieties, by the different modes of their impressions.
Because, the supposition of a percussion, or stroke to be made by a Corporeal
image, is manifestly repugnant to a Faculty incorporeal. But whether or no I
ought to acquiesce in that other opinion delivered, and maintained by a whole
army of Contemplative men, viz. That the Intellect knows and discerns things
by simple Intuition, i.e. by beholding their Images represented in the
Phantasy, as we see our faces represented in a mirror or looking-glass: truly
I am yet to learn from wiser heads than mine. For, though I admire the subtilty
of the conceit, and love not to be immodestly Skeptical, especially in matters
that transcend my narrow comprehension: yet, to speak ingenuously, I as little
understand how Intuition can be ascribed to an immaterial, that has no Eyes;
as I do how Feeling of strokes can be ascribed to a thing that cannot be
touched. Nevertheless I will not point blanck deny this latter opinion to be
true, only because I cannot perceive the Competency of such an act as intuition
to the incorporeal Soul of man: for, that were to make my scanty reason the
measure of truth; and to confide more in my own dullness, than in the admired
perspicacity of so many eminent Wits preceding me. Wherefore having confessed
my ignorance, I refer the matter to your arbitration: allowing you as much time
as you shall think fit, seriously to consider the same; and in the interim
contentedly suspending my curiosity, which has too often perplexed me. For,
hitherto could I never drive it into my head, how those terms of infusion,
connection and intuition can be intelligibly applied to a spiritual, or
incompound essence, such as we conceive the Reasonable Soul to be: and if I
have used them in this discourse, it was rather because I could think of none
less improper, than because I approved them as adequate to the notions to which
they are vulgarly accommodated. Besides, I hold it extremly difficult, not to
speak some nonsense, when we adventure to treat of the nature of spirits,
whereof we understand so little: and you (I presume) will rather pity, than
condemn a man for stumbling in the dark. But I have too long detained you upon
Preliminaries: and therefore deprecating your impatience, invite you now from
the porch into the little Theater of the Passions, which I designed to erect
more for your divertisement, than study.

SECT. IV. Of the Passions of the Mind in general.
TAking it for granted then, from the reasons precedent, that in Man, besides
the Rational Soul, by which he becomes a Reasonable creature, there is also a
Sensitive one, by which he is made a living and sensitive creature; and that
this later being merely Corporeal, and coextens to the body it animates, is by
the law of its nature subject to various Mutations: I come in the next place to
consider what are the most remarkable of those Mutations, and the Causes whence
they usually arise; as likewise the principal effects of them upon the body and
mind of man.

Art. 1* A twofold state of the Sensitive Soul. viz. of tranquillity.
Obvious it is to every man's notice, that there is a twofold state or condition
of his Sensitive Soul; one of quiet and tranquillity; another of disquiet and
perturbation: every man living finding his spirit sometimes calm and serene,
sometimes agitated and ruffled more or less by the winds and tempests of
passions raised within him.

In the state of Tranquillity, it seems probable that the whole Corporeal Soul
being coextens to the whole body inshrining it (as the body is to the skin
envesting it) does at the same time both inliven all parts with the vital flame
of the blood, to that end carried in a perpetual round (as the vulgar conceive
the Sun to be uncessantly moved round about the Earth, to illuminate and warm
all parts of it) and irradiate and invigorate them with a continual supply of
Animal spirits, for the offices of Sense and Motion. And this Halcyon state
certainly is the only fair weather we enjoy within the region of our breast,
and the best part of human life.

On the contrary, Art. 2. And Perturbation.
in the state of Perturbation, all that excellent Economy is more or less
discomposed. Then it seems that the same frail soul is so strongly shocked and
commoved, that not only her vital part, the blood, the calm and equal
circulation being interrupted, is forced to undergo irregular floods and ebbs,
and other violent fluctuations; but the Animal spirits also, impelled to and
fro in a tumultuous manner, cause great disorders in the functions of sense and
motion; yea more, by their exorbitant manner of influx into the nerves of the
Heart and Lungs, they move them irregularly, and so contribute to render the
course of the blood yet more unequal. Nor does the tempest stop here; it
extends sometimes also to other Humors of the body, to the solid parts and
members of it, and even to the discomposure of the Reasonable Soul her self.

The Tranquillity of the Sensitive Soul is easily observable in sleep, Art. 3.
The first, most observable in sleep, and when objects appear indifferent.
when the spirits are bound up, or at least at rest; and very often also when
we are awake, namely whenever the objects affecting the sense, or created in
the imagination, appear to import neither good, nor evil to us, and we are no
further concerned than barely to apprehend and know them. For, then they
smoothly and calmly slide into the common sensory and imagination, and soon
pass away without any the least disquiet or commotion of the appetite.

Art. 4. The other, manifest in all Passion.
The Perturbation of it is as easily manifest in all the passions, which are the
consequents of desire, or of aversation. For, when any object is represented
under the appearance of good or evil to us in particular; instantly the
Sensitive Soul is moved to embrace, or avoid it; and imployes not only the
Animal Spirits, her Emissaries, but the blood also, and other humors
universally diffused through the body, and even the solid parts too, as
instruments to effect her design. More plainly; when the Imagination conceives
any thing to be embraced as good, or avoided as evil; presently by the spirits
residing in the brain, and ranged as it were into order, the Appetite is
formed: and then the impression being transmitted to the Heart, according as
that is contracted or dilated, the blood is impelled and forced to various
fluctuations, and irregular motions: and thence the Appetite being by instinct
transmitted to the nerves ordained for that use, they cause motions of the
solid parts respective thereunto. And this we may conjecture to be the order of
motions excited successively in the phantasy, spirits, blood and solid parts,
in every Passion of the mind of what sort soever. Nor can it indeed sink into
my dull head, by what other means of mutual intercourse, besides such a quick
transmission of spirits first from the brain into the Praecordia, and thence
back again to the brain, by nerves to that end extended betwixt those sources
of life and sense, the great and speedy commerce in all passions observed to be
maintained between them, can be effected.

Art. 5. That in the state of Perturbation, the Sensitive Soul va^^^th her
Gestures, by Contraction or Expansion.
But however this admirable Commerce may be otherwise explained, it is lawful
for us us to conceive, that the Sensitive Soul, when put into this state of
perturbation, does strangely vary her Postures, according to the diversity of
motions caused in her: and though that diversity be very great, yet that in all
perturbations whatever, she is more or less amplified, so as to swell beyond
her ordinary bounds; or more or less contracted within her self, so as to be
less extense or diffused, than usually she is at other times, in her state of
tranquillity: as will be exemplified in all the passions we design particularly
to describe. Mean while it is observable, that sometimes she being affected
with joy, or pride, and as it were exulting above measure, does advance and
expand her self, as if she strove to be greater, and to stretch her grandeur
beyond the narrow limits of the body. Whereupon the Animal Spirits being
respectively commoved in the brain, enlarge the sphere of their irradiation,
and by a more abundant influx vigorously agitate the Praecordia or vital parts,
so forcing the blood to flow more copiously into all parts, and to diffuse it
self more freely and speedily through the whole body. On the contrary,
sometimes being surprised with grief, or fear, she contracts her self into a
narrower compass; so that shrunk up to a scantling less than her usual circuit
of emanation, she becomes of too small a size vigorously to actuate the body as
she ought. Whence the Animal faculties drooping as it were, perform their
actions either slowly and weakly, or perversely: and the Praecordia wanting
their due influx of spirits, almost flagg, suffering the blood to remain in
their conduits longer than it ought, even to danger of stagnation, and
consequently of sudden death. These two contrary Motions therefore of
Contraction and Expansion, I suppose to be the two General ones, to which all
the various Postures of the Sensitive Soul, when she is perturbed, may be
commodiously referred: it seeming to me, considering her to be exactly like a
Flame, and obnoxious to the like accidental mutations, that she is not
naturally capable of other besides these; and that how great soever the variety
of such her Mutations may be in the vast diversity of Passions, yet they are
all but several degrees, Art. 6. We are not moved to Passion, by Good or Evil,
but only when we conceive the same to concern our selves in particular.
and diverse modes of either her Extension, or Contraction.

This being then supposed, I proceed to the first and General Causes of all
Passions. Where I observe first, (what was only hinted a little before) that it
is not the simple representation of good or evil in any object, how great
soever it be, that is sufficient to raise Commotion in the sensitive Soul; for,
we usualy without perturbation behold the prosperous or adverse events
befalling other Men no ways related to us: and therefore it is further
required to the moving our affections, that the good or evil apprehended, be by
us conceived to concern ourselves in particular, or our Friends at least, and
near relations, who in this case are part of our selves. Secondly, that even
that good or evil wherein a Man conceives himself to be concerned, is not
always apprehended by him under one and the same ration or aspect; but
variously, as well in respect of the object itself, as of the Subject to which
it does more peculiarly and immediately appertain. Of the diverse rations under
which one and the same object, good or evil, may be apprehended by one and the
same Man, respectively to the various circumstances thereof; we shall more
opportunely speak anon. And as for those that respect the Subject, or Man
apprehending; it is worthy our serious remark;

Art. 7. All Passions distinguished into Physical, Metaphysical, and Moral.
That all Good or Evil represented to Man, does concern the Sensitive Soul,
either as she is distinct from the body, and abstract from all relation; or as
she is intimately conjoined to the body, and interressed therein; or finally as
she is subordinate to the Rational Soul. For, though every Affect or Passion be
founded in the Corporeal Soul, yet it always respects the good or evil of one
or other of these three subjects, and is first raised on the behalf of this,
that, or the other. Wherefore according to this triple relation of the
Sensitive Soul, all Passions incident thereto; may be said to be either
Physical, or Metaphysical, or Moral: of which in their order.

1. Passions merely Physical, Art. 8. What are passions Physical.
or which properly belong to the Sensitive Soul alone, are those natural and
occult inclinations and aversations commonly called Sympathies and Antipathies,
whereby one Man, more than another, is not only disposed, but even by secret
impuls forced to affect, or dislike such or such a person, or thing, without
any manifest cause or inducement so to do. Of Sympathies betwixt Persons there
is great variety of Examples, especialy in Lovers; among whom many are not
allured by that grand bait of the Sensitive Soul, Beauty; but strongly
attracted, and as it were fascinated by they know not what hidden Congruity or
(as the French call it) agreeableness of Spirits: which enchains them so firmly
to the persons beloved, that notwithstanding the deformities they see and
acknowledge to be in them, yea and the contempt they sometimes receive from
them, they still dote upon, and with delightful submissions court and adore
them. And as for Antipathies as well toward Persons as things; instances of
them also are without number, and many show themselves at our very table. Where
one Man abhors a breast of Mutton, yet loves the Shoulder cut from it; a second
swoons at the sight of Eels, and yet will feast upon Lampreys or Congers; a
third abominates Chees, but is pleased with Milk; a fourth devests roasted Pigg,
yet can make a meal upon bacon. This Man sweats at presence of a Cat; that
falls into an agony by casting his eye upon a Frogg or Toad; an other can never
be reconciled to Oysters. Nay more, there are who feel themselves ready to
faint, if a Cat be hidden in some secret place of the room wherein they are,
though they suspect no such encountre of their natural enemy, till they are
wounded with the invisible darts or emanations from her body. And all these
admirable Effects proceed not from any positive Evil or malignity in the things
abhorred; for, what is one Man's meat, is an others poison: but only from their
incongruity, or occult Enmity to this, or that particular Sensitive Soul. For
if at any time it happens, that the consistence of Animal Spirits that
constitute the lucid or Sensitive part of this Soul, be by the encountre of any
object, put into great disorder: she ever after abhors the approach, or
eff^luvia of the same. Whereas the Congruity of particles proceeding from an
object, to the contexture of the Soul, is on the contrary the ground of all her
secret Amities.

2. Passions Metaphysical, Art. 9. What Metaphysical.
or which seem to have their first rise from, and principaly to relate to the
Rational Soul, are those which Divines call devout and religious Affections
directed to objects Supernatural, and chiefly to God. For, when our nobler Soul
reflecting upon the excellency and immortality of her nature, aspires by
sublime speculations toward her supreme felicity, the contemplation and love of
her Creator; and determines her Will to pursue that incomprehensible, because
infinite subject of all perfections, which alone can satisfy her understanding
with light or knowledge, and her will with love: she does not only exercise
herself in simple and abstracted conceptions, such as are proper to her
immaterial essence alone, and conformable to the dignity of the thing she
speculates; but communicates her affects also to the Sensitive Soul, by whose
subordinate motions she is obliged to act respectively to her end. And these
motions or acts being thus traduced from the superior to the inferior Soul,
and thence derived first to the brain and imagination, then to the heart;
produce therein, and so in the blood, the various motions that constitute such
Passions, as we observe in our selves, when we are most ardently urged to acts
of devotion and piety toward the supreme Being. Whence it is doubtless, that
Divine love, detestation of sin, repentance, hope of Salvation, fear of
incensing Divine justice, and most, if not all other acts (or passions) of
devotion are commonly ascribed to the heart: and that not without some reason.
For, though I cannot admit the heart to be the Seat of the Passions, as the
Aristoteleans unanimously hold it to be, only because of the sensible
alterations therein produced in most passions: since in truth those alterations
are rather consequents, than causes of Passions; and since they are not felt by
us as in the heart, but only by means of the nerves descending thither from the
brain; as pain is not felt as in the foot, but by intervention of nerves
betwixt the foot and the brain; and as the stars appear to us as in heaven, by
mediation of their light affecting our Optic nerves. So that it is no more
necessary the Soul should exercise her functions, or receive her passions
immediately in the heart, only because she feels her passions therein; than it
is she should be in heaven, because she sees the stars to be there; or in the
foot, because pain appears to her to be there. Notwithstanding this I say, yet
the adscription of these devout Passions to the heart, is not altogether
destitute of reason. For, (for instance) when the inferior Soul is commanded
by the Superior, to humble, and as it were to prostrate* herself in adoration
of the sacred Majesty of God; instantly both parts thereof, as well the
Sensitive, as the Vital, are forced to repress and restrain their wonted
emanations or effusions. Whereupon the Animal Spirits being in whole legions
withdrawn from minis tring to the Imagination and Senses, are by the nerves
transmitted in crowds to the heart: which while they closely contract and shut,
they cause the blood to remain longer than is usual, in the cavities thereof,
and by that means keep it both from being too much kindled in the Lungs, and
from being sent from the heart in too great abundance into the rest of the
body, and more especialy into the brain; as if Nature itself had instituted,
that in sacred passions the blood, or principal seat of life, should be offered
up to the Author of life, upon the altar of the heart, while the brain, or seat
of reason, is kept serene and clear. Nor is it difficult to a man praying to
Almighty God with fervency of Spirit, to observe in himself, that his blood is
more and more arrested and detained within his breast the while; insomuch that
his heart seems to swell, his lungs to be oppressed, and he is forced frequently
to interrupt his oraisons with profound sighs, for attraction of fresh aer: as
if the reasonable Soul not content to devote herself alone, and pour forth her
holy desires to God, labored to make a libation also of the vital blood, for a
propitiatory oblation. So that though the Soul cannot in strictness of truth be
said to receive her passions in the heart; yet since the alterations caused in
us by them, are greater and more sensible in the heart, and consequently in the
blood, than in any other part of the whole body beside: I am not so addicted to
vitilitigation, as to contend about the propriety of those expressions in
scripture, which seem to ascribe all our sacred passions principaly to the
heart.

3. And as for Passions Moral; I refer to their classis all those that are
excited in the Sensitive Soul, Art. 10. And what Moral.
upon her perception of such good or evil objects as concern her confederate
the Body, with which she is most intimately conjoynd, and upon whose welfare
her safety does necessarily depend. Concerning these in general, it is
remarkable; that though the Sensitive Soul has secret loves and aversations of
her own, commonly called (as we have already said) Sympathies and Antipathies;
and though she owes obedience to the commands and dictates of her superior, the
Rational Soul: yet being by so strict a ligue, and as it were a conjugal union
affianced to the body, she is strongly inclined to prefer the conservation of
that her favorite, to all other relations; and accordingly to gratify and
indulge it even in those things that are prohibited by religion and reason. So
that no wonder if she be affected with pleasure, or pain, and with all other
passions referible to them, for the prosperous or adverse state of the body.

To make this our entrance into the springhead of all Passions somewhat more
lightsome; we are here to recount two fundamental verities, both of so
conspicuous evidence, I do not remember, I ever heard them contradicted.

Art. 11. All Passions referred to Pleasure or Pain.
One is, that all Affects which external objects can possibly excite in us, in
respect of the various modes or manners by which they fall under our notice,
may be commodiously referred to two general heads, namely Pleasure, and Pain.
For, whatever is perceived by the Senses, appears to the Soul to be Good, or
Evil, grateful, or offensive; and whatever is offered to her under the
appearance of Good, or Grateful, instantly causes some certain Pleasure in
her: as on the contrary, whatever is represented to her as Evil, or offensive,
as quickly raises in her some kind of Pain, or trouble: provided (as was
before advertised) she apprehend herself to be any way concerned in such good,
or evil. So that we cannot but applaud the judgment of Epicurus and Aristotle
in constituting but two kinds of Passions, namely Pleasure and Pain: the one
calling them (...), voluptatem and dolorem; the other naming them (...),
voluptatem and molestiam.

The other is, Art. 12. And all their Motions, to Contraction and Eff
that all the various motions of the spirits and blood, or of the Sensitive
Soul, excited in the various Passions, may likewise be conveniently reduced to
two general heads, namely Contractions, and Effusions; which our Master Galen,
I remember, terms (...): as they are referred to Pain and Pleasure. Because in
Pleasure, the Soul dilateth herself as much as she can, that is, she diffuseth
the spirits, as her Emissaries, to meet and receive the good represented to
her: and in Pain, she on the contrary compresseth or withdraws herself inward,
that is, she recalls the spirits toward herself, in avoidance of the Evil
apprehended.

Manifest it is therefore, that all Corporeal Passions have their roots
grounded in Sense, whereof pleasure and pain ^re two opposite affects: one,
(...), agreeable and familiar to nature; ^he other, (...), alien and offensive.

And that I may, as far as I am able, Art. 13. Wherein consist Pleasure and
displeasure of sense.
^xplain wherein pleasure and displeasure of ^^nce does consist; I take liberty
to sup^ose, that at first when an object affects ^he Sensory with soft and
smooth tou^hes, or motions, such as are consenta^eous to the delicate
contexture of the ^erves of which the sensory is chiefly composed, or to the
internal motions of the spirits therein residing; it instantly causes that
grateful sense called delight: as on the contrary, if the object invade the
sensory with asperity, or violence, such as hurts the tender nerves thereof, or
hinders the natural motions of the spirits therein; then it produces that
ungrateful sense called displeasure or pain. The impression being thus made by
the object upon the Organ of sense, and thence by a certain motion of the
spirits resembling the waving of water, carried on to the brain; if it be
pleasant, it immediately puts the spirits therein reserved, into brisker, but
regular motions conformable to their nature and uses: if displeasing, it puts
them into confusion. If the impression be light, the motion thereby caused in
the brain, soon decays, and vanishes of itself: if strong, the motion is
continued from the brain down to the breast, and the heart and blood
participate thereof respectively; and so passion instantly succeeds. But
whether this be the true manner of objects producing pleasure, or displeasure
of sense, or not, most evident it is, that we have, as no conceptions of things
without us in the brain, so no passions for them in the heart, but what have
their first original from Sense.

Now having in this manner shown as plainly as I could (1) what Mutations are
incident to the Sensitive Soul (2) what are the most considerable Causes of
those Mutations (3) what the most remarkable Effects and consequents of them
upon the body and mind of Man (4) the Differences of Passions respective to the
various relations of the Sensitive Soul to the Rational, Art. 14. A rehearsal
of the heads handled in this Section.
and to the body (5) that all passions are referible to pleasure, or pain (6)
that all Motions of the Spirits and blood caused in passions, belong to
Contraction, or Effusion: and (7) wherein consist pleasure and displeasure of
Sense: our next work must be to speak

SECT. V. Of the Passions in particular.
NOt of all that are incident to the mind of Man, Art. 11. Why Men have not
been able to observe all Passions incident to the Sensitive Soul.
which were extremely difficult, if not altogether impossible for me to do.
For, seeing the objects that raise pleasure and displeasure are innumerable;
and the various ways or manners by which they affect the sense, and excite
motions in the brain, spirits and heart, are equaly innumerable: even those
Philosophers themselves who have with all possible attention of mind labored
to search out the several sorts of Passions, have not been able to take notice
but of very few, nor to give names to all those neither. Besides, considering
of how subtle particles, how fluid and easily moveable a substance, and how
delicate a contexture the Sensitive Soul seems to be composed; we may soon
conceive her to be subject to greater variety of impressions, commotions,
fluctuations, inclinations, alterations and perturbations, than can possibly be
observed and distinguished even by the most curious. It may well suffice then
to enumerate and describe the most remarkable of her Passions, such as like so
many lesser streams, flow from the two general fountains before mentioned,
Pleasure and Displeasure of sense, or motions begun in the sensory, traduced to
the brain, and continued to the heart; and that are of a more simple nature.

Art. 2. The Passions best distinguished by having respect to the circumstances
of Time.
Which that we may perform with more of order, and less of obscurity; we are to
consider, that the Passions receiving their most notable diversity from certain
circumstances of Time, may therefore be most intelligibly distinguished by
having respect to the same Circumstances. For, since there are of Conceptions
three sorts, whereof one is of that which is present, which is sense; another,
of that which is past, which is Remembrance; and the third, of that which is to
come, which is called Expectation: it is manifestly necessary, that the
condition of the pleasure, or displeasure consequent to conceptions, be
diversified, according as the Good or Evil thereby proposed to the Soul, is
present, or absent. For, we are pleased, or displeased even at things past;
because the Memory reviving and reviewing their images, sets them before the
Soul as present, and she is affected with them no less than if the things
themselves were present. So also of things future; forasmuch as the Soul by a
certain providence preoccupying the images of things that she conceives to
come, looks upon them as realy present, and is accordingly pleased or
displeased by Anticipation: every conception being pleasure, or displeasure
present. This being presupposed we proceed to the Genealogy of the passions.

When the image of any new and strange object is presented to the Soul, Art. 3.
Admiration.
and gives her hope of knowing somewhat that she knew not before; instantly she
admireth it, as different from all things she has already known; and in the
same instant entertains an appetite to know it better, which is called
Curiosity or desire of Knowledge. And because this Admiration may, and most
commonly is excited in the Soul before she understands, or considers whether
the object be in itself convenient to her or not: therefore it seems to be the
first of all passions, next after Pleasure and Pain; and to have no Contrary:
because when an object perceived by the sense, has nothing in it of new and
strange; we are not at all moved thereby, but consider it indifferently, and
without any commotion of the Soul. Common it is doubtless to Man with Beasts;
but with this difference, that in Man it is always conjoined with Curiosity; in
Beasts, not. For when a Beast sees any thing new and strange, he considers
it so far only as to discern whether it be likely to serve his turn, or to hurt
him; and acordingly approaches nearer to it, or flees from it: whereas Man,
who in most events remembers in what manner they were caused and begun, looks
for the cause and beginning of every thing that arises new to him Whence it is
manifest, that all natural Philosophy, and Astronomy owe themselves to this
passion: and that ignorance is not more justly reputed the mother of
Admiration, than Admiration may be accounted the mother of knowledge; the
degrees whereof among Men, proceed from the degrees of Curiosity. Now this
Passion is reducible to delight, because Curiosity is delight: and so by
consequence is Novelty too, but especialy that novelty from which a Man
conceives an opinion of bettering his own estate, whether that opinion be true
or false: for in such case, he stands affected with the hope that all Gamesters
have while the Cards are shuffling; as Mr Hobbs has judiciously observed.

Nevertheless it seems rather a calm than a tempest of the mind. For, Art. 4.
Which causes no commotion in the heart and blood.
in Admiration, whereby the Soul is fixed upon the contemplation of an object
that appears to her new and strange, and therefore well worthy her highest
consideration; the Animal spirits are indeed suddenly determined, and with
great force, partly to that part of the brain, where the image is newly formed,
and partly to the Muscles that serve to hold the organs of the external senses
in the same posture in which they then are, that so the object may be more
clearly and distinctly perceived: yet in the heart and blood there happens
little or no commotion or alteration at all. Whereof the reason seems to be
this; that since the Soul at that time, has for her object, not good or evil,
but only the Knowledge of the thing which she admires; she converts all her
power upon the brain alone, wherein all sense is performed, by the help whereof
that knowledge is to be acquired. And

Art. 5. And yet is dangerous, when immoderate.
Hence it comes, that Excess of Admiration sometimes induces a Stupor, or
Astonishment; and where it lasts long, that wonderful disease of the brain,
which Physicians name Catalepsis, whereby a Man is held stiff, motionless, and
senseless, as if he were turned into a statue. For it causes that all the
Animal Spirits in the brain are so vehemently employed in contemplating and
conserving the image of the object, that their usual influx into other parts of
the body is wholly intercepted, nor can they by any means be diverted: whereby
all members of the body are held in a rigid posture, inflexible as those of a
dead carcas, or of Man killed by lightning. Of this admirable effect of
excessive Admiration, Nich. Tulpius, an eminent Physician of Amsterdam, has
recorded (observe. medic. lib. 1. cap. 22.) a memorable Example in a young Man
of our Nation, who violently resenting a sudden and unexpected repulse in his
love, and astonished thereat, became as it were congealed in the same posture,
and continued rigid in his whole body till next day. Immoderate Admiration
therefore cannot but be, by fixation of the Spirits, hurtful to health.

After admiration follows Esteem, Art 6. Estimation and Contempt.
or Contempt, according as the thing appears great and worthy estimation, or of
small value and contemptible. For which reason we may esteem or contemn
ourselves also: from whence arise first the Passions, and consequently the
Habits of Magnanimity, or Pride; and of Humility or Abjection. But if the Good
that we have a great esteem of in another man, be extraordinary: then our
esteem is increased to Veneration; which is the conception we have concerning
another, that he has the power to do unto us both good and hurt, but not the
will to do us hurt; accompanied with an inclination of the Soul to subject
ourselves to him, and by fear and reverence to purchase his favor. All which
is evident in our worship or veneration of God*

Art. 7. Both consequents of Admiration.
That these two contrary Passions* Existimation and Contempt, are both
consequents of Admiration; is inferrible from hence, that when we do not admire
the the greatness or smalness of an object, we make neither more nor less of it
than reason tells us we ought to do; so that in such case we value or despise
it without being concerned therein, that is, without passion. And although it
often happens, that Estimation is excited by Love, and Contempt proceeds from
Hatred; yet that is not universal, nor does it arise from any other cause but
this, that we are more or less prone to consider the greatness or meanness of
an object, because we more or less love it.

Art. 8. That there is no just cause for a man to have a high value for himself
but the right use of his free will.
But though Estimation and Contempt may be referred to any objects whatsoever,
yet are they then chiefly observed, when they are referred to ourselves, that
is, when we put great or small value upon our own merit. And then the motions
of the Spirits upon which they depend, are so discernible, that they change the
very countenance, gestures, walking, and in word all the actions of those who
think more haughtily or meanly of themselves than is usual. But for what may we
have a high esteem of ourselves? Truly I can observe but one thing that may
give us just cause of self-estimation; and that is the lawful use of our free
will, and the soveraignity we exercise over our Passions. For (as the
incomparable Monsieur des Carts most wisely notes) take away the actions
dependent upon our Free will, and nothing will remain for which we can deserve
to be praised or dispraised with reason: and that in truth renders us in some
sort like unto God Almighty, by making us Lords of ourselves; provided we do
not through carelessness and poorness of Spirit, lose the rights and power that
royal prerogative of our nature conferreth upon us. Wherefore I am of the same
Des Carts his opinion, that true Generosity, which makes a Man measure his own
merit by right reason, does consist only in this; that he both knows he has
nothing truly his own, except this free disposition of his Will, nor for which
he justly can be commended or blamed, but that he uses that liberty well: and
finds in himself a firm and constant purpose still so to do; that is, never to
want will to undertake and perform all things that he shall have judged to be
the better; which is perfectly to follow Virtue.

Whereas Pride, Art 9. Pride.
which is a kind of Triumph of the mind from an high Estimation of ones-self
without just cause, expressed chiefly by haughty looks, ostentation in words,
and insolency in action; is a Vice so unreasonable and absurd, that if there
were no Adulation to deceive men into a better conceit of themselves than they
realy deserve; I should number it among the kinds of Madness. But the
contagious air of Assentation is diffused so universaly, and has infected the
tongues of so great a part of mankind, that even the most imperfect frequently
hear themselves commended and magnified for their very defects: which gives
occasion to persons of stupid heads, and weak minds, and consequently of easy
belief, to fall into this Tympany of Pride or false Glory. A passion so far
different from true Generosity, that it produces effects absolutely contrary
thereunto. For, since other Goods, besides the virtuous Habit of using the
liberty of our wills according to the dictates of right reason, as Wit, Beauty,
Riches, Honors and the like, are therefore the more esteemed, because they are
rare, and cannot be communicated to many at once: this makes Proud men labor
to depress others, while themselves being inslaved to their own vicious
cupidities, have their Souls uncessantly agitated by Hate, Jealousy, or Anger.

The contrary to Self-estimation, Art. 10. Humility*
is Humility: whereof there are likewise two Sorts; one, Virtuous or Honest;
the other, Vicious or base.

The Virtuous, Virtuous*
which is properly named Humility, consists only in that reflection we make
upon the infirmity of our nature, and upon the errors we either have heretofore
committed, or may in time to come commit: and makes us therefore not to prefer
ourselves before others, but to think them equaly capable of using their
freedom of Will, as well as ourselves. Whence it is, that the most Generous are
also the most Humble. For being truly conscious both of their own infirmity,
and of their constant purpose to Surmount it, by doing none but virtuous
actions, that is, by the right use of the liberty of the Will, they easily
persuade themselves, that others also have the same just sentiments, and the
same good resolution in themselves; because therein is nothing that depends
upon another. Wherefore they never despise any man, and though they often see
others to fall into such Errors that discover their weakness; yet are they
still more prone to excuse, than to condemn them, and to believe their faults
proceeded rather from want of knowledge and circumspection, than from defect of
an inclination and will to good. So that as on the one side, they think not
themselves much inferior to those who possess more of the goods of Fortune, or
exceed them in wit, learning, beauty etc. So neither do they on the other,
think themselves to be much Superior to others, who have less of those
perfections; because they look upon such qualities as not worth much
consideration, in comparison of that goodness of Will, upon which alone they
have a just valuation of themselves, and which they suppose that every man
equaly has, or at least may have. This Humility therefore is inseparable from
true Generosity: and being well grounded, always produces Circumspection or
Caution, which is fear to attempt any thing rashly.

Art 11. Vicious or Dejection of Spirit.
The Vicious Humility, which is distinguished by the name of Dejection or
Poorness of Spirit, proceeds likewise from an apprehension of our own
infirmity; but with this difference, that a man conceives himself to be so far
deprived of the right and use of Fre-will, that he cannot but do things
against his inclination, and of which he ought afterward to repent; and
believes himself not able to subsist of himself, but to want many things whose
acquisition depends upon another. So it is directly opposite to Generosity or
Bravery of mind, and it is commonly observed, that poor and abject Spirits are
also Arrogant and Vainglorious: as the Generous are most modest and humble.
For, these are above both the smiles and and frowns of Fortune, still calm and
serene as well in adversity as prosperity: but those being slaves to Fortune,
and wholly guided by her, are puffed up by her favorable gales, and blown down
again by her gusts. Nor is it a rarity to see men of of this base and servile
temper, to descend to shameful submissions, where they either expect some
benefit, or fear some evil: and at the same time to carry themselves insolently
and contemptuously to ward others, from whom they neither hope nor fear any
thing. This Ague of the Soul then, being ill grounded, does so shake a man with
distrust of himself, that it utterly Cows him, and keeps him from daring to
attempt any worthy action, for fear of ill success: which Vice the Lord Bacon
calls Restifeness of mind, and falling out of love with ones-self.

There is yet another remarkable Passion that seems to belong to Humility,
Art. 12. Shame and Impudence*
and that is Shame. Which arises from an unwary discovery of some Defect or
infirmity in us, the remembrance whereof sensibly dejecteth us, and puts us for
the most part to the Blush, which is its proper Sign. That it is a sort of
Modesty or diffidence of our selves, is manifest from hence; that when a man
thinks so well of himself, as not to imagine another can have just cause to
contemn him; he cannot easily be checkd by Shame: and as the Good that is or
has been in us, if considered with respect to the opinion others may conceive
of us, does excite Glory in us; so does the Evil whereof we are conscious,
produce Shame. And yet it cannot be denied but that in this discouraging Affect
there is also some mixture of Grief or secret regret, proceeding from
apprehension of Dispraise: because being ever accompanied with inward
displeasure at the defect or fault uncircumspectly discovered, it cools or
damp's the Spirits, teaching more wariness for the future. The Contrary to
this, is Impudence; which is contempt of Shame, yea and oftentimes of Glory
too. But because there is in us no special motion of the Spirits and heart,
that may excite Imprudence; it seems to be no Passion, but a certain Vice
opposite to Shame, and to Glory also, so far forth as they are both good and
laudable: as Ingratitude is opposed to Gratitude, and Cruelty to Commiseration.
And the chief cause of this vicious insensibility of Honor, is founded in
grievous contumelies to which a man has been accustomed in former times, and
which he by degrees comes to despise, as of no force to hinder his enjoyment of
commodities belonging to his body, whereby he measures all good and evil:
thereby freeing himself from many necessities and streights to which honor
would have obliged him. This therefore being no Passion, we are not concerned
here further to consider it.

But as for Pride and Dejection; that they are not only Vices, but Passions
too, Art. 13. That Pride and its contrary, Abjectness of Spirit, are notonly
Vices but Passions also.
is evident enough from the commotion of the Spirits and blood that discovers
itself outwardly in men surprised by them upon any new and sudden occasion.
The same may be said of Generosity also and Humility. For, notwithstanding
their Motions be less quick and conspicuous, and that there seem to be much
less of Convenience or fellowship betwixt Virtue and Passion, than between
Passion and Vice; yet no reason appears, why the same Motion that serves to
confirm a conception that is ill grounded, may not serve likewise to confirm
the same conception though itbe well grounded. And because Pride and Generosity
consist equaly in Self-esteem* differing only in the injustice and justice
thereof: they seem to be but one and the same Passion originaly excited by a
certain motion, not simple, but composed of the motions of Admiration, Joy and
Love, as well that love which is conceived for onesself, as that for the thing
which makes one to value himself: as on the Contrary, the Motion that causes
Humility, whether it be Virtuous or Vicious, seems to be composed of the
motions of Admiration, Grief, and self-love mixed with Hatred of the Defects
that give occasion to one to conceive a mean opinion of himself. Now what are
the Motions of the Spirits or Sensitive Soul, that produce Admiration and
Pride; we have formerly declared: and as to those that are proper to each of
the other passions already considered; they remain to be particularly described
in their due places.

Art. 14. Love and hatred.
As Admiration, the first of all the Passions, arises in the Soul before she
has considered whether the thing represented to her, be good and convenient to
her, or not: so after she has judged it to be good, instantly there is raised
in her the most agreeable and complacent of all Passions, Love; and when she
has conceived the same to be Evil, she is as quickly moved to Hatred. For Love
seems to be nothing but a Propension of the Soul to that thing which promises
pleasure or good to her: and Hatred is nothing but the Souls Aversation from
that which threatens Pain or Grief.

By the word Propension here used, is to be understood, not Cupidity or desire,
which is in truth a distinct passion proceeding from love, and always
respecting the future; but Will or consent by which we consider ourselves as
already joined to the thing loved, by a certain conception of ourselves to be
as it were a part thereof. As on the contrary, in Aversation or Hate, we
consider ourselves as entirely separate from the thing hated.

According to these two opposite notions, Art. 15. Defined.
I should define Love to be a Commotion of the Soul, produced by a motion of
the Spirits, which inciteth her to join herself, by her will, to objects that
appear convenient and grateful to her: and Hatred, to be a Commotion produced
by the spirits, that inciteth the Soul to be willing to be separated from
objects that are represented to her as ungrateful and hurtful.

Of Love there are made by the Schools two Sorts, Art. 16. Love, not well
distinguished into Benevolence and concupiscence.
whereof the first is commonly called Amor Benevolentiae, love of Benevolence
or Good Will, whereby we are incited to wish well to the thing we love: the
other, Amor Concupiscentiae, which causes us to desire to enjoy or possess the
object loved. But this Distinction, if considered without prejudice, will be
found to concern only the Effects of love, not the essence of it. For, so soon
as a man has in Will joined himself to an object, of what nature soever it be;
he is at the same instant carried toward it by Benevolence, or (to speak more
plainly) he in will also adjoyns thereunto what things he believes conducible
to the good thereof: which is one of the principle Effects of love, but does
not infer a different Species of it. And the same object, if it be judged good
to be possessed, or to be joined to the Soul in another manner than by the will
alone* is instantly desired: which also ought to be accounted among the more
frequent effects of love. Whence I conclude, that Desire connexed to Love, is
Benevolence: as connexed with Hate, it is Malevolence or ill will. I add, that
as Amity or Friendship seems to be nothing but constancy of Love: so Enmity,
nothing but constancy of Hatred.

Art. 17. But by the various degrees of E^^imation.
If then you seek for a more genuine Distinction of Love, I know not how better
to gratify your Curiosity, than by entertaining it with that delivered by the
most excellent Monsieur Des Carts in his book concerning the Passions; which I
will therefore faithfully recite. Love (says He) may, in my judgment, be with
good reason distinguished by the several degrees of Esteem we have of the thing
loved. For, when a man has less esteem for an object, than for himself, and
yet loves it; his love is no more but simple Propension or Benevolence: when as
much as for himself, it is Amity or Friendship; when greater than for himself,
it may be called Devotion. By the First, a flower, a Bird, a Horse etc. may be
loved. By the second, no man of understanding can love any thing but Men, who
are so properly the object^ of this passion, that one can hardly be found so
imperfect, but he may be conjoined to another in the most perfect bond of
friendship, if that other conceive himself to be truly and sincerely beloved
by him, and think him to have a Soul truly noble and generous. And as for the
last, Devotion; indeed the principal object thereof is God Almighty, toward
whom there is no man living, who considers as he ought, the incomprehensible
perfections of the Divine nature, but must be devote (for, as Seneca, Deum
colit, qui novit) Yet there is a Devotion also to ones Prince, or Country, or
City, or to any private person, whom we esteem above ourselves. And the
difference betwixt these three sorts of Love, is chiefly manifest from their
diverse Effects. For when in each of them the person loving considers himself as
joined and united to the thing loved; he is always ready to quit or leave the
least part of the whole that he makes with the same, to preserve the rest.
Whence it comes that in simple Benevolence, the Lover always prefer's himself
to the thing loved: but on the contrary, in Devotion, he always prefers the
thing loved, so far above himself, that he fears not to dye for the
conversation thereof, of which noble Love there have been glorious Examples in
men who have voluntarily exposed themselves to certain death, for defense of
their Prince, or of their City, yea sometimes also for private persons to whom
they had particularly devoted themselves.

Art. 18. That there are not so many distinct sorts of Love, as of objects to
excite it.
This Distinction being admitted (as in my opinion it well deserves to be) there
will remain no necessity of constituting so many distinct sorts of Love, as
they are various objects to excite it: seeing there are many Passions very
different among themselves, and in respect of their several objects, which yet
agree in this, that they all participate of Love. For Example, the Passion by
which the Ambitious is carried on to Glory, the Avaricious to riches, the
Drunkard to wine, the Libidinous to women, the Honest to his friend, the
Vxorious to his wife, the good Father to his Children, etc. differ very much
among themselves, and yet so far resemble each other, that they all participate
of Love. But the love of the first four aims at nothing but the possession of
their peculiar objects; nor have they indeed any thing of love for those
objects, but only Desire mixed with some other special passions. Whereas the
love of a Parent to his Children, is so pure, that he desires to obtain nothing
at all from them, nor to possess them in any other manner than he does already,
or to bring them to a nearer conjunction with himself; but considering them as
parts of himself, seeks their good as his own, yea with greater care than his
own, as not fearing to purchase their felicity at the rate of his own undoing.
And the Love of an honest man to his Friends, is also of the same perfection.
But the Love of a man to his Mistress, commonly distinguished by the name of
the Erotic passion; is always mixed with desire of Fruition.

Art 19. Hatred less various than Love.
And as for Hatred; though that be directly opposed to Love: yet cannot it be
distinguished into as many different kinds; because the difference betwixt
Evils from which we are by our will separated, cannot be so well observed, as
that which is betwixt the Goods to which we are by by our will joined.

Art. 20. Desire, always a Consequent of Love.
From what has here been said concerning Love, as distinguishable chiefly by
the several degrees of Estimation conceived for the thing loved, it may easily
be collected* that from Love arises Cupidity or Desire, whereby the Soul is
disposed to covet for the time to come, those things which she represent's to
herself as convenient and likely to afford her pleasure. Thus we desire not
only the presence of an absent good, but also the conservation of the good
that is present: yea we desire likewise the absence of Evil, as well that which
is already incumbent, as that which we believe possible to come upon us in the
future. For in Cupidity or Desire of any thing whatsoever, which the Soul
judges to be wanting to herself; she always looks foreward to the time to
come.

Art. 21. But not always Concomitant of it.
It may be collected also, that though Desire cannot be without Love, yet Love
may be without Desire of possessing or enjoying the object, otherwise than by
the pure embraces of the will alone. And this may be confirmed by observations
of the different Motions of the Soul and Spirits raised in these two Passions,
and the diverse symptoms consequent thereunto. For

In Love, Art. 22. The Motions of the Soul and Spirits in Love, and their
Symtoms.
when it is not accompanied either with Cupidity, or with vehement Joy, or with
Sadness, but continues pure and simple; the Soul being incited to conjoyn
herself in will to objects that appear good and convenient to her, and
instantly dilated; the Animal Spirits are like lightning dispatched from the
brain by the nerves instantly into the Heart; and by their influx render the
pulse thereof more strong and vigorous than is usual, and consequently the
circulation of the blood more nimble and expedite. Whereupon the blood being
more copiously diffused by the arteries, and more particularly those ascending
to the brain, carries with it a recruit of vital spirits newly enkindled: which
being there further sublimed or refined, and corroborating the idea or image
that the first cogitation has formed of the thing loved, oblige and in some
sort compel the the Soul to continue fixed upon that cogitation, and
continually to indulge the same. And herein, if I am not much mistaken, does
the passion of Love principally consist. For, they who are affected therewith,
have their pulse equal (the Spirits that cause it, being immitted into the
Cardiac nerves with an equal and placid motion) but stronger and more frequent
then ordinary; they feel a certain agreeable heat diffused in their breast; they
find their brain invigorated by abundance of Spirits, and thereby grow more
ingenuous; and in fine they digest their meat quickly, and perform all actions
of life readily and with alacrity. All which may be ascribed to the free and
expedite, but equal Circulution of the blood, caused by a copious influx of
Animal Spirits into the Heart. Whence we may safely conclude, that this
grateful passion is highly beneficial to all parts of the body, and conduces
much to the conservation of health; provided it continue within the bounds of
moderation. But if it exceed them, and break forth into a wild and furious
desire; then on the contrary, by degrees enervating the members, it at length
induces very great weakness and decay upon the whole body. For, Love
accompanied with vehement desire, does so entirely employ the Soul in the
consideration of the object desired, that she retains in the brain the greatest
part of the Spirits, there to represent to her the image thereof: so that the
whole stock of nerves, and all the Muscles are defrauded of the influx of
Spirits from the brain, with which they ought to be continualy inspired or
invigorated. Whence in process of time the whole Economy of nature is
perverted, and an universal languor ensues.

And in Cupidity, Art. 23. The Motions of the Soul and Spirits in desire.
whereby the Soul is so effused toward good or pleasure represented to her as
certainly to come, as that she is suddenly checked and contracted again by
reflection upon the delay of the same; there occurs this Singular, that it
agitateth the heart more violently, and crowds the brain with more legions of
spirits, than any other of all the passions. For out of Desire to obtain what
we ardently pursue, the Spirits are most swiftly transmitted from the brain
into all parts of the body that may any way serve to do the actions requisite
to that end; but above all into the Heart. which being thereby dilated and
contracted both more strongly and more frequently than in the state of
tranquillity, quickly forces up a more abundant supply of Vital Spirits with
the blood into the brain; as well that they may there conserve and corroborate
the Idea of this Desire, as that whole brigades of them may be from thence
dispatched into the Organs of the Senses, and into all Muscles, whose motions
may more especially conduce to obtain what is so vehemently desired. And from
the Souls reflection upon the delay of her fruition, which she at the same time
makes; there arises in her a solicitude or trouble, whereby she is checked
and contracted again, and the spirits are by intervals retracted toward the
brain. So that the more subtle and spiritual blood being with the spirits
recalled from the outward parts, the heart comes to be constringed and
straightened, the Circulation of the blood retarded, and consequently the whole
body left without spirits and vigor. Let none therefore admire, if many of
those Men whom Lust, or Concupiscence, Ambition, Avarice, or any other more
fervent desire has long exercised and inslaved, be by continual solicitude of
mind, brought at length into an ill Habit of body, to leanness, a defect of
Nutrition, Melancholy, the Scurvy, Consumption and other incurable diseases.
Nor are you after this so clear manifestation of the great disparity betwixt
the Motions and necessary Consequents of Love when pure and simple, and those
of Love commixt with Cupidity or ardent Desire of enjoyment, longer to doubt,
but that Love and Desire are Passions essentially different; notwithstanding it
be true, that the Later is always dependent upon the Former.

And as for the Motions of the Spirits and blood in that anxious Affect of the
mind, Hatred, Art. 24. The Motions of the Spirits and blood in Hatred.
which is directly opposed to Love, evident it is, that when the Soul is moved
to withdraw herself from any object that appears to threaten Evil or pain,
instantly the Spirits are retracted inwards to the brain, and principaly to
that part of it which is the instrument or mint of Imagination; there to
corroborate the idea of Hatred, which the first thought has formed of the
ungrateful object; and to dispose the Soul to sentiments full of bitterness and
detestation: So that the while, very few of them, and those too inordinately
and by unequal impulses, are transmitted into the Heart, by the Pathetic
nerves, And from this offensive Contraction of the whole Sensitive Soul, and as
it were compression of the Animal spirits, and subsequent destitution of the
Heart, it comes, that in this sour passion always the Pulse is made weak and
unequal, and oftentimes frequent and creeping; that cold, mixed with a certain
pricking heat not easy to be described, but sensibly injurious to the vital
parts, and repugnant to their regular motions, is felt within the breast; and
that even the stomach itself, diverted from its office of Concoction,
nauseateth the meats it had received, and strives to reject them by vomit.
Which often happens upon sight of an odious and abominable object. Now all
these evil effects of Hate, give indisputable evidence, that it can never be
either grateful to the mind, or beneficial to the motions of life, upon which
health so nearly depends: and this, because Hate always has Sadness for its
concomitant; and because by diversion of the Animal spirits, partly to assist
the Imagination, partly to move the members for avoidance of the hated object,
it defrauds the blood of its due supplies of spirits and fuel, retards the
motion and equal distribution of it, and by that means destroies concoction,
incrassates the humors, heaps up melancholy, and by degrees brings the whole
body to poverty and leanness. Moreover, sometimes this disagreeable Passion is
exalted to Anger, whereby the Soul, offended with the Evil or wrong she has
suffered, at first Contracts herself, and by and by with vehemence springs back
again to her natural posture of Coextension with the whole body, as if the
strove to break out into revenge: and then it is that the spirits are in a
tumultuous manner, and impetuously hurried hither and thither, now from the
brain to the heart, then back again from the heart to the brain; and so there
follow from these contrary motions alternately reciprocated, as well a violent
agitation, palpitation, burning and anxiety of the heart; as a diffusion of the
blood, distension of the veins, redness of the face, and sparkling of the eyes,
together with a distorsion of the mouth (such as may be observed in great
indignation, and seems composed of laughter and weeping mixed together) grinding
of the teeth, and other symptoms of Anger and fury. It is not then without
reason Physicians advise Men to decline this passion, as a powerful enemy to
health in all but such as are of a cold, dull, and phlegmatic temperament;
because it inflames first the spirits, then the blood, and when violent, it
puts us into fevers, and other acute distempers, by accension of choler, and
confusion of humors. And I could furnish you with examples of some whom this
short fury has fired into perpetual madness, of others whom it has felled
with Apoplexies, others whom it has thrown into Epilepsies, racked with
Convulsions, unnerved with Palseys, disjoynted with the Gout, shook with
tremblings, and the like: but that the books of Physicians are full of them.

Art. 25. Hate always accompanied* with Sadness
Here before we proceed to other consequent Passions, it is fit to make a short
reflection upon Hatred, that I may verify what was only hinted in the precedent
enumeration of the evil Effects thereof, viz. that it is ever accompanied with
Sadness. Concerning this therefore I reason thus. Forasmuch as Evil, the proper
object of Hate, is nothing but a Privation; and that we can have no conception
thereof without some real Subject wherein we apprehend it to be; and that there
is in nature nothing real which has not some goodness in it: it follows of
necessity, that Hatred, which withdraws us from some Evil, does at the same
time remove us also from some Good to which the same is conjoined. And since
the Privation of this Good, is represented to the Soul as a Defect or want
belonging to her: it instantly affects her with sorrow. For Example; the Hate
that alienateth us from the evil manners of a man with whom formerly we have
been acquainted, separateth us likewise from his Conversation, wherein we might
find something of Good: and to be deprived of that Good, is matter of regret and
Sorrow. So in all other Hatred, we may soon observe some cause of Sorrow.

To the excitement of Desire in the Soul, Art. 26. Hope and Fear.
it is sufficient that she conceive the acquisition of the Good, or avoidance
of the Evil represented to her as to come, to be possible: but if she further
consider whether it be Easy or Difficult for her to obtain her end; and there
occur to her more reasons for the facility: then there succeeds that gentle
Effusion or Tendency of the Soul toward the good desired, which is called Hope
or Expectation of good to come. Whereas on the contrary, if the greater weight
be found in the other Scale, and she apprehend the thing desired, to be
Difficult; she is immediately Contracted, and coold with that ungrateful
passion, Fear, which is expectation of Evil to come. And as Hope exalted to the
highest degree, is changed into Trust, Confidence or Security: So on the
contrary, Fear in extremity becomes Desperation. Again, if this Contraction of
the Soul by Fear, be sudden and profound, and the Evil expected very great;
then is the passion called Terror, Dread and Consternation, which sometimes is
so violent, as to cause Exanimation or sudden Death.

Art. 27. Pusillanimity and Courage.
If the Soul, upon apprehension that the Good desired, is not indeed absolutely
impossible, but highly difficult for her to obtain; or the Evil feared, is not
altogether impossible, yet extremely hard to be avoided; persist in her
Contraction: she is daunted or cowd into that ignoble weakness called
Pusillanimity or Cowardice. But if after her Contraction at first, she
exserting her strength, spring forth as it were, and with vehemence dilate
herself, to surmount her fear, and overcome the difficulties apprehended: then
is she reanimated as it were, or fortified with the noblest of all Passions,
Courage or Boldness, or Bravery of Mind, which makes her contemn all obstacles
to her attainment of her end, whether it be the acquisition of good, or
declination of Evil; and which (when it is not a habit or natural inclination)
seems to be an ardor or flashing of the Sensitive Soul, disposing her to act
vigorously, and without fear, toward the vanquishing of difficulties that stand
betwixt her and the scope she aims at.

And of this Animosity, Emulation is a species, whereby the Soul is disposed to
attempt or enetrprise difficult things, Art. 28. Emulation, a species of
Magnanimity.
which she hopes will succeed happily to her, because she observes them to do
so to others. But then it is to be distinguished from simple Animosity by two
proprieties. Whereof One is, that it has not only an internal Cause, viz. such
a disposition of the spirits and body, that Desire and Hope may have greater
power in impelling the blood in abundance to the heart, than Fear or Despair
can have in hindering that motion: but also an external Cause, namely, the
Example of others who have been prosperous in the like attempts, which creates
a belief in us, that we also shall be able to conquer the difficulties
occurring afwell as those others have done. The Other, this; that Emulation is
ever accompanied with secret Grief, which arises from seeing ourselves
exceeded or excelled by our concurrents. But simple Animosity wants both
Example for incitement, and Grief for alloy. But both these passions equaly
depend upon Hope of good success. For,

Though the object of Audacity be difficulty, yet to animate us to contend
bravely with that difficulty, Art. ^^. Confidence* and Despair.
we must be possessed with a strong hope, or certain belief, that we shall at
length attain our end. Yet this end is not the same thing with that object;
for, there cannot be both Certitude and Despair of the same thing at the same
time. So when the Roman Decii rushed into the thickest troops of their enemies,
and ran to certain death; the object of their daring was the difficulty of
conserving their lives in that action, for which difficulty they had nothing
but Desperation, being resolved certainly to dye: but their End was, either by
their example to inspire courage into the Roman army, and by them to obtain the
victory they hoped; or to acquire posthume Glory, whereof they were certain. If
therefore even in this action that was in itself desperate, Courage were
grounded upon Hope; we may well conclude, that it is always so.

Art. 30* Doubting.
From the reasons we have alleged of Hope and Fear, it is evident, that we may
have those contrary passions excited in us, though the Event of the thing
expected no way depend upon our selves. But when we proceed to consider the
Event as altogether, or for the most part depending upon our own counsel, and
perceive a difficulty to arise either in our election, or execution of the
means whereby to obtain our end: then there immediately follows a Doubting or
Fluctuation of the mind, whereby we are disposed to deliberate and consult; and
which is indeed a species of Fear. And this wavering, while it retains the Soul
as it were in a doubtful balance betwixt two actions which are offered to her
election; is the cause that she performs neither, but takes time to consider
before she determines which to do, for fear of erring in her choice. Which
Fear, if moderate and under the command of Prudence, is always of good use; in
that it serves to prevent Temerity or Rashness: but in some over-cautious
persons, it is so vehement, that though but one thing occurr to be done or
omitted by them, it holds them too long upon the rack of suspense, and hinders
them from proceeding to action. And in this case, the passion is Excess of
Doubting, arising from too ardent desire of good success, and weakness of
Understanding, which has indeed many confused notions, but none perspicuous
and distinct concerning the means to effect its design.

If during this irresolution, Art. 31* Remorse and acquiescence
we have determined the liberty of our choice, and fixed upon some one action
in order to our end; and the event be not answerable to our expectation:
presently we are affected with that disquiet of mind, which is named by the
Greeks, Synteresis; by the Latins, Morsus Conscientiae; and by the French,
Regret; which yet does not (as the precedent passions) respect the future, but
present or past time* This Remorse of Conscience is no other but a kind of
Sorrow, arising from a scruple interposed, whether what we are doing, or have
done, be good, or not. And it necessarily presupposes dubitation. For, if we
were clearly convinced that the action we are doing, is realy evil; we should
certainly abstain from doing it: because the will is not carried to any thing,
but what has some show of goodness in it. And if it were manifest, that what
we have done, is realy evil: we should presently be touched not with simple
regret, but with Repentance. For, as the Good we have done, gives us that
internal Acquiescence or satisfaction, which is of all other Passions the
sweetest: so on the contrary, the ill we have done, punishes us with
Repentance, which is of all passions the bitterest.

Having in this manner discovered the originals and distinct proprieties of
these two opposite Passions, Hope and Fear, with their genuin dependents; it
may not a little conduce to the illustration of what has here been briefly
delivered concerning them, if we more expressly describe the diverse Motions of
the Sensitive Soul and Spirits that constitute their formal reasons, so far at
least as those motions are observable from their respective Characters or
Effects.

In Hope therefore (which we defined to be a gentle and sweet Effusion or
Expansion of the Soul toward some good expected to come) if we be possessed
with an opinion, Art. 32.* The Motions of the Soul and Spirits in Hope.
that the thing desired will shortly come to pass; I conceive that presently
the Animal Spirits, which before were employed as Emissaries, to contemplate
the image of the object, returning toward the Soul, give notice of the approach
of the guest expected: and that thereupon the whole Soul composing herself by
expansion to receive and welcome the same, sets open all the doors of the
Senses to admit more freely all the good belonging thereunto; retains the
imagination fixed and intent upon the grateful idea thereof; and by copious
supplies of spirits dispatched into the nerves of the Heart, so invigorates and
quickens the pulse thereof, that thereby the blood is more briskly sent forth
into the outward parts of t he body, as it were to meet the expected thing.
Whence it is, that when we are full of Hope, we feel a certain inflation both
within and without in our whole body, together with a glowing but pleasant
heat, from the blood and spirits universaly diffused. But if during this
comfortable emotion of the Soul, there occurr any sudden cause of Doubt or
fear; she is instantly checked and coold into an anxious Retraction of herself,
and a sinking of the spirits, so that the motion of the heart becomes weaker
and slower, and the external parts grow languid and pale. For,

Art. 33. The Motions of the Soul and Spirits in Fear.
In Fear, the Sensitive Soul, which was before expansed, being surprised with
apprehension of approaching Evil, and willing to decline it, immediately
withdraws herself into her retiring room, and shrinks up herself into herself;
at the same time recalling her forces, the spirits, to her aid, and compressing
them. If the Fear be exalted to the degree of Terror, and the Evil seem
impendent; then at the same time the spirits are suddenly recalled from the
outguards, the pores of the skin also are shut up by strong constriction (as if
the Soul would obstruct and barricado all avenues against her invading enemy)
whereby the hairs are raised an end, and the whole body is put into a Horror or
shaking, After this, if the passion continue, the whole army of spirits being
put into confusion, so that they can not execute their offices; the usual
succors of Reason fail, and the powers of voluntary motion become weak; yea
sometimes, by reason of a resolution of the nerves and sphincters of the gutts
and bladder, the Excrements themselves are let forth involuntarily. From this
damp obscuring the Lucid part of the Sensitive Soul, there quickly succeeds an
Eclipse also of the Vital. For the influx of the Animal spirits from the brain
into the Cardiac nerves being intermitted, the motions of the heart must of
necessity be renderd weak, and insufficient to maintain with due vigor and
celerity the circulation of the blood: which therefore stopping and stagnating
in the ventricles of the heart, causes fainting and swooning by oppression;
and sometimes (where the passion is hightned into Consternation also sudden
death. And from this arrest of the blood in the heart, by strong constriction
of the nerves thereunto belonging; we may with reason derive that same anxious
oppression, and chilling weight which men commonly feel in their breast, when
they are invaded by violent Fear; and upon which the most acute Monsieur Des
Carts seems to have reflected his thoughts, when he defined Consternation to
be not only a cold, but also a perturbation and stupor of the Soul, which takes
from her the power of resisting evils that she apprehends to be near.

Art. 34. The Motions in Desperation.
This Fear, when it excludes all hope of evasion, degenerateth into the most
cruel of all passions, Desperation. Which though by exhibiting the thing
desired as impossible, it wholly extinguish desire, which is never carried but
to things apprehended as possible: yet it so afflicts the Soul, that she
persevering in her Constriction, either through absolute despondency yields up
herself as overcome, and remains half-extinct and entombd in the body; or
driven into confusion and neglect of all things, contracts a deep Melancholy,
or flies out into a furious Madness; in both cases, seeking to put an end to
her misery by destroying herself.

On the contrary, when Fear gives place to Hope; and that Hope is strong enough
to produce Courage; thereby to incense the Soul to encounter the difficulties
that oppose her in the way to her end: in this case she first dilates herself
with great vigor and celerity, breaking forth as it were into flashes of
efforts; then instantly diffuseth whole legions of spirits into the nerves and
muscles, to extend them, in order to resistance or striking with all their
forces; and uniting all her powers into a brave devoir to overcome, undauntedly
pursues the the conflict. Hence it comes, that the breast being strongly
dilated and contracted alternately, the voice is sent forth more sounding and
piercing than at other times; as if to sound a defiance and charge at once: the
arms are raised up, the hands constringed into fists, the head advanced into a
posture of daring and contempt of danger, the brows contracted, and the whole
face distorted into an aspect full of terror and threatenings, the neck swollen,
and most other parts distended beyond their usual dimensions. All which
symptoms evidently arise from a copious and impetuous effusion of Animal
spirits from the brain, and of blood from the heart, into the outward parts.

From this concise explication of the motions of the Sensitive Soul, the
spirits and blood, that constitute the passions of Hope and Fear, with their
dependents, Animosity and Desperation, the clue of our method leads us to the
fifth classis of passions.

The consideration of good present, Art. 35. Joy.
and belonging to us in particular, begets in the Soul that delight which we
call Joy: wherein consists our possession of that good, which the impressions
of the brain represent to the Soul as her own.

First I say, that in this delightful commotion does consist the possession of
good; because in truth the Soul reaps no other fruit from all the goods she
possesses: and when she takes no delight or joy in them, it may justly be
said, she does no more enjoy them, than if she did not at all possess them.

Then I add, that the good is such as the impressions made upon the brain
represent to the Soul as hers; that I may not confound this Joy whereof I now
speak, and which is a Passion; with Joy purely intellectual, which enters into
the Rational Soul by an action proper to her alone, and which we may call a
pleasant commotion raised by herself in herself, wherein consists the
possession of good, that her intellect represents to her as her own. Tho realy
so long as the Rational Soul continues conjoined with the Sensitive, it can
hardly be but that this intellectual joy will have the other that is a passion,
for its companion. For, so soon as our Intellect observes that we possess any
good, though that good be so far different from all that pertains to the body,
that it is wholly unimaginable; yet presently the Imagination makes some
impression in the brain, from whence follows a motion of the Sensitive Soul,
and of the Spirits, that exciteth the passion of Joy.

Of this so grateful affection there are diverse sorts, Art. 36. The various
Degrees of Joy and their names.
or (to speak more strictly) degrees. For, as various circumstances may
intervene, and cause the Soul to be more or less affected with her fruition of
the good she possesses: so may we distinguish various differences of the
passion itself. To be more particular; as the good she possesses, is great or
small; unexpected, or long desired; durable, or transitory; and as reason
moderateth the appetite, or suffers it to be unbridled: so it comes to pass,
that the Effusion of the Soul, and consequently the pleasure is greater or
less, permanent or momentary, immoderate or temperate, etc. And hence the kinds
of more remiss Joy are called Complacency, Iucundity, Gladness, Exhilaration:
and those of more intens, Rejoicing, Exsultation, Triumph, Boasting, Transport
or Ecstasy, Laughter, etc.

By the same reason, Art 37. The various Degrees of Grief, and their names.
as the Evil that causes the opposite passion of Grief, is in the present
great or little, sudden or foreseen, long or short, and the like: so are there
excited various kinds or degrees of Trouble or Grief; and accordingly the
passion is distinguished into Discontent, Solicitude, Vexation, Sadness,
Sorrow, Affliction, Misery, Lamentation, Weeping and Howling. All which belong
to Grief, which is an ungrateful Languor of the Sensitive Soul, wherein alone
consists the incommodity that happens to her from Evil or defect, which the
impressions made upon the brain, represent to her as her own. For, besides
this, there is also an Intellectual Sorrow proper to the Rational Soul, which
is not to be placed in the number of the passions, tho for the most part it
has for its adjunct the passion of Sorrow; by reason of the most strict
conjunction betwixt the two Souls in this life.

Art. 35. Envy and Pity.
As the Good or Evil present, being represented as belonging particularly to
ourselves, produces Joy or Grief in us: so when Good or Evil is proposed to
us, as belonging to others; we so far concern ourselves therein, as to judge
them worthy, or unworthy of the same. If we judge them unworthy of the good
that is happened to them; that raises Envy in us: if we think them not to
deserve the Evil that is befallen them, then we are affected with Pity or
Commiseration, which is a species of Sorrow, and the contrary to it is Hardness
of Heart, proceeding either from slowness of imagination (for men of dull
capacities are generally less apt to pity the calamities of others) or from
strong opinion of our own exemption from the like sufferings, or from that
inhuman temper of mind which the Grecians call Misanthropia, Hatred of all or
most men; or finally from despair after long adversity, whereby the mind being
grown as it were callous or brawny (as Seneca expresses it) is apt to
conceive, that no evil can come to it, greater than what it has been
accustomed to undergo.

On the contrary, Art. 39. Generous men most inclined to Commiseration; and why.
they are more than others propens to Commiseration, who think themselves very
weak and obnoxious to adverse fortune: because representing to themselves
another misfortune, as possible to happen to themselves also (for the evil
that happens to an innocent man, may happen to every man) they are easily
moved to pity, but more out of love of themselves than of others. And yet it
has been ever observed, that men of the most generous and Heroic spirits,
such who having by brave resolutions, and habitual magnanimity, elevated their
souls above the power of fortune, and so could fear no evil that she could
bring upon them* have nevertheless been prone to Commiseration, when they
beheld the infirmity of others, and heard their complaints, because it is a
part of true Generosity, to wish well to every one. But the Grief of this
Heroic Commiseration is not (as the other) bitter, but like that which
Tragical cases represented in a Theater, produce, it is placed more in the
Sense, than in the Soul itself which at the same time injoyeth the satisfaction
of thinking that she does her duty in sympathizing with the afflicted. And the
difference betwixt the Commiseration of the vulgar, and that of Generous minds,
does chiefly consist in this; that the vulgar pittieth the misery of those who
complain, as thinking the evil they suffer, to be very grievous and
intolerable: but the principal object of generous pity, is the imbecility and
impatience of those who complain n; because men of great Souls think, that no
accident can fall upon a man, which is not really a less evil than the
Pusillanimity of those who cannot endure it with constancy; which Seneca
intimates ( de tranquillitate anim^, cap. 15.) where he says, neminem ^^ebo
sientem; nam suis lacrymis efficit, ne ullis dignus sit: and though they hate
the vices of men, they do hate not their persons, but only pity them.

Manifest it is therefore, that in some, Art. 40. Commiseration, a species of
Grief mixed with Benevolence.
Commiseration is nothing but imagination of future Calamity to our selves,
proceeding from the sense of another man's calamity; as it is defined by Mr
Hobbs: in others, a species of Grief, mixed with Love or Benevolence toward
those whom we observe to suffer under some evil, which we think they have not
deserved; as it is defined by Monsieur des Carts.

Manifest it is likewise, Art. 41* Envy, a sort of Grief mixed with Hate.
that the contrary passion, Envy, is a sort of Grief mixed with Hate, proceeding
from our sense of prosperity in another, whom we judge unworthy thereof. A
passion never excusable, but where the Hatred it contain's, is against the
unjust distribution of the good that is envied, not the person that possesses
it, or that distributed it. But in this corrupt age, there are very few so just
and generous, as to be free from all Hate toward their competitors, who have
prevented them in the acquisition of a good which is not communicable to many
at once, and which they had desired to appropriate to themselves; though they
who have acquired it, be equally or more worthy thereof.

Art. 42. Acquiescence of mind, a kind of Joy.
When we reflect our thoughts upon good done by our selves, there results to us
that internal Satisfaction or Acquiescence of mind, which is a species of Joy;
calm indeed, and serious, but incomparably sweet and pleasant; because the
Cause of it depends upon nothing but our selves. But then that cause ought to
be just, that is, the good upon which we reflect our cogitations, ought to be
of great moment: otherwise the Satisfaction we fansy to our selves, is false,
and ridiculous, serving only to beget pride and absurd arrogance. Which may be
specially observed in those who esteem themselves truly religious, and pretend
to great perfection of Sanctity, when in reality they are Superstitious and
Hypocrites: that is, who because they frequent the temple, recite many prayers,
wear short hair, observe fasting-daies, give alms, and perform other the like
external duties of Religion; therefore think themselves to be arrived at the
highest degree of purity, and to be so far in the favor of Almighty God, that
they can do nothing that may displease him, and that whatever their passion
suggesteth to them, is of holy zeal; though it not seldom suggesteth the most
detestable crimes that can enter into the heart of Man, as the betraying of
Cities, assassination of Princes, extermination of Nations, only because they
follow not their fanatique opinions. And this Delusion seems to be the Daughter
of internal Acquiescence grounded upon an unjust cause. Again, to excite this
most comfortable passion, it is requisite that the good act upon which we
reflect, be newly done by us: because that constant satisfaction or
self-acquiescence which always is a concomitant and certain reward of Virtue,
is not a passion, but a pacific Habit in the Rational Soul; and is therefore
called Tranquillity and Quiet of Conscience.

On the contrary, Art. 43. Repentance, a species of Grief, but allayd with
something of Joy.
from our remembrance of an Evil act by us committed, arises Repentance, which
is a branch of Grief, always most bitter, because the cause of it is only from
ourselves: but then this Grief is allayed by expectation of amendment, or
returning into the right way to good; which is referrible to Joy. Nor does the
bitterness of this passion hinder it from being of excellent use in our life,
when the action whereof we repent, is realy Evil, and we certainly know it to
be so: because in such cases it strongly inciteth us to do better in the
future. But it is not universaly profitable. For it is no rarity for men of
weak and timorous minds to be touchd with Repentance of actions they have done,
tho they do not certainly know those actions to be realy evil, but only believe
them to be so, because they fear lest they be so, and if they had done the
contrary, they would have been equally disquieted with repentance. Which is an
imperfection in them well worthy Commiseration: and they ought to repent of
such their Repentance.

(...) 44. ^avour.
When we observe, or recall to mind good performed by an other, tho not to
ourselves; we are thereby moved to Favor the doer: because we are by nature
inclined to like and love those who do actions that we think good, althouh
from thence nothing of good redounds to us in particular. Favor therefore is a
species of Love, accompanied with desire of seeing good to happen to the person
whom we favor; and sometimes with Commiseration, because the adversity that
falls upon those whom we think to be good, makes us the more to reflect upon
their merits.

But if the good done by another upon which we reflect our cogitations, (...)
45. Gratitude.
has been done to Us; then to favor is adjoined Gratitude: which likewise is a
kind of Love, excited in us by some action of another, whereby we believe* that
either ^he has realy benefited, no^ at least intended to benefit us in
particular^ and accompanied with Desire to show ourselves thankful to (...)
therefore this passion of Gratitude (...) excells simple Favor in this, that
it is grounded upon an action which concerns Us: so has it far greater force
upon the mind, especialy in men of noble and generous natures. The Contrary
hereunto is Ingratitude, which notwithstanding is no Passion (for Nature, as if
she abhorred it, has ordained in us no motion of the Spirits whereby it might
be excited) but a mere Vice, proper to men who are either foolishly proud, and
therefore think all benefits due to them; or fottishly stupid, so as to make no
reflection upon good turns done them; or of weak and abject minds, who having
been obliged by the bounty and charity of their Benefactors, instead of being
grateful, prosecute them with hatred; and this because either wanting the will
to requite, or despairing of ability to make equal returns, and falsely
imagining that all are like themselves, venal and mercenary, and that none does
good offices but in hope of remuneration; they think that their Benefactors
have deceived them; and so deprave the benefit itself into an injury. Hatred
then being an adjunct to Ingratitude; it follows that Love must attend on
Gratitude, which is therefore always honest, and one of the principal bonds of
human Society.

Art. 46. Indignation.
On the contrary, when we consider Evil committed by an other, tho not against
us; we are moved to Indignation: which is a species of Hatred or Aversion
raised in us against those who do any thing that we judge to be evil or unjust,
whatsoever it be; sometimes commixed with Envy, sometimes with Commiseration,
sometimes with Derision; as having its object very much diversified. For, we
conceive Indignation against those who do good or evil to such who are
unworthy thereof; but we Envy those who receive that good, and pity those who
suffer that evil. And yet in truth, to obtain good whereof one is unworthy, is
in some degree to do evil: and to do Evil, is in some sort to suffer evil.
Whence it comes, that sometimes we conjoyn Pity, sometimes Derision to our
Indignation, according as we stand well or ill affected toward them whom we
observe to commit Errors. And therefore the Laughter of Democritus, who derided
the folly, and the Tears of Heraclitus, who bewailed the misery of mankind,
might both proceed from the same cause, Indignation.

But when Evil is done to ourselves, Art. 47. Anger.
the passion thereby kindled in us, is Anger: which likewise is a species of
Hatred or Aversation, but different from Indignation in this, that it is
founded upon an action done by another with intention to hurt us in particular;
and in this, that when it has proceeded to a determination of hurting him who
did it, it passes into Revenge; whereas at first accension, the Passion is no
more but Excandescence or sudden Heat of blood. The Desire of Revenge that for
the most part accompanies Anger, whether it aim at the death, or only at the
subjection of our Enemy; is indeed directly opposed to Gratitude (for this is
desire of returning good for good, and that, desire of requiting evil with
evil) as Indignation is to Favor: but incomparably more vehement than either
of those three affections; because the desire of repelling harm, and revenging
our selves, is a part of natural instinct necessary to self-preservation, and
so of all desires the strongest and most urgent. And being consociated with
Love of ourselves, it affords to Anger all that impetuous agitation of the
Spirits and blood, that Animosity and Boldness or Courage can excite: and its
assistant, Hatred, promoting the accension of the Choleric or more Sulphurous
parts of the blood as it passes through the heart, raises in the whole mass
thereof a more pricking and fervent heat, than that which is observed in the
most ardent Love, or most profuse Joy.

Art. 48. Two sorts of Anger; one, Harmless the other Revengefull.
Now as men inflamed with this violent passion, or (as Seneca calls it^ short
fury of Anger, differ in point of temperament; and as this or that of the usual
concomitants of it, is more powerful than the rest: so must the Effects thereof
upon the body be likewise various. And from this variety men have taken notice
chiefly of two sorts of Anger. One, that is quickly kindled, violent at first,
and discovers it self visibly by outward signs: but performs little, and may be
easily composed. And to this, they are most obnoxious, who are good-natured,
i.e. who are inclined to goodness and love. For, it arises not from profound
Hatred, but from a sudden Aversion surprising them: because being propens to
conceive that all things ought to proceed in that manner which they judge to be
the best; whenever they see others to act otherwise, first they admire, and
then are offended; and so what would be to others matter only of Indignation,
to them proves cause of Anger. But this commotion is soon calmed, because the
force of the sudain Aversion that raised it, continues not long: and so soon as
they perceive that the thing for which they were offended, ought not to have
commoved them to passion; they suppress their displeasure, and repent of it.
The Other, that wherein Hatred and Grief are predominant, and which though at
first it hardly betray it self by external signs, unless by the sudden
paleness of the countenance, and trembling; is notwithstanding more impetuous
within, secretly gnaws the very heart, and produces dangerous effects. And to
this pernicious sort of Anger they are most subject, who have prou^, cowardly
and weak Souls. For, so much the greater do injuries appear, by how much the
better opinion pride makes Men to have of themselves; yea and by how much
greater value is put upon the things which the injuries take away: and these
things are always so much the more valued, by how much the more weak and
abject the Soul is; because they depend upon others, but the Generous put
little value upon any thing that is not dependent upon themselves.

When we consider what opinion other Men have of Us, the Good which we believe
to be in us, disposes us to Glory, which seems to be composed of
Self-estimation, and Joy; Art. 49. Glory and Shame.
for to see ourselves well esteemed by others, gives us cause to have a good
esteem for ourselves: and on the contrary, the Evil we are conscious of,
forces us to Shame, which is a sort of Modesty or Humility, and
Self-diffidence; for (as we have formerly observed) who thinks himself above
Contempt, will hardly be humbled to shame. These two Passions, Glory and Shame,
tho directly opposite each to other, do yet agree in their End, which is to
incite us to Virtue; the first by hope, the other by fear: and that we may make
a right use of them both, we are to have our judgment well instructed what
actions are truly worthy praise or dispraise; lest otherwise we be ashamed of
virtuous actions, or affect glory from vices; as it happens to too great a
part of mankind.

Thus have we at length recounted all the Passions of this our fifth division,
and deduced them successively from their several causes or occasions, in that
order wherein their most remarkable diversity seemd to us most easily
distinguishable. But now because some of these passions are simple, others
Composed; and that to our more clear understanding of the nature of both sorts,
it is necessary to enquire more profoundly into the Motions of the Sensitive
Soul and spirits that constitute their Essential Differences: it remains that
we yield obedience to that necessity, so far forth at least, as to explain the
Motions proper to that couplet of more simple affections, Joy and Grief; the
two points in which all human actions end; and to that most violent one, Anger.

In Joy therefore, Art. 50. The Motions of the Soul and spirits i^ Joy.
which is a delightful commotion of the Sensitive Soul as it were triumphing in
her fruition of good or pleasure; I conceive that the Animal spirits being in
great abundance, but with a placid and equal motion, sent by the nerves to the
heart, cause the orifices thereof to be opened and dilated more than at other
times; and so the blood to be imported and exported more copiously and freely:
and that by this means, from the blood are brought into the brain a plentious
supply of new spirits, which extracted out of the purest and most refined parts
of the blood, are most fit to confirm the idea formed of the present good in
the imagination, and so to continue the Soul in her pleasant Emotion. Hence
probably it is, that in this most agreeable passion, both the pulse is always
made equal and more frequent, tho not so intense and strong as in Love; and a
certain grateful heat is felt, not only through the Lungs and all the breast,
but through all outward parts of the body; from the diffusion of the blood in
full streams into them, which is discernible even by the florid purple color
wherewith they are suddenly tinged, and by the inflation or plumpness of all
the muscles of the face, which is thereby rendered more serene, sweet and
cheerful. Easy therefore it is to infer, that as this passion is most congruous
to the nature of the Corporeal Soul, so are the corporeal motions that
accompany and characterize it, most profitable to health; provided they be
moderare. For, this Commotion and Effusion may be so vehement and sudden, that
the Soul may become weak, and unable to rule the body, or to actuate the organs
of speech, yea swooning, and death itself sometimes follow profuse and insolent
Joy. So Lacon Chilo, an eminent Philosopher, suddenly expired in excessive
joy, beholding his Son a Victor in the Olympic games. So Sophocles the
Tragedian also, and Dionysius the Tyrant died of a surfeit of sudden Joy. The
reason whereof seems to consist, not in a vehement effusion and dissipation of
the vital spirits, and a destitution of the Heart consequent thereunto; as
Fernelius would have it; because the faster the blood is effused through the
arteries from the heart, the swifter must it return to the heart through the
veins, so that the heart cannot be totaly exhausted and left destitute of
blood: but rather in a surcharge and suffocation of the heart by too redundant
an afflux of blood. For, upon extraordinary dilatation of the floud-gates of
the heart by immoderate joy, the current of blood both out of the Vena cava,
and from the arteria venosa, may pour itself with so much violence, and in so
great a quantity, into the ventricles thereof, that the heart, unable to
discharge itself soon enough of that oppressing deluge, by retruding its
valves, may be suffocated, its motions stopped, and the Vital Flame in a moment
extinguished. For certain it is, that in the state of health, the blood is not
admitted into the heart beyond a certain proportion: nor can that proportion be
much exceeded, whatever the cause be that makes an apertio portarum there,
without manifest danger of life.

Art 51. Laughter.
Among the Signs of this delightful passion, some have given the upper hand to
that distortion of the countenance, accompanied with a loud, but inarticulate
voice, which we call Laughter: but this being neither proper to, nor
inseparable from Joy, cannot therefore belong to it essentialy. That it is
frequently a concomitant of Mirth or Hilarity, is not to be disputed: but Mirth
is the lowest degree of Joy, a light and superficial emotion of the Sensitive
Soul and Spirits, a kind of short tickling of the Imagination, usualy expressed
by Laughter: whereas Joy is serious, profound and grave, according to that
memorable Sentence of Seneca (epist. 23.) res severa est verum gaudium.
Laughter then (as I said) is not proper to all Joy; because common to some
other affections: for some are observed to laugh out of Indignation, others out
of Contempt and disdain, neither of which belong to any kind of Joy. Nor is it
inseparable from Joy; because in truth Joy cannot produce Laughter, unless when
it is very moderate, and has something of Admiration or Hate mixed with it. For,
we have it from the oracle of Experience, that in great and profound Joy, the
cause of it, whatsoever it be, does never force us to break forth into
laughter: nay more, that we are most easily provoked to laugh, when we are sad.
Whereof the reason seems to be, either because in solid Joy, the Sensitive Soul
is so deeply commoved, so entirely taken up with the delight of fruition, that
she cannot attend to shake the Midriff, Lungs and Muscles of the breast; nimbly
and strongly enough to create laughter: or because at that time the Lungs are
so distended with blood, that they cannot, by repeted concussions, or alternate
contractions and relaxations, be further inflated with air, whereof no little
quantity is required to produce that loud sound emitted in Laughter. That we
may understand this matter more fully, let us examine the cause or occasion,
and the Motions of Laughter.

As for the First, Art. 52. The occasions of Laughter.
viz. the Occasion or Motive; whatsoever it be, there must concur therein these
three Conditions following. (1.) it must be new and surprising; because
whatsoever is ridiculous at first, cease to be so when grown stale, (2.) it
must be such a novelty as may suggest to us a conception of some eminency or
advantage in our selves above another whom the occasion chiefly concerns: for,
why are we naturally prone to laugh at either a jest (which is nothing but a
witty or elegant discovery and representation of some absurdity or indecency of
another, abstracted from his person) or at the mischances and infirmities of
others; unless from hence, that thereby our own abilities are the more set off
and illustrated, and recommended to us by way of comparison? (3.) It must not
touch our own, or our friends honor; for, in that point we are too tender to
tolerate, much less to laugh at a jest broken upon our selves, or friends, of
whose dishonor we participate. These requisites in a ridiculous cause
considered, we may adventure to conclude, that Laughter is an effect of sudden,
but light Joy arising from the unexpected discovery of some infirmity in
another not our friend, and from imagination of our own eminency, and exemption
from the like. Here then (you see) is something of Admiration from the Novelty,
something of Aversion from the Infirmity, and something of Joy or triumph from
our opinion of some eminency in our selves.

Art 53. Laughter out of Indignation.
And as for that Laughter which is sometimes joined with Indignation; it is most
commonly fictitious or artificial, and then it depends entirely upon our will,
as a voluntary action: but when it is true or Natural, it seems likewise to
arise from Joy conceived from hence, that we see our selves to be above offense
by that evil which is the cause or subject of our indignation; and that we feel
our selves surprised by the unexpected novelty of the same. So that to the
production of this Laughter also is required a concurs of Joy, Aversion and
Admiration; but all moderate.

If this be so, Art. ^4. A rare example of involuntary Laughter.
what then shall we think of that odd example of Laughter in Ludovicus vives;
who writes of himself ( lib. 3. de Anima, cap. de Risu) that usually when he
began to eat after long fasting, he could not forbear to break forth into a fit
of loud laughter? This doubtless was not voluntary; because he strove to
suppress it: nor could it be Convulsive, such as Physicians call Risus
Sardonius; because he was in perfect health, sensible of no pain therein, nor
incommodity thereupon. It must therefore be Natural, though not Passionate;
proceeding from some cause very obscure, and idiosyncritical, that is peculiar
to his constitution: perhaps this, that in this Learned man, either the Lungs
were more apt to be distended with blood, or the Midriff more easily put into
the motions that produce laughter, than commonly they are in most other men.
The First, because in general, whatsoever causes the Lungs to be suddenly
puffed up and distended with blood, causes also the external action of
Laughter; unless where sorrow changes that action into groaning and weeping:
the other, because all Laughter is made chiefly by quick and short vibrations
of the Midriff. But this rare Phenomenon we shall perhaps be better able to
solve, when we have considered how the action of Laughter is performed in all
other men.

Art. 55. A conjecture concerning the cause thereof.
Concerning this Problem therefore, it is observable that in Man, there seems to
be a greater consent or sympathy, or rather commerce of motions betwixt the
Midriff and the Heart, yea and the Imagination also; than in Brutes of what
order or tribe soever: and that the Reason given hereof by the most accurate of
our Modern Anatomists, is this; that the principal Nerve of the Midriff is
rooted in the same Nerve of the Spine (named Nervus vertebralis) from whence
there comes a conspicuous branch into the grand plexus of the Intercostal
nerve; and that commonly two, sometimes three other branches more are derived
from that same notable plexus, into the very trunk of the Nerve of the
Diaphragm (as you may see most elegantly represented by Dr. Willis in the 9 th
Table of his most elaborate Book de Anatomia Cerebri) which are not found in
Beasts. For, from this plenty and singular contexture of nerves, it may be
conjectured, not only why the Diaphragm does so readily conform its motions to
those of the Praecordia, and of the Animal Spirits excited in passions of the
Mind, and cooperate with them; but also why Risibility is an affection proper
only to Man. For (as the same most curious Dr. Willis reasons, in his chapter
of the functions and uses of the Intercostal pair of nerves) when the
Imagination is affected with some pleasant and new conceit, instantly there is
caused a brisk and placid motion of the heart, as if it sprung up with joy to
be alleviated or eased of its burden. Wherefore that the blood may be the more
speedily discharged out of the right Ventricle of the heart into the Lungs, and
out of the left into the Aorta or grand Artery; the Diaphragm, being by
abundance of Animal spirits immitted through so many nerves proceeding from the
aforesaid Plexus, briskly agitated is by nimble contraction drawn upwards; and
so making many vibrations, does at once raise up the Lungs, and force them to
expel the blood out of their vessels into the arteria venosa, and to explode
the air out of their pipes into the windpipe; and this by frequent
contractions of their lax and spongy substance, answerable in time and
quickness to the vibrations of the Midriff. And then because the same
Intercostal nerve, which communicates with the nerve of the Diaphragm below,
is conjoined above also with the nerves of the jaws and muscles of the face;
thence it is, that the motions of Laughter being once begun in the breast, the
face also is distorted into gestures or grimasces patheticaly correspondent
thereunto. And this is the most probable account I am able at present to give
of the occasions and motions of passionate Laughter in general: nor can I at
present think of any more plausible conjecture concerning the reason of the
admirable laughter of Ludovicus Vives, than this; that in him the nerves
inservient to the motion of the Midriff, might be after such a peculiar manner
contrived and framed, as easily to cause quick and short reciprocations
thereof, upon the pleasant affection of his Imagination by the grateful relish
of his meat, after long abstinence, which does always highten the pleasure of
refection: But we have insisted too long upon the motions of Joy.

Art. 56. The Motions and Effects of Sorrow.
In the contrary whereof, viz. Grief or Sorrow (which we have above described to
be an ungrateful languor of the Soul, from a conception of evil present, moving
her to contract herself, that she may avoid it) the Animal Spirits are indeed
recalled inward, but slowly and without violence: so that the blood being by
degrees destitute of a sufficient influx of them, is trasmitted through the
heart with too slow a motion. Whence the pulse is rendered little, slow, rare,
and weak; and there is felt about the heart a certain oppressive strictness, as
if the orifices of it were drawn together, with a manifest chilness congealing
the blood, and communicating itself to the rest of the body. From which
dejecting symptoms it is easy to collect, that this doleful affection,
especialy if it be vehement and of long continuance, cannot but infer many, and
grievous incommodities to the whole body. For, besides this that it darkneth
the spirits, and so dulls the wit, obscures the judgment, blunts the memory,
and in a word beclouds the Lucid part of the Soul: it does moreover incrassate
the blood by refrigeration, and by that reason immoderately constringe the
heart, cause the lamp of life to burn weakly and dimly, induce want of sleep by
drying the brain, corrupt the nutritive juice, and convert it into that Devil
of a humor, Melancholy. No wonder then if in men overcome with this so dismal
passion, the countenance appears pale, wan and liveless; the limbs grow heavy
and indisposed to motion, the flesh decays and consumes through want of
nourishment, and the whole body be precipated into imbecility, Cachexy or an
evil habit, languishing and other cold and chronic diseases. All which the
wisest of Men, King Solomon, has summed up in few words in 17 Chap. of his
Proverbs, where he advertiseth, that a sorrowful spirit dries up the very
bones. And yet notwithstanding, it is very rarely found, that from Grief either
long and obstinate, or violent and suddenly invading, any man has fallen into
a swoon, or been suddenly extinguished. Which I am apt to refer to this; that
in the ventricles of the heart, tho but very slowly commoved, there can hardly
be so small a quantity of blood, but it may suffice to keep alive the vital
flame burning therein, when the orifices of them are almost closed, as commonly
they are by immoderate grief.

Art. 57. Sighs and Tears.
Sometimes this bitter passion is signified by a certain uncomely distortion of
the face, somewhat different from that of Laughter, and acompanied with Tears;
sometimes only by Sighs: by Sighs, when the Grief is extreme: by Tears, when it
is but moderate. For as Laughter never proceeds from great and profound Joy, so
neither do Tears flow from profound sorrow; according to that of the
Tragedian, leves curae loquuntur, ingentes stupent. Nor is weeping the
pathognomonic or infallible sign of Grief, For, all tears are not voluntary;
every light hurt or pain of the Eyes causing them to distill against our will:
nor all voluntary ones the effect of Grief. Some weep for sudden joy joined
with Love, especialy old men: some when their Revenge is suddenly frustrated
by the repentance and submission of the offender; and such are the tears of
Reconciliation. Some again weep out of Anger, when they meet with a repulse or
check of their desires, which causing them with regret to reflect upon their
own weakness and insufficiency to compass their wills, affects them with
displeasure, and dissolves them into tears, as if they fell out with themselves
upon a sudden sense of their own defect: and this kind of weeping is most
familiar to Children and Women when they are crossed in their wills and
expectation; as also to Revengefull Men, upon their beholding of those whom
they commisserate, and their want of power to help them. Notwithstanding the
Occasions of weeping be thus various, yet since Tears are frequently both an
effect and testimony of sorrow, the nature and motions whereof we have now
attempted to explain: it can be no impertinent Digression, to inquire further
into their original or sours, and the manner how they are made to flow, when we
are willing to signify our present sorrow by shedding them.

Art. 58. Whence Tears flow.
As for the Fountain therefore whence all our Tears flow, and the Matter whereof
they consist; the succesful industry of Modern Anatomists has discovered, that
in the Glandules placed at each corner of the Eyes, there is either from the
blood brought thither by the arteries (as the vulgar doctrine is) or (as I,
upon good reasons elsewhere delivered, conceive) from the Nutritive juice
brought by nerves, separated, and kept in store a certain thin, clear and
watery humor, partly saline, partly subacid in taste; the use whereof is as well
to keep the globes of the eyes moist and slippery, for their more easy motion;
as to serve for Tears when we have occasion to shed them. And to this some have
added, that because there are certain branches of nerves (like the tendrels of
a vine) incircling the vessels leading to and from those Glandules, and by
their tension sometimes constringing them: therefore it is probable, that when
the serous humor is too abundant in the blood brought into the brain, the same
is by the arteries (whose pulse is quickened somewhat by the pressure of these
nerves) brought more copiously than at other times, into those Glandules, and
after its separation, there detained from returning by the veins, that are
likewise straightened by constriction of the same nerves. Whether this ingenious
conjecture be true or not; certain it is, that the Matter of Tears is the same
with the liquor of the Lymphae-ducts, and that they flow from the aforesaid
Glandules, which are therefore named Lacrymales.

And as for the manner of their Expression from thence in some passions of the
Mind; Art. 59. How they are expressed.
the most rational account I have hitherto met with concerning it, is this.
When any occasion of weeping occurrs, and affects the Sensitive Soul; instantly
the Ventricles of the heart, with all the Praecordia, are by the blood in
abundance brought into them, more than usualy crowded and distended, and the
Lungs also stuffed and inflated, so that they cannot perform the action of
respiration but by sobbs intermixed; and the Midriff, to give room to such
distension of the heart and Lungs, is pressed downward, with a more intense
contraction alternately succeeding; which great depression and brisk
contraction being repeted, is the efficient cause of Sobbing. and at the same
time the air being with difficulty admitted into the lungs, by reason they and
the Midriff are so exceedingly distended, and with no less difficulty exploded
again by the windpipe: thence comes that whining sound of crying and howling.
To this affection of the vitals, the parts of the face also, being distorted
into a sad and mournful aspect, exactly correspond: because the nerves which
contract the Praecordia, have a communion of continuity, and cooperate with
those which are inserted into the muscles of the face, and which compose it
into the postures of weeping and laughter in passion. Nor does the disorder
cease here, but extend itself to the upper region also, to the brain, where the
Spirits being put into confusion, and the arteries surcharged with too great an
afflux of blood from the oppressed heart; the palace of the Soul itself is
brought into danger of a purple deluge. For prevention whereof, the nerves
incircling and binding the trunks of the arteries in many places, strongly
constringe them; so that the commotion of the blood is much repressed, the
liquor thereof (in the beginning of the passion highly rarefied) suddenly
condensed, and the serous part of it being put into a flux, is transmitted into
the above mentioned Glandules of the Eyes, there placed and destined by nature
to receive it. And then because these Glandules are in like manner constringed,
and as it were squeezed by certain nerves that are of the same original and
community with the Pathetic nerves of the face and heart: the serous liquor is
expressed out of them through their excretory channels leading to the corners
of the Eyes (most accurrately described, with their uses, by that diligent
Anatomist Nichol. Steno, in a singular treatise) and forced to distill in a
shower of tears; the strong Contraction of the membranes investing the whole
brain, concurring to that expression.

The same may be said likewise of the shedding tears for Joy. Art. 60. The
reason of weeping for Joy.
For in sudden and great Joy conjoined with Admiration, the Sensitive Soul
very much expanding herself, and diffusing the Animal Spirits; the blood is
sent from the heart in great abundance to the brain, so as to distend the
vessels that contain it: which being soon after strongly contracted again by
the same Soul withdrawing herself inward, (as if she feared a dissolution by so
ample an Effusion) the blood is in a sort put into a flux or melted, and the
serous part of it separated in the Glandules of the Eyes, and thence by
constriction of the nerves squeezed forth in tears.

Art. 61. Why Infants and Old men are more (...) prone than others to shed
tears.
This being supposed, it will not be difficult for us thence to infer, that
Infants and Old Men are indeed more prone to weep than those of middle age: but
for diverse reasons. Old Men for the most part weep out of Love and Joy
together; because both these affections causing a great Effusion of the
Sensitive Soul, and consequently a large apertion of the orifices or sluices of
the heart; must therefore (especialy where they are conjoined) cause also a
transmission of the blood from thence to the brain in great abundance: and the
blood being generaly more thin and diluted with serum in old men, must yield
more matter for their tears. But Infants commonly weep out of mere Sorrow and
vexation, such as is not accompanied with the least of Love: because the
contraction of the Soul and nerves caused by sorrow, expresses out of the
blood (which is always abundant in children) brought by the arteries to the
brain, a sufficient quantity of serum to replenish the Glandulae Lachrymales,
and supply the sourse of their tears.

Art. 62. The reason of Sighing and Sobbing.
There remains yet that other Sign of Sorrow, which does usually accompany it
when it is profound and extreme; and that is Sighing; the cause whereof is very
much different from that of weeping, though both proceed from Grief. For, the
same occasion that moves us to shed tears, when our Lungs are stuffed and
distended with blood; provokes us also to fetch deep sighs, when they are
almost empty, and when some sudden imagination of Hope or comfort opens the
sluice of the Arteria Venosa in the lungs, which sorrow had lately contracted.
For, then that little blood that remained in the lungs, in a moment passing
down through that pipe into the left ventricle of the heart; the ambient air
instantly rusheth by the mouth into the lungs, to replenish that place the
blood had left free: and this great and quick repletion of the lungs with air,
is what we call Sighing.

You have now heard what Conjectures seem to me most consentaneous to reason
and Anatomical observations, concerning the Corporeal Motions excited in those
two eminent passions, Joy and Sorrow, with their usual Adjuncts, Laughter and
weeping: be pleased to hear also a few words touching the more violent motions
proper to Anger, which I have promised next to consider. Art. 63. The Motions
and Symptoms of Anger.


That the Effects of this most vehement Commotion of the Sensitive Soul are
various, not only as the occasion or injury is conceived to be greater or less;
but also according to the various temperaments of persons, and to the diversity
of other Passions conjoined therewith: is obvious to common observation, and we
have already hinted. And from this variety it is, that men have distinguished
Anger into Harmless and Dangerous, or simple heat of blood, and thirst after
Revenge: assigning moreover to each sort its proper Signs or Characters
observable in the outward parts of the body, and especially in the face. For
some when they are angry, look pale, or tremble; others grow red, or weep: and
the vulgar judges the passion of the first sort to be much more dangerous,
than that of the other. Whereof the reason may be this; that when we either
will not, or cannot show our resentments, and revenge otherwise than by our
change of countenance, and by words; we then put forth all our heat, and exert
all our force at the very beginning of the commotion; so that the blood being
in this sudden effort copiously effused from the heart into the face. and there
detained a while by constriction of the veins by those Branches of the Fifth
pair of nerves that are inserted into the muscles of that part; we are forced
to appear in the scarlet livery of shame, that is, to blush out of indignation
and regret or grief at the unworthy affront. And sometimes the first emotion of
desire to vindicate our selves, together with commiseration of our own want of
power to revenge more effectually, causes us also to shed tears.

But they who on the contrary, reserve themselves for, and strongly resolve
upon revenge in time to come, grow deeply sad and pensive at the present; as
conceiving themselves thereunto obliged by the nature of the injury done to
them, and casting about in their thoughts how to accomplish their revenge: and
all this while the Sensitive Soul persisting in her Contraction and revocation
of the Spirits inwards, there is no extraordinary, nay but little diffusion of
the blood outward. And sometimes they also fear the evils that may ensue from
the revenge they intend; which strikes them into paleness, shivering and
trembling: the Sensitive Soul being then distracted betwixt the contrary
motions of desire of revenge, and of fear of the ill consequents thereof; like
a Sea beaten by two contrary winds. Yet after this first conflict is over, when
they come to execute their revenge, then fear giving place to rage, they soon
grow the more inflamed and daring, by how much the colder they were during
their deliberation: as in Fevers that invade with cold and shivering, the
following heats are always most ardent and unquenchable. You see then how the
Motions, and consequently the Efforts and Effects of this violent passion may
be diversified even by diversity of other affections conjoined therewith. For
in the Harmless and Blushing or Weeping anger, there is always a mixture of
shame and self-pity; which by allaying the desire of revenge, helps much to
check and moderate the commotion of the blood; and therefore such anger seldom
lasts long, and is more easily composed: when on the other side, in the Pale
and Trembling, but Dangerous anger, there is first deep Indignation, then Fear,
and at last Furious persuit of revenge; by which the blood being most violently
agitated, and the sulphurous parts of it all kindled into a flame, is not to
be calmed and reduced to temper, unless by the pleasure of revenge, or by
triumph in the submission of the Enemy, or by the cold damp of repentance. For
prevention of which most bitter passion, by moderating our Anger; I think my
self in Charity obliged to conclude this argument with an excellent Moral
remark of Monsieur des Carts.

Although the passion of Anger be in itself useful, Art. 64. ^xcess of Anger,
to be avoided; and that chiefly by the help of true Generosity.
in that it inspires us with vigor and courage necessary to repel injuries:
yet the Excesses of no other passion are with greater care and caution to be
shunned. Because by perturbing our judgment, they often induce us into those
errors, whereof we ought afterward dearly to repent: yea sometimes they hinder
us from repelling injuries so safely and honorably, as otherwise we might, if
we were less commoved. But as nothing does more increase the flame of Anger,
than Pride: so (I am persuaded) nothing can more abate and restrain the
Excesses of it, than true Generosity. Because while Generosity makes us to have
but little value for all things that may be taken from us; and on the other
side, to prize above all temporal things, our Liberty and Empire over
ourselves, which is lost when we are capable to be hurt by an other: it makes
us with Contempt alone, or at most with Indignation to revenge those injuries,
with which weaker minds are wont to be offended.

Being now at length arrived at the end of this my divertising Exercise,
wherein I proposed to my self to inquire into the Occasions, Causes,
Differences, Motions and Effects of the most powerful and remarkable of all
the Passions, by which the Mind of Man is apt to be perturbed; so far as my
weak understanding assisted by reading and meditation would permit: before I
lay aside my pen, I find it requisite to advertise you briefly of two things,
one whereof may conduce to your more easy comprehension of what I have hitherto
delivered concerning the more general Differences of the Passions; the other
may serve to my exemption from the censure of the Illiterate.

Art. 65. That of all the Passions hitherto considered, only six are Simple;
the rest Mixed.
The First is, that of all the Passions recounted and described in this impolite
discourse, there are only six that seem to be Simple and Principal, namely
Admiration, Love, Hatred, Desire, Joy and Grief; which are therefore said to be
Simple, because they consist of only one single act or commotion of the
Sensitive Soul disturbed with the apprehension of things whether real or
imaginary. For, as to all the rest; either they are but various species of
those Simple ones, or they result from diverse mixtures and combinations of
them; being therefore named Mixed Passions, because they consist of more than
one act or Motion. If therefore I have chiefly considered the Nature, motions,
and principal Effects of the Six Simple or Primitive passions; contenting
myself only with a brief Genealogy of the Compound or Derivative, as sufficient
to direct your cogitations to the various Mixed commotions whence they result:
it was only lest I might abuse your patience by undecent repetitions, or
oppress your mind with too great multiplicity of particulars, which is none of
the least impediments of Science.

The Other is, Art. 65. Reasons against publication of this discourse.
that notwithstanding the Excellency, and singular Vtility of the Argument
whereof I have treated in this Discourse; yet seeing my design in composing it,
has been partly to render my present solitude less tedious to my self, and
chiefly to give you some testimony that I convert not my leisure into idleness:
You ought not to frustrate my confidence of your secrecy, or to expose my
defects, by communicating these papers to Others. Not to Philosophers, least
they find nothing new in them but my Lapses. Not to the Unlearned, because they
are incompetent judges of truth or error, especially in such Philosophical
Enquiries; more addicted to barbarous contempt of Knowledge in others, than to
confess ignorance in themselves. To These therefore (you may be most assured) I
am not ambitious you should recommend this Treatise, wherein is contained
nothing that can either please, or reform them. I know it is no less difficult
to teach them the art of regulating their exorbitant Passions, than it is to
bring them to prefer the severe dictates of reason, to the flattering
suggestions of Sense; or to convince them, that realy nothing is pleasant, but
what is also honest; nothing very desirable, but the right use of their
freedom of will; nothing formidable, but the evil they themselves commit. I
know, that in the Vulgar, Religion is fear; constancy, brutish obstinacy;
zeal, pride; friendship, interest; and virtue itself but dissimulation. I know
also, that the multitude is not led by merit, but carried headlong by
prejudice, to praise or dispraise: and that they are more propens to malignity
and detraction, than to charity and candor. The Vulgar then, and all that herd
with them, I exclude from my studies; lest by perversely interpreting them (as
they do all things) they should interrupt my tranquillity, which I value
infinitely above their favor, and wherein I endeavor to find a happiness,
which neither their hatred, nor the iniquity of Fortune shall take from me.

That I may find this the sooner, I now and then entertain myself with serious
reflections upon my own defects, as the only impediments that have hitherto
hindered me from attaining unto it: and among the rest, I hold my mind longest
fixed on this following Meditation: which I therefore freely impart to you who
are my Friend, both because I think it may be of equal use to you also, by
helping you to moderate your Affections to the transitory things of this shadow
of life; and because the precedent discourse will perhaps be somewhat the less
imperfect, after it has received so pertinent a

CONCLUSION.
Art. 1. That all the Good and Evil of this life depends upon the Passions:
THat all the Good and Evil of this life depends upon the various Passions
incident to the Mind of Man; I need no other document than my own dearly bought
Experience: which has too often convinced me, that while I out of weakness
suffered my self to be seduced and transported by the ardor and excesses of my
Affections, I have fallen into Errors, that have more dejected my spirit, than
a long succession of infortunes could ever do; and from whence I could not
expect better fruit, than that of shame, sorrow and repentance.

Art 2. Which yet were instituted by Nature as incitements to the Soul.
Notwithstanding this, I ought not to be so unjust, so ungrateful to Nature, as
to transfer the blame of such Errors upon her; as if she had been less careful
than she might have been, to secure Man from infelicity: only because she
thought fit to make him obnoxious to so great a multitude of inward
Perturbations. No, I ought rather to remember, that among all of them, there is
no one but has its Use, and that a good one too: provided we rightly employ
the forces Nature has given us, to keep it within the bounds of Moderation.
And it may suffice to Natures vindication, that reason obliges me to
acknowledge, that her design in instituting our Passions, was in the general
this; that they might dispose and incite the Soul to affect and desire those
things, which Nature by secret dictates teaches to be good and profitable to
her; and to persist in that desire: as the same commotion of the spirits that
is requisite to produce them, does dispose the parts of the Body also to those
motions that serve to the execution of her will. And hence doubtless it is,
that they who are naturaly most apt to be moved by passions, have this
advantage above others of duller and grosser constitutions, that they may (if
they will) taste more of the pleasures belonging to the Sensitive Soul: but then
again they are likewise thereby more exposed to drink of the gall and wormwood
of pain and remorse, when they know not how to regulate their passions, and
when adverse Fortune invades them. I am confirmed then, that because man is
constituted propens to Passions, he is not therefore the less perfect, but
rather the more capable of pleasure from the right use of the good things of
this life: and by consequence, that Nature by making him (...), has therein
signalized both her wisdom and indulgence.

Art. 3. That we are prone to Errors, not from want of an omniscious
understanding:
But had he not been more perfect, if it had pleased his Creator to endow him
moreover with such Excellency above all other Animals, as might have secured
him from committing Errors through the violent instigation of his Passions,
whenever they should incite him to desire and pursue things not realy, but
only apparently good for him? Certainly no. For it is not only impious, but
highly absurd, to imagine that God can be Author of our Errors, because he has
not given to us an Understanding Omniscious: for it is of the formal reason of
a created intellect, that it be finite; and of a finite intellect, that it
extend not itself to all things. But that Man should have a Will unconfined or
extensible to all things, this indeed is convenient to his nature: and it is a
transcendent perfection in him, that he can and does act by his own will, that
is freely; and so is, by a peculiar prerogative, Author of his own actions, and
may deserve praise and reward for them. For no Man praises a Watch, or any
other Self-moving engine made by art, for performing the motions thereby
designed; because those motions necessarily result from the figure and
construction of its parts: but the Artist himself deserves praise, because he
framed the engine not by necessity or compulsion, but freely. So we by the same
reason deserve the more by well doing, that is by embracing truth, because we
do it voluntary or by election; than we should, if we could not but do it. When
therefore we fall into Errors, occasioned by our Passions; the defect lies in
our own act, or in the use of our liberty, not in our nature: for that is the
same when we make an erroneous judgment of things represented to us, as it is
when we make a right judgment. And although Almighty God might, if He had
thought good, have given so great perspicacity to our Understanding, as that we
could never have been deceived: yet by what right can we require that privilege
from him? True it is (I confess) that among us Men, if any has power to hinder
this or that evil, and yet does not hinder it; we accuse him as cause of it:
and justly too, because the power that Men have one over others, was
instituted, and committed to them to that end, that they should use it to the
restraining of others from evil. But there is not the same reason why we should
think God to be Author of our Errors, only because it was in His power to have
prevented them, by making us superior to deception: for the power that God has
of right over all Men, is most sovereign, most absolute, most free. And
therefore we are obliged to ascribe to His Divine Majesty, all possible praise
and thanks for the good gifts He has out of his infinite benignity been
pleased to bestow upon us his Creatures: but we have no pretext of right to
complain, because He has not conferred upon us all things that we conceive he
might.

Besides, although the Intellect of Man be not omniscious; Art. 4. But from our
ill use of that understanding we have, in the conduct of our desires suggested
by passions.
yet is it not so narrow, so limited, as not to extend to the conduct of his
Unlimited Will, in the Election of Good, and avoidance of Evil; and
consequently to his exemption from Error by the violence of his Passions. For,
first, by virtue of his Understanding, Man is capable of Wisdom, which is
alone able to teach him how to subdue and govern all his Affections, and how to
dispense them with such dexterity, as not only to make all the Evils they
produce, easily tolerable, but even to reap internal satisfaction and joy from
all. And secondly, it is evident from the very nature of our Passions, that
they cannot carry us on to any actions whatsoever, but only by the Desire they
excite in us: and therefore if we can but direct that desire to right objects,
that is to things realy Good; we may by that alone prevent our being deceived,
that is our being carried to evil actions by violence of our Passions: but that
Right Reason is of itself able so to direct our desire arising from passions,
is manifest from the known Utility of Moral Philosophy, which prescribes
certain rules to that end. I will conclude then, that I commit Errors in
passion, not because I am naturaly prone to Passions, nor because I want an
omniscious Understanding: but only because I make not a right use of that
finite indeed, yet sufficient Understanding God has given me, Art. 5. That all
Errors to which the desires excited by our Passions, expose us, arise from
hence, that we do not sufficiently distinguish things that depend entirely
upon ourselves, from those that depend upon others.
in the conduct of that Cupidity my passions excite in me.

That I may therefore be henceforth better able to make use of my Understanding
as I ought, in such occasions; it highly concerns me to enquire in the next
place, into the origin of that Error, to which the Cupidity accompanying our
Passions, does most frequently expose us: for, that being once known, will be
the more easily avoidable. This Error then does arise (if I mistake not) from
hence; that we do not sufficiently distinguish those things that depend
entirely upon ourselves, from those that depend upon others, as to their
events: it being a general rule, that Desire is always good, when grounded
upon certain Knowledge; and on the contrary always evil, when founded upon
some error. Now as to things that depend upon ourselves alone, that is upon our
Free Will; to know them to be good, is sufficient to assure us we cannot desire
them too fervently: because to do good things that depend upon ourselves, is
to pursue Virtue, which cannot be too fervently desired, nor can the event of
our desire of such things possibly be unhappy, because from the conscience that
by desiring them we have rightly used the freedom of our will, we receive all
the satisfaction we expected. But alas! the Error that is too commonly
committed in such cases, lies not in the over fervent, but in the overcold
desire. And the best remedy against this defect, is to free the mind as much as
is possible, from all other desires less profitable; and then to endeavor
clearly to understand, and with due attention to examine the goodness of the
thing that is represented as worthy to be desired.

As for the things that are altogether independent upon Us; Art. 6. And that
they may be prevented by two General Remedies, viz. Generosity.
however good they may be, yet we are never to desire them vehemently: not only
because it is possible they may never arrive, and so vex and torment the mind so
much the more bitterly, by how much the more eagerly they have been desired;
but chiefly because by preoccupating our thoughts, they withdraw our study from
other things whereof the acquisition depends upon ourselves. And against these
vain desires there are two general Remedies; whereof the first is true
Generosity; the other, a firm belief of, and tranquil dependence upon
Providence Divine. For, that noble and heroic habit of the mind, which is
called Generosity, and which seems to comprehend all other Virtues; though it
animateth Men to great and honorable enterprises, does yet at the same time
restrain them from attempting things which they conceive themselves incapable
to effect; inspiring courage, not temerity. Then by teaching, that nothing is
either more worthy of, or more delightful to a spirit elevated by the love of
Virtue, above the vulgar, that to do good to others; and in order thereunto,
to prefer beneficence to self-interest: it makes us perfectly charitable,
benign, affable, and ready to oblige every one by good offices, when it is in
our power so to do. Again, being inseparable from virtuous Humility, it makes
us both to measure our own Merits by the impartial rule of right reason, and to
know that we can have no just right to praise or reward, but from the genuin
and lau^^ble use of the freedom of our* Will. And from these and other the like
excellent effects of this divine Virtue, it is that the Generous attain to an
absolute dominion over their exorbitant passions and desires. They conquer
Jealousy and Envy, by considering, that nothing whereof the acquisition
depends not wholly upon themselves, is realy valuable enough to justify their
earnest desire of it. They exempt themselves from Hatred toward any, by
esteeming all as worthy of love as themselves. They admit no Fear, by being
duly conscious of their own innocence, and secure in the confidence of their
own Virtue. They banish Grief, by remembering that while they conserve their
will to do good, they can be deprived of nothing that is properly theirs. And
Anger they exclude, because little esteeming whatsoever depends upon others,
they never yield so much to their Adversaries, as to acknowledge themselves
within the reach of their injuries. It is not then without reason, that I fix
upon Generosity, as one of the universal remedies against our inordinate
Cupidities. And

As for the other, Art. 7. And frequent reflections upon Providence Divine.
namely frequent reflection upon Providence Divine; this doubtless must
likewise be of sovereign efficacy to preserve us from all distempers of mind.
For, it establish us in a certain persuasion, that it is absolutely impossible
that any thing should come to pass otherwise than this Providence has from all
eternity determined: and consequently, that Fortune is but a Chimera, hatched
in the brain out of an Error of human understanding, and nourished by popular
superstition. For, we cannot desire any thing, unless we first think the same
to be some way or other possible: nor can we think those things to be possible,
that depend not upon us, unless so far as we imagine them to depend upon
Fortune, and that the like have happened in times past. But this opinion proceeds
only from hence, that we know not all the Causes that concur to single
Effects. For, when a thing that we have apprehended to depend upon Fortune, and
so to be possible, succeeds not: that is a certain sign, that some one of the
Causes necessary to make it succeed or come to pass, has been wanting; and
consequently, that the same was absolutely impossible; as also that the like
event, that is such a one to the production whereof the like necessary Cause
was wanting, has never come to pass. So that had we not been ignorant of that
deficient Cause, we never had thought that event to be possible, nor by
consequence ever desired it.

Art. 8. Which utterly excludes Fortune, but leaves us at liberty to direct
our desires.
We are therefore utterly to renounce that vulgar absurdity, that there is in
the World a certain Power called Fortune, that makes things to happen or not to
hapen as she pleases: and in the ^oom thereof to establish this great verity,
that all things are directed by Divine Providence, whose decree is so
infallible and immutable, that excepting those things which the same decree
has left to depend upon our Will, we ought to think, that in respect of Us,
nothing does or can come to pass, that is not necessary, and in some measure
fatal: so that we cannot without error desire any thing should come to pass
otherwise than it does. But forasmuch as our desires for the most part extend
to things that depend neither wholly upon us, nor wholly upon others: therefore
we ought in them to distinguish exactly what depends entirely upon ourselves,
that so we may extend our desires to that alone. And as for the rest; though we
ought to look upon the success as fatal and immutable, lest we place our desire
thereupon: yet ought we also seriously to weigh and consider the reasons that
suggest more or less hope, that they may serve to direct our actions
accordingly. For reason requires we should follow the more probable and safe
way to our end: and when we have done so; whatever the Event be, we ought
contentedly to acquiesce in this, that we have done what our Understanding
judged to be best. And truly when we have learned thus to distinguish
Providence Divine from Fortune, we shall easily acquire a habit of directing
our desires in such a manner, that because the accomplishment of them depends
upon ourselves only, they may always afford us full satisfaction. Art. 9. How
we may expedite our selves from the difficulties that seem to make the decree
of Divine Providence irreconcilable to the liberty of our will.


But do we not here entangle ourselves in great difficulties, by endevoring
thus to reconcile this eternal Preordination of God, to the Liberty of our
Will? we do, I confess; but conceive withal, that we may disentangle
ourselves again, by remembering, that our Understanding is finite, but the power
of God by which He has from eternity not only foreknown all things that are or
can possibly be, but also willed and preordained them so to be, is infinite:
and then that it is enough for us, clearly and distinctly to know that this
infinite Power is essentialy in God; but too much for us so to comprehend the
same, as to see in what manner it leaves the actions of Men undermined and
free. For of the Liberty or indifferency that is in us, we are all so conscious
within ourselves, that there is nothing we can comprehend more evidently, more
perfectly. And it were absurd, because we cannot comprehend one thing which we
know to be of its own nature incomprehensible to us; therefore to doubt of
another which we do intimately comprehend, and by daily experience find to be
in ourselves.

Again, since we thus know most certainly, that all our Errors depend upon our
Will; Art. 10. How it comes that we are often deceived by our will* though we
are never deceived with ou^ will.
is it not wonderfully strange that we are ever deceived, when no Man is
willing to be deceived* It Is so indeed; but nevertheless the Problem seems
capable of solution by considering, that it is one thing to be willing to be
deceived, and another to be willing to give assent to those things wherein it
hapens that error is found. And though there be no Man, who is expressly willing
to be deceived: yet there is scarcely any, who is not often willing to assent
to those things wherein error is, unknown to him, contained. Yea it often falls
out; that the very desire of attaining to truth, causes those who do not
rightly know by what way it is to be attained, to give judgment of things they
do not clearly perceive, and so to err. So that the sum of all this perplex
and intricate matter is this, that Error arises from our assent to things
whose truth or falsity, good or evil, we have not clearly and distinctly
discerned. For, since God cannot without impious absurdity be imagined to be
Author of deceit, the faculty He has given us of perceiving and discerning,
cannot naturaly tend to falsity: as neither can our faculty of assenting, that
is our will, when it extends itself only to those things that are clearly
perceived. Whence it follows, that to direct our desires aright, our main
business must be to employ our Understanding or faculty of discerning, strictly
and attentively to examine and consider the goodness of the objects, before we
determine our Will upon them: wherein does chiefly consist the use of all Moral
Wisdom, and whereupon great part of our temporal Felicity depends.

Art. 11. A third general Remedy against Error occasioned by inordinate
Passions, viz. Premeditation and Deliberation.
But do not I here propose a lesson very hard to human frailty to learn? Is it
not extremely difficult thus accurrately and calmly to examine things, when the
imagination is vehemently commoved by the object of some more violent passion,
and the judgment strongly surprised? I acknowledge it to be difficult indeed:
but this difficulty has its proper Remedy, namely Premeditation and
Deliberation. I find in myself (and so do all Men, I believe) that the motions
raised in my blood by the objects of my affections, do so promptly follow upon
the first impressions made by them in my brain, and from the mechanical
disposition of the organs of my body, though my Soul contribute nothing toward
their advancement, but continues indifferent; that all the wisdom I can call
to my assistance, is not sufficient to resist and arrest them. And others there
are, I know, who being naturaly propens to the commotions of Joy, or of
Commiseration, or Terror, or Anger; have not the power to refrain themselves
from swooning, or tears, or trembling, or heat of blood, whenever their Phansy
is vehemently assaulted by objects apt to excite those Passions. Nay, as if all
Mankind were equaly subject to the same defect, it is held for a Maxim, that
the first motions of our passions are not in our power. And yet
notwithstanding, this so universal defect is not incurable by Premeditation and
care. When therefore we first feel any such strong commotion of our blood, we
ought to be premonished and to remember, that all things that offer themselves
to the imagination, respect only the deception of the Reasonable Soul, and to
persuade her that the reasons which serve to recommend the object of her
passion, are far more firm and considerable than in reality they are: and on
the contrary, that those which serve to discommend it, are much weaker and less
considerable than in truth they are. And when Passion comes at length to
persuade us to do those things whose execution admits of any the least pause or
delay: we must remember to abstain from giving judgment concerning them, much
less assent to them, and to avert our cogitations to other things, until time
and quiet have wholly composed the commotion in our blood. Finaly, when heat of
passion inciteth us to actions that allow little or no time for counsel or
deliberation; in this case we are to convert our will chiefly upon following
those reasons that are contrary to what that passion suggesteth, although they
appear less valid. So when an Enemy invades us unexpectedly, that sudden
occasion permits us not to take time for deliberation whether of the three is
best, to resist, to submit, or to fly. Here therefore, when we feel ourselves
surprised with fear; we should endeavor to avert our thoughts from the
considerat^on of the danger, and fix them upon the reasons for which there is
greater security and honor in resistance than in flight: and on the contrary,
when we perceive ourselves to be by anger and desire of revenge provoked to
rush turiously upon him who assaults us; we must remember to think, that it is
great imprudence to precipitate ones self into manifest danger, when safety may
be obtained without infamy: and where we are inferior to the Aggressor in point
of strength, there we are likewise to consider, that it is better to retreat
honorably, or to consent to terms of submission, than like a wild beast to
expose ourselves to certain death. This therefore I ought to prescribe to my
self, as a Third Pancreston or Universal Antidote against the incommodities
impendent from Passions; viz. to give myself time for deliberation, where the
occasion will allow it: and where it will not, there to convert my thought
chiefly upon the reasons that contradict the suggestions of my passion: and
always to remember that the reasons that offer themselves to recommend the
object of my passion, are not realy so valid and considerable, as my
imagination represents them to be. Nor does this counsel seem difficult to be
put in practice, especialy by considerate Men and such who are wont to make
serious reflections upon their actions.

But what need I thus perplex my thoughts in searching for Medicines to mitigate
the violence of Passions, Art. 12. A fourth universal Remedy, viz. the constant
exercise of Virtue.
when there is one singular Remedy infallibly sufficient to secure us from all
the Evils they can possibly occasion, and that is the constant exercise of
Virtue? For, seeing that the internal commotions of the Reasonable Soul touch
us more nearly, and by consequence are much more prevalent over us, than the
affections of the Sensitive, which though different from, are yet many times
conjoined with them: most certain it is, that all the tumults raised in the
Sensitive, have no power to perturb the tranquillity of her Superior, the
Rational, provided she have reason to be in peace and content within herself;
but serve rather to augment her Joy, by giving her occasions to know and
delight in her own perfection, as often as she finds herself much above any the
least discomposure or disturbance from them. And that she may be thus content
within herself, she need do no more but entirely addict herself to the love and
persuit of Virtue. For, whoever has so lived, that his conscience cannot
accuse him of ever neglecting to do those things which he judged to be best
(which is exactly to follow the conduct of Virtue) this Man does from thence
receive that intellectual joy and satisfaction, which is of such sovereign
power to make him happy, that the most violent commotions of his affections can
never be of force enough to perturb the tranquillity of his Soul; and which
being the Summum Bonum of human life, is not to be attained (as Seneca from his
oracle Epicurus most judiciously observes, Epist. 23.) nisi ex bona
conscientia, ex honestis consiliis, ex rectis actionibus, ex contemptu
fortuitorum, ex placido vitae ac continuo tenore unam prementis viam. Nor is
there indeed any other internal satisfaction or joy belonging to the Rational
Soul, but what she thus forms to herself out of herself; and what can
therefore be no more interrupted than she can be destroyed: the assurance
whereof made the fame Seneca say ( Epist. 27.) Sola virtus praestat gaudium
perpetuum, securum: etiam si quid obstat, nubium modo intervenit, quae infra
feruntur, nec unquam diem vincunt.

And these, my dear friend, Art. 13. The study of Epicurus's Morals recommended
are some of those Philosophical considerations upon which I sometimes reflect
(as I lately told you) as Universal and Efficacious Remedies against vain
desires suggested by our Passions, and the various Evils to which they usualy
expose us. Which now you have with so great patience heard; it is fit I should
gratefully resign you to a more profitable conversation with your own thoughts,
which I know to be for the most part employed in the study of things noble and
worthy your excellent wit. But first, lest you should think I do it somewhat
abruptly, and by omitting to prescribe also Special Preservatives proper to the
excesses of each particular Affection, end this discourse before I have
finished it: suffer me in a word to advertise you, that I make this omission,
not from incogitancy, nor out of weariness, but only for your greater benefit.
For, being of opinion, that the Ethics of Epicurus are (after Holy writ) the
best Dispensatory I have hitherto read, of Natural Medicines for all distempers
incident to the mind of Man: I conceive, I may do you better service by
recommending that Book to your serious perusal, than by writing less accurately
of the same most weighty argument. This therefore I now do; not doubting but
that in the Morals of that grave and profound Philosopher, you will find as
good Precepts for the moderating your Passions, as Human wisdom can give.

FINIS.

