IMPRIMATUR.

Ex Edib. Lambeth. 14 Sept. 24. 1685. Jo. Battely, R. Rmo. P. Dno. Willielmo
Archiep. Cantuar. a Sacris Domesticis.

THE Devout Communicant, Assisted with RULES FOR The Worthy Receiving OF THE
BLESSED EUCHARIST.

TOGETHER With Meditations, Prayers and Anthems, for every day of the Holy Week.

In Two Parts.

By AB. SELLER Rector of Combentynhead, Devon.

LONDON: Printed for R. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.
MDCLXXXVI.

THE PREFACE.
HAVING sadly observed, how much Injury the Doctrines of Faith have received by
multiplied Disputes; and that the best Methods which the wisest men have used
to stifle such unmanly Controversies, have unexpectedly begot more of the kind;
I resolved to try, whether diverting the humor might not tend to the cure of
the Malady; and the employing of our time in Devotional Offices, might not dull
the Edg of a quarrelsome Inclination; the Peace of Jerusalem being never
promoted so readily as by constant Prayers, frequent Communion, and a holy
Life. This consideration gave being to these Papers, which for the most part
were penned when I was at a great distance from Books; but happy in leisure,
which gave me many opportunities of Meditating on my Duty, and of endeavoring
to fit my own Soul, and others, for the worthy receiving of the Holy Eucharist.

And tho it may seem a bold attempt to presume to write a Treatise on this
Subject, after so many excellent Discourses published by others to this purpose;
yet, if the Book answer the design of the Author, and become useful to inflame
the desires of Men, and make them in Love with the Blessed Sacrament, and the
other Offices of Holy Religion, that Objection will vanish of course; for the
Author has attained his end, if the Name of God be glorified, the Laws of
Christianity obeyed, and the Mysteries of Christianity reverenced. And perhaps
Books of Devotion should be multiplied, that every Person of whatever Temper,
Genius or Disposition he may be, may, if it be possible, be invited to the Love
and Practice of our blessed Saviors Precepts, that if one Book do not please,
another may; and that Treatise is happily penned, that Rescues, tho but one
Soul from the Dominion of Satan, and the Snares of Vice.

I am conscious to my self, that I have prescribed such Rules, which God knows
I have not so carefully observed, as I ought; and have expressed my self in
Language, to which my Performances bear no Proportion; but withal, I am
assured, that both my self, and every one of Gods Priests, and in truth every
Christian, ought to live according to these Injuctions, and ought to mourn over
our imperfect Obedience, and our neglect of our Duties; nor is a good Book the
less useful, because its Author is not an Illustrious Example of every Virtue
recommended in it. It has been anciently, and is to this day a just complaint,
That we are all so eager after the Tree of Knowledge, that we lose the Tree of
Life; that by pursuing the aims of an unbecoming Ambition, like Adam, we first
forfeit the true Image of God, and then expose our own Nakedness, being robbed
of the Ornaments of Truth and Virtue, while we are in Love with the imaginary
Embellishments of Fantastic Learning; upon which account it too often happens,
that few men have less Sense of, and regard for Piety, than many who have spent
their days in Books and Studies; but this is so far from being a just
discouragement to the well-inclined Proselites of Holiness, that it should
rather incite their Affection toward Heaven, since our blessed Master has
assured us, that Immortality and Eternal Glory are not gotten by the
understanding of Mysteries, but by an humble conformity to his Laws and
Example; and that the illiterate, but pious part of Adam's Sons, shall take
Heaven by a holy Violence, when the notions of the unconverted Scholar shall
but increase his Damnation.

It is said, That Greece was never more debaucht, than when the Seven wise Men
lived in it; and perhaps never was any Age of the World more Learned, nor ever
more Wicked than this; a great part of which Lewdness is owing to the neglect
of the Blessed Sacrament. For did men but seriously consider, that our Holy
Redeemer has enjoined the frequent use of this Mystery, they durst not be so
bold as to trample on the Injunction; did they remember, that the Apostles
prayed, Audaciam existimo de bono divini praecepti disputare -- quid revolvis,
Deus praecepit. Tertul. de poenit. c. 4.
and broke this Sacramental Bread every day; that the custom continued in most
Churches for Four hundred years after their time; that the disuse of this daily
Sacrifice brought in private Masses into the Church, with many other
Inconveniences; Did they but solemnly reflect on the great and wonderful
Blessings that are conveyed in this Sacrament, it would be impossible that the
House and Table of God could be so slighted, as we see they are; and there
would be no need of Canons and secular Laws to injoin us to make our selves
happy; but men will not be persuaded, that the Severities of Christianity are
Necessary to make their Lives comfortable, and their Deaths safe; they indulge
to present Enjoyments, and forget the Impartial Account of the last Day; when,
if the Righteous shall hardly be saved, where shall the Sinners and the Ungodly
appear? If the Holy To. 2. p. 353.
Chrysostom was so affected with the account which the Holy Writ gives of that
Judgment, that he tells the World, he trembled as often as he heard those Words
( God shall render to every man according to his Works) affirming, that every
other wise man shares in the same Fear, and is under the same Agonies; if so
few shall be saved (as the same Father passionately goes on) that not a hundred
of so many Myriads as live at Constantinople, where that Eloquent Prelate
Preached, should escape the dreadful Sentence of Eternal Condemnation; what
will become of us, and with what confidence can we go on, without thinking, in
those Paths that lead to the Chambers of Death and Destruction?

I have pitched upon the Holy Week, as the season of Devotion; not that the
Offices will not serve for any other time of the year; but, because Easter was
the time when all men, even the most indevout and ungovernable Persons, thought
themselves bound to receive the Eucharist; as also, because it is one of the
times when our Church enjoins all her Children upon the peril of her Censures,
to come to the Table of God; for which end it prescribes Fasting, and requires
their Attendance at the Church every day of this Week, to prepare themselves
for the receipt of the Solemn Blessings which that Festival brings. And in
truth, the whole Lent is but, as it were, an Eve to Easter; but more
especially, the last Week of Lent, which Represents in their proper Seasons,
The Triumphant entry of Christ into Jerusalem; The Conspiracy of Judas and the
Jews to betray him; The Institution of the Blessed Sacrament; The Crucifixion,
And the Descent into Hell. On this Week, the Church abstained from all
Sensualities and Worldly Pleasures, lived upon a dry Diet; their Sorrow was
deep, their Prayers intense, their Fastings strict, and their Watchings
frequent; and for this Reason I have after the pattern of V. To. 5. p. 524. etc.
St. Chrysostom in his Homilies, prefac'd every days Devotion with an account
of the time, and the Primitive practices on that day; that the Ignorant and
Unlearned might know the reason, why such days are set apart by the Church of
God; as being well assured, that the Lents and Festivals of the Greek Church,
are one of the most succesful means, next the Blessing of God, of maintaining
the Christian Religion among them, in despite of all the Mohammedan Artifices,
and cruelty to ruin it.

I have also (besides an account of the Ancient Usages relating to the Holy
Sacrament) subjoyned an Epistle and Gospel, Meditation, Prayer, and Anthem,
suited to the time (tho not so fitted to every particular day of the Great
Week, but that they may be more or less made use of according to the Capacities
and Discretion of the Devout Christian, on any day of that Week, or on any
other Week of the Year) and for Friday, I have annexed a method of
Self-Examination, together with a Litany, and other Collects (which also may be
used on Wednesday, or on any other, or every day of the Week) because that day
is a fastingday through the whole Church of God, and the time when our Holy
Redeemer was Crucified, upon whose Death depends all the Honor and Happiness
of the Christian World. Nor have I inserted a Litany of my own, as if I were so
vain to prefer it to that incomparable Litany which our Church enjoins; but,
because there seems to be a need of a more particular Deprecation of Sins in
the Closet, than in the public Congregation.

And here I solemnly protest, That none of these private Offices can atone for
the neglect of the Public Service (which the Church enjoins every day of this
Week) but that every good man ought to frequent the House of God, and to be
present at all the Hours of Prayer; which if he neglects, I cannot see how he
can expect the Divine Blessing on his private Devotion. In the Circumstantials
of which private Worship, I have instanced in those particulars which many good
Christians, to whom this Book may be serviceable, cannot enjoy; but every man's
prudence must be his guide in such Cases; and he who has not a Closet so
furnished, as is advised, ought to take care that he do not altogether want a
place to pray in; and God will accept of him, not according to what he has
not, but according to what he has.

Here also I cannot but remark, and censure a most unbecoming practice of our
Dissenting Brethren, who in despite of our Savior's command, that we should
pray in secret, choose their Closets commonly next the Street; and when they are
in it, Pray aloud, tho alone, that all who pass by, at least that are in the
house, may hear them; which what it can mean, but a design to be heard of men,
I cannot understand; for if they heartily confess their sins, and as I think,
it ought to be in private Prayers, by name, and with all the Aggravating
Circumstances that have attended their Transgressions; What Temptations are
such People under, either to hide their sins from God, that the World may not
know them; or else so to acknowledge them, as not to be ashamed to continue in
them, because those whose Vices are notoriously known, generally take shelter
in impudence.

But how unhappily such men do disserve the interests of Religion, is not the
Subject of this Preface; only I cannot forbear remembering some few things that
relate to this Sacrament: such as their total neglect of the Eucharist in so
palpable a manner, that one of their most Eminent Preachers confesses that he
never gave it in 18 Years; their admitting none to the Participation of the
Mysteries, but those who were in Church Covenant with themselves, as if there
were any other Church Covenant besides that of Baptism; or any other
Church Membership, but that of the Holy Catholic Church, which is the
Communion of Saints; their undecent, and rude distribution of it, not by the
hands of the Priest, but from one to another, as if they were at a merry
meeting, rather than at Gods Table; their slovenly Receiving of it sitting, to
the scandal of their Brethren, and to the Encouragement of the Socinian, and
other Heretics; with many other such Usages, which I shall not mention.

I have nothing more to account for in this Preface, but that I have freely
made use of several passages (Prayers especially) of the Ancients, and of some
few Modern Writers, without any scruple (and I here profess so much by way of
acknowledgment to all those good men, by whom I have profited) for if God have
the Glory, and the World the Benefit, it matters not who is the Instrument.

And now may the God of Peace and Truth, enlighten the Understandings of all
Mankind, that they may know and love, and practice their Duty, that every one
that is called by the Name of Christ, may depart from Iniquity, and may delight
to Communicate with his Savior; that we all in Gods time may pass from the
Festivals of the Church on Earth, to the Everlasting Feast that is held in
Heaven. Amen.

The CONTENTS.
PART. I.
THE Introduction. Of the Circumstances of Religious Worship in private. Chap.
1. Of the Obligations of the Sacraments to Holiness. Chap. 2. Of the common
excuses for not coming to the Blessed Sacrament. Chap. 3. Of the danger of
unworthy Receiving. Chap. 4. Of Examination in General. Chap. 5. Examination of
past sins. Chap. 6. Examination of present Virtues. Chap. 7. Examination of the
Communicants Knowledge. Chap. 8. Of the Study of the Holy Scriptures. Chap. 9.
Of Christian Love. Chap. 10. Of the Love of God. Chap. 11. Of the Remembrance
of our Blessed Savior. Chap. 12. Of the Love of our Neighbor. Chap. 13. Of
the Duties of Unity. Chap. 14. Of the Duties of Charity. Chap. 15. Of the Love
of Enemies. Chap. 16. Of Love to the Holy Sacrament: Chap. 17. Of Resignation,
and Self-denial. Chap. 18. Of Humiliation before the Reception. Chap. 19. Of
joy, and resolution after the Reception. Chap. 20. Of the Qualities of the
Priest who Consecrates. Chap. 21. The Methods of the Ancients at the Reception.
Chap. 22. The Honor done to the Sacrament by the Ancients. Chap. 23. The abuse
of the Sacrament to evil ends.
PART. II.
The Introduction. The Office for Palmsunday. For Monday before Easter. For
Tuesday before Easter. For Wednesday before Easter. For Maundy Thursday. For
Good Friday. The Examen. The Litany.
For Easter-Eve. For Easter Day. Rules of Conduct for Easter Day, and the
Sacrament.
THe Reader is desired to pardon the Faults of the Press, in Mispointing the
English, and putting Words in a wrong Letter, in making some unnecessary
Repetitions, and mis-accenting the Greek, and other obvious Mistakes, and to
Correct the following

ERRATA.
Part I. P. 9. l. 20. ad. the Bible, the Liturgy, etc. p. 16. l. 2. r.
Prescriptions. p. 21. l. 10. f. such r. many. p. 30. l. 9. f. for r. because.
p. 47. l. 18. f. anger r. malice. p. 80. l. 15. f. Rhetoric r. reason. p. 82.
l. 1. r who. l. 23. r. celebrating. l. 26. r. adapted. p. 115. l. 4. del. and.
l. 23. r. say it. p. 158. l. 19. r. brighter. p. 196. l. 3. f. so r. to be. p.
199. l. 6. r. Legate. p. 75. del. but left to discretion.

Part II. p. 2. l. 10. r. emblem. p. 4. l. 11. del. for ever. p. 35. l. 18. r.
but are. p. 42. l. 8 r. cram p 69 l. 14. r. conquer hearts. p. 103. l. 6. del.
only. p. 107. l. 15. r. is in. p. 136 l. 22. r. not my p. 179 l. 18. f. some r.
also the. p. 193. del. without all doubt. p. 198. l. 3. r. the prayers were p.
242. Marg. Lib. 8. c. 14, 15.

PART I.

Containing GENERAL RULES FOR THE Worthy Receiving OF THE BLESSED SACRAMENT OF
THE LORDS SUPPER.

(...).

p. 77. The more any man Loves God, the more is he inwardly made partaker of
the Divine Nature.

PART I.
THE INTRODUCTION.
Of the Circumstances of Religious Worship in private.
IT is fit that every man who intends to live well, should set himself Rules
how to spend every portion of his time as usefully, and as much to Gods, and
his own honor, as he can: And because the Reputation of Religion is secured,
and its Interests fenced by Ceremonies and Circumstances; and holy Offices
require a fit place, and select opportunities, wherein they may be performed,
it will be necessary, first, to speak of those Circumstantials which are so
conducive to the advantageous discharge of this duty. And First, That it is
requisite that the considerate Christian should have a place of Retirement, is,
I suppose, disputed by none but the rash, the vicious, and ungovernable. If
therefore a man's worldly concerns will afford it him, the devoutly inclined
should allow himself a Closet; which Room, tho not by a solemn consecration,
yet by designation and use, should be deputed to the private discharge of the
duties of Piety. Now a Closet is an Oratory; and therefore whenever I go
thither, I ought to be free from worldly considerations, and wholly intent upon
the business of eternity: for who ever turned a Chapel into a Counting House,
or a Shop? And this also brings a new advantage with it: For whenever I go
there again, the view of the place brings to my mind the good thoughts,
devotions and resolves, that when I was last there, took up my time; and
consequently with ease, puts me afresh upon the same performances: And
therefore whenever I go, tho but occasionally, into my Closet, I am bound to
say a short Collect before I leave it; as he who by chance only goes through a
Church, looks on himself obliged to make an halt, and to say his prayers. For
let the apartment seem what it will to others, it is to me the house of God: it
is no place for sport or society; for loose thoughts, or vain words: it is a
place of retirement, and not of company: and therefore should be most remote
from noise, and the disturbances of the house; and because it is the place I
first go to after I am out of my bed, and the last that I take my leave of
before I go to sleep; this course not only secures Gods blessing on my
undertakings, since I begin nothing without begging his help, nor end any thing
without giving him thanks; but withal it makes me careful and devout, since I
must do nothing upon which I dare not desire Gods blessing.

The situation of the Closet should be properly, if conveniently, toward the
East; and that way the Window should look, not only because it is the
pleasantest situation, and introduces the early light, one of the best of Gods
temporal Largesses; but because in that part of Heaven probably my Mediator and
Advocate sits at the Right Hand of his Father (for in his Humane Nature he must
be confined to some certain place) and toward that part the ancient Christians
(and to them I must always pay a deep veneration) used to direct their prayers.
This place should be furnished either for Necessity or Ornament. Some things are
necessary for the discharge of the duties of reading, praying, and meditating,
which every good man's prudence will dictate to him. And here for my self I
profess, That I think my self always bound to pray on my knees, or in the more
humble posture of prostration; and to read standing, if my health will give
leave, because then I hear the Commands of my dearest Master and Savior; but I
would meditate sitting, if walking be not more acceptable to me, because the
man who would meditate to advantage, should be no way discomposed by any thing
of uneasiness that may disturb the mind or body.

The ornamental furniture should be plain, but so ordered, that it may appear
like an Oratory, and be a representation in little, of the house of God. For
that some Ornament is necessary, I am convinced, because our blessed Savior in
the time of his lowest humiliation, would not celebrate the Passover, but Mar.
14.15. (...).
in a room that was furnished and adorned and fit for such a Sacred Office. To
the Window there should be fixed a little Table and that should be my Altar,
whereon I may offer my God a broken and a contrite heart, pierced through with
the Darts of Divine Love, and the Ardors of Zeal for the honor of my Savior.
A little remote from it should be a Desk, whereon the Book of God should be
always placed, and always open (which very sight is an intimation of my duty).
Nearer the door (and that in the Church was the place of Penitents) should be a
space where I may prostrate my self in the time of my sorrow, and my
humiliations; and there also should be a little Treasury, like the Treasury of
the Temple, or the Poor Man's Box in our Churches, where, on every day in which
I fast, and on other occasions, as God shall enable me (especially when I have
received some signal deliverance from danger, or other testimony of Gods love
and favor) I may lay up something for the poor; by which means I shall have a
stock of Charity always by me, whenever I see a fit Object for it: And no
necessity shall make me alienate what has been so devoted (for it is Corban,
consecrated to God and his service), tho perhaps I meet not the same day with
some indigent person to bestow it on: For how poor and naked are my
Humiliations, or Thanksgivings, without Alms?

On the days of my humiliation, I would have no other Pictures in the Closet
(while at other times any draught that represents a grave and honest Subject,
may well enough become the place), except a Mary Magdalen, or Peter in his
penitent posture after the denial of his Master, or a lively Representation of
my dying Savior, with this Motto, I desire to know nothing but Jesus Christ,
and him crucified: For I would willingly have my bleeding Master always present
to my eye, when I am well inclined, to encourage me; when bent to do evil, to
reclaim me. He prayed often, and meditated frequently, and was continually a
man of sorrows and mortification: But his Passion is an indispensible
Obligation to Piety: For what can endear holiness so persuasively, as the
remembrance that Christ died to purify to himself a peculiar people zealous of
good works? Can I look upon that sad spectacle, and not be touched with remorse
and compassion, and with a due consideration, that my sins brought my Savior
to so much shame and torture; and nothing but my Repentance can answer the ends
of his sufferings?

A Lute, or some such grave instrument (if the devout person has any skill in
Music), were very proper to join with the Voice in the praises of God. The
room also should be hung, so as the Windows may be darkened, to make the Closet
gloomy and awful, upon any time when it may be convenient, but more especially
during the Lent, the weekly Stations (or half fasts) of Wednesday and Friday,
but above all on Good Friday, and the Holy-Saturday, the days when our blessed
Master suffered on the Cross, and lay in the grave. I know nothing more
necessary, but that the place should be furnished with Books according to every
man's capacity, as he is able to buy, and to understand; but nothing should be
there but what is devotional, such as Sacred History, Divine Poems, devout
Meditations, and the Rules of Holy Life: Nor should these be intermixed with any
Books of other sorts (for tho Secular History and Poems, Romances and Plays, be
an allowable diversion, yet because the Closet is a Chapel, I think them not
allowable in that place: For the men who are lovers of those Writings, never
carry them to Church with them: And therefore any other room in the house is
better fitted for such Books). Those who can only read English (for the Masters
of Languages are best able to advise themselves), I counsel, That, whatever
else may be either admitted, or wanting, the devotional Works of the Reverend
Dean of Peterborough, Dr. Patrick, with his excellent Paraphrases, may always
find a shelf there; and with them the Writings of that good person the Author
of the Whole Duty of Man, who has given so liberally to the Treasury of the
Church, and so humbly denied himself his due praises, by a studious concealing
of his Name; together with the Primitive Christianity of Dr. Cave, that they
who cannot read the Works of the Ancients, may in that Learned Author, admire,
and imitate their transcendent Virtues. And I mention these Books only, not
that I undervalue any other Authors who have writ on Pious Subjects (for I know
that there are now extant many very valuable Treatises, set out by the Divines
of our Church, and perhaps more and better than all the rest of the Christian
World can boast of), but because in so great a multitude there ought to be some
choice; and I think these the most convenient, and best adapted to the
necessities of the persons to whom I undertake to prescribe; tho at last I must
acknowledge, that all this discourse has its relation only to people of
condition, of estate and leisure: For to the poor, every room in the house that
is private, is a Closet, and the Liturgy of our Church, with the Whole Duty of
Man, a Library.

When the Closet is so furnished, the next thing considerable is, what time must
be spent in it? And here it is impossible to prescribe the same Rules to all
persons; only it is to be remembered, that the rich and prosperous are freed
from the drudgeries of Life, and so have much time to dispose of; as also have
Scholars, and all that are studiously inclined. And that whereas twice or three
times a day may be enough for a man of business to retire, and serve his Maker,
I much question whether people of leisure can be dispenc't with, unless they
observe all the Canonical hours, at lest those which happen between six in the
morning and nine at night inclusively, as long as health will permit. I am
enjoined in the Name of our Holy Savior, and St. Paul Luke 21.36. 1 These. 5.17.
to pray always, and without ceasing; that is as often as I can conveniently,
for the other duties of my Calling, as a Man, and a Christian; but I must never
omit doing it every day, at some set seasons and returns of time: For so the
good Widow is said Luke 2.37.
to have served God day and night at the Temple; i. e. at the accustomed hours
of the Jewish devotion: And so this Example binds me also to the public
service of the Church, if I am where I can enjoy that honor and privilege, as
well as to the private performances of my Closet. And to encourage this, it is
well worth the remembering Act 2.1.15. V. Basil. regul. fusior. inter. 37.
, that the Holy Ghost, the most glorious and useful donative that ever the
Christian Church did enjoy, was bestowed on the Apostles when they were
celebrating the Festival of the Pentecost with prayers and praises, and that
upon one of the solemn set-hours of prayer, the third hour of the day.

My first employment in my closet is Prayer, and that either supplication or
praises, as I am sensible of what either sins I have lately committed, or
blessings received. And if the Egyptians, acted only by the light of Nature in
the beginning of all their ceremonies, made three solemn acclamations to the
Unknown Darkness; i. e. to that God whom humane faculties cannot comprehend;
ought not I to preface my service with as many acts of solemn adoration to the
blessed Trinity? After I have prayed, I am under obligation to read some part
of Holy Writ (and after it some Paraphrase, or other suitable discourse), with
awe and attention: And when I have so done, I meditate; which when I do, I fly
the society of the World, to converse with God and good Angels; I put my self
into the true way to that peace of mind which a sinner wants; and I walk
directly toward Heaven; I follow my Savior, who left the multitude, and went
into a mountain apart, to enjoy the society of his Father: I am taken from the
occasions of censuring others, or judging my Neighbors; and have nothing to
do, but to contemplate the state of my own foul, and the Mercies of my God. In
this place also do I choose to fast, that I may do it in secret: and by avoiding
being seen of men, may earn an open Reward from my Father that sees in secret.
And tho on every day I give my God my earliest attendance, yet on the days of
my solemn Vows, I bind my self to prevent the morning, that in the beginning of
the watches I may pour out my heart like water before the Lord. Thus every day
will be a day of business and traffic, and every night I shall be some steps
nearer to my Fathers Palace.

The Collect.
GRant, Lord, that when I serve thee in secret, I may do it with a true and
upright heart; and that all my public performances may be encouragements to
others to love, and praise, and adore thee; that I may pray fervently, and
thank thee heartily, and read carefully, and meditate seriously, and fast
humbly, and live conscientiously all the days of my life, in hopes at my death
to be admitted into thy presence, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

CHAP. I. Of the Obligations of Religion, especially the Sacraments, to
Holiness.
WEre the Christian Religion to be judged of by the excellency of its Author,
and the purity of its Precepts, by the wisdom of its contrivance, and the
usefulness of its designs, it would need no other Credentials that it came down
from Heaven, and that its Original was from God: But if we judge of it by the
practices of its professors, who under the mask of Piety, allow themselves in
all sorts of sensuality, who scruple not to break all their Vows made to their
Maker, tho confirmed and renewed in the presence of Men and Angels, and sealed
by the most precious Body and Blood of the Son of God; who call themselves
Saints, and yet live more irregularly than Brutes: This very consideration is
enough to incline a man to applaud the Morals of the Heathen World, and to
believe, that either that body of holy Precepts is not the Gospel of the
blessed Jesus, or such men are not professors of it: so strongly are the
generality of Mankind in a loose and ungovernable Age, bent toward Vice and
Ruin: Nor can it otherwise be expected, when men put on the form of godliness,
in defiance to the power of it; and think, that the Redemption wrought out for
them by Christ, is only a deliverance to do all sort of abominations. Nor can I
give a better Reason, why the Christian World are so degenerate from truth and
holiness, than that so few of us reflect on the Obligations of the Covenant
that we have entered into with God, tho so often and so solemnly acknowledged
by us, that we confidently lay claim to the Privileges, but never mind the
Duties of Religion. May our gracious God so mercifully forgive me, and the rest
of sinners, our former neglect, as we may resolve for the time to come, to
alter our course, and put on more becoming Resolutions, and faithfully make
good what we have so solemnly promised our Redeemer.

For when I seriously, and as becomes a Christian, consider with my self the
Relation which every baptized person has to the Son of God; and that that
initiatory Sacrament was designed, as to free him from his share in Adam's sin,
so to engage to a life of Obedience to the Laws of our blessed Savior; and
that therefore we are buried with him in baptism, that like as Christ was
raised up from the dead, by the glory of the Father, even so we also should
walk in newness of life, reckoning our selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but
alive unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord; I cannot but remember, that
among all those holy and beneficial Precepts which he has blessed the World
with, that is none of the least in advantage and usefulness, that injoins me to
do as he did in remembrance of his Passion, the great cause of our redemption
and happiness, and encourages me to frequent communicating, because as often as
I do eat that bread, and drink that cup, so often do I show forth the Lords
death till he come; so often do I call to mind my old promises of obedience and
conformity to the divine prescription, and enter into new engagements to love
and adore my Savior.

How eagerly therefore ought my soul to pursue after, and to embrace all
Opportunities of coming to that holy Table where God exhibits himself? Happy
are those Servants of his, who stand continually before him, and keep
themselves always in that frame of mind that fits and encourages them to
communicate every day. Happy are those men who only want Occasions, but are
never defective in intention or preparation; who are never without the Wedding
Garment, nor without Oil in their Lamps. How did our dear Savior long to
institute the Sacrament Luke 22.15.
; with desire did he desire to eat the passover, at the close of which the
Eucharist was celebrated, before he suffered? And should not thou, my soul,
as earnestly long to receive it? Were this Sacrament like that of Baptism, not
to be re-iterated, or but once only in my life to be received, and that just
before my death, with what ardors of mind should I wish to be dissolved, that I
might thus also be with my Savior? And must the Blessing, because it is
common, be for that Reason cheap? Is the bread of Heaven become contemptible,
because it may be my daily food?

But remember, O my soul, it is not enough to approach this Venerable Altar,
unless thy Repentance be sincere, thy Sorrow hearty, thy Resolutions
unalterable, thy Piety flaming, and thine Alms generous. My preparations should
be the same with those of dying persons, not of those who have lived loosly all
their days, in hopes to make their faint desires of Heaven, when the pleasures
of the Earth have deserted them, to pass for true love to those joys; but of
those who all their lives long have been crucified to the world. My care ought
to be so to approach Gods Table on Earth, as if I were the next moment to be
carried by Angels to eat bread with him in his Kingdom. It is true, I am too
sensible that this is more easily talked of than done; that when the good Man is
acting the Priest, and sacrificing himself to God, then Satan is at his right
hand, perplexing him. And I have sadly experimented, how difficult it is to
deny my self, to put off the Old Man, and to crucify my transgressions: But is
it not, O my soul, much more sad and difficult, more uneasy and distracting,
to be confined to utter darkness, and to endure the tortures of Hell in a
remediless Eternity? To argue from a present state of ease, is a shortness of
discourse that is not to be allowed. Were I never so passionately bent to
gratify an unreasonable Lust, I doubt not but I should be afraid to proceed,
did any man but threaten me with immediate death, if I should pursue my
unlawful design: And ought I not with greater Reason to forbear, when that God
who can neither lie nor deceive, threatens me with everlasting damnation? Am I
afraid of the crackling of Thorns, and will not Thunder scare me? Do I run away
from an ignis fatuus, and wilfully throw my self into insufferable flames? In
the Name of God therefore I do now resolve to fit my self for the approaching
Festival of Easter: and whatever I have heretofore done, I will no longer put
off my dear Savior, but will from this instant give my self entirely to his
service.

The Collect.
GRant Lord, That all the words of my mouth, the meditations of my heart, and
the actions of my whole life, may be now, and ever acceptable in thy sight, O
God, my Savior, and my Redeemer. Amen.

CHAP. II. Of the common Excuses for not communicating.
BEcause through our natural aversness to all that is good, my own evil heart
is inclinable to supersede this so beneficial a commerce with my God, I will
first show how vain my pretenses are for absenting, and then how dangerous it
is to come unprepared. And first, the common Excuses are very vain and
unbecoming: For the command to receive this Sacrament, is so plain and
obligatory, that I am convinced nothing should excuse me from frequent
communicating; And yet so perverse is my will, so ungovernable are my passions,
that the good which I would do, Heave undone, and the evil which I should not
do, that I do; so that sometimes when I have a desire to communicate, I
presently find that Ardor easily cool, and end in an unbecoming lukewarmness,
and unconcernedness for the Offices of Religion. Thus I grow old before I am
good: And to learn an act of Virtue is a business of time: while on the
contrary, my sins grow to maturity in their Cradle, and are like a spot of Oil,
which being at first hardly perceivable, suddenly spreads its self, till it
fully the whole Garment. Satan, the Adversary of Mankind, musters many little
Arguments to affright me, and my own heart is strongly inclinable to comply
with him; as if when God had made so noble a provision, and sent out his
servants, his Ministers, to call them who are bidden to the Wedding, he would
contentedly be put off with slight answers, and poor excuses. Oh, how apt is my
Vicious Nature, either wholly to neglect the Offices of Religion, or to look on
them as burdensome and tedious, that the Prayers are too long, and the
Reproofs of the Sermon too sharp! But if to the Prayers and Sermon the
Eucharist be added, I am too prone not only to be weary, but angry with God;
and think it is well done to be so, not considering what an happiness it is to
have Communion with my Savior, and how much more uneasy my state would be,
should my God require from me, as he did from the Jews, such expensive
sacrifices, and personal attendances on the solemn Feasts at his Temple: as
also how unreasonable it is to imagine, that God has adorned this inferior
world with such Variety of good things, only to swell my Pride, and pamper my
Lusts; and in the mean time has reserved nothing for himself, but what is
cheap, contemptible, and of no value?

One solemn excuse is, I have no leisure: and it is the plea of the men in the
Luke 14.18; etc.
Parable. This, says a good man, sounds like confession and humility, but is in
truth denial and defiance: it is called want of leisure, but is in reality
sloth, idleness, and irreligion. Can I judge it equitable, to give all my time
to my secular Business and Recreation, and none to my God, to whom I owe a
liberal portion of my enjoyments; nay, all my enjoyments, and my self too? Have
I so many days to trifle away, and none for the concerns of Eternity? My whole
life should be one continued Sabbath, and every act of my Calling, either as a
Man, or a Christian, a preparative to the Communion, and to my Death. And would
a man spend his hours so vainly, that when he has most need of comfort, he
should most want it; and when he comes to die, be bereaved of all consolation?
And is not the same care to be taken, to fit my self for the Sacrament, as for
my last Account? What God now invites me to, is a matter of great weight; the
business is, whether I intend to be saved, or not? If I think Heaven not worth
the looking after, it is no wonder if I am to every good work a Reprobate, and
insensible of my need of the means of Grace: But if I resolve to be a Candidate
for Glory (as it were better for me that I had never been born, than to live
voluptuously here a while, and be damned for ever), I must apply my self to
that method that will give me a title to it; and the only method is an holy
life; and that state is not attainable without means, among which, frequent
communicating is an excellent instrument of conveying Grace into the mind, of
renewing my Resolutions, and applying to my soul the Merits of my Savior: So
that if I put any estimate on my salvation, there is a necessity of my coming
often to God's Table; and when I say, I want time to prepare my self, I mean, I
want leisure to be a Christian; and I am not willing to take pains to be saved.

2. Another plausible pretense for absenting my self, is, I am unworthy; and he
who eats and drinks 1 Cor. 11.29.
unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself. And whose fault is it, that
I have not made my self worthy? God has been wanting in nothing that is
required on his part; my unworthiness therefore is both my sin, and also my
punishment. Besides, humility is a necessary preparation to this Sacrament, and
an absolute Renunciation of our selves, and our own Righteousness, that we may
depend solely on Christ, is one of the indispensible qualifications requisite
to fit us for the Paschal Feast: For the Centurion, who said, Lord, I am not
worthy that thou should come under my roof, did, notwithstanding, accept of
our Savior's Offer, and reapt the benefit of his miraculous Assistances, and
was honored with his Testimony, that in all Israel the Son of God found not so
great faith as his: And St. Epist. 118.
Austin tells me, That if my sins be such as do not deserve Excommunication
from the Church ( i. e. if they be only sins of ignorance and infirmity), I
ought not to excommunicate my self, but I ought to receive, if I may, every
day. Nor is it inconsiderable, that tho my Graces be weak when I approach this
Altar, there God gives me his holy Spirit, if my sins hinder it not, to enable
me with greater power and vigor to do his will. And as it is very dangerous to
communicate unworthily, so to refuse to come, is equally dangerous: For not
Hom. 24. in 1 Cor. 10.
to communicate in this holy Supper, is as dangerous as the Pestilence, or
death it self, says St. Chrysostom; to despise it is Sacriledg, and a scorn of
the Bread and Waters of Life, and a depriving my self of the means to make me a
true and perfect Christian: For it is an excellent Maxim in Religion, He who is
not fit to receive to day, will be less fit to morrow; and he who is not fit to
communicate every day, will be fit to communicate no day, and in a small time
will throw off all fear of God. For if the end of the institution be to renew
our Covenant made with our Savior, of taking him for our Master (which is the
true Notion of Religion) then the withdrawing our selves from this Sacrament
can be accounted nothing else but a Virtual slighting of Christianity, and
renouncing our Obedience to our Savior. For do I not put an Affront upon God,
when I say, the Table of the Lord is contemptible? For not communicating (says
a devout person) is the next sin to apostatizing: for it is an actual disowning
our communion with our Head and his Members, and a cutting off of our selves
from the body of Christ. And if unworthiness may hinder me from receiving the
Eucharist; am I not as unworthy to pray, or to hear, as to communicate? And
does not this plea tend to supercede all duty? May I not hear to my prejudice,
and pray to my ruin? May not the word that I have heard, rise in Judgment
against me, and my prayer be turned into sin? And is it not as expressly
required of me, to do as my Luke 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.24.
Redeemer did, in remembrance of his Passion, as it is to frequent any other of
his Ordinances? But what if God should make that my fate which is now my
choice, and deprive me by his Judgments of the liberty of enjoying those
Ordinances which I now contemn? Would not thou, O my soul, look on it as an
astonishing Judgment, and such a Decree, as thou would give part of thy
blood to reverse? And must I be my own Executioner? And have I not enemies
enough in the World, and Hell, that I must be my own most embittered Adversary?

3. Another hinderance is, that the preparation required is very difficult, and
that it is no easy thing to be a Christian. But this also is an unreasonable
suggestion: For tho the severities of Mortification and Self-denial, appear in
a formidable dress; yet in themselves they are true satisfactions: For nothing
can equal the Joy of that soul that is rescued from eternal horrors. And I
should rejoice to be pulled out of a Dungeon, where else I must inevitably
perish, tho it were by the hair; and to be saved, tho so as by fire. Men are
possessed beforehand with needless fears, and take characters of the ways of
godliness from the sensual and debauched; as if we should put a deaf man to
give an account of harmony. But to those who have entered seriously upon the
profession of holiness, and made themselves proselites to Wisdom, her ways
appear to be ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. Besides, the
sinner draws himself a Scheme of Virtue that is not correspondent to the
dictates of Reason, or Holy Scriptures: For Virtue is a Borderer upon our
Natural Habits; and our evil inclinations may be made subservient to piety;
either, 1. by correcting the Excesses of Nature, and altering the degree of our
Passions; So Grace turns Choler into a well-regulated Zeal, Melancholy into
inclinations to Devotion, Abstinence and Mortification: it makes the Phlegmatic
cautious and fearful to offend his God, and ready to be a penitent whenever he
has offended: and it makes the Sanguine apt to rejoice in God, and in the
light of his countenance; to be easy to forgive, and willing to be reconciled;
it warms the cold and careless into a religious and devout temper; it abates
the eagerness of Covetousness, till it become frugality; and easily changes the
prodigal into a man of a liberal and generous mind. 2. Our evil Passions are
without difficulty devoted to God, by altering the Object of our pursuits. For
would the Voluptuous person pursue after Eternity, as he has done after the
gratifications of his sensual Appetites; would the Miser transfer his love from
his unrighteous Mammon, to the living and true God; and were the revengeful
thoughts of the angry man no longer fixed upon his offending brother, but
employed against his own Vices, how smooth would the path of Virtue appear, and
how free from Thorns and Encumbrances?

4. Another Excuse is, I am deterred from approaching to this Feast of fat
things, because I am not in Charity. But what should hinder, why I should not
love all Mankind? Did not my blessed Savior pray for his enemies at his Death?
And is not the Sacrament a commemoration of that his Death? Now as I cannot
call that man a Mariner that never learnt his Compass, nor that man a Soldier
that never fought; how much less can I call my self a Christian, who never
conform to my Master's pattern? What man, but one of an impudent forehead, and
most obdurate heart, can dare to pray his heavenly Lord to forgive him ten
thousand Talents, who will not forgive his fellow servants an hundred pence? And
perhaps at last, I think many actions uncharitable which are not so Vid.
Injunct. 21. of Qu. Eliz.
. For I do not believe, that if my Neighbor causelessly quarrels with me the
day before I am to communicate, or I am without design engaged in the heat of
talk, which is not sinful, or a man forces me to go to Law with him, to recover
my just right; that these things shall deprive me of the benefits of the
Sacrament: For these things are my Afflictions, and I suffer them patiently,
and still am in Charity. As I do not think, that if I am bidden to a Feast
sometime before, or have allowed my self any innocent Recreation, that this
shall unfit me for the Christian Passover. But withal I must say, that were it
put to my choice, I would rather omit those Civilities, and deny my self those
Pleasures at that time, than lose my spiritual Advantages: And I would avoid
all occasions of being angry, or doing any thing that might but give suspicion
that I were not thoroughly reconciled to all the world, rather than at such a
critical time to make my self an Offender: For the wrath of man works not the
righteousness of God. And when I pray, as I always do when I communicate, I am
enjoined to lift up pure hands without wrath or doubting. No worldly care
therefore, nor the entertainment of friends, nor a small fit of sickness, that
does not confine me to my bed, or chamber, shall ever hinder my approaches to
God's Altar, nor every little quarrel, which against my will I am engaged in,
when I am ready to make satisfaction, if I have given Offense, and to forgive,
if I have taken any. For shall I rob my self of Gods be ssing, because another
man is froward, stubborn, and untractable? The case therefore of Pallad. vit.
Chrysostom. p. 126, 127, 128.
St. Chrysostom did deserve pity, who being just ready to celebrate these
Venerable Mysteries, was so unnessarily, and unseasonably, and uncharitably
angered by Eusebius, Bishop of Valentinople, that he was forced to desist from
the Office, and to desire Pansophius, Bishop of Pisida, to consecrate for him;
being persuaded, that that occasional anger was an invalidating of his
preparation. And in truth, the Conc. Carth. 4. Can. 93.
Church was so much an enemy to all quarrels, that it forbad the admittance of
the Oblations of those who were not in perfect Charity, either at the Altar, or
into the Church-Treasury.

5. But if I sin after so solemn a Renewal of my Vows in this Sacrament, will
it not increase my guilt? So among the Ancients some deferred their Baptism
till the time of their death, that they might not be impeacht of defiling the
White Robes which they then put on. And does not this Argument equally hinder
the performance of all other Offices of Christianity? May I not as well defer
to repent, since a relapse into evil habits, after such an ab-renunciation of
them, is an heavy aggravation of my Crime? And is not this to do as it is
reported of the Circassians, who follow their Thievery till they are Sixty, and
then spend the remainder of their days in Prayers, devoting their Youth and
Strength to the Devil, and their Vices; their Old Age, Impotence, and Diseases
to God and Repentance? But what if death should seize me while I thus defer
making up my accounts with my Master? What if a dull Lethargy (which perhaps is
but the effect and punishment of my irregularities) should seize my brain, and
stifle the spirits, and disable me from thinking? So that by reason thereof I
am dead while I live. What if a Fever should captivate my Reason, and put me
into a Frenzy, so as I can only name God in my Oaths and Curses; will not this
hinder all commerce with God, or my own Soul? And how deplorable must my estate
then be? For Heaven was never designed a Bedlam, a Receptacle for the
Distracted and Vicious. How can I promise my self to repent, or communicate to
morrow, who put off hearkening to my Savior to day, since all his injunctions
relate to the present time? And if that that must save me, be a work of Grace,
of time, and perseverance, what folly is it to neglect it? And will not the
slighting these passionate and earnest invitations of my God, be a great
increase of my guilt?

6. But does not Satan sometimes tempt me to think it unlawful to communicate
with sinners, or, as it is worded, with a mixed company? And am not I my self
the greatest sinner? And who can come there who is not so? And does not our
Church, as well as all other the Reformed, debar all gross and notorious
transgressors from the Sacrament? Can I call this any thing but Cunning in my
ghostly Enemy, who first tempts me to mean thoughts of my self, and would keep
me from God's Table, because my self am unworthy; and now tempts me to pride,
and contempt of my Christian brother? I am sure Charity thinks no evil, and
obliges us in honor to prefer others to our selves. Besides, why do I pray, or
hear with sinners, if I must not communicate with them? And how do I know but
he who offended deeply yesterday, is as deep a penitent to day? And how dare I
to judge another servant? It is not in the diseases of the soul as of those of
the body? Nothing makes the spiritual Plague infectious but my consent: A man
may, if he will, live chaste in a school of debauchery, and keep himself
temperate in the house of an Epicure. If my brother comes unworthily, he eats
and drinks damnation to himself, and not to me. And I am sure I have employment
enough to examine my self, to keep me from being busied about other men's
matters.

Lastly: But is not the posture of receiving, apt to give scandal, and to be
mistaken for an act of worship performed not to God, but to the Elements? I am
sure Humility is a necessary Attendant on the worthy Communicant; a Virtue
which is peculiarly Christian, which the Philosophers do not so much as name in
their Catalogues. I know also, that when I communicate, the Priest prays, that
the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ may preserve my body and soul unto
eternal life; and with him I pray when I say Amen: and the posture of prayer is
kneeling; and therefore I fall down, and worship before the Lord our Maker.
Perhaps our Savior gave the blessed Eucharist to his Apostles in another
posture (for we are not sure, because the Scripture is silent); and so also did
he give it only to men (when there were many Female Disciples), and in an upper
room, and after a Feast (as it was also in St. Paul's time celebrated after the
Love-Feast, or Agape). But has not the Church as much power as the Synagogue?
And did not the Jewish Church alter the posture of the Passover, which was at
first to be eaten standing with the shoes on, to a Table posture, which also
our Savior seems to have observed? For can we think, that our Savior's
practice binds more than God's express command? Or does it bind more in one
circumstance than in others? Besides, I am convinced, that the practice of the
Ancients, and the commands of my superiors, should much sway me in doubtful
cases. But they tell me, Aug. in Ps. 98. Chrysostom. To. 3. p. 778. (...). Id. to 5.
p. 518. etc.
That it is a sin not to adore when I receive. And when I so adore, I no more
worship the Altar, or the Elements, that I bow before, than when I kneel in the
Pew, I worship the Desk, or the Book that lies on it. Nor has the one been
more abused to Idolatry than the other: For the Heathen do worship Wood and
stone, as much as the Papists the Host. And is not this adoration a part of
that honor which is fixed on Christ, the Institutor of this Sacrament; who also
is the thing signified under those Visible Figures? for he has sworn by
himself, that every knee shall bow to him, which honor he purchased by his
blood: For because he humbled himself to the death of the Cross, therefore God
has given him a Name above all Names; that at the name of Jesus every knee
should bow. And is not this Sacrament a Representation of that Passion? Nor was
it ever heard, that Superstition could abolish the duty of a Text. And if when
I kneel, I give countenance to the Papists, who in this case err by attributing
such honor to the Son of God, which he allows not of; I am sure in sitting at
this Table I countenance the Socinians, and other Anti-Trinitarians, who debase
our Savior, and degrade him from his Godhead: for which Reason Altar
Damascen. p. 752.
in Four several Synods in Poland, the Protestants, both Lutherans and
Calvinists, agreed to abolish that Custom. To conclude, the famous Huniades is
as great in Story for his Humility as for his Victories; and as much
celebrated, that he would not, tho on his Deathbed, receive the blessed
Sacrament but on his knees, as for the many Overthrows that he gave the
Mahometans. Since therefore these, and the like Excuses, are but Engines to
entrap and betray me: And since the same Authority that forbids me to kill, or
to steal, bids me do this in remembrance of my Savior; I do from henceforth
resolve to communicate upon every Occasion, as I love my life and my salvation.

The Collect.
GRacious God, the instructor of the ignorant, and the guide of them who are
out of the way; convince me of my folly, remove my prejudices, and arm me with
thy Grace against the assaults of Satan, that I may not consult with Flesh and
Blood, but with thy lively Oracles; that I may long for all occasions to
communicate with thee, and may stifle all Excuses that would hinder that holy
Converse; that above all things I may love thee here, and live with thee for
ever hereafter, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

CHAP. III. Of the danger of unworthy Receiving.
BUT do not thou imagine, O my deceitful heart, that there is nothing required
of thee, but only to approach this holy place, and taste of the Dainties it
affords: They never relish well but to the Palate that is seasoned. This Bread
turns to a Stone, and the Wine into Gall and Wormwood to the sinner, whose soul
is vitiated. Our Savior does not vouchsafe to eat this Christian Passover but
with his Disciples, with the penitent and the devout. He is the Carcass, and
here the Eagles are expected; but Dogs are prohibited; Revel. 22.15.
without are dogs, and all that work iniquity. And whatever wretch should dare
break through these Fences, and commit a Rape on this blessed Sacrament, he
will be deceived of the benefit expected; for this spiritual food to him has
no extraordinary relish, nor does it differ from that which ministers to his
Lust and his Wantonness: and he runs the greatest hazard of eternal damnation.
He had better have swallowed the deadliest Poison. I dare not therefore
magnify constant Communion, so as to depretiate the Virtues that must qualify
the Communicant, and make him worthy. It is an insufferable affront to
Religion, and an intrusion not to be pardoned, when the crafty Usurer shall
come from his yesterdays grinding the face of the poor, to eat to day the Body
of his Savior; the Shopkeeper from his little arts and methods of fraud, the
Glutton from his crammed dishes, the Intemperate from his last nights debauch,
and the lustful from the arms and embraces of his Mistrisses, to force
themselves a way to Gods House and Table; that man unavoidably 1 Cor. 11.27, 29.
eats and drinks damnation to himself, and is guilty of the body and blood of
the Lord. And tho perhaps the word in the Original, which our Translators
render Damnation, be sometimes taken in a softer sense, and only signifies
Temporal Judgments: And it be a Quaere, whether he who thinks himself unworthy,
be for that Reason unfit (because the most humble is the best prepared); or
whether every actual unworthiness makes a man liable to so severe a sentence:
Yet doubtless, every profane and impenitent Wretch is in the high-road to
Ruin: And hardly can salvation it self save such a man, Heb. 6.6, etc.
who after he has been enlightened from above, and tasted of the good gift of
God, falls away: For he has anew crucified to himself the Lord of life. I
therefore, as a private person, charge thee, O my soul, look to thy self, and
examine severely thy state. Thy happiness and eternal welfare depend on thy due
preparation. And as God's servant in the Function of the Priesthood, I charge
the Drunkard and Adulterer (and I do it in the Name of our adorable Savior), I
charge the Covetous and the Extortioner, the Proud and the Revengeful, the
Profane Man and the Hyp^crite, the practical Infidel and Debauchee, not to
presume to tread this holy ground; Fire will break from this Altar, and consume
them. Here is an angry Cherub, with his Flaming Sword, turning every way to
secure the Tree of Life, that it may not be tasted of by the wicked and
profligate; but I also charge the same Atheistical and vicious liver, to alter
his evil habits, to wash his soul clean in the waters of true penitence, and
then let him visit the Temple. It is equally damnable, not to come at all, and
to come unprepared.

The Collect.
In imitation of St. Chrysostom.
HOly Savior, who have been in all places, who did not disdain to visit the
Grave with thy Body, and Hell with thy Soul, while thy Divinity was with the
penitent Thief in Paradise, and with thy Father on his Throne. Thou Spirit of
Truth; thou Heavenly King and Comforter, who art present every where, and
fillest all things: Thou Treasure of Goodness, and Guide unto Eternal Life,
where will thou that I shall provide the Passover? O! come, and pitch thy
Tents in my Soul, and purge me from all pollution; cleath me with thy
Righteousness, give me Faith and Knowledge, Love and Obedience, that I may
always be fit to enjoy thy company, and to share in thy Merits: Pardon my sins,
and save my soul, O thou Author of all Goodness. Amen.

CHAP. IV. Of Examination in general.
THere is an indispensible necessity of Examination preparative to worthy
receiving. For tho Charity inclines me to judge Favorably of others, yet I dare
not flatter my self. And if severity be at any time lawful, it is in the
Offices of Repentance. I ought to suspect my best actions, and censure my very
devotions: I ought to fly the very appearances of evil, as I dread the shadows
of the Grave, and to tremble at a temptation when first in View: For nothing
can be so terrible as the state of a (...).
Reprobate. For if the Sacrifice must be without blemish (if it must not only
not want any Essential, or Integral part, not an Ear, or an Eye, but also must
not so much as have a Scab, or an Ulcer; the blood must not be tainted, nor the
Lungs scirrous), how much more ought the Priest to be perfect; thoroughly
furnished unto every good work? It is the Apostle's advice, 1 Cor. 11.28. Let
every man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that
cup: (...), which is a word of a very large and comprehensive signification: I
ought to examine my self, as (...). h. e. (...). Vid. S. Chrysostom. Hom. 20. in
Ep. ad Romans to. 3. p. 174.
the Ancient Priests did their Sacrifices: For both the Jews and Gentiles, when
an Oblation was brought to the Temple, did not only inspect its Outside, but
cut it down by the back, and searched and examined the Entrails, according to
the Rules of Art (for every man was not thought fit for this Employment: It was
the Priest's Province). For in truth, when I approach this Table, I offer my
self to God a reasonable, lively, and holy Sacrifice: And therefore ought to
inspect my thoughts and actions. For if I do not, God sees me; since Heb. 4.13.
Vid. Theophil. in Loc. p. 909.
all things are naked, and open, and exposed as a Sacrifice, when it is cut down
by the back, to the eyes of him with whom we have to do. Or rather, I ought to
examine my self, as Goldsmiths and Bankers do their Metals, by the Touchstone,
or the fire: in allusion to which Custom, Clem. Alex. Strom. 1. Orig. to. 19.
in Johan Epiphan. Haer. 44. Pallad. Vit. Chrysostom. p. 37. Hieron. Cassian.
Cyril. Alexandr. etc.
the Fathers frequently quote an excellent Saying of our blessed Savior's;
which is not in our Bibles; (...); advising his Disciples to be expert Bankers,
to discern between good Metal, and that which only makes a show. The word also
implies an Examen, or Trial, like that which Harpocration. Lexic. v. (...).
Suid. in (...). Aristotel. in Politic. (...).
Officers, both Military and Civil, past through at Sparta, by the order of
Lycurgus, and in other Governments in Greece, who in the public place of
Judicature, were either approved, or exploded: After which pattern the
Primitive Sages made all their Ordinations in public: In the face of the
Church were the Catechumens examined: Their penances were public, and so were
their Confessions, that whatever was done there, might have the Approbation of
the whole Community. A like scrutiny to which I should make into my own
Conscience, whether I am worthy of this eminent dignity of eating at my
Master's Table. This scrutiny I am to make as a Priest, as an Officer in the
Church of God; and I am also to make it as a private Christian, whether I am
fit for this Communion of Saints, because Harpocrat. Lex. v. (...).
private persons also, who had no share in the Government, were subject to this
Examen; their Lives also being inspected, whether they in their lower Stations,
demeaned themselves as they ought. But the word has still a further
significancy; For at Athens, when a young man took upon him the management of
his own Estate, and was set free from the government of his Guardians, he was
called, Id. ibid. (...). Vid. Valesii not. p. 22.
(...) or (...): for then he wrote Man, and took the charge of himself. And am
I not obliged also in this sense of the word. Did not my Sponsors promise for
me in my Baptism? And am I not arrived now to that Age that frees me from their
Tuition? And can I give a better instance, that I have attained to years of
discretion, than my wise and serious choice of God for my Lord, and of the ways
of holiness for my delight? For true examination and discretion, consists
Theophyl. in Romans 2.18. p. 28. (...).
in knowing what to do, and what to leave undone; which I can never do as I
ought, unless I examine my past sins, my present virtues, and my resolutions
for the future. For if when I address to a Prince for his Pardon, I deprecate
my former Offenses, profess my Loyalty, and promise, that nothing shall ever
alter my affections, and my duty; much more am I obliged to do so, when I
appear before my God

The Collect.
O God of all Power and Goodness, give me a right Judgment of my self in all
things, that I may prove my own work, and have rejoicing in my self alone, and
not in another, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

CHAP. V. Of the Examen of my sins past.
WHen the Apostle bids me examine the state of my soul, with respect to the
transgressions which I have committed; he means two things: 1. That as to my
gross and more notorious Offenses, I should call them to remembrance. For there
is no man who needs to dispute with himself, whether Adultery and Murder,
Theft and Covetousness, Anger and Self-love, Disobedience and Rebellion,
Sacriledg and Blasphemy, are sins. Every man is naturally convinced, that such
actions are breaches of the Laws of God; And therefore in such cases there is
no need of Trial, as to the fact, whether it be a fault or not. In this case
the penitent is only to reflect on his enormities, and to remember them with
all their aggravating circumstances, in order to Reformation and Amendment. 2.
As to my lesser transgressions, my Negligences, the forgetfulness of my Vows,
and the defects of holy Performances, I am to experiment, whether I might not
have been more diligent, and more devout, and whether my sins of infirmity be
not rather owing to my sloth, than the frailty of my Nature, or the weakness of
my Graces? I am also to examine, whether many of my Reputed Virtues be not
Vices; whether I have not consulted my own interest, or secular applause, more
than the honor of God? how dull and cold I have been in my devotion, how
remiss in the Offices of Charity, and how slightly I have set about the duties
of Repentance? Is not my Religion rather the Creature of my Fancy than my
Reason? And am I not a Christian only, because I was born within the Pale of
the Church? Have I only avoided the greater transgression, and hugged some
secret darling lust, as Sampson did the Philistine Damsel, in my bosom? Am I
not proud of my Performances, and swol'n with un unbecoming Tympany of
Vainglory? Have I not, to prevent a smaller sin, committed a greater? As some
men avoid an unconcernedness for Religion, by falling into fits of a furious
Zeal, imitating that Physician, who to cure a Patient of the Hiccup, affrighted
him into Fits of Convulsion. These, and many other such Enquiries, are to be
made, if I intend to be a true Penitent.

The Collect.
GRant, Lord, that I may call all my ways to remembrance, and seriously reflect
on my past life, that I may weep bitterly over my Enormities, and censure
severely whatever is but suspicious; and for the future may sin no more, lest I
lose the benefits of thy Sacrament, and forfeit the hopes of Heaven. Amen.

CHAP. VI. Of the Examination of my Virtues.
MY Virtues also, and Resolves, are to be brought to the Touchstone; and I must
experiment, whether my Repentance be real and sincere; whether my Sorrow has
been deep and true, my Confession hearty, my Resolutions strong, and my
Amendment practical; and whether I intend to continue in these holy purposes.
How often have I already relapsed? And are not my present Engagements and Vows,
rather the product of custom and of shame, than hatred of my Vices? And am I
this day as fearful of offending, and as tender of my duty, as the first day
that I vowed, or as I was when I last communicated? Do I remember how dear my
former Offenses cost me, and how d^fficult my Repentance was? How many sighs
how many disturbances of a distracted Conscience it gave occasion to? And have
I courage enough to resist a temptation for the future; to put a knife to my
throat when I am at a Feast, and to wear Sackcloath in the Palace of Princes?
Can I be grave in light company, and reserved among the vain, and virtuous in a
debauched Society, and chaste among the effeminate? Are these my Resolutions
constant? do they dwell in my mind? Or am I holy only by occasion, and outward
accidents, and extraordinary events? Am I as humble and devout in my
prosperity, as in the day of affliction? Do I pray as often on the days of my
pleasure, as on a fasting-day? And am I as just, as charitable, and temperate,
when I follow my worldly business, as when I communicate? Have I remembered 2
Cor. 13.5.
the Apostle of the Gentiles, to examine my self, whether I am in the Faith; or
else I am a Reprobate? Is my Faith such as works by Love, and publicly
declares it self by an entire Obedience to the Laws of Christ, and is fit to
give me a right to communicate? For the Catechumens, who were not baptized, had
Faith; and so had those who were in a state of Penance; and yet their Faith was
not thought sufficient to entitle them to the Privileges of God's Table: For
Faith is not so much an affiance in God, as a giving credit to his Revealed
Will, as it is a body of Laws adapted to the promoting of God's Honor, and our
Salvation: Therefore when I say, I believe, I mean, I resolve to live according
to those injunctions; that I take Jesus for my Savior, and expect to share in
the benefits of his Death and Resurrection, no further than I obey his will.

I must also further examine; Am I in perfect Charity? Is my hope firm, and my
love to Jesus unalterable? Do I as earnestly long for this spiritual food, as I
do for my daily sustenance? And could I be content rather to want the
Necessaries of life, than to be deprived of the Bread of God? And do I bear in
mind the doom of those who slighted the divine Invitations, and would not come;
and of him who intruded, not having the Wedding Garment? These, and many other
such Questions, are necessary to make this duty of Self-examination
advantageous: For nothing less than the strictest scrutiny, can make a worthy
Communicant. It was therefore an excellent Observation of the Ancients, That
the preparation for the Holy Eucharist, should be as strict and complete, as
our preparation for our dissolution; and that I should no more dare to appear
before God's Table with any known sin unmortified, than I should dare to appear
before his Tribunal with it. For when I approach this tremendous place. I am
not concerned about matters of curiosity, and of light value; but about the
most momentous affairs of Religion, about my Souls health, and eternity. I do
not therefore puzzle my self with little questions; nor do I dispute, what are
the exact dimensions of the Kingdom of darkness, where it is, and what
different Climates are in it; but the question is, whether Heaven and Hell be
real, or imaginary places? Whether the Judicature of Conscience signify any
thing in this world, or the Tribunal of Christ in that which is to come? Can I
dwell with everlasting burnings, and a consuming fire, where the torments are
infinite in their height, and infinite in their duration? Is not depending on a
death-bed-Repentance, a deceiving of our selves? And if so, what shall I do
now, that when I go hence I may die in God's favor? What shall I do to be
saved? This is a terrible Interrogatory, a question of weight and moment: For
as no man is fit to die, but he who loves God above all things, and is in
perfect charity with all Mankind; who is unconcerned with the affairs of the
world, and has learnt, and practiced an entire Resignation of himself into the
hands of his Creator; whose accounts are adjusted, whose life has been one act
of intercourse with Heaven, and whose interests in eternity are secured; so
neither is any man fit to approach the holy Table without the like preparation.

The Collect.
LET thy holy Spirit so assist me, O most gracious Father, that my preparation
for the Sacrament may be as exact, as if I were to fit my self to stand before
the Throne of my eternal Judge, that nothing may a lienate my affections from
thee, nor alter my Resolutions Heavenward; but that I may so worthily eat the
Flesh, and drink the Blood of the Son of man, that when I go hence, I may be
admitted to the Marriage Supper of the Lamb, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

CHAP. VII. Of the Examination of my Knowledge.
IT IS not to be denied, that some knowledge is requisite to fit me for this
Heavenly Communion, that I may be able 1 Cor. 11.29.
to discern the Lords Body. But this knowledge rather consists in the
understanding of the Offices of Holiness, than in the comprehension of the
depth of this, and other sacred Mysteries. I am very sure, that at the first
Institution the Apostles were very meanly furnished with such Learning: The very
Foundation of the Sacrament (the Death and Resurrection of our Savior) was a
Riddle to them. Nor did they then understand either the method of working out
our Redemption, or of the establishing of the Kingdom of the Messiah in the
world: And yet because they were humble and devout, sincere and obedient, our
great Master gave them admission to his Table. And so was it also in the
Primitive Church: For the Bishops of old allowed every one, as soon as he was
baptized, to come to the Holy Eucharist, although they carefully avoided any
discourses about this Sacrament, before those who had never been partakers of
it: And when their Subject led them that way, they spoke in Figures and
Metaphorical Expressions, and appealed to the understanding of those who had
communicated: For they were well persuaded, that it was a Mystery. Now
Mysteries are not to be pryed into, but admired; not to be commonly talked of,
nor curiously disputed about, but to be looked on with Veneration and Respect,
to be studied and reverenced. They knew it was no slight and perfunctory
employment to communicate with the Holy Jesus; but they withal knew, that a
little measure of Knowledge, and a great degree of Humility, Piety and Charity,
would entitle to the Privileges of God's Altar. Now all that they instructed
the Candidates of these Mysteries in, was only the duties of Morality, Justice
and Honesty, Peaceableness and Compassion, Chastity and Temperance, together
with an ardent love to God (only now and then they could not forbear
reprehending an Heretic): And these were the Subjects of all the Sermons of
those days. And there was nothing expressly required from the person who came to
the Font, but a solemn profession of the Articles of the Creed. And upon this
profession the Catechumen was baptized; and after his Baptism, immediately
admitted to the Lord's Supper. When therefore I know and understand, that our
blessed Savior, by his precious Death, sealed a Covenant with God in the
behalf of Mankind; and that I have solemnly in my Baptism, ratified my part of
that agreement, resolving no further to depend on his Merits, than I obey his
Laws: When I understand, that I must be truly penitent for my former Offenses,
and ought to live better for the future: when I believe all Gods promises of
Mercy and Salvation made to me in Christ Jesus, and am convinced, that I ought
to be thankful for that Mercy to God, and charitable to all Mankind; then, I
suppose, I have knowledge enough to entitle me to this Ordinance: For if my
search after knowledge, should engage me in the Labyrinths of the Schools, and I
must not receive till I am able to demonstrate, how Christ were present there,
and to comprehend all the Arguments that are brought for, and against
Transubstantiation; I might perhaps be always seeking, but I should never come
to the knowledge of the truth; And if I happened to understand what I enquired
after, should probably be never the better.

For what advance has that man made in Christianity, that has spent his days
in the little questions of the School men; how one body can be hid under the
accidents of another body Suarez. to. 3. disp. 51.
? how the whole body can be so present, as that what was cut off in his
circumcision, should not be wanting. Or whether a Rat, when he nibbles a
Consecrated Host, does communicate, and truly eat the substantial Body and
Blood of Christ? with many other such Impertinencies, to give them the softest
Name. Whereas one day spent in the due consideration, how I shall receive
worthily, and how I shall live more piously, gives me more useful knowledge than
an Age of controversal studies. That God is present in the Sacrament, I have
infallible Authority to assure me. Thy Word, O my Savior, is sufficient to
command my belief; but the mystery is enough to stifle my curiosity: And to
seek to know more than thou art willing to reveal, were to derogate from the
Reverence due to thy Oracles and Authority. For how can I pretend to describe
so transcendent an Institution, which the Angels themselves stoop to look into?
This Sacrament was ordained for better purposes, than to puzzle and confound:
It was designed to strengthen and confirm; to bind us to remember God and our
selves; to remember his love, and our Returns of gratitude: For the deepest
speculations seldom make a man more wise, or more holy; but the knowledge of
Jesus Christ, and him crucified, I am sure, is the true method to endear me to
God. The business of a good man is not to amuse, but to prepare himself to
communicate with his Savior. The understanding of a Religious soul is vastly
different from that of a great Scholar; and the Wisdom that comes down from
above, consists not in Word, but in Power. I am resolved therefore, not to
meddle with the quarrels of the different parties of Christendom: While they
dispute, I will pray; while they sacrifice their Charity to the maintenance of
their Faith, I will pursue after peace and holiness: And by that means, I doubt
not but I shall be fit to communicate here, and to see God in Heaven.

The Collect.
TO thee, the only wise God, from whom comes every good and perfect gift, does
my soul in her Necessities address her self, beseeching thee, who give
liberally, and without grudging, to enlighten my understanding with the beams
of truth, and to lead me to the Palace of Wisdom: Give me less of that Knowledge
that swells and makes vain, and more of that Charity that edifies: Enable me in
all my Engagements to contend for Truth, and not for Victory; in all my Reading
to be more in love with the Piety of the discourse, than the Eloquence; that
all my Reasonings may be subdued, and every thought brought in captivity to the
obedience of Christ. And since my proficiency in thy School, O my best of
Masters, is not to be judged of by my being honored with Visions, or enabled
to unriddle Mysteries; not by the Eminency of Learning, or Station, but by a
transcendent Piety, an Angelical Conversation, and a profound Humility; give me
to this end thy Grace, and let thy Holy Spirit govern me, because without those
Assistances all Learning is but Neise, all Wisdom Craft, and all my Natural
Powers Impotence, my Virtues but Formality, and my Devotions but Pretense: so
shall my Knowledge no longer consist in empty Notion, but shall exert it self
into practice: And I shall so follow thee, my dearest Savior here, as I may
live with thee for ever. Amen.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Study of the Holy Scriptures.
IF the most useful wisdom be that which is practical, instead of busying my
self with Books of Controversy, I will be a diligent Reader of the Holy
Scriptures; For they are the Oracles of God, able to make me wise to salvation,
and perfect unto every good work. In those Oracles there is nothing trifling
and impertinent, nothing doubtful or obscure of the things which belong to my
eternal welfare: Dionys. Areop. Eccl. hierar. c. 3.
"For the whole Book of Holy Scriptures (says the Eloquent Father) does set
before us either the creation and disposal of all things by the divine Power,
or the Polity and Government both of Church and State, under the Law, or the
distribution and possession of the inheritance which God had given to his
peculiar people; or an account of the wisdom of their sacred Judges, their holy
Kings, and devout Priests; or the undaunted courage and bravery of their
Patriarchs, under all sorts of Affliction; or excellent holy Precepts, how to
govern our Actions; or the Songs of heavenly Love, and the Idea's of Divinity
imprinted on the Mind; or the prophecies of future things, or the Achievements
of the Son of God in our Humane Nature; or the Acts and holy Discourses of the
Apostles, delivered to them from God, and done in imitation of him; or the
mystical and abstruse Visions of his beloved and inspired Disciple. In these
shall be my delight, and in these will I spend my time: These Oracles alone can
charm my Passions, and allay my Griefs.

And what a dishonor is it to us, Olearii I^iner.
that the Turks in their Schools, should teach their children nothing but to
read and write, and remember the sentences of the Alcoran (which is their
Scripture); and that the poor Abudac. c. 22. p. 29.
Coptite Christians, tho under severe and cruel bondage to their Mohammedan
enemies, should take care to instruct their Youth in the Doctrine of the Book
of God, obliging them to learn the Psalter, and the Epistles of St. Paul,
without book, while we think that study unworthy of our selves, or our
posterity? "We plead, it is true, as St. Caesarius of Arles, says, the
difficulty of learning the Rules of Faith and Holy Life without book,
especially if we cannot read: But if the most ignorant and unlearned, can find
out a way to remember a profane or lewd Song or Story, will their ignorance
excuse them, if they have not learnt the Precepts of the Gospel? Men have wit
and memory enough, to attain, without reading, to that which the Devil teaches
them for their destruction: But when they are to receive from the mouth of
their blessed Savior, the Laws that will make them eternally happy, then they
plead ignorance. But whatever others do, or my self have heretofore practiced,
I profess for the future, that I will love thy Law: And do thou think upon me,
O Lord, according to thy word, wherein thou have caused me to put my trust.
Thou have given me thy Holy Scriptures, that through them I might have hope in
all capacities, and in all distresses of mind, body, or estate: For tho I read
there, that Lucifer sinned himself beyond the hopes of Redemption, and that
there is a sin against the Holy Ghost, that cannot be pardoned, and a sin unto
death that is not to be prayed for; yet the state of sinful men is declared to
be different from that of the fallen Angels: And what these particular
Transgressions are, and wherein they consist, is not plainly revealed in those
Oracles, that no man might despair of mercy; but withal, that every man might
beware of the smallest sin, as if it were of the greatest magnitude, the
deepest dye, and most dismal consequences. From this Book also I learn, That at
what time soever a sinner repents, and does that which is lawful and right, he
shall save his soul alive: For who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's
Elect, since it is God who justifies? and who is he that condemns, since Christ
has died, and is risen again, and sits at the right hand of God, to make
intercession for us? Lord, be merciful to my former sin; for my neglect has
been great; and keep me steadfast to my duty for the remainder of my life, that
tho I cannot see my God, yet I may every day hear him, and converse with him in
his word; and being enlightened thereby, may learn to depart from evil.

The Collect. For the 2d Sunday in Advent.
BLessed Lord, who have caused all Holy Scriptures to be written for our
learning, grant that I may in such wise hear them, read, mark, learn, and
inwardly digest them, that by patience and comfort of thy Holy Word, I may
embrace, and ever hold fast the blessed Hope of Everlasting Life, which thou
have given us in our Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

CHAP. IX. Of Christian Love.
WHen I have thus adorned my soul with saving knowledge; my next employment is
strictly to examine my practice, and what degrees of divine love I have
attained to: now I better feel what that love is in my heart, than I can
describe it with my tongue: For when I am in the Palace of divine Love, I am in
St Paul's Third Heaven, where, tho the Apostle, without doubt, saw ravishing
sights, and such as were worth dying for; and heard admirable discourses, such
as the King of Glory entertains his favorite Angels with; yet he assures us, he
heard and saw (...). 2 Cor. 12.4.
what could not be uttered or described: But as it is said of Heaven, tho it
does not appear what we shall be, yet we have a glorious character of that City
given us in Holy Writ; so it may be said of Christian Love; Great things are
spoken of it, and such as render it venerable in the eyes of all wise and
discerning persons: For, 1. It is a complication Aug. de C. D. l. 15. c. 22.
Nihil aliud virtus est, quam or do amoris. Id. de C. D. l. 14. c. 7. Amor
inhians habere, quod amatur, cupiditas est, idem habens, eoque fruens, laetitia
est, etc.
of all Virtues: "When it longs for what it affects, it is desire; and when it
enjoys it, it is gladness; when it flies what it abominates, it is fear; and
when it falls into the hands of its enemies, it is sadness, says St. Austin;
and 1 Cor. 13.
a greater than St. Austin has told me, That Love is the most comprehensive
Virtue: For Charity suffers long, and then it is meekness; it is kind, and then
it is courtesy; it envies not, and so it is peaceableness; it vaunteth not it
self, and so it is modesty; it is not puffed up, and so it is humility; it does
not behave it self unseemly, and then it is called decency; seeks not her
own, and then it is publick-spiritedness; is not easily provoked, and then it
is patience; thinks no evil, and so it is simplicity and innocence; rejoiceth
in the truth, and so it is verity and spiritual gladness; bears all things,
and so it is Christian fortitude; believes all things, and so it is faith;
hops all things, and so it is assurance; endures all things, and then it is
magnanimity; and it never fails, and so it is perseverance; it purifies more
than the flames of Martyrdom, and is a better Alms than the world, disposed of
to charitable uses, it enlightens more than all reading, and all contemplation;
and it makes a man a Christian, while Knowledge and Miracles only make him a
Prodigy. In a word, it is all Philosophy, and all Religion; and he alone truly
knows how to live, who knows how to love: Nay, it is Heaven upon Earth, says
the devout Poet: For, We know not what they do above,
But that they sing, and that they love.


Nay, it is God himself: 1 John 4.8.
For he that loves not, knows not God, for God is Love. 'Who is able to
describe the beauties of Holy Love, says St. Clement Ep ad Corinth. p. 63, 64.
? The height to which it carries us is unsearchable: it unites us to God, and
it covers a multitude of sins; it is the bond of Union, and the bane of Schism
and Divisions; and without it nothing can please God: It was nothing but Love
that brought down Jesus from Heaven, to shed his Blood for us; and nothing but
Love that can carry us thither, whence he came down on Earth.

2. Love is the only Original of all our satisfactions in this Life; it
sweetens all sufferings, and makes difficulties easy; for it subdues whatever
opposes it. True Love is a flame enkindled in the mind by our holy Savior,
which preys upon, and destroys all secular and carnal affections: its eye is
fixed on Heaven, and its wings spread toward that bright Palace; and thither it
endeavors with unwearied speed to fly, because that is the only Region of
Rest: For I may be secure in the love of the world, but I can never be safe but
in the love of Jesus. This divine Virtue is always content; when it is in
trouble it is not distressed; when under the greatest perplexities, it is far
from despair; when it is persecuted, it is never forsaken of its God, or its
hopes; and when it is wounded, it cannot be slain; for it always carries about
with it the marks of a dying Redeemer, and desires to know nothing but Christ,
and him crucified, that it may die to the world.

3. According to what a man loves, so is his denomination in this world, and so
shall his judgment be in another. We call a man Covetous from his love of
money, and Voluptuous from his love of Pleasure, and Envious from his love of
Revenge; and so also we call a man a Christian from his love to God and his
Neighbor; For on those two hang all the law and the prophets. And in the
proceedings of the last day, a man shall be examined, not what he has known,
nor what he has believed; not what he has hoped, nor what he has talked of,
but what he has loved; and accordingly the love of the World shall damn the
sinner, while the love of Heaven makes the Saint happy. Now this love can never
be complete, unless it reflect upon God, my Neighbors and mine Enemies, and be
particularly conversant with the Offices of Religion.

The Collect. For the 14th Sund. after Trin.
ALmighty and Everlasting God! give unto me, and to all thy people, the
increase of Faith, Hope and Charity; and that we may obtain that which thou
do promise, make us to love that which thou do command, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

CHAP. X. Of the Love of God.
I Tremble when I read that sentence, 1 Cor. 16.22
If any man love not the Lord Jesus, let him be Anathema Maranatha. And yet it
is but just, that the Punishment should be proportioned to the Offense; and
that that man should be hated by his Maker, who has no affection for his
Savior, in whom there is nothing wanting that may endear him to our Respects
and our Love.

1. There is in him the greatest Perfection, and the most admirable
Excellencies. Can I with patience behold the Miser condemn himself to the Mines
for the sake of his Mammon, and a bigoted Devoto use wonderful Abstinences,
and submit to great austerities only to serve his desires of Applause? Can I
every day see how the lovers of Pleasure and Revenge, wilfully make themselves
dismal spectacles of Ruin and Desolation, and be all the while unconcerned, and
take no delight to please my adorable Redeemer, and save my own soul? Wis.
13.3, etc.
If men being delighted with the beauties of the Heavenly Host, took them to be
Gods; let them know how much better the Lord of them is: For the first Author
of Beauty has created them; and by the beauty and greatness of the Creatures,
proportionably is the Maker of them seen. But it is too sadly found true, that
the love of the world grows to a prodigious stature of a sudden, while the love
of God and Holiness is pincht in its Infancy, and starved in its Swath-bands:
It is a Plant which seldom meets with a fit Soil; and when it grows up, can
never be brought to maturity, without the constant beams of the Sun of
Righteousness, a plentiful portion of the dew of Heaven, and a great care to
preserve and cherish it.

2. I ought to love my Savior, because I have the greatest Obligations to him:
For his love to me brought him from Heaven to Earth, from a Throne to a Cross,
and thence into Hell, for my Redemption. Greater love than this has no man
shown, than that he should lay down his life for his friend, said the
compassionate Jesus. And is there no higher degree, no nobler instance of love,
O my infallible Master? Yes, certainly, thine was, when thou were content to
die for thine Enemies: Many waters could not quench it, and it was stronger
than death. Now if the love of an undone world conquered God's Anger, made him
suspend his Justice, and degrade his Son; should not the love of God much
rather engage me to conquer my Lusts? Could I die, O my best Friend, a thousand
times over for thee, yet should I not love thee according to thy deservings.
But this is our great folly, and the cause of all our miseries; we are set on
fire under the Pole, and we freeze under the Aequinoctial; the world makes us
passionate Lovers, while the Son of God cannot.

3. To love God is the most natural and easy of all Recompenses. Should
thou, Lord, now require from me the burthensom Attendances, and the expensive
Sacrifices that were enjoined under the Old Law, I could have no Reason to
complain; but to love thee sincerely is the cheapest of Returns: For when my
bodily weakness or infirmities, will not suffer me to fast, or watch, or wear
sackcloath, and my poverty hinders my giving Alms, yet I am never so poor,
never so weak, but I can love; and tho perhaps I cannot hear every day, nor
pray every hour, nor communicate every week, yet nothing hinders but that I may
love my God every moment; and that will bring me to Eternity.

4. The Love of God is the Fountain of acceptable Obedience; and proportionable
to my Love to God is my Zeal and my Devotion, my Resolution and my Piety; and
when once these Ardors cool, every thing that is good languishes and decays. To
be affrighted, threatened and compelled to serve my Master, is a dishonor to my
Christian performances, and fullies all their Beauties: but it is a Sacrifice
that God is well-pleased with, when the Offering is brought freely, and offered
cheerfully, and sent up in flames to Heaven, being offered on the Altar of
Love: For Jesus is the Author of salvation to those only who so love him; and
the Grace of God is only with them who love his Son in sincerity.

5. A due Reflection upon this Sacrament, is a great encouragement to love him
who instituted it; for by it we are made one Body, of which our blessed Savior
is the Head: And therefore among other Rites that intimated this Union, it was
the ancient use (nor is it yet prohibited in our Church, but left to
discretion) to mingle Water with the Wine in the holy Chalice, to testify the
Mystical Union that is betwixt Christ and his Church: For as Water and Wine mix
and incorporate, so are the faithful Communicants made the same body with the
Son of God: For in the Opinion of Cypr. Epist. 63. Eusebius. Emis. Hom. 5. de
Pasch. etc.
the Ancients, the Wine is the Figure of our Redeemer's Blood, and the Water of
the many Nations purchased by it.

Besides all which, it is further considerable, that of worldly things a man
may love what he shall never enjoy; or if he happen to enjoy it, he may
afterward lose it; or the very fruition may cloy and nauseate, which was
expected to please and satisfy: But no man ever yet fell in love with Jesus,
and lost his aim; no man ever yet converst with him, but he experimented the
pleasure of such amiable society, and could be content to dwell with him for
ever: And so shall the good man: For what shall separate him from the love of
Christ? Tribulations, Afflictions, and Death it self cannot; and what then can?

When therefore I say, I love God, I vow and endeavor to keep his
Commandments. Dare I call my self the Disciple of an humble Jesus, and be a
slave to my Pride? the servant of a chaste and temperate Savior, and wallow in
the puddles of Lust and Luxury? Dare I give the Reins to my Anger, and profess
my self a follower of the pattern of Meekness? How can I call my self a
Christian, who deserve not the title of a Man? that am as gluttonous as a Wolf,
as intemperate as a Swine, and as lustful as a Goat? The death of my Savior
was designed to redeem me from the power and practice, as well as from the
punishments of Vice: For the Son of God was manifested to destroy the works of
the Devil. And how can I say, I love him, if my heart be not with him?

The Collect. For the 6th Sund after Trin.
O God, who have prepared for them that love thee, such good things as pass
man's understanding, pour into my heart such love toward thee, that I loving
thee above all things, may obtain thy promises, which exceed all that I can
desire, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

CHAP. XI. Of the Remembrance of my Blessed Savior.
NOW one solemn act of my love to God, and one great duty of the Gospel, is to
remember my best friend, my Savior. And it is a particular advantage of the
Christian Religion, that as all holy signs in general, are given for the
confirmation of the divine promises, so the most sacred Offices of the Gospel,
are proper and genuine Representations of the Death and Resurrection of that
Savior, who is the Author and Finisher of our Faith, and Institutor of our
Religion. Thus in the Sacrament of Baptism, the Ancients in those warm
Countries, dipped all who came to that Ordinance (except those who were baptized
on their deathbeds) Romans 6.4.
burying the Proselyte with his Savior in Baptism. They used also to dip them
three several times under water, to exhibit a Memorial of our Savior's being
three days buried; and the Mystery, unless in case of Necessity, was at first
celebrated but once in the year, the Catechumens being baptized Tertul. de
Bapt. cap. 19.
at Easter only, which was the day of our Savior's Resurrection.

But more especially was the Eucharist designed evidently to set before our
eyes Jesus Christ crucified among us, by bringing to our remembrance the shame
and sufferings of a dying Savior, our merciful God applying himself to the
most ductile and easy of all our Faculties: For our Understandings require
much teaching; and we must proceed from lower methods, till we come to be
capable of demonstration. And what man is there among the wisest of Adam's
sons, that can expound the Riddles of Providence, or the Mysteries of the
written Law of God? The Will follows the guidance of the Understanding; and yet
when it is so directed, it is a blind, bold, and daring faculty, and for the
most part stubbornly neglects to do its duty: But the Memory needs nothing but
sensible Objects to inform it, and is the strongest and most retentive of all
our Faculties, and such as few men want. And in truth, every act of Obedience
is but a remembrance of my duty, and every Transgression an act of
forgetfulness: For as often as I sin, I cease to mind a dying Savior; Psalm.
9.17.
and the wicked, who shall be turned into Hell, are the same with the people
that forget God.

The Sacrament therefore of the Eucharist is a Commemoration of Jesus, and his
Passion, without which all his other performances could not save us: For all
the Rhetoric, Eloquence, and demonstration of his Sermons, all his divine and
beneficial Miracles, together with the unblamable and unspotted Holiness of his
Life and Conversation, could never have been sufficient to have redeemed us
without his Crucifixion: 'Twas his death only that was the Original of our life
and salvation. What need then has my dull and unaffected soul of such
encouragements to give my Savior a place in my thoughts? The very performance
of the duty is its own Recompense, and properly agrees to those Notions of
Virtue, that all Mankind bring with them into the world, it being natural to
every one to be thankful, and to remember his Benefactors. Athen. Deipnos. l.
5. c. 1.
The Heathens had their Annual Festivals, to commemorate their wise men and
Philosophers, to call to mind their wise sayings, and their prudent, just and
virtuous carriage: The Jews also had their set-times wherein they honored the
Memories of their Prophets, and good men; as the Christian Church appointed
Anniversaries, which they called the Birth-days of their Martyrs, it being a
solemn act of Justice to have the Righteous in everlasting Remembrance. And if
the Church were so careful to commemorate the Achievements of her Members, is
it credible, that she should forget the miraculous performances of her Head? In
nothing was her care so conspicuous, as in constituting a Memorial of the
Prince of the Martyrs, and giving the day of our Savior's Passion, a place in
the Church-Kalendar in the times of the Apostles, if we may believe Antiquity:
For the Remembrance of Jesus ought at all times to be sweet as honey in all
mouths, and as music at a banquet of wine.

For what can be so rude and disingenuous, as to slight so obliging a friend,
so great and so good a person, especially when he has left me such illustrious
testimonies of his love, which put me in mind of his humiliation for my sins?
For if the Picture, or the Garment of an absent Friend puts me in mind of the
person whose they were, and inclines me to grateful Reflections on my
Benefactor; how much more should I be obliged, when such lively Representations
of a Savior executed, bleeding and dying for me, are exhibited to me, as the
Sacrament affords me? A Sermon may give me a passionate character of my
crucified Redeemer, but nothing can represent his Passion so to the life as the
Holy Eucharist: that is the most affecting preaching: For in that ministration
his sufferings are acted over again in the View of his Disciples. Hence the
Primitive Christians celebrated the Holy Communion at first every day, and
afterward every Sunday and Holy day throughout the year, adapting all their
additional Circumstances and Ceremonies to this end and purpose, that they
might represent the Passion. Hence was it that they built their Churches
commonly in the form of a Cross; and for this cause they covered the Bed in 16.
S. Matthew. Damas. P. Epist.
Altar with a white linen cloth, not so much to denote the purity of the
Mysteries, or the innocence of the Communicants, as our Savior's being wrapped
in fine linen at his Funeral. On the Chrysostom. To. 6. p. 360.
Altar also they placed the Cross, and that without superstition, that they
might direct their eyes and minds toward Heaven; where the crucified Jesus sits
on his Father's Right Hand. They enjoined their Communicants when they prayed,
Tertul. de Orat. cap. 11.
to stretch out their hands in the form of a Cross; and when they received the
consecrated Elements Council. Trull. Can. 101.
, they put themselves into the same posture: The elevation of the Elements,
when taken into the hands of the Priest, emblems the lifting up of Christ upon
his Cross; the breaking of the Bread implies not only that he died, but that he
was slain, that he died a violent death; and when the Wine is poured out,
nothing can more pertinently and plainly represent the shedding of his sacred
Blood.

In the Liturgy of p. 984, 985. Edit. Savil.
St. Chrysostom, which is now used in the Greek Church, the Priest is expressly
enjoined to make upon the Bread which is to be consecrated, the sign of the
Cross, with the Holy Lance (for so they call the Knife which is then used,
alluding to the weapon with which our Savior's side was pierced), and to say
three times, In remembrance of our Lord, our God and Savior Jesus Christ;
after which he is to strike the Lance four times into the extremities of the
Cross, and to say, when he strikes it into the right side, He was led as a
sheep to the slaughter; when into the left side, As a lamb without blemish is
dumb before the shearer, so he opened not his mouth. Then he is to strike it
into the top of the Cross, saying, In his humiliation his judgment was taken
from him; then into the bottom, saying, And who shall declare his Generation?
After which the Priest elevates the Bread, saying, For his life was taken away
from the Earth now and for evermore. Amen. And then lays it in the Patin,
saying, The lamb of God, who takes away the sins of the world, is sacrificed
for the sins and salvation of the world: During every one of which several
actions, the Deacon says, We beseech thee to hear us, O Lord. And when the Wine
and Water is poured into the Chalice, the Deacon says, And one of the soldiers
pienc'd his side with a lance, and there issued out water and blood, which
mixture they always make, the better to represent that part of the Passion. And
the whole Church has thought fit to consecrate Red Wine, that the color might
mind us of our Savior's Blood; as the Jews in the Passover used the same
colored Wine in remembrance of the Blood of their predecessors, which was
spilt in Egypt.

The Greeks consecrate no Bread but what is marked as abovesaid, and stamped
with these Letters, IC XC NK. i. e. Jesus Christ overcomes, which was the Motto
of the Cross shown to Constantine the Great. And in the Gethick Church in
Spain, as the Mosarabick Missal mentions, they divided the Holy Bread into Nine
parts, to which they affixt the Names of Incarnation, Nativity, Circumcision,
Transfiguration, Passion, Death, Resurrection, Glory, and Kingdom; under which
Names they comprehended our Savior's whole History; intimating unto all who
were spectators of their proceedings, that the design and intention of the
Sacrament was only to imprint on their minds the Memorial of our Savior, and
his performances for our salvation. Thus the whole Church thought themselves
obliged to do in remembrance of their dearest Master and Patron, who, had he
been corporeally present under the Accidents, had had no need to have bidden us
to remember him: for we only remember things and persons that are absent.

And is there any Reason that I should be so often put in mind of that which
alone can make me happy? Thou have bid me, O my God, that as often as this
Sacrament is celebrated (and what a Reproof is this of my seldom coming to that
Ordinance?) that I should call to mind thy Death. Lord, how can I forget thee?
I should sooner forget to eat, or to sleep. How violent and acute were thy
pains, and yet how courageously endured? Did not my iniquities cause thy
sufferings? and are not all the benefits purchased thereby, transferred and
made over to me? And can I forget such a Friend? What therefore shall I do to
fit my self to receive the advantages of thy Passion sealed and conveyed to me
in this Sacrament? I will deface all the Records of Vanity and Folly, of sin
and iniquity, that have found a place in my memory, and there will I treasure
up the History of my dearest Jesus his Undertakings, of his Sufferings and his
Victories, and thence will I transcribe the Copies of Obedience into my life
and conversation, till I am perfectly conformed to his Image.

The Collect.
GRant, I beseech thee, O my crucified Savior, that I may this day, and every
day remember thy shame and thy sufferings, that I may magnify thy goodness,
and imitate thy patience, and be conformed to the pattern of thy Virtues, that
I may love thy Laws, and depend upon thy Merits; that after frequent acts of
remembering thee, and communicating with thee, I may be remembered by thee in the
Agonies of death, and after my death may have a place in my Master's Kingdom;
Amen.

CHAP. XII. Of Love to my Neighbor.
NExt to my love to my Maker, ought my love to my Neighbur to take place, whose
welfare is to be as dear to me as my own, and to whom I must do good, as much
as lies in me, as I hope to see the Face of God: for I must love my Neighbor
as my self; and every one is my Neighbor who wants my assistance. This love
therefore engages me to submit to my superiors, to walk in peace, to prefer
others before my self, to instruct the ignorant, to soften the passionate, to
reprehend the vicious, to reclaim the profligate, to counsel the unadvised, to
speak peace to distressed Consciences, to visit the Prisons, and to administer to
them who are appointed to die; to relieve the oppressed, to clothe the naked, and
to feed the hungry. For these were the employments of our charitable Master,
who was our great Almoner, and who has commanded us, if need be, 1 John 3.16
that we also should lay down our lives for the brethren. And this Doctrine was
so well understood by Johannes Elecmosynarius, that when he met with a modest
necessitous person, to whom he had been formerly charitable, but at last found
him inclinable to refuse his Alms, he plainly told him, That he had not yet
arrived to that height of Christian Love to which he was obliged: for the Laws
of our Religion oblige me to die for thee.

And by so doing, I make a noble change; I barter a few transitory trifles for
eternity; I give a small pittance of my wealth, and with it I purchase the
prayers of the poor and indigent, who generally pray heartiest, and are heard
soonest; and I gain Heaven by it: For it Acts 20.35.
is much more blessed to give than to receive. Nor will a narrow and
necessitous Fortune make an excuse: For tho a man cannot build an Hospital, or
redeem a number of Captives, yet he may deal his bread to the hungry, and cover
the naked with a Garment: Or if this be above his Circumstances and Estate, yet
he can give good advice, and a good example; and he can pray for all mankind to
that God who gives liberally, and without grudging; and this is a noble piece
of Charity.

The Collect.
O God, whose Nature and Property is ever to have Mercy, and to do good, send
down thy Holy Spirit into my Heart, that I may love my Neighbor as my self,
and do unto all men as I would they should do unto me; endeavoring as much as
lies in me to promote the welfare and salvation of all the world, and by
earnest Prayers, pious Advices, and a good Example, to advance thy Kingdom of
our Holy Savior, till the Number of his Elect be accomplished, through the
Merits and Mediation of our only Mediator and Advocate. Amen.

CHAP. XIII. Of Unity.
MY Love to my Neighbor is discovered, 1. by my union and peaceableness: 2. By
my Alms. 1. By my Union: for this is one great end of the Sacrament, to unite
all Christians in the bond of peace: For 1 Cor. 10.17.
we are one body, says, St. Paul, because we are partakers of one bread; and
therefore the primitive Christians had their public Love Feasts joined as an
Appendix to the Holy Sacrament, in which persons of all Sexes, Characters and
Degrees, did promiscuously partake of Gods blessings, and made the meeting
properly an Eucharist (and some old Glos MS. (...).
Glossaries say, that the Lord's Supper, in S. Paul, is this Love-Feast); and
to testify the sincerity of their Love, they gave the Holy Kiss each to other,
before they approacht the Holy Table, which they called the sign of
Reconciliation, Cyril. Catech. Mystag. 5.
and the Act. Pass. Perpet. and Faelicit. p. 35.
solemnities of peace; (and some learned men affirm, that they gave it also a
second time, just before their departure out of Churh; and then they called it,
Tert. de Orat. cap. 14.
the seal, or close of their Devotion, tho Legate. pro. Christ. p 41.
Athenagoras expressly affirms, that it was forbidden by the Canons of the
Church, that any person should give this Kiss a second time) as the Act. Mart.
ubi supr.
Martyrs also saluted one another before their deaths, as a token that they
went out of the world in perfect Charity, and in the Communion of the Church of
God; And to this time, on Easter Day, and a fort-night after, the Olear. Itin.
l. 2. p. 53.
Moscovites, wherever they meet, use this custom. Nor may any person, of what
condition, sex, or quality soever, dare to refuse this Kiss. And in the Sandy
's Trav. l. 1. p. 62.
Greek Church now, tho it be an insufferable wrong to kiss a Greek woman at any
other time, yet between the Feasts of the Resurrection and Ascension, it is
allowed, when they greet one another with these words, Christ is risen.

For it is this Sacrament that does unite us in our holy brotherhood, by Virtue
of which we are empowered to acknowledge one Father, which is God; to be made
partakers of one and the same spirit of Holiness, and to be set free from the
powers of darkness, and admitted into the only true light: For every man who is
a believer, is a brother, and no one else; for Vid. Chrysostom. Hom. 25. in Ep. ad
Hebr.
the terms are reciprocally used by the Apostle, it being also anciently given
to those who were called The Faithful Just. M. Apol. 2.
, as they were distinguished from the persons under catechizing or penance; And
therefore in those best days, as no man durst travel to any Foreign Church, in
expectation of admission into their Communion, or receiving their Assistance
and Relief, without Letters Testimonial from the Church which he left; so they
who were so recommended, were acknowledged as Good, Catholic and Orthodox
Christians, by their admission to the participation of the Lords Supper. And
among the Clergy it was an ancient custom to send pieces of the consecrated
bread of the Eucharist Iren. apud Eusebius. l. 5. cap. 24.
from one Bishop to another, as a Symbol, and Mark of Communion, till the
Council of Can. 14.
Laodicea, out of reverence to the Sacrament, forbad it, the Prelates
afterward, instead of the consecrated bread, sending some parcels of the bread
destined to, and prepared for the Holy Sacrament.

Now this mutual participation of Sacraments, and other Offices of Religion, is
not unfitly thought by some men to be meant by that Article of the Apostle's
Creed, The Communion of Saints, the Holy Catholic Church being so denominate
from those sacred Rites which are in common to all Christians, whereby they are
not only united to God their Savior, but have fellowship one with another: And
to this purpose the ancient Church thought fit in the beginning of the
Communion-service, when none were present but those who were complete
Christians, and in entire Communion with the Church in all Ordinances, to
recite out of the Diptychs (which were never read but at the Altar) not only
the Names of the famous Princes and Bishops who were alive, as a testimony that
they held communion with them, but also of all the Saints departed, of the
Mother of God, the Apostles, Martys, Confessors, and others, that they might
give a public testimony to the world, that they lived in the profession of the
same Orthodoxy for which some of those Saints were martyred, and in which they
all died; magnifying the Name of Christ for his goodness to his Church, in
calling it out of darkness into mavelous light, and making them children of
God: And whosoever was left out of those Tables, was by that Omission
excommunicate, as is famously known in the case of St. Chrysostom. Since
therefore all these holy usages are so many lessons of Peace and Union, I will
avoid all Schism as carefully as I shun the paths of death and I will
conscientiously keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace; I will
honor my superiors, and obey their Laws; I will reverence my Holy Mother the
Church, and value her Communion, and will study to be quiet, and to do my own
business.

The Collect.
KEep, O Lord, thy Universal Church with thy perpetual Mercy in thy true
Religion, and in constant peace and godliness, that all thy faithful people may
do unto thee true and laudable service, and through thy protection may be free
from all adversities, and devoutly given to serve thee in all good works; that
all who are baptized into the Death of thee, O Holy Jesus, may die unto sin,
and rise again unto newness of life. Peace and Love have thou made the sum of
the Old Law, and enjoined as a new Commandment in the Gospel. Thy first Message
to the World was peace on Earth, and thy last Legacy was peace to thy
Disciples. Be thou pleased therefore to convince all Heretics, to reclaim all
Schismatics, and to correct the profane and irreligious; cement our breaches,
allay our passions, pacify our minds, grant that we may all speak the same
things, and that there be no Divisions among us; convince us, that tho
different Modes of Worship shall not disinherit a man of thy favor, yet
disobedience to Government is a great sin. Let the Holy Dove hover over those
waters, and allay the tempest; and let it teach the world to follow after the
things that make for peace, that Jerusalem may be as a City at unity with her
self, and all her children may love and praise thee, who with the Father and
the Holy Ghost, live and reignest ever one God world without end. Amen.

CHAP. XIV. Of Alms.
IT is also another end of this Sacrament, to engage all who receive it, to
pity the poor, the Alms of the Communicants being usually called Vid. Hebr.
13.15.
the Sacrifice, because rendered by way of Oblation to God, and given to the
poor, as his Bedesmen. And can thou, O my soul, imagine, that thou do duly
observe the Lord's day, and reverence his Sacrament, when thou come to Church
without thy Oblation? Nay, such an honor was it in the Primitive Church to
give Alms, that all men were not thought worthy the honor of being admitted to
the Offertory, tho permitted to enjoy the other privileges of Religion:
Constit. Apost. l. 4. c. 5, etc.
For neither the unjust Publican, nor the Usurer, nor the Executioner, nor any
promoter of debauchery and looseness, were allowed this liberty: For they
seriously discountenanced all Fraud and Vice, and accounted that man a
Reprobate who endowed a Church with the spoils of the poor: They would not
admit of that Shopkeeper to the Communion, who put upon the ignorance of a
Customer, and made him pay more for what he bought than the thing was really
worth; nor would they allow that man to give his Estate to pious uses, who had
gotten it by Extortion, and robbing the Fatherless.

And how should this present Age blush, when we consider this; especially when
we remember, that where no Law bound but that of Natural Conscience, some
Heathens were ashamed to commit such Iniquity? Thus Vit. Isidor. apud Phot.
cod. 242. p. 555.
Hermeas of Alexandria, when an ignorant person offered to sell him a book for
less than the value, corrected the illiterate man's mistake, told him the book
was more worth, and gave him the full price for it. And thus Knolles Turk.
Hist. S. Selim. p. 561.
the great Selim, the first of that Name, when in the Agonies of death his
beloved Bassa Pyrrhus advised him to erect an Hospital with the money which had
by his Order been unjustly taken from the Persian Merchants; smartly replied,
'Wouldest thou, O my Pyrrhus, that I should bestow the Goods of other men,
wrongfully taken from them, upon works of Charity and Devotion, for my own
Praise and Vainglory? No, see they be again restored to the right Owners, and
then I may die in peace. Where are the Christians who think themselves thus
obliged? And how few are there of us, who do not fall short of these Examples
of Heathens and Mahometans?

And in truth, Justice is a duty so sacred, that my Alms are Robbery without
it, the best actions which are founded in injuries, being such sacrifices as
were offered in Tophet, where Murder was the Oblation. And to this day it is a
Bava Metz. 59.1.
Maxim among the Jews (tho the greatest Usurers in the world), that when the
Sanctuary was destroyed, all the gates of prayer were shut up, except the gate
of fraudulent usages; that is, that tho God may be deaf to all other prayers,
yet his ears are always open to the cry of those who have been injured,
defrauded and robbed. My Alms therefore ought to be of Goods justly gotten, and
of them must I make my distribution with all cheerfulness, and as often as God
gives me any opportunity: Nay, it is my duty to seek for occasions of
beneficence, and to Romans 12.13.
be given to Hospitality; that is, to be earnest and unwearied in the pursuit
of all opportunities of being charitable: Which command was so entirely
complied with in the Apostles time, that Acts 4.34.
every believer sold his Estate, and made one common stock for themselves and
their poorer brethren, the Apostles being the distributers of that stock to
every man as he had need. And tho some men affirm, that this custom lasted but
a little while, because in St. Paul's time 1 Cor. 16.2.
the men of Corinth were obliged to lay aside, every Lord's Day, what they
devoted to charitable uses; yet this Argument does not prove what it is
intended to demonstrate: For probably they gave their praedial visible Estate
to the Church, and yet might reserve something out of what they got by their
Trades, their Profession, or Labor, to be given weekly to the indigent. And
when at last that method was antiquated, Tert. Apol. cap. 39.
every Christian was obliged once a month, or oftener, as he was willing, to
give somewhat to the Church-Treasury: And this money was employed to feed the
poor, to bury the dead, to maintain Orphans, and to put them into a capacity to
get their own living; to make provision for the decrepit by Age or Sickness, to
cherish the Shipwrack'd, and to relieve those who were condemned to the Mines,
or banished, or cast into prison for the sake of God and Religion. So universal
was their Charity, and so liberal their Inclinations in those good days.

How then can any man satisfy himself that he is prepared to come to this
Sacrament, who is negligent of this duty? Do not the Mysteries exhibit to me
the greatest Instances of my Savior's Charity and Compassion? And can I be his
Disciple, unless I imitate his Virtues? St. Gregory the Great was so
scrupulous, that when News was brought him, that a man was found dead within
his Territory, he suspecting that he died of want, and that the not timely
relieving every indigent person, did cast an Aspersion on his Government, he
for that Reason abstained for some time from the Holy Communion. And tho I am
not willing to cherish such unnecessary scruples, yet that man does very rashly
thrust himself upon God, who neglects any opportunity of doing good when it is
offered to him: For who can expect that his Savior should give him the
dainties of his Table, who denies his crumbs to his necessitous brother? Nay,
the Ancients, rather than suffer the poor to want, thought it no Sacriledg to
sell the Church plate for their Relief: And St. Caesarius, when he died, made
no other Will but this, I bequeath all that I am worth to the use of the poor;
and St. Paulinus, Bishop of Nola, sold himself into captivity, to redeem the
son of a distressed Widow. There is no way but this to make Friends of the Mammon
of Unrighteousness; nor is there any likelier method to restore us to God's
Love and Favor. Mercy ard Truth are the Image of God: And Chrysostom. To. 4.
Hom. 13. in 1 Timothy p. 302.
tho the Heathens define a man to be a Rational Creature, and capable of
Knowledge, the Scripture defines him otherwise, when it tells us, that the
merciful person is only a man, and that there is nothing so venerable in Nature
as the Almoner.

The Collect. For Quinquages. Sunday.
O Lord, who have taught us, that all our doings without Charity, are nothing
worth; pour into my heart that most excellent Gift of Charity, the very Bond of
Peace, and of all Virtues, without which whosoever lives, is counted dead
before thee. Grant this for thine only Son Jesus Christ his sake, Amen.

CHAP. XV. Of Love to my Enemies.
BUT it is not enough for me to love the brethren, and to do good to the
Household of Faith; I must also love my Enemies, and do good to them who intend
my Ruin: For if ye only love them who love you, what reward have ye? Matthew.
5.44, etc.
do not even the Publicans the same? And if you salute the brethren only, what
do you more than others? do not even the Publicans so? Be ye therefore perfect,
be ye merciful, as your Father in heaven is merciful; for be makes his Sun to
rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just and on the unjust.
Our blessed Savior therefore says to me, and to all his Disciples, Love your
enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for
them that despitefully use you and persecute you, that you may be the children
of your Father which is in heaven. This is the perfection of Virtue; this the
glory of our Christian profession; and herein do the Laws of our blessed Master
out do all other Schemes of Morality: Vid. Tert. ad Scapul. Athenag. Legate. etc.
Nor could either Jew or Gentile approach to so sublime a degree of compassion,
which is truly Evangelical, and a Lesson only learnt in the School of Christ.
And therefore the Confessor at Alexandria, whom Cassianus mentions, answered
like himself, when his Heathen Adversaries pursued him with all sort of
Contumely and Reproaches, and at last disdainfully asked him, What Miracle did
your Master Christ ever do? When he made this Return, It is no mean Miracle
that he has wrought in me, that I can tamely hear your Reproaches, and not be
concerned at the Injury; that I can suffer you to revile me, and can at the
same time bless and speak well of you.

At this Sacrament I commemorate the Death of my Redeemer, who died for his
Enemies, and offered his Merits to those who crucified him, as well as to those
who obliged him. And this is that particular Accomplishment of the Divinity,
that is proposed to our imitation: For whereas an attempt to be like God in
Power and Majesty, degraded Lucifer, and his confederate Angels; and Resolves
to attain to the degree of wisdom which the Creator possesses, banished Adam,
and undid his posterity; the transcribing the copy of the divine goodness and
compassion, will re-instate the world into a better Paradise, and give men the
place which the Fallen Spirits deserted. Nay, many times an act of mercy proves
successful beyond expectation, and delivers an Adversary not only from temporal
wants, but from eternal horrors: And I may make a Convert of that Enemy whom I
pity and relieve. And if to know the art of true Charity be a greater privilege
than to be crowned with the Majesty of Kings, then to convert a soul is a
nobler Alms than to give a Million of money to the stock of the poor.

And it is very remarkable, that our Savior has not only made this duty of
forgiving Injuries Mat. 6.12, 14, 15.
a necessary and indispensible qualification, to fit me for the receiving of
God's pardon; but seems to imply, that upon one act of Obstinacy, one Refusal
to obey this Injunction, my former sins, that have already been forgiven me,
shall be brought again to remembrance, and be the cause of my condemnation: For
when in the Mat. 18.27, 34.
Parable, ten thousand Talents were remitted to the disabled Servant by his
Lord, and the Obligation cancelled; yet when the same Servant dealt
unmercifully with his Fellow servant, his Lord delivered him to the Tormentors,
till he should pay all that was due to him: And so shall our Heavenly. Father
do to us, if we from our hearts forgive not every one his brother their
trespasses.

And for this Reason, I cannot but think it a commendable custom in the Greek
Church, in which, during the celebration of this Office, not only the Deacon;
who assists, begs pardon of the consecrating Priest, as St. Chrysostom's
Liturgy injoins Smyth 's Acc. of the Greek Church. p. 143.
, but the Priest who consecrates, takes care to reconcile himself before he
approaches the Altar; and the assisting Priests also bow toward the people, as
an instance of their begging forgiveness, if they have offended any one there
present: After which every Lay Communicant immediately before he receives, says
aloud, Christians, forgive; to which the Congregation answers, God shall
forgive you. And in the Primitive Church the Deacon was bound to say aloud, Let
no man who is not in perfect Charity, dare to approach this Table. And the
better to demonstrate the Churches Resolutions in this case, as Easter was the
most solemn time of giving the Eucharist, so in the foregoing week, on Maundy
Thursday, the Penitents were solemnly admitted to Communion: For whereas on
that day the blessed Sacrament was always administered, because that was the day
on which it was instituted; Innocent. Ep. 1. ad Decent. cap. 7. Ambr. li. 5.
Ep. 33.
so on that day also were the Churchcensures remitted, because on that day our
Holy Savior delivered himself into the hands of the Jews for our Redemption;
the Conc. Carthag. 4. Can. 80, 82.
Penitents being brought up to the Altar before which they kneeled, and being
reconciled by the Imposition of the Priests hands, were afterward communicated.
All which were Instances of the Church's Charity, and an excellent Rule how we
ought also to demean our selves toward our Enemies.

I therefore think my self bound to pray as heartily for my most malicious
enemies, as for my own salvation And I cannot but remark the folly of the
Romanists, who, tho they say all the rest of their prayers on Good Friday,
kneeling, do alter that posture when they pray for the Jews (as they also omit
saying the Amen), and that for these poor Reasons Durand. Ration. lib. 6 cap.
77.
: 1. because the Jews mocked our Savior with bowing the Knee, and saying, Hail
King. 2. Pecause all their prayers cannot alter the Divine Decrees, nor shorten
the time, their conversion not being to commence till the fullness of the
Gentiles be brought in. But the Arguments are vain and frivolous, and the usage
savours of a narrow and a contracted soul: For to ingross salvation to my self
or party, is Christian Judaism; it is impropriating the Messiah, and depriving
all others of the capacity of being happy.

So that if I consider my Relation to the rest of the world, either as a Man,
or a Christian, I cannot but account my Adversaries (whether they be so to my
person or principles) in the number of my Friends, and such as do me good: For
by envious exclaiming against my Irregularities, they engage me to more
circumspection and greater care in performing my duty to my God, the world and
my self. And they give me occasion to manifest my Patience, my Humility, and
Self-denial, with many other Virtues. And were the Malice of my Enemies never
so causeless and inveterate, and the Injuries done me, never so great, yet they
have not crucified me; But so did my Savior's Enemies deal with him, while he
forgave them, and interceded for them.

And has not that my Savior Matthew. 5.24.
enjoined me, rather to leave his service undone, than that my duty to my
Neighbor; rather to leave my Gift at the Altar unoffer'd, than to make the
Oblation without being in perfect charity (for Tert. de Orat. c. 10. Optat.
lib. 6. Chrysostom. in loc etc.
the Fathers generally understand that passage of the Holy Sacrament:)
Chrysostom. To. 6. p. 622.
"If I cannot forgive, ten days fasting will not fit me for this Altar; For
where Envy and Malice dwell, neither the Fast nor the Festival do any good.
Where Envy abides; thence the Spirit of God is banished: And what hopes can that
man have of salvation, who is destitute of the Holy Ghost? There is nothing
therefore that can excuse me from the practice of this so amiable a Virtue,
which intitles me to a conquest of my Passions, and makes me Master of my self.
Revenge is not my Province; God will repay. And tho it may make me for a while
uneasy not to pursue it, yet I am sure it is much more uneasy to be damned,
and to be confined to eternal torments.

The Collect.
BLessed Jesu, who when thy Sacred Body suffered its acutest pains, and when
thy Innocent Soul felt its most afflicting Agonies, were ready to implore thy
Father's Forgiveness on thy most embittered Adversaries; be thou pleased to
forgive my Enemies, Persecutors, and Slanderers, and to turn their hearts; and
so enable me by thy Holy Spirit to walk in thy steps, that I may bless them who
curse me, and do good to them who hate me, and pray for them who despightfully
use me; whether they are my Enemies justly, or without a cause; wilfully, or
unwillingly, by what means or way soever they have done me Injury; Father,
forgive them, as I desire thou would forgive me: For no man can use me worse
than I have deserved at thy hands; and when they curse, then do then bless. And
be thou pleased to remove from me, and all Mankind, all Bitterness, Wrath,
Anger, Clamor, Evil speaking and Malice, and whatever grieves thy Holy Spirit;
that we may be kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even
as God, for thy sake, has forgiven us; that the Spirit of Love may subdue all
desires of Revenge; that we may be Followers of those Rules which be first
pure, then peaceable, and at last may be admitted into the Habitations of
Eternal Concord and Unity, through thy Merits and Mediation, who art the great
Reconciler, the Angel of the Covenant, Jesus Christ the Righteous. Amen.

CHAP. XVI. Of Love to the Holy Sacrament.
WHen I love any man sincerely, every thing that has a Relation to my Friend,
is dear to me, and of a particular value. I look upon a Ring given me by a
living Friend, as a Remembrancer of the Donor, and his Affection; but if it be
given to me at his death, and that death a Martyrdom, and the Ring be dipped in
the sacred blood ( Act. Passion. ss. Perpet. and Faelic. p. 34.
which was sometimes practiced by the Martyrs), it upon that very account
becomes venerable in my eyes; and I reflect on it with a deep respect intermixed
with love: and such is the blessed Sacrament to me. When Jesus was crucified,
his Passion, for the time, was very terrible; the Earth shook, the Rocks rent,
and the Sun was Eclipsed; but such things easily die in our memories, unless
reqresented by something visible, by some outward sign.

The sight of Calvary must needs engage a modern Traveller to remember a
bleeding Savior who died there sixteen hundred years agon. And as the marks of
our Redeemer's Foot steps, when he ascended, which made their impression in the
ground, and continued visible Paulin. Ep 11. ad Severum.
till the Fifth Century, could not but presently recall into the thoughts of
but a transient considerer, the History of the Triumphs of Jesus, which were
the Reward of his sufferings (and such sights, without doubt, wrought
wonderfully in the primitive Martyrs, when the Blood of a dying Redeemer was
yet warm, and those Memorials not defaced, who looked upon the places with
Respect, and there built Churches to perpetuate the Memory of the Mercy.) It is
true, afterward those places administered to superstition; and I am sorry to
say, so did the Sacrament too; and to Idolatry also, tho it owes its Original
to divine Institution.

When therefore I contemplate these symbols, I not only remember my Master, as
he has obliged me, till his second coming, but I also put an Estimate on his
Institution; I account it an Honor to be admitted to his Table, and I long for
frequent opportunities of going thither; and nothing can satisfy me but such
an Entertainment: For the highest degree of Holiness is most acceptable; And I
am no Christian, if I love not my God with all my heart. And nothing less than
a vigorous passion, and the desires of a necessitous person, deserve to be
called love to the Eucharist. Nor dare I desire it, to gratify any by-end, but
to save my soul: For if I long for it only out of wantonness, the Bread may
feed my body, but it will never supply the wants of my soul; the Wine may cheer
my spirits, but never refresh my mind. Nothing less than transports can express
the sense of the devout person on such an occasion: 'Lord, how sad was I when I
came last from thy Holy Temple? And had I not great Reason to be so,
considering, that I left thy service to be involved again in the world? How
tedious has been the time since I last communicated with my Jesus? And when
shall I come again, and appear before him, that I may meet my Savior in his
Mysteries, and converse with him with delight, and true satisfactions? Psalm.
42.12.
Like as the heart pants after the waterbrooks, so longs my soul for thee, O
God: My soul is athirst for God; yea, even for the living God: When shall I
come and appear before the presence of God? My Savior, when he first ordained
this Sacrament, expressed himself with Earnestness and Vehemence: Luke 22.15.
With desire have I desired to eat this passover; that is, according to the
expressions of the Synagogue Greek; I have heartily desired, I have
passionately longed to do it: and yet he had no need of Sacraments to
strengthen or confirm him. And should there not be in me the same mind, and the
same measure of Love that was in my Redeemer?

Wise men tell us, that three things incite the will, and create love;
Excellency, Difficulty and Absence: and all these meet here: 1. This is the
most sublime Mystery of our Religion, and the most excellent; And therefore the
Fathers give it the most Honorable Titles, and call it the Mystery, and the
Sacrament of Sacraments, etc. Nor can any enjoyment make me more happy, but
being admitted to the Marriagesupper of the Lamb in Heaven: For neither eye
has seen, nor ear heard, nor can the heart of man conceive the present Favors
which God in this life bestows on them that love him.

2. It is no easy slight thing to be a Worthy Communicant. The deepest Sorrow,
the heartiest Resolutions, the most unalterable Vows, and the strictest
Obedience, are qualifications indispensibly necessary to worthy communicating.
The Table of God is not lightly to be talked of, much less presumptuously to be
addressed to: And therefore the Fathers, when they mentioned the Holy Eucharist,
because their Congregation was mixed, only hinted at things, and subjoined,
(...) Chrysostom. Passim.
Those who have been partakers of that Table, know what we mean. And others are
not fit for such sublime Notions. And for this Reason Sec. 46. de Verb. Dom.
St. Austin preaching on that Text, My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is
drink indeed, purposely avoids a plain Explanation of the words: And that he
might tempt that part of his Auditory which had never received, to a love to
that Sacrament, he uses this way of Reasoning, 'If thou, who art a Catechumen,
art willing to be instructed in this Mystery, now is the Feast of Easter, enter
thy name among those who are to be baptized at the Festival, and then thou
shall be informed. If the time do not invite thee, let curiosity incline thee.
And for this Reason the Table whereon the consecrated Mysteries were placed,
was concealed (...).
with Curtains from the view of the people, during the first Service and
Sermon, till the Communion-Office began.

3. The day that I long for, is to come, and the substance represented under
these symbols, is in Hnaven: For they shall contain the Son of Man till the
time of the consummation of all things. But till I see him in his Glory, this
is the most proper and most advantageous way of enjoying him. I know not how
long it shall be ere I die, and go to the lover of my soul; and therefore I
will converse with him in his Ordinances: nor know I but I may die to morrow;
and therefore I will, if I can, communicate to day. For how can I live without
him either in Person or Representation, who is the light of my eyes, the joy of
my heart, and should be dearer to me than my Life and Being.

It is a strange whimsey, I acknowledge, in De Hierarchia. p. 611. Ed. Rotomag.
Father Celot, the Jesuit, "That the multitude of Masses bring so much glory
to God, and so much profit to souls, that there could not be too many, if not
only according to Moses's wish, all the Lord's people were Priests; but also if
all men and women, if it were possible, and all inanimate bodies, and even
brute beasts, were turned Priests, to celebrate the Mass. (And yet every Priest
in the Romish Church is bound to say Mass every day). Nevertheless I must say,
it were well to be wished, that both by Priest and People this Sacrament were
addressed to with greater frequency and more Reverence; and that all the parts of
the Creation were employed in praising their Creator. For can I be happy too
osten, or too much? I will therefore love every thing that bears the divine
Image stamped upon it, and nothing shall occasion my thinking the Table of the
Lord contemptible.

The Collect.
MY soul, O Lord, is delighted with thee, and with whatscever has a relation
unto thee: Thy Name is Holy and Reverend in my thoughts, thy Word Powerful and
sacred in my ears, thy Body and Blood sweeter than Honey to my mouth, and
beyond all Delicac^es to my taste: Give me therefore, gracious Lord, frequent
occasions of calling upon thy Name, of hearing thy Word, and receiving thy
Mysteries, that my Savior may dwell in my heart by Faith here, and hereafter I
may dwell with him in the Vision of his Glory to all eternity. Amen.

CHAP. XVII. Of Resignation and Self-denial.
NOR must this love which I prosess to my God and his Ordinances be faint and
weak, but it ought to be strong enough to conquer all that opposes it: For can
I say, I love God, if I deny him preference in my esteem to all things else?
For if I love Father or Mother, or any other Relation, or my own Ease, or Life
it self beyond my Savior, I am not worthy to be called his Disciple, and am
unfit for the Kingdom of Heaven. It Is a Maxim in the School of Jesus, Mat.
16.24. (...). Theophil. in loc.
If any man will come after him, let him deny himself; and that not by way of
Ceremony or Complement, with the Elder Brother in the Gospel, who said, I go,
sir, but went not; but with the greatest sincerity, and the most intense zeal.
For to be a Christian is to be a Follower of the Son of God, who paid so exact
a deference to his Father, that tho his own and his Father's will were the
same, yet he protests, that he came into the world John 6.38.
not to do his own will, but the will of him who sent him; and that when
nothing else could do it, when Sacrifices and Burnt Offerings were
insignificant, then was it Recorded of him, that he came to do the will of God.
And what greater Instance could be given of this his Piety, than that act of
entire Resignation in the Garden? 'For, as Chillingw. Sermon. 5. p. 71.
an acute man observes, he, in the manner of expressing this act of his
Humility in the Three Evangelists, supercedes all scruple, and clears all
evasion: for in St. Luke 22.42. it is, Not my will, but thine be done: In which
words he resigns the faculty of his will, the whole power of it into his
Father's hands. In St. Mark 14.36. it is not what I will, but what thou will;
wherein he resigns the act and exercise of his will. But in St. Matthew. 26.39.
it is, Not as I will, but as thou will; wherein he submits his will not only as
to the act and power of it, to do what God shall command him, but is willing to
do it God's way, and after what manner God shall please. Nor can any man
conceive a degree of Obedience beyond this. This was his Glory. Nor did it
lessen his Excellencies or his Happiness: For notwithstanding this his
Humiliation, he was always glorious, and always blessed; as the Angels, when they
leave the Throne of God, and come down on Earth, carry their Heaven with them,
or rather find a new one in their Obedience.

And ought not I to learn of this our great High Priest, not to remove
mountains, or to curb the winds; not to feed five thousand by Miracle, or to
raise the dead, but to be humble and meek, to deny my self, and to depend on
God? How should this Love of Christ constrain me? For can there be any room for
pride or covetousness, for lust or ambition, for wantonness or intemperance,
when I have given my self entirely to my Savior? Since Gal. 5.24.
they who are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the lusts thereof, and
must resolve to love nothing but their Savior, to hate nothing but
disobedience, to dread his power only, and to grieve at nothing but his
displeasure. To such persons all things else are insignificant, and cannot
cheer the heart, unless he vouchsafe his Favors, and the light of his
countenance.

And tho perhaps my portion may be severe, and my province difficult, yet I
cannot expect to be better treated, when my Master's Cup was so embittered. It
could not be expected, that our Redeemer should love his Disciples better than
his Father loved him, who was his only begotten and beloved Son. But when God
loved thee most ardently, O my Savior, he inured thee to labors and
sufferings, to great conflicts and struglings. And thus he Heb. 2.10.
consecrated thee to be our High Priest, and gave thee perfection by thy
adversities. For such a sacrifice became us; and his sufferings were a great
testimony of his Innocence: For not only the Blood of the Oblation was first
let out at the foot of the Altar, to emblem the mortification of our passions
before we approach our Maker; but it was also observable, that every beast was
not thought fit to make a Sacrifice: Sheep and Doves, Creatures famous for
their harmlesness and their purity, for their innocence and their tenderness,
were destined to the Altar, while Dogs and Swine, and other creatures that
delight in Rapine or Pollution, were banished from God's House. And can I expect
to communicate with my Jesus in his Kingdom, who refuse to share with him in
his sufferings? How unreasonable is it to expect, how impossible to be
conformed to his Ascension and Triumphs, without a conformity to his
Indignities and Passion, to his Agonies and Crucifixion? For that Text, If any
man will come after me, let him deny himself, is a Prophecy as well as a
Precept; and so must be fulfilled in the Church as long as it has a being; and
every good man must do what St. Francis and others are only feigned to do; he
must bear about in his body the marks of the Lord Jesus.

Nay, it is one of the conditions on our part of the Covenant which we make
with God in the Sacrament, To be ready, if need be, to die with, and for that
Savior of ours, who has given us his own most precious Body and Blood, to
represent his dying for our sins. For if the love of St. Thomas was so great to
Lazarus, that he was content John 11.16.
to die with him, how much more should I be ready to lay all my concerns at the
feet of my Redeemer? For of him Ap. Theophyl. in loc. p 721.
Origin understands St. Thomas to speak. How acceptable therefore would
Martyrdom be to me for such a friend? And how prescrable to the Ease and
Honors, the Pomps and Voluptuousness of this sensual and giddy world? Poor St.
Romanus, when he was Reprieved from Execution, expressed himself with much grief
Theodorit. Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 17.
, Romanus is not worthy the Honor of Martyrdom. And when the holy Basil. Orat.
in S. Gord.
Gordius was to be beheaded, he was troubled at nothing but that he had but one
life to lose for his dearest Redeemer, and would have been contented to have
shed his blood for his Savior, as often as he had shed his tears for his sins,
had God given him Powers adaequate to his Will and Resolutions: For what can
check the Sallies of a Seraphick Passion, or daunt that man who lives above the
world? And what should hinder, but that I also should exert as great Courage,
and as much Resolution, and love my blessed Master as much and as heartily as
they? I am sure my Obligations are a great; and therefore my Gratitude should
be as eminent and illustrious.

The Collect.
SEnd down, O Lord, the Spirit of Power into my heart, to triumph over the
degenerate and fearful Spirit that resides there: Enable me to subdue all my
Passions to the Laws of Reason and Religion; to mortify my Lusts, and to deny
my self, that what thou determinest may be my choice, and I may devoutly and
humbly resolve to make thy will the Rule of all my actions, through the merits
and mediation of the great High Priest, and Bishop of Souls, Jesus Christ the
Righteous. Amen.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Humiliation before the Reception.
AMong the many duties preparative to Worthy Receiving, Fasting, humiliation,
and intense devotion, are not of the least use and advantage, tho the world is
so much a slave to sloth and ease, and hates any thing that is laborious and
painful, most men being like Cicer Tuscul 2.
Dionysius of Heraclea, who finding the pains of the Gout too strong for his
principle of Apathy, deserted the Stoics, and turned Epicurean; an undeniable
evidence, how much more we are guided by our Senses than our Reason. But
notwithstanding all our prejudices, these methods of severity are very
requisite to complete our preparations for the Lord's Table.

The Fathers generally observe, that Adam undid himself, and was the cause of
our Ruin, by transgressing the Rules of Abstinence, which his Maker had
prescribed him in Paradise: That when the Old World indulged to the gratifying
their extravagant Appetites, then their destruction was at the door (they were
drowned first in their full Bowls, and then in the Deluge): And that Job's
children, while they were in the height of their mirth and feasting, were upon
the brink of their graves; with many other such Instances. And therefore the
Christian Church, in imitation of the Jews, who fasted twice in the week, kept
also their solemn Meetings on every Wednesday and Friday, on which they prayed
heartily, and heard the Word of God gladly, and at Three in the Afternoon,
first received the holy Sacrament, and then went to their ordinary meals. On
these days they humbled their souls, and sent up strong cries to God for the
pardon of their sins, and the diverting of the divine Judgments from
themselves, and all the world. But as if those days of Mortification would not
be sufficient, they appointed the Lent-Fast, to be in an especial manner a time
of preparation to the blessed Eucharist: At that time they inured themselves to
all sorts of hardship; they abstained Constit. Apost l. 5. c 17 Chrysostom. To. 5 p.
581, etc.
from their Baths; they drunk nothing but water, and did eat no thing but Bread
and Herbs (not changing dull and heavy Flesh for Fish and Wine, the Dainties of
the Old Epicures, as the Romanists do Nay, the present Greeks, during Lent,
will not so much as mention the word Butter Cheese, Flesh, Fish, withour the
following Parenthesis, (...): that is, with reverence to the holy Lent be it
spoken Grelot 's Voyage. p. 143.
): they frequently watched all night, and when they slept, lay on the bare
ground: And lest people, through the weakness that cannot but succeed such
severities, might fall asleep in the Church, they had among the Eastern
Christians Typic. Sabae. cap. 5. p. 9. (...).
an Officer to awaken all drowsy persons, and to bid them be intent on the
duties of the season. Then also they made their frequent Confessions, heard
Sermons every day, and practiced all the Rules of Self-denial, and took care,
not only that their Diet should be mean, but their Tertul. de Penit. c. 9. and
de Jejun.
Habit coarse: Their Penitents were covered with rough sackcloath, and
sprinkled with ashes, till their faces were lean and dis-figured with their
abstinences: For he who pampered himself while the Church fasted, was looked on
as an Atheist, or an Epicure (says Tertullian); 'That his Belly was his God,
his Lungs his Church, his Paunch his Altar, and the Cook his Priest; That the
steams of his crammed Dishes past with him for the blessed Spirit, and his
poynant Sauces were looked on by him as the influences of the Holy Ghost, and
his Belchings as Prophecy; that all his Charity was warmed in the pot wherein
his Dinner was boiled, his Faith kept alive in the Kitchen, and his Hope
preserved from starving by his diverse Dishes.

They were not to be persuaded that a small degree of penitence would atone
for a great Crime, and take off the Ecclesiastical Censures. Those who were
reconciled were not admitted to the Holy Communion, till they had addressed to
the i^ spiritual Guide, and had his benediction and the Prayers of the Church.
But many Criminals were never admitted to the privileges of the Altar till the
day of their death: and some were left wholly to the mercy of God (especially
if the man had relapsed Ambrose de Paenit. l. 2. c. 10.
: For as they never baptized any man twice, so they never admitted any man
twice to public Penance: For should they have done so, the Compassion of the
Church would have brought her Laws into contempt. And tho the Church has since
thought fit to give Transgressors better hopes, by an easier Remission of her
Censures, to let the Novatians know, (who thought the ancient Discipline
indispensible, and for that Reason denied the first Paragraph of the Eighth
Chapter of St. John's Gospel to be Canonical, because it afforded an Example of
such Lenity in the Remission of gross sins) that she had such a power; yet it
were to be wished, that the ancient Discipline could be retrieved to curb the
Extravagancies of a loose, sensual, and Atheistical Age, whereby notorious,
vile, and profligate sinners were bound to Ten, Twenty, or Thirty years
Penance, and sometimes longer, proportionate to their Crimes, and the heinous
Circumstances that attended them. This would repair the Ruins of Religion, and
restore the lost Reputation of despised Christianity.

In those best days their holiest men inured themselves to the greatest
strictnesses. And what extraordinary performances must we think were then
required to fit a gross Offender for the Holy Communion? For they had learnt,
that such severities are the proper method to subdue the body, and deliver the
soul from the drudgeries and impositions of its sensual Appetites; That to
fatten the body is but to make the Prison of the soul the stronger; that the
mind is then best enlightened, when it is free from the burden of meat, and the
cares of the world; and that the longer a man fasts while he prays, the fatter
and more acceptable will be the sacrifice of his Devotion; and that when Acts
10.
Cornelius did so, then came the Vision that brought salvation to his house:
But above all, they remembered our Holy Redeemer's Mark 2.19, 20.
Injunction; and that this was the time in which the Bridegroom was taken away
from the earth; and that therefore the children of the bride-chamber ought to
fast. Nor will every slight degree of sorrow serve to express the Resentments
of such a loss, and the sins that caused it: For when I look on him whom my
Transgressions have pierced, I ought to mourn as one mourns for his only son;
and be in bitterness, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn.

And is it not a shame to the Christians of this Age, not to follow such an
excellent pattern? But why do I call my self and others to the imitation of the
Virtues of the Disciples of Christ? Simon Coriar. Ep. 12. inter Epist. Socrat.
and Socratic. p. 28.
The very Heathens will make us blush at the Day of Judgment, who advise their
Friends to inure themselves to Hunger and Thirst, because those things do
wonderfully advance a man in the study and practice of the Laws of Wisdom.

But here I must observe, That every Abstinence is not a Fast: For I may be
kept from meat either by poverty or business, by the Rigor of my Enemies, by
the Violence of a Disease, or the injunction of my Physician: But that which
makes a Fast in the Ecclesiastical sense of the word is, when it answers the
ends of Religion, and the performance is directed to the good of my soul. Nor
does every Fast which is voluntarily undertook for the ends aforesaid,
presently commence an acceptable Sacrifice to God, unless it be attended with
all other virtuous performances. The Patriarch of Constantinople, called John
the Faster, lost the Reward of his abstaining from all sorts of Delicacies,
while he could not abstain from Pride and Vainglory, but disturbed the world
with his pretenses to the Title of Universal Bishop. Nor did the men Socrat.
Eccle. Hist. l. 7 c. 15.
of Alexanandria fast to any purpose, but to smite with the fist of wickedness,
when during this solemnity, they murdered the most excellent Philosopher
Hypatia. This is truly Superstition, to seek to bribe God with little
Observances, and to trample on his more obliging Precepts. So the Pharisees
dreaded being defiled, should they but enter into a Court of Judicature during
the Paschal Solemnity, but were nothing affrighted at the contriving and
compassing the Death of the Innocent Jesus.

When therefore I oblige my self to fast, I propose to my self the pattern of
one of those venerable Sages who had gotten an absolute conquest over their
Lusts, and had so kept under their bodies, and brought them into subjection,
that they were no longer apt to rebel against the Precepts of Reason and
Religion And to my Abstinences I join my Tears, remembering that excellent
advice of Apud Leon. Allat. de Symeon. p. 23.
Symeon Stylita, Never to communicate but with the deepest compunction and
heartiest sorrow for my sins, till I have moistened the holy bread with my
tears. And when I weep, I will pray with the greatest ardors of love, and the
strongest bent of my mind, but with the least outward motion imaginable, lest
that should seem to savor of the Theater, and not of the House of God.

It was the mistake of the Old Philostrat vit. Apollonii Tyan.
Gymnosophists, That the higher they leapt in their sacred dances, wherein they
praised their Deities, they came so much the nearer to Heaven, and rendered
themselves and their actions thereby the more acceptable to their Gods. Nor do
I think, that Ignatius Loyola, and other of the Romish Saints, were ever the
more in God's favor, because they are said to be lifted up above the ground in
their prayers, as if Angels carried them so much the nearer to the Throne of
Grace. This also is a privilege the Heathens have pretended to, and perhaps
with as much Right as our Modern Votaries: For Eunap. vit. Jamblich. Init.
Jamblichus is reported, when he prayed, to have been raised up Ten Cubits
above the ground, and his Face and Garments to have been changed into a bright
Gold-colour; but when the Devotions were done, he returned to his former color
and station. Nay, greater things than these may be done, and yet a man be no
Favorite to the Almighty. But if I pray fervently and devoutly; if my heart
breathe out its complaints, and longs to be delivered from the burden of its
sins; if my soul hunger after Righteousness, and be athirst for the living God,
longing to come into his presence and to partake of his gracious dispensations;
then, tho my tongue be silent, and my lips stand still, I may safely presume,
that I shall have profit when I pray unto him. And by this means shall my soul
mount upward, when to my fasting and tears I join my supplications and my alms:
For they are the wings of the mind. Nor will I doubt, when I am so prepared,
but my God will hear me, and accept of me, and send me away with a blessing.

The Collect.
O Lord Jesu Christ, who in the days of thy Humiliation, did offer up Prayers
and Supplications, with strong crying and tears, unto him that was able to save
thee from death, and were heard for that thy Piety; melt, I beseech thee, my
obdurate heart, till it become soft, and fit to receive thy impressions:
Represent to me my sins, and thy sufferings, to make me sorrowful; and set
before my eyes the vanity of the world, to wean me from depending on it: Enable
me to beg earnestly, and never to desist, till I receive thy benediction; that
I may trample upon all the pomps and pleasures of this life, and settle my
Affections upon that which is to come; that I may love and desire all
opportunities of Communion with thee on Earth, till thy Merits procure for me a
place at thy Table in Heaven. Amen.

CHAP. XIX. Of Joy and Resolution after the Reception.
IF it be just and reasonable, that our Thanksgivings should be proportioned to
the Excellency of our Enjoyments, and our gratitude be adequate to the
beneficence of our Patron; how eminent and exceeding should my joy be, when I
have been honored with the society of my God, endowed with the purchase of my
Savior's Blood, and admitted to the Communion of Angels, and the Privileges
of the Saints? If Luke 1.41.
the Baptist, when the unborn Infant, Jesus, came to his Father's House, leapt
in his Mothers womb, and gave such early Testimonies of his Veneration to the
Messiah (as the Legend tells us, That Vid. Card. Bona de Divin. Psalmod. cap.
18. Sect. 3. p. 893.
St. Benedict, before he was born, sung distinctly with his Sister Scholastica,
to the praise and glory of God), how much more solemn should my Exultations be,
who have been admitted to entertain an adult Savior, and to be a sharer in his
Triumphs? So true, and so hearty should my joy be, as that which a new Convert
experiments, who has been lately rescued from a state of folly and fear, and
admitted into the number of the Sons of God. Or rather it should match the
mirth of Nuptials: For in this Sacrament is my Soul married to my Holy
Redeemer: Nay, my inward satisfactions should express themselves, as a
victorious Army glories in its Conquests; every noise should be a shout, and
every sentence a part of a triumphant song: For my dearest Savior, by his
Death, conquered his Enemies, and by the Symbols of that Death, enables me, his
meanest and weakest Servant, to rout the scattered Forces of the Kingdom of
Darkness.

Such a demeanor agrees to the practice of the Jews, who enjoyed but a shadow
of this blessed Sacrament: It agrees to our blessed Master's actions at the
Celebration, to the Nature of the Ordinance, and to the Customs of the
Primitive Christians. The Jews (whose Passover was only a commemoration of
their deliverance out of Egypt, while our Paschal Lamb has set us free from
spiritual and eternal Thraldom) never did eat the Lamb but they sung the great
Hallel, which begun with the 113th, and ended with the 118th Psalm. And because
to have but such ablessing in view is an happiness, they begun and ended the
Ceremony with the expressions of their thankfulness: Buxtorf. Hist. Sacr.
Caenae.
for they sung the 113th and 114th Psalms, before they did eat the Passover,
and the other four Psalms after they had fed upon that Sacrifice. And
accordingly did our Savior: For we have the strongest probability, that he,
who did in other Ceremonies comply with the injunctions of the Synagogue, would
not in this particular be singular; and therefore are apt to believe, Mat. 14
26.
that the Hymn which he sung before he went out to the Mount of Olives, was the
great Hallel: But if it were not the same, it was, doubtless, some Laud to the
Almighty, as for all his Benefits, so particularly for his Sacraments. And this
is highly worth consideration, that when Jesus sung this Hymn, it was the Eve
to his cruel and unparalled Tragedy, that the Man of Sorrows, who all his
life long did eat the bread of affliction, and quench his thirst with his
tears, having the Cross in view, sung an Hymn. 'Twas a dismal and affrighting
Evening; But God gives the good man songs in the night, while the sinner is
astonished with the Terrors of a disturbed Conscience.

And as this Joy agrees to the Custom of the Synagogue, and our Master's
practice, so it properly corresponds with the intention of the Institution: For
tho Thanksgiving be but a part of the Office, yet because the denomination is
given from that which is most eminent, the whole Service is called, the
Eucharist by the 1 Cor. 10.16.
Apostle, because, Cabasil. Expos. Liturg. cap. 52.
"when we communicate, we have greater cause to rejoice than to supplicate: For
when we are made partakers of these Mysteries, we have received many more
favors than we want: For of the things that we want, some we cannot yet attain
unto, as the incorruptibility of our bodies, and our translation to Heaven:
Some we have forfeited by our frequent Relapses, as the Gifts of the Holy
Ghost, our Health and our Riches. So that were we as pious as we ought, there
would be even in this world no need of supplications: all our Offerings would
be Eucharists and Praises. But our sloth and our negligence are the causes of
our needs. Do we beg Remission of our sins? Was not that given us in Baptism?
And how came we, but by our own fault, to need it again? Do we want Heaven?
Does not the Scripture tell us, the Kingdom of Heaven is within us? And were we
not made Sons of God in the Laver of Regeneration? And if Sons, then Heirs; Why
then do we so pray? Because we have forfeited that Estate, and deserve to be
disinherited, and to be made of Sons; Servants: And do we want Temporal
Blessings? We should first seek the Kingdom of God, and all these Things would
be added.

When we are fit to communicate with God, our Wants are inconsiderable, and our
greatest Employment in the duties of Religion, is to celebrate his
Condescension, to admire his Goodness and Patience, and to adore his Majesty;
and therefore the Hymn, which the Ancients sung at the Celebration of these
Mysteries, was by some called Dionys. Ar. Eccl. Hier. c. 3. (...).
the holy Eucharist, because it comprehended in it self the commemoration of
those holy Gifts that descend from God, and seemed to include all the
particulars of that Office; nor did the Primitive Constit. Ap. li. 5. c. 13.
Just. M. apol. 2. etc.
Church ever receive this Blessed Sacrament, but they had their Psalms, and
Forms of Thanksgiving; for if every worldly Blessing deserved its Remembrance
and an acknowledgment; how much more were they bound to praise God for
spiritual Blessings in heavenly places? and to this day the Olear. Itiner. li.
5. p. 279.
Armenian Church think they cannot communicate aright, unless they have not
only vocal, but Instrumental Music; and they plead for the usage, that while
our Blessed Savior prayed in the Mountain, the Angels came down, and
entertained him with such sort of Music; and tho this be an ungrounded
Tradition, yet Antiquity was agreed, that the Angels were present at the
Celebration of this Sacrifice; and that when the Gr. Nyss. To. 1. p. 957.
Church sung, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath, the Seraphim sung with
them, and that they attended on these Representations of our Savior, as they
did upon his Person.

For it was also an Hippolyt. in Ps. 42. apud Theodorit. dialog, 2. Eusebius.
Epist. ad Constant. Imp. in act. Conc. Nic. 2. act. 6. Col. 493. Jul. Firmic.
p. 48. Ambros. de his. qui initiant. c. 7. etc.
undisputed tradition among them, That when the great Conqueror of Death and
Hell was ascending to His Father's Right Hand, the Holy Angels which attended
him on Earth, followed him with Songs of Praise and Triumph, and spoke to their
Brethren the Angels in Heaven, in the Words of the inspired Psalmist, ( Ps.
24.7. etc. according to the Translation of the Septuagint then in use) Lift up
your gates, O ye Princes, and be ye life up ye everlasting Doors, and the King
of Glory shall come in: To which the Heavenly Angels, sollicitous to enquire
who it was that came with so much Authority to demand the opening of the Gates
of that Palace, because no man to that day had ever entered into the Holy of
Holies; answered, Who is this King of Glory? To whom the return was presently
made, It is the Lord strong and mighty, even the Lord mighty in Battle; and
after that, all the Heavenly Host joined Consort, and did sing with one Voice,
Lift up your heads, O ye Princes, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, and
the King of Glory shall come in: And if those bright Spirits were so
transported at the sight of the victorious Jesus, should not my Soul be much
more engaged to break out into Exclamations and Rejoicings, and to imitate the
Harmony of the admiring Angels?

And for this Reason when the Church at Easter had remembered the Resurrection
of Christ, and strengthened themselves with the Sacrament, that they might be
able to walk in his steps, every day between that Festival and VVhitsuntide was
a day of rejoicing, every day of the fifty was a Sunday, say Tert. de coron. c.
3. Ambr. in Luc. li. 8. c. 17. Marx. Taurin. Homil. 61.
the Fathers; nor did they on any of those days so much as stoop to kneel at
their Prayers; nor do we in our Church ever fast the Eves of the Feasts that
then happen Except before. Ascension day.
; only in this interval we humble our selves in the Rogation Week, which was
introduc't upon extraordinary occasion and necessity; or rather, as I think,
was transferred to this season from some other time of the Year: And so
sensible was the Church of the infinite Benificence of God, that in the fourth
and fifth Centuries several Monasteries were erected, societies of devout
Persons, whom they called (...), men who never slept, because some or other of
the Fraternity was always in the House of God singing his Praises, and
celebrating his Bounty.

But why should I want the Encouragements to adore my Redeemer, which Angels
and Saints afford me? The Heathens guided only by the Dictates of Nature,
entertained every little secular Blessing with joyful Acknowledgments; Jul.
Firmic. p. 38. (...).
they never saw a Candle brought into the Room, but they saluted the Light, and
bid it welcome; but at Gods Altar I am blessed with the light that lightens every
man that comes into the world. And when the men of Id. p. 6, 7. (...).
Egypt found their Mock-Deities, they excliamed; We have found him, let us
rejoice together: And am not I much more obliged to do so, when I have found
the Messiah to whom Moses and the prophets bear witness. when I have found the
way of Salvation, and the means to attain to the favor of God?

To this end the Book of Psalms should be always in my hands, and the Jubilees
of it in my mouth; for nothing like that Book fits a man for the giving or
receiving these Mysteries Dion. Areop. Eccl. Hier. c. 3. p. 288.
: 'In the Psalms we praise God for all his Works, and we praise all good men
for their holy Speeches, and excellent Actions, they quiet our Affections, and
subdue our unruly minds, as David's Harp did drive the evil Spirit out of Saul.
And they call to our Remembrance that Savior of ours, who is almost in every
one of them described to the World. With these Songs of Praise did those devout
men deceive the tediousness of a Journey, and of worldly Business; the
Husbandman sung the Hallelujahs while he followed his Plough, and the
Shopkeeper while he managed his Trade; and with them they begun and ender their
Meals; they were the Companions of their Employments, the entertainment of
their leisure Hours, and the solace of their Cares.

And are not these things written for Examples? Nothing therefore shall hinder
but that I will treat my Savior with Cheerfulness, and a glad Heart, who
treats me with a Feast above the desert of Angels; Angels cannot make him more
happy than he is; they can only sing his Praises; and to their Hallelujahs will
I join mine: nor shall my joy make it self visible only in my Anthems, but it
shall be more illustrious in my Conversation; for this Blessing which I receive
is a Sacrament, it is an Oath that obliges me, as it did my Forefathers in the
Faith, Vid. Plin. lib. 10. Ep. 97.
the Primitive Christians, to a Holy Life, to Justice and Temperance, and the
practice of every other Virtue; it binds me to avoid Theft and Adultery, and
every other Crime, as I am willing to avoid Damnation. I do resolve therefore,
as I live by the Mercies of God, so I will live to his Glory; and nothing shall
make me weary of loving and serving him, but I will as far as I can, imitate
the Adorations and Obedience of the Seraphim, till they carry me to Heaven,
where I shall bow down to, and exult in my Savior for ever.

The Collect.
IT deserves my best Praises, O most merciful Lord, the Benefactor of my Soul,
that thou have thought me worthy to be a partaker of thy holy and immortal
Mysteries; guide me uprightly in my ways, and confirm me in thy fear; and
because all that I have is derived from thee, O Lord, I devote all unto thee, I
give thee my Body, my Soul, my Fame, my Friends, my Liberty, and my self;
dispose of me, and all that is mine, as it seems hest to thee, and may most
advance the glory of thy blessed Name, who live and reignest with the Father
and the holy Spirit, world without end. Amen.

CHAP. XX. Of the Priest who consecrates.
BUT above all men, I hope my Brethren of the Clergy will not take it amiss
that I have inserted this Chapter; I did not design it to instruct them, they
are the Angels of God; but to direct and guide my self in the discharge of the
Priestly Office.
Gods Minister, who consecrates, ought to be careful that he be duly qualified
in the purity of his intention, and the Holiness of his conversation, in
self-examination and self-denial, in Humility and true joy; for Jesus who
instituted the Mysteries, was a holy and innocent High Priest, and separate
from sinners: And tho it be no wonder that Judas may communicate, yet it is
monster when Judas consecrates; to see dogs and swine, and other unclean beasts
wallow and delight in filth and pollution, is common and ordinary; but to see
Ermins defiled, is prodigy. To behold one of the Sons of Belial making haste to
be damned, is an usual, tho deplorable sight; but to see an Angel fall into the
condemnation of Satan, to behold one of the Sons of God turn Apostate, and to
make a League with the Powers of Darkness, is a reversing of the methods of
Nature and Providence, and a defiance to the constitutions of Holy Religion.

Shall I take the immaculate Body of my Savior into a polluted Mouth, and
think to consecrate his Blood with profane Lips? Ought I not to wash my hands
in innocence, before I compass the Altar of God? before I receive Jesus for my
self, and give him in to the hands of others? It was given in charge to the
Priests of the Old Law, Be ye holy, for I the Lord your God am holy; Nor can
that Commandment be antiquated under the Gospel: Nay, the Mosaical
Constitutions required, that the Priest should not only be free from any inward
Pollution, but also that he should have no Levit. 21.18, etc.
outward Blemish, not so much as a flat Nose, nor a broken Hand or Foot; not a
crook back, or the Scurf, no nor so much as a Blemish in his Eye; nay, so
careful were they of the Priest, who sacrificed, that they not only surveyed
the shape and make of his limbs, but as De sacrific. Init.
Philo observes, they also curiously made inspection into his Skill, whether he
were able to discern a Sacrifice, and every part of it, from the Head to the
Foot, Tert. Apol. c. 30. p. 223. cur praecordia victimarum potius, quam ipsorum
sacrificantium examinantur?
that nothing tainted or defective might be offered for an Oblation to God; and
is there not the same skill and diligence required from an Evangelical Priest,
who must advise others, and above all things should not neglect his own soul?

For if a Physician of the body gives no encouragement to his Patient to depend
on his skill, unless himself be of a vigorous constitution, and a healthy look
(since all his Discourse of keeping others alive for ever, will appear but
empty talk, and vain boast, if his own livid Countenance and decayed Limbs are
a contradiction to his confidence) how much more ought those who take on them
the Cure of Souls, to mind the conforming of their Conversations to the
Preceps, which they give to others, lest while they make their boast of the
Law, through breach of the Law they dishonor God: For how necessarily sad and
affrighting must be the reflections of that man, who reads the threatenings of
Heaven to others against those sins which his own Conscience testifies himself
has been guilty of?

It Is an exemplary story, if it be true, that Epiphanius relates of Origin,
Haeres. 64. p. 228.
that after his fall returning to Jerusalem, he was defired to preach, which
Office he addressing himself to, occasionally lights upon that passage of the
Ps. 50.16, 17.
Psalmist, Unto the ungodly says God, why do thou preach my Law, and take my
covenant into thy mouth, whereas thou hate to be reformed, and have cast my
words behind thee? Which passage as soon as he had read, he could not but call
to mind his former Apostasy, whereupon he sat down, and wept, and the whole
Congregation wept with him, and that was all the Sermon they had for that day.

Who, O my Soul, dares speak evil of that Priest, who spends all his Time and
Strength in the service of that God whom he acknowledges? and who will not
reverence that Clergyman, who busies himself in visiting the sick, in
instructing the ignorant, in reclaiming the profligate, in comforting the
disconsolate, in diligent Preaching and Catechizing, and in a reverent
Administration of the Sacraments? There is a natural Veneration and Respect
that all men pay to that which is truly Religious; but when he who instructs
others, never preaches to himself, this casts an odium on Christianity, that is
not easily defaced; for a wicked Priest at the Altar is worse than Judas; for
when Judas kissed, and then betrayed our Blessed Savior, tho the action was as
he intended it, abominable, yet as God applied it, it became the Instrument of
the World's Happiness; but when the vicious Priest approaches God's Table, and
puts the Body of Jesus into his own Lips, and the hands of his people, he
prophanes the tremendous Sacrament, he affronts the Majesty of God, he does no
good to himself or others, but much harm; he eats and drinks Damnation to
himself, and gives a very evil Example to his Neighbors; and what Power can
bring any good out of so much Wickedness?

And yet to sin like Judas, is to be a vile and notorious Transgressor; and the
case of that Traitor is an affrighting Example; our Holy Redeemer had given him
his Body and Blood, tho he knew he would betray him, that he might attempt all
methods to reclaim him, to soften his hard Heart by Kindness and Condescension,
and to secure him from the Temptations of Satan by arming him with the power of
God, and the Grace that is conveyed with those Mysteries; but Judas was the
first Instance, that the Holy Sacrament, which the Son of God instituted for
the Consolation and Welfare of his Servants, may become the occasion of
Condemnation to those who receive it unworthily, and that the Devil may enter
into that Man's mind, whose Body has received the Lord Jesus: and how
impudently wicked does such a Wretch grow of a sudden? for when our Master had
declared, that one of his Family would be that Traitor, who should deliver him
into the Hand of the High Priest Luke 22.21.
: When the rest of the Innocent Apostles were struck dumb with Astonishment,
Judas took the hardiness to ask him the Question: Thus he who is not bettered
by the means of Grace, insensibly grows worse, and hardly can a Miracle save
such a resolute sinner: And what dismal Lamentations, what complication of Woes
are sufficient to mourn the state of such a Priest? for Vid Hieron. Ep. ad
Heliodor. to. 1. p. 4. m.
who shall make atonement for him, whose Office it is to intercede for others?
'The Soul of a Priest, says Lib. 6. de Sacerdot. p. 44, 46, etc.
St. Chrysostom, should be bright, and more untainted than the Rays of the
Sun, lest the Spirit of God be forced to desert him, and that he may be able to
say, Now it is no longer I that live, but Christ who lives in me; for like that
great Light, that rules the day, he should enlighten the World, and warm it
with the Ardors of Divine Love; for when the Priest stands at the Altar, the
Angels attend him, and all the Heavenly Powers mix their Voices with his, and
all the Space round the Altar, is filled with the Blessed Spirits who honor
him that is there represented, and incircle his Body, as Guards do a Prince.
Nay, so great is the Honor that is done to a good Priest, when he administers
in Holy Things, that he stands in Gods stead; for as God offered up his only
Begotten Son for the Redemption of the World: So does the Priest at the Altar
make a Commemoration of that one perfect and entire Sacrifice and Oblation of
our Holy Savior for the sins of Mankind; and was it ever known, that any man
durst play the Devil in the likeness of God? To meet Satan in the Habit of an
Angel is not unusual, but to see an Angel of God (as Priests are called, and
truly are) to be a real Fiend, is abominable. When therefore thou considerest
this, do not thou tremble, O my Soul, when thou consecratest this Tremendous
Sacrament? And ought thou not to practice the deepest Reverence, and to
demean thy self humbly and decently, because of the Angels who attend thee, and
because of God whom thou representest? Great is the Honor which God gives his
Priests, and great is their Charge; and who is sufficient for these Things?

A prayer for the Priest before he goes to consecrate; out of St. Chrysostom.
Liturgy.
'TO minister to Thee, O thou King of Glory, in Holy Offices, is a great and
terrible undertaking, and such as is dreadful to the powers of Heaven; but thou
acted by thine unspeakeable and Infinite Love, becamest our High Priest, and
being Lord of all things, deputed'st men to the Ministry of this Sacrifice;
Look down upon me a sinful and unfruitful servant of thine, cleanse me from an
evil Conscience, and prepare me by the Powers of thy Holy Spirit to stand
before thy Holy Table, and to minister thy sacred and uncorrupted body, and thy
precious Blood; turn not thy Face away from me, nor reprobate me from the
number of thy Children; Lord remember me when thou art in thy Kingdom; Lord, I
am not worthy that thou should come under the polluted roof of my Soul; but
as thou were pleased to lie down in the Manger among the Beasts, and to sit at
Meat in the House of Simon the Leper, and to receive the Harlot, a like sinner
to my self, when she came unto thee, so vouchsafe to make thy entrance into my
unreasonable Mind and into my defiled Body, which is dead as well as Leprous;
and as thou did not abominate the mouth of the Harlot when she kissed thy
unpolluted Feet, so O Lord my God, do not despise and abominate me a sinner,
Pardon, blot out, and forgive all my sins, which I have committed, either
willingly or unwillingly, whether they are sins of Knowledge or Ignorance,
whether in Deed or in Word, or in my Will and Thoughts; forgive me all of them,
as thou art Good and Gracious, and preserve me from condemnation, that the
Oblations of thy People may be acceptably offered unto thee by me thy unworthy
and sinful servant; and that I my self may receive thy Precious Body and Blood,
to the curing of my soul and Body, and may distribute thy Mysteries to others
to their benefit and salvation: For thine is the Kingdom, Power, and Glory;
Thine, O Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever, Amen.

CHAP. XXI. The Methods of the ancient Church at the Celebration of the Holy
Communion.
THe Writings of the Fathers, together with the Old Rituals and Liturgies, do
at large give an Account both of the deep Respect that was paid to the
Sacrament, and of the Zeal, Reverence and Devotion of those who received it,
together with the several Rites and Ceremonies that beautified and completed
the performance. It cannot be denied but that in several Churches there were
circumstantial differences in the Performance of this Duty; but withal it
cannot be denied, that in the main there was an exact agreement.

As soon as the Bishop or Priest who Preached, had ended his Sermon, all persons
Dionys. Areop. Eccl. Hier. c. 3.
who were not Baptized, or were possessed by Evil Spirits, or were in the state
of Penance, were dismissed; the Deacons or Subdeacons keeping the Doors, that
no unqualified person might presume to stay any longer in the Church, or to see
the solemnity of the Celebration, who was not worthy to Communicate. After
which the Deacons brought the materials of the Holy Sacrament, which they had
before received from the Hands of the Faithful, Vid. Mendoz. in Can. 22.
Council. Illiberit.
and had laid up in the Church Treasury (a place like our Vestry) and
delivered them to the Bishop (if present, if not to the Priest) who laying them
on the Table, tendered them to God with this short Prayer: Lord, we offer thy
own out of what thou have bountifully given us.

Then the Deacon (or as in some Churches, the Subdeacon) brought Water to the
Cyril. Catech. Mystag. 5. and Liturg.
Bishop, and his Presbyters, in which they were obliged to wash, because the
Psalmist says, I will wash my hands in innocence, and so will I compass thine
Altar, O Lord; for washing was an Emblem of the Purifying both of the Body and
Mind, the Enseb. l. 10 c. 4. Chrysostom. to. 6. p. 619. etc.
people having washed at the Churchdoor, before they begun their prayers, it
being accounted very indecent to appear before God, unless they could lift up
clean hands without wrath or doubting.

The Bishop and his Clergy had their seats round the Altar, which stood in the
middle of the Quire; nor was any person permitted to be there besides the
Clergy, (except the Grecian Emperor in the Churches of the East) for even the
Monks themseves in those days had no place among the Clergy, but stood just
without the Cancelli, or Rails, the Episcopal Throne (for so it was styled) was
placed just above the Holy Table, his Presbyters seats being on each side of
it, the Deacons standing by Chrysostom. to. 4. p. 271. and passim.
all clothed in white Garments, some being concerned in the Ministration of
the Sacrament (which they were injoined to do Constable. Ap. li. 2. c. 57.
with fear and reverence) others to quiet the people, and Ap. Constable. l. 8. c.
12.
one to keep the Children in due order, for they also were admitted to this
Sacrament; and in some Churches two of the Deacons shaded the Chalice with a
Skreen, that no flies or other such insects might fall into the Consecrated
Wine.

Now the Churches among the Ancients were so ordered, that as there was a
partition between the Body of the Church and the Quire, so there was also a
Veil or Curtain, which shaded the Altar, and kept it from the sight of those
who had no right to the Mysteries; which Curtain, when it was drawn, the People
in a solemn manner (looking upon the Holy Table as a Type of Heaven, and the
Priests attending as the Angels of God descending to Minister to Men) did give
God hearty thanks Liturg. S. Jacobi.
that there was an entrance given them into the Holy of Holies, Cyril. Cat.
mist. 4. Ambr. de his qui initiantur. c. 8.
and that he had prepared a Table in their sight before the face of them; for
they believed Chris. to. 5. p. 565.
that this was tipified by the rending of the Veil at our blessed Savior's
passion, that the people might look into the Holy of Holies, and see their
Crucified Redeemer: now upon the Altar (besides the Linen, and the Vessels
necessary for the Consecration, of which Tet. de pudirit. c. 7. and c. 10.
the Chalices had the Impress of the good Shepherd bringing back the lost Sheep
on his Shoulders) there was nothing set, besides a Tert. apol. 1.39. and Chrysostom.
to 6. p. 631.
Cross, and Lights (and both of them very anciently) to express, that whatever
was there done, was a representation of that Sacrifice which our Blessed
Savior made of himself on the Cross for our sins, and of that first Supper
which he instituted, and that it was a Feast of Joy to the Christian World.

After these preparative Actions, the people were Dion. Areop. ubi sup. Constable.
Ap. 2.57. Basil. Liturg. etc.
bid 'To rise up together, and to stand decently and with trembling; and
turning toward the East, to pray to that God who ascended into the Heaven of
Heavens, and fitteth in the Eastern part of it, toward which place stood
Paradise, whence the first man by the cunning of Satan was banished. And when
the Congregation had put themselves into this posture, the Deacon who attended
the Bishop, said aloud, Constable. ap l. 8. c. 11.
Let not any man who is at enmity with his brother, let not any man who is only
hypocritically reconciled, approach this table. To which also he subjoined, Let
us attend; after which the Bishop saluted his people with the peace of God be
with you; to which they answered, and with thy Spirit; (tho To. 3. p. 647.
St. Chrysostom places the double salutation as it was called, after the Kiss
of Peace) and immediately the Dion. Areop. ub. sup. Cyril. Cat. mystag. 5.
Constable. Ap. 2.57.
Deacon aloud bad the people give each other the Holy Kiss, or the Kiss of
Charity, which Action was managed with the greatest care and modesty
imaginable; for Conc. Laodic. Can. 19.
first the Bishop gave the Kiss to his Presbyters, and the Presbyters to the
inferior Clergy, and afterward among the La^ty the men kissed the men, but the
women their own Sex only, (for they had their different apartments, and
particular Officers appointed to each apartment, the Ostiarii.
Doorkeepers at the entrance of that which belonged to the men, and the
Deaconesses to that belonging to the Women) and this they were advised to do
with this sober caution Constable. Ap. ub. supr.
, that no one should salute his brother deceitfully and treacherously, as Judas
kissed our Lord when he betrayed him. In the Liturgy of St. Basil, the people are
bid to salute one another, that they might unitedly confess the Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit, the consubstantial and inseparable Trinity; and then they
repeated the Creed; and in that of St. Mark there is a prayer to be said at the
performance of this Ceremony; wherein 'They desire God to look down on his
Church, and to bestow on them his Love, and his Assistances, and the Gifts of
the Holy Ghost, that with a pure Heart, and a good Conscience, they may salute
one another with the Holy Kiss, not in Hypocrisy, but in purity and innocence,
in one Spirit, in the bond of peace, and of Love, that they might become one
Body and one Spirit in one Faith, and one hope of their calling, that at last
they might all be partakers of the Divine and infinite Love o-Christ Jesus.

Then in Cyril. ub. supr.
the Church of Jerusalem, the Priest did bid the people lift up their hearts,
and they answered, We lift them up unto the Lord; the Priest rejoined, Let us
give thanks unto the Lord: The people answered, It is meet and right so to do;
after which the Church calling upon the whole Creation to praise God, did sing
the Angelical Hymn, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabbath: Which Hymn was
ushered in with this Preface: Liturg. S. Jacobi.
'Let all Flesh keep silence, and stand with fear and trembling; and put off
all worldly and sensual Thoughts, for the King of Kings, the Lord of Lords,
Christ our God is coming forth to be slain, and given for Meat to all his
Faithful Servants; the Quires of Angels go before him, and with them,
Principalities, and Powers, the Cherubim with many Eyes, and the Seraphim with
six Wings, shading their Faces, and singing the Hymn, Hallelujah, Hallelujah,
Hallelujah. Then followed the Prayer of Consecration, and with that the Prayer
for all states of Men, and for the peace of the World, together with the
recital of the Diptychs, which was always closed with the Lord's Prayer.

But in other Churches it was otherwise Constit. li. 2. c. 57. and li. 8. c.
11, 12.
: First the general Prayer for the whole state of mankind for Peace and
Prosperity, and all other Blessings, was said; at the end of which, the Names
of all the Eminent Persons who either had dyed in the Communion of the Church,
or yet lived in it, were recited out of the Ecclesiastical Tables, or Dyptichs,
and then the people were bid to lift up their hearts unto God, etc. Whereupon
the Bishop making the sign of the Cross, blessed the People, saying, Preserve, O
Lord, thy people and bless thine inheritance, which thou have purchased by the
blood of thy Christ, and have called to be a royal priesthood and an holy
nation. And then the Bishop standing at the Altar, proceeded to the Prayer of
Consecration, which was agreeable to our Savior's Form at the Institution; at
Dion. areop. ub. supr. Basil. de spir. S. cap. 27.
which time the Elements, which were before covered with a fine Linen Cloth
in Imitation of Christ's being so wrapped, when he was laid in his Sepulcher,
were uncovered, that the people might see the Bread broken, and the Wine poured
out.

After the Prayer of Consecration, the Cyril. ub supr.
Priest first heartily said Amen: And after him Just. in Apol. 2. Dion. Alex.
apud Eusebius. li. 7. c. 9. etc.
the people praying that so it might be; and protesting that they believed,
that that Sacrament was the true Body and Blood of Christ: but in the Liturgy
of St. James, when the Words of the Institution were recited, the Deacon first
said Amen; and then acknowledged, That they did believe and confess, that as
often as they did eat that flesh and drink that blood, they did show forth the
Lords Death: To which the people answered, We do show forth thy death, O Lord,
and we do acknowledge thy Resurrection. This being done, the Deacon bid the
people attend to the holy oblation in peace and quietness, and to bow their
heads to their Savior Jesus in honor to his name and institution. Then it was
said, Holy things to holy persons: To which the people answered, There is one
holy, one Lord, one Jesus Christ, blessed for ever, in the glory of God the
Father. Then the people were exhorted to the reception of the holy Mysteries,
the Priest singing with heavenly Melody the words of the Psalmist, Cyril. ubi
sup. Psalm. 34.8.
O taste, and see that the Lord is gracious; to which the Congregation in some
Liturg. S. Jacobi.
Churches, answered, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord.

When the Consecratlon was done, (which probably, if there were many Bishops or
Priests present, they all joined in) the person consecrating said, Liturg. S.
Marc.
As the Heart desires the waterbrooks, so longs my soul after thee, O God:
And then himself received, (in which Action it is observable, by St.
Chrysostom's Liturgy he was obliged to drink three times of the Chalice,
bowing all the while in honor of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost) and
afterward he gave it to the Clergy, if any were present; (the Bishop giving it
to the Priests, the Priests to the Deacons, and the Deacons to the people)
after the Constable. Apost. ji. 8. c. 13.
Clergy, the Monks received, (for they gave them the preference, because they
looked on them as a sort of Ecclesiastical persons, not purely Laymen, tho not
in Orders) and after the Monks, the Deaconesses. Virgins and Widows, then the
Children, then the rest of the Laity in their several Orders; that is, as I
conjecture, first the Men, afterward the Women; Conc. Tolet. 4. c. 17.
the Priests and Deacons communicating at the Altar, the Inferior Clergy in the
Quire, and the people at the Rails without; tho I am well persuaded, that in
the first Ages, the Laity also came up to the Altar, to which they were invited
to draw near in the Fear of God, and with Faith and Charity; and when they
approacht, they were commanded by the Deacon to stand decently, and reverently,
in the fear of God, and with contrition of heart, and to receive modestly and
piously, behaving themselves as those who approacht the presence of a King. And
accordingly they received in a posture of deep Reverence and Adoration (for no
man durst to receive, but he adored) and while the Mysteries were distributing,
the Congregation Constable. Apost. ubi sup. Liturg. S. Jacobi, and S. Chrysostom, etc.
sung the 33d Psalm, or as we reckon it, the 34th, I will bless the Lord at all
times, his praise shall be continually in my mouth; but in St. Austins time at
August. Retractat. lib, 2. cap. 11.
Carthage they used to sing the Psalms of David, not only during the
distribution of the Sacrament, but also before the Oblation; I suppose, he
means only those which were suitable to the occasion and mystery.

In Just. M. Apo. log. 2.
Palestine, and in many other places, the Bishop, or Priest, brake the bread,
and gave it into the hands of the Deacons, and they gave it to the People, as
they also distributed the Cup. At Tertul. de Coron. cap. 3.
Carthage, and else where, especially in Africa, the people received both the
Elements from the hands of the Bishop, while at Clem. Alex. Strom. 1.
Alexandria the people were allowed themselves to take the consecrated Bread
from the Patin (tho I think, this was a peculiar custom of that Church, and
lasted but a little while; but generally he who consecrated, gave the Bread,
and the Deacon the Cup. 'In the Cyril. Cat. mist. 5.
Church of Jerusalem, when the Communicants received the bread, they took care
not to spread their hands abroad, or to widen their fingers, but placing their
hands in the form of a Cross, they supported the Right Hand with the Left, and
in the hollow of the Hand received the Body of Christ. This Vid. Chrysostom. to. 5.
p. 519.
holy bread they first put to their Eyes, and then did eat it, being extremely
careful, that no part of it should fall to the ground; thus they received the
bread; and when the cup was to be received, the Cyr. ubi supr. Constable. Ap. li.
8. c. 3. Prosper. in Sentent.
Communicant was forbid to stretch out his Hand, and only advised to bow
himself, and being in the posture of Worship and Adoration, the Wine was poured
into his Mouth, and before he swallowed it, he was obliged to moisten his
Fingers in it, and then to touch his Eyes, his forehead, and the rest of the
Organs of his senses, thereby sanctifying them, and securing them from the
assaults of Satan.

He who Ministered the blessed Sacrament Chrysostom. l. 3 de Sacerd. Aug. Ep. 259.
, carried it in his right hand, and when he gave the Bread, he said Ap. Constable.
l. 8. c. 13.
, The Body of Christ, or Liturg. S. Marc.
the Holy Body; and the Communicant said, Amen. And when he gave the Cup, he
said, The Blood of Christ, the Cup of Life, or the precious Blood of our Lord
God, and Savior, and then also the Communicant answered, Vid. Aug. contr.
Faust. Manich. lib. 12. cap 10.
Amen. But afterward the form Liturg. Greg. Dialog.
was enlarged (as I conjecture by Gregory the Great) The Priest saying; The
Body of our Lord Jesus Christ preserve thee unto Eeernal Life, Amen; To which
the Communicant replied, I will receive the heavenly Bread, and will call upon
the Name of the Lord; and when the Priest delivered the Cup, he used this Form,
The Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ preserve thee unto Eternal Life, Amen; and
the Communicant rejoined, I will receive the Cup of Salvation.

After the Distribution was ended Constable. Ap. ub. Supr.
, the Deacon spoke to the Congregation in these words, Let us who have received
the precious Body and Blood of Christ, give him our Thanks and Praises; to
which end, he did bid them put themselves into an erect posture, and to stand
upright, that both Soul and Body might be intent on the Office, that in the
Prayer, which completed the Sacrifice, they might praise God heartily, and
with a good courage for the Honor and Privilege of partaking of those
Mysteries, and then they were dismissed. The remainder of the Consecrated
Elements was Just. M. Apolog. 2.
, some of it, sent to those who were absent, especially to the Confessors in
Prison; who were every day in expectation of Death; the rest, the faithful, who
had communicated, carried home with them, and Naz. Or. 11. and Or. 19.
that in both kinds, and Tert. ad Vxor. l. 2.
they commonly did eat of this Bread before their ordinary meals; especially,
at their entertainments of Friends; and Bishops usually sent pieces of it, one
to another, as a token of mutual Communion. In after times, in some Churches,
the Communicants did eat what was left, in some they buried, in others they
burnt the remainders; and in other places they gave them to the Schoolboys,
and other Children, who had not communicated. What was left of the Oblations
unconsecrated, found the Ancients the materials of their Love-seasts (tho the
Apostolical L. 8. c. 31.
Constitutions give it to the Clergy) afterward the Bread was given to the
Catechumens, or Penitents, who were speedily to be reconciled; or it was sent
instead of the Sacramental Present abovementioned, by one Bishop to another.

These were the Ancient Methods; and may our good God give this present Age his
Grace, and fill our Hearts with a holy Fear of his Majesty, and a due Reverence
and respect to all his Ordinances, that the Examples of the devout Christians
of the Primitive Ages may incline us to an Imitation of their Piety, Humility,
and other Virtues, till we come to the general Assembly of the firstborn in
Heaven, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

CHAP. XXII. Of the honor done to the Sacrament, by the Ancients.
THE Holy Eucharist being the highest Office of Religion, and the greatest
Privilege of Christians on Earth; the Church has thought fit on all occasions
to testify, what a Reverence ought to be paid it, and what honor is justly
due to it. And therefore took all care to sense, and secure it from any
attempts that might lessen its esteem, or profane its usages; of which I shall
mention the most materal.

For 1. None was permitted to be present at the Celebration, but those who had
right to receive the Mysteries; for tho the Governors of the Church prohibited
no Persons to be present at the Sermon Conc. Carth. 4. c. 84.
, were they Infidels, Jews, or Heretics; yet as soon as the Sermon was done
Constable: Ap. lib. 1. cap. 5, 6.
, the Deacon made a Proclamation, Let no Infidel tarry here; and lest that
warning should not secure the Mysteries from being prostituted, the faithful
People were bid to (...), Chrysostom. adv. Jud.
examine, and take Cognizance one of another, and to look distinctly, that
there were no Stranger among them; the Church having prayed for them already,
That God would convert them to the Truth. When they were dismissed, and Silence
made Id. hom. 2. in 2 Ep. ad Corinth.
, the People were bid to stand decently, and to pray for the Catechumens, (who
were all the while Kneeling, or Prostrate) that God would bring them to Baptism
Constable. App. ub. Sup.
; the People in the mean while praying silently to themselves, and saying, Lord
have mercy; after which the Deacon bad the Catechumens arise, and pray for
themselves, That God would give them an Angel of peace, and that they might be
made perfect Christians; upon which they were dismissed, and went out; then the
Persons, who were under the power of Satan, were dismissed with the Prayer for
the Daemoniac's; and after all Conc. Laodic. c. 18.
, the Penitents, with Imposition of Hands; after which time no one durst stay
in the Church, upon pain of Excommunication, but he who intended to Communicate
(only they permitted (...), Albasp. li. 2. Obs. 25. Allat. de Narthece vet.
Eccles. ss. 24. etc.
one sort of Penitents, whose time of Penance was just expired, to be present
at the Prayers, and to join in the Hymns, tho they forbid them to receive the
Sacrament.) And that no instance of their care might be wanting, there was a
public cry made, See that there be no Catechumens among you, lock to the
Doors; and to this end Constable. Ap h 8. c. 11.
, the Subdeacons were engaged to stand at the Doors, to let out those who had
no right to the Altar, and then to keep them shut, that no one might come in,
or go out, till all the Solemnity was over; and lest this also might not be
sufficient, the Deacons were obliged Dion. Ar. Eccl. Hier. c. 5. Chrysostom. to. 1.
p. 688, etc.
to take a view of those who approached toward the Altar, that no unworthy
person might partake of the Mysteries; that is, no notorious offender, whose
crime deserved Excommunication. They also never discoursed of this Sacrament
before those who had never received it; or if they did, it was only in a
Mystical manner; the sacred Elements were also kept covered, that no profane
Person might look on them, and that they might by that method inhance the
desires of the unbaptiz'd to fit themselves! by Baptism, to taste and see how
good the Lord is to his servants; and if it happened, Albasp. l. 2. obs. 2.
that any Catechumen came but occasionally to a sight of the Mysteries, they
presently baptized him, and then gave him the Mysteries which he had seen; and
because they understood the fourth Petition of our Lord's Prayer of this holy
and supersubstantial bread, they therefore never used that Prayer in their
Liturgies, till the Communion-service, nor did they ever teach it the
Catechumens, till the Week in which they were to be baptized.

2. So venerable was this Sacrament in the eyes of the Ancients, Conc.
Eliberit. c. 28. Constable. Ap. li. 4. c. 8. Conc. Carth. 4. c. 39.
that every man was not allowed to bring his gift to God's Altar, the Church
looking on the debarring men from this Privilege, as a great punishment, and
accounting the Oblation of a profane person, as Deuteronomy. 23.18.
the hire of a whore, or the price of a dog, which were not to be brought into
the house of God, for any vow. Now that this might be regularly done, it was
the custom for all persons before the beginning of the Service, to bring their
offerings into the Church-Treasury, together with their Names, as I conjecture,
and according to their Virtues or Demerits, their Sacrifices were either
accepted or rejected; and so courageous were the Clergy in this case, that they
sometimes refused the Oblations of the Emperor himself; for when Greg. Naz.
Orat. 20. in land. Basil.
Valens the great Patron of the Arians made his Offering at Caesarea, on the
solemn Festival of Christmas at the Holy Table, as the custom was, no one of
St. Basils Clergy would receive it at his hands; tho we are told, Nieet. Com.
in Naz.
that the Present was no less than Vessels of Silver.

3. That part of the Church where this Sacrament was celebrated, was had in
great veneration; for Conc. Laod. c. 19. Trullan. c. 69.
no man was allowed a place in the Chancel, but the Clergy; who in the greater
Churches of those days were very numerous, so that it was requisite they should
have room allowed them, the better to discharge their ministry
without-disturbance; only in the Churches of the East, the Emperor had the
privilege of a Seat in the Quire, because he was an Ecclesiastical person, or
as Constantine the Great called himself a Bishop in Temporals, by reason of his
Jurisdiction over those who attend at God's Altar.

The surniture also of this part of the Church, after the persecutions were
over, was very rich and august, for the zeal of new converts is generally very
fervent; Ch^ys. to. 2. p. 22 and to. 3. p. 778. Conc. Chalced. act. 10.
many Silver and Gold Vessels, and some set with precious Stones were given for
the use of this Sacrament (and when so given, were always kept neat and clean)
and it was common with the devout Pallad. histor. Lausiac. c. 119.
women, to give their silk Garments to make Altar-cloaths; and sometimes the
Table it self was of Silver, nay, the very floor was beautified, and the Walls
and Pillars, and the Lights hung by silver chains; and to alienate or
prostitute any such things as had been given to God, was looked on as a great
sin; nay, Can Ap. 73. Chrysostom. hom. 11. oper. imperf. in Matthew.
to put them to any common use, was sacriledg.

They also not only gave the most honorable Names to the Sacrament it self (as
the Greeks now call the pieces of consecrated bread (...), Pearls) but they
spoke awfully of all that belonged to it. Hence we read, not only of a holy
Lance, or Knife, of the holy Patin, and Chalice, but Synes in Catastas. p. 303.
of the most holy Basins, out of which the Priests washed before they begun the
Office; and of the most honorable pavement of the House of God; but the Table
or Altar was called the Holy of Holies, the royal and divine table, the
tremendous Altar, the Sepulcher of Christ, and the Tabernacle of his glory,
etc. For these and many the like passages frequently occur in the Writings of
the Ancients; and if a Malefactor fled to this Table it generally proved a
Sanctuary to him, and rescued him from punishment.

At this Table were all the Prayers of the Church offered up to God, to
signify to the world, that they did not expect to be either heard or forgiven,
but upon the account of the sufferings and merits of Christ, who was sacrificed
for the Offenses of the World, and is on that Table represented as slain, to
redeem mankind; for if the Merits of Christ are conveyed in this Sacrament,
what are all our prayers available without his Merits? And because the Priest
is Gods substitute in this Sacrifice, and gives the Seal of Christ's Merits to
the worthy Communicant, the devout Laity, tho of the greatest Quality, when
they met a Bishop or Priest, Vit. Fulgent. c. 29.
bowed their Heads to him for his Blessing, Nyss. to. 2. p. 1022. Chrysostom. to. 5.
p. 539. Cabasil. c. 53.
and kissed his hand that used to hold and distribute the Body and Blood of
Christ: Every person also who approacht this Table, washed, and put on their
best Apparel, on purpose to testify the purity of their minds, the joy of their
hear^s, and their respect to the holy Sacrament.

4. The Ancients looked on the celebration of this Sacrament, as what did
complete all other sacred Offices; and therefore in those best of times they
received every day, because they thought they could not serve God as they
ought, without performing that necessary duty; for they believed, that because
our Blessed Savior having bid his Church do so in remembrance of him, had yet
fixed no time when it should do so, that therefore he intended it for that
reason, as a part of the Religions Worship which ought to be performed as often
as Christians meet to serve God; for the remembrance of a dying Savior and his
last desires made a strong impression upon their minds: And therefore this
Office was added to all the other Offices of Religion; for they never Baptized
any person, but they immediately gave him this other Sacrament also; and when
any were Married, this Ordinance consummated the Union; when they ordained a
Clerk, they carried him up to God's Table, and caused him to eat of his Masters
Bread; they gave it to dying persons, when they visited the sick; and they gave
it to them who were alive, when a Funeral happened.

5. They approacht this Table with the deepest Reverence, and an awful Dread;
they came to Church fasting, thinking it a Presumption to eat any thing before
they had tasted of the Dainties their Savior had provided for them; they
received the Sacred Elements in their right hands, and with a Solemn care,
looking on them as a pledge of Gods Love, and an assurance of Salvation Cyril.
Catech. mystag. 5.
, and they would as willingly have lost a Limb, as let a crum of it fall to the
ground. But above all, they took care to receive in a posture of Adoration, of
Reverence and Humility; it is true, we do not read that they received Kneeling;
for on Sunday, and all the time between Easter and Whitsuntide (and probably on
other Festivals, for the same reason) the Laws of the Church prohibited
Kneeling, so much as at their Prayers, because they were times of rejoicing;
they stood then, as those who were risen with Christ, and who were in
expectance of the joys of Heaven; and they remembered, that this was a
Eucharist, a solemn Thanksgiving (and for that reason they always ended their
Fasts before they Communicated) and an erect posture best fits these ends. And
yet notwithstanding Aug. in Ps. 98. Ch^ys. To. 3. p. 778. (...). To. 5. p. 518.
(...). He also mentions the (...) and (...) of the Communicants. Theodorit.
dial. 2. (...).
all this they adored, when ever they received they stoopt, and bowed with
Reverence and Godly fear, and sometimes fell down and then received; and this
is plain, not only from the passages in the Fathers, cited in the Margin, but
also from the known Story of the Female Macedonian Heretic, who receiving the
Body of our Savior from the hands of St. Chrysostom, is Sozom. l. 8. c. 5.
(...).
said to stoop down, as if she would pray.

6. They anciently carried home some of the Consecrated Elements with them,
Tert. ad Ux. l. 2.
which they did eat before their common Meals, Sanctifying their Meat and Drink
thereby; nay, every common meal was to them a sort of Communion; Vid. Jo.
Frontonis Familia Christiana. p. 8, 9, 10.
for they never durst eat till they had prayed to God for a Blessing; and at
their Tables they refused to admit any excommunicate person, or any Heretic,
much more the profane and profligate, nay, not so much as a Catechumen, unless
upon extraordinary occasion. The Bread and Wine, when so blessed, was looked on as
holy; and they were troubled, if casually either of them fell to the ground;
and as they began their meals with the Sacramental Elements, so they mutually
reconciled themselves to each other before they sat down, and said the Lord's
Prayer (in which the Petitions, Give us this Day our daily Bread, and forgive
us our Trespasses, were very proper to the usage) after which they gave the
kiss of Charity, and signed themselves with the sign of the Cross, and then
begun their meal: and in most Families some one was deputed to read the holy
Scriptures, the hard places of which the Master of the House interpreted: and
when they had done, they thanked God for all his Blessings in some holy Hymn,
and the Master of the Family gave the remainders to the poor: for he acted the
part of a Priest in his own House; and thus they turned the House into a
Church, the Table into an Altar, and the Feast into a Sacrifice; and if at any
time a Stranger came among them (as they durst not shut their doors against any
such) they gave him the preference (especially if a Priest) to begin and end
the prayers.

7. And so much respect did the devouter Christians pay to this Sacrament, Naz.
orat. 10. and or. 19.
that they would not spit on the pavement of the holy place, while they were at
Church, nor turn their backs on the Altar when they lest it. As now among the
Aethiopians, no Man spits the whole day after he has received this Sacrament.
And in the Church of Constantinople, by the advice, and example Phot. Cod. 59.
of St. Chrysostom, they swallowed a little Cake, or Wafer, to prevent
spitting, or vomiting after the reception.

But that which made them tremble when they approached the Holy place, was an
opinion S. Maxim. mystag. Eccles. c. 24.
which they entertained, That the Angels being present, did Write down the
names of all the worthy Communicants, whose behavior they inspected, and whose
names they brought into remembrance before God; for they were fully convinced,
Ambr. de Sacram. li. 1. c. 2. Aug. Ser. 3. in Ps. 33 etc.
that the Angels stood round the Altar, and assisted at the Sacrifice. "For at
that time, says St. To. 7. p. 892.
Chrysostom, the Angels fall down before the Lord, and the Archangels pray,
they lay hold on the occasion, and the Sacrifice that is on God's Altar gives
them assistance; for as men pluck the branches of Olives, and tender them to
Princes, thereby putting them in mind of that mercifulness and compassion that
becomes them: So do the Angels, instead of Branches of Olives, holding up the
Lords Body, befeech God for all mankind, as if they said, We implore thee for
those whom thou did love so dearly, as to give thy Lise for them; and we pour
out our Prayers for them for whom thou were pleased to shed thy Blood; and we
supplicate for those for whose welfare thou did sacrifice thy Body. They also
believed, that as long as they did Communicate, they did enjoy the company of
those blessed Spirits; and that when they were kept from the Lord's Table, they
were under the power of Satan; for Excommunication was a terrible sentence to
them, and the worst of punishments; so great an affliction did they account
that, which is now our choice; being fully persuaded, that he who was shut out
of the Church here, without a deep Repentance, and Absolution, must necessarily
be kept out of the Kingdom of Heaven. And, May God of his great Mercy and
Goodness give his Holy Spirit to all that are called Christians, that they may
put a just value on the Privileges of the Church of God; that they may Honor,
Reverence, and Frequent the Holy Sacrament, which is the Communion of Saints;
and may dread the being justy deprived of those advantages; that we may neither
excommunicate our selves from thy Table, nor deserve the censures of the Church
to drive us from it, but that thy fear may be upon us all the days of our Life,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the abuse of the Sacrament to evil ends.
IT is an Observation confirmed by sad Experience, That the best of things, or
persons, when they degenerate, prove the worst of their kind; and it is also as
sadly confirmed, That the best of enjoyments, when employed to bad ends and
purposes, prove the causes of the greatest mischiefs; and this is demonstrated,
as by many other instances, so by the abuse of the Divine Institution of the
Holy and most Advantageous Sacrament of the Eucharist, to serve the designs of
sensual, ambitious, and covetous men; very great alterations having been made,
both in the Doctrine, and Rites of that Sacrament, from the Primitive
Institution, and Original Practice. Of this Nature, I must confess, there are
some things that seem to me not so fairly defensible in the Centuries that
preceded the Establishment of Popery, such as Aug. op. imperf. adv. Julian l.
3. c. 164.
the making Plasters of the Eucharist to Cure Blindness, or other Diseases;
Id. de C. D. l. 22. c. 8.
the Celebrating of this Sacrament in a private house to expel the Evil Spirits
that haunted it, Nicet. Paphl. Vit. Ignat. Theop. an. 20. Heracl.
the dipping Pens in the Consecrated Wine, when they either Sealed Covenants,
or condemned a notorious Heretic, Ambr. in ob. Satyr. Fratr.
the tying it about the neck as an Amulet, in the time; of Imminent danger;
Hesyc. in Levit. l. 2. c. 8.
the burning, or burying the remainders of the Consecrated Elements, or Evagr.
l. 4. c. 35.
giving them to Schoolboys, and such like persons, who were not present at the
Consecration; with other such usages; but I remember, that those were the days
of Miracles, and Extraordinary men might make use of uncommon methods; and that
it becomes not me to uncover the Nakedness of the Fathers, especially because
at this distance of time few men are capable of understanding the reasons why
they did many things at which we now wonder. And it were to be wished, the same
Apology were so made for the succeeding Ages, wherein strange Opinions, and as
Novel Customs had their Original; for then the reverence due to the mysteries,
degenerated into Superstition and Idolatry, and the Mysteries themselves were
many times applied to unbecoming usages, and on trifling occasions.

For men would not be content to believe that God was really present in the
Sacrament, but they were resolved to study a way how to make him so by a Method
that baffles sense, and contradicts reason; and to this purpose men begun not
to be satisfied with the common Bread, in which the Eucharist was Anciently
Celebrated; the bread that was usually eaten at ordinary meals, was thought
unfit for this sacred use, and therefore unleavened bread and wasers were
introduced, and this perhaps was the practice of the eighth Century, and in two
or three Hundred Years after the notion of Transubstantiation began to be
owned, but in such an Age, which Baronius and other Historians say, was the
shame of the Papacy, when there was neither Learning nor Virtue at Rome, but
the greatest ignorance, and the greatest debauchery imaginable; and with this
Doctrine the half communion was introduced, the people being Sacrilegiously
robbed of the Cup for sear they should in Receiving, spill the Blood of Christ;
after which the Schoolmen first amused themselves, and then their neighbors,
with impertinent inquiries relating to these Mysteries, which made neither
themselves, nor others wiser, or better; and what number of Miracles were then
coined to uphold the new Doctrines, that when reason would not persuade men to
believe, they might be convinced by wonder, and extraordinary apparitions!
People being told, that the Bread by the Prayers Jo. Diac. vit. Greg. l. 2. c.
41.
of St. Gregory the Great, was turned into a piece of Flesh, in view of all the
people; that our Paschas. c. 14. de Corp. Dom.
Savior frequently appeared on the Altar, in the shape of a beautiful Boy;
Vid. Pinelli meditat. 4. p. 126. ad p. 146.
That St. Antony of Padua's Mule worshipped the Host; and that Bees in their Hive
built a Chapel to an Host, which was by the owner put there to increase his
stock. And thus by degrees it grew to be a God, till at last it had a Festival
appointed, called Corpus Christi day, on which it is solemnly prayed to, as at
other times it is bowed down to, and Adored.

And as the Ark of the Govenant was carried before the Camp of the Israelites,
so the Hey. l. Hist. of Reform. p. 70.
Cornish Rebels in Edw. 6 time carried the Consecrated Host under a Canopy with
Crosses, Banners, and other such solemn appendages before them, in hopes
thereby to get a certain Victory; and as the Kings of Persia had their Immortal
Fire carried before them, to is this Sacrament carried before the Pope on
solemn days; and as Anciently men swore by the Name of God, so they now swear
by the Sacrament: and did not Pope Hildebrand confult this Sacrament as as an
Oracle to know what success he should have against the Emperor of Germany; and
when it did not answer expectation, threw it into the Fire? if we may believe
Cardinal Benno: and if he be doubted, there are other Vid Orland. in. Hist.
Soc. Jes. l 12. ss 48. p. 394. and li. 16 ss 22. p 544.
Instances out of more Authentiek, and uncontroverted Authors to prove the
usage: and how often has the Pix been brought out to quench Fires? As was
lately done at V. Daille de obj. Cult. Relig. li. 1. c 10 p. 138 and Con
Saligunst. c 6.
Avenion by the Popes own Legal Governor of that City, when the flames begun to
rage in the Recollects Convent.

And yet many of the practices of some men of that Communion are no way
reconcilable to the notion of the Divinity of the Eucharist: for not to mention
Alan. de. Sacrific. c. 32.
that if but a Hen be sick in the Neighborhoud, you may have a Mass said for
its recovery, it was usually buried with the Corpses of Bishops, whom they
Interred in their Episcopal Robes with a Patin, and Chalice by them, and the
Consecrated Bread on their breast; and this, says the old Bals in Can. 83.
Trullan.
Canonist was done to affright the Devil from Hannting their Tombs: and it was
also given as an Bals. in Can. 61. Trull Conc. Wormat. c. 10. etc.
Ordeal to discern, whether a person were guilty of a crime that could not be
proved, especially to Clergymen, to purge themselves from notorious crimes. It
was also sometimes left as a pawn, or pledge, and so St. Lewis of France pawned
an Host for the pledge of his Ransom to the Sultan of Egypt, as did also
Uladislaus King of Hungary to the Turkish Emperor Amurath, when they made an
Agreement. But beyond all this, men were not only contented to receive this
Sacrament as an Oath of secrecy to conceal Treason, Parricide, Murder, and
such like crimes; but some were so hardy as to attempt the damnable villainy of
poisoning their God to murder the Lords Anointed; so the Naucler. Gener. 42.
p. 991.
Emperor Henry the 7th was dispatched; and so also Pope Malmesb. l. 3. c. 39.
Victor 3d was sent to his Grave; and we are told Lambard's Peramb. of Kent. p.
66.
, that William Archbishop of York being discontent that he could not get the
Preeminence of the Sea of Canterbury, mingled Poison with the Wine of the
Chalice, and so murdered himself. But I should tire my self, and others,
should I multiply quotations; for either these are proofs enough, or a greater
number of witnesses will not serve turn. And,

May the Blessed Jesus, the Governor of his Church, purge it from all dross,
from all unwarrantable opinions, and superstitious practices, that all his
Family may Worship, Serve, Honor, and Humbly Obey him, as we ought to do, till
the number of the Elect be Consummated, when the Sons of God shall be admitted
to sing Eternal Praises to his Majesty in Heaven. Amen, Amen.

The End of the First Part.
PART II.

Containing an Account of the Festivals of the Holy Week.

Lessons, Meditations, Prayers, and Anthems.

(...).

Athenag. legate. pro Christ. p. 5. No Christian can be wicked, unless he be-ly
his profession.

PART II.
The INTRODVCTION.
THE devout Christian being thus fitted to commucate with his Savior; being
instructed how to discern the Lord's Body, and being acquainted with the
advantages which the worthy receiving of it, does bring with it, and with the
Duties preparative to such a receiving; what remains, but that every occasion
of coming before God, and partaking of the Dainties of his Table, be with all
eagerness pursued after, and embraced. Consider therefore, O my Soul, how
should thou long to dwell in the Courts of God, and to serve him in the
Beauties of Holiness? His Name is wonderful, and he is fairer than the Children
of Men; full of Grace are his Lips, for God has blessed him for ever; and in
him also has God blessed the rest of the Sons of Men; him has God anointed
with the Oil of Gladness above his Fellows, consecrating him to be our high
Priest, to make Atonement for the Sins of the World: All his Garments smell of
Myrrh, Aloes, and Cassia, of bitter Scents, that embalm his Crucifixion; for,
when he was nailed to the accursed Tree, then was the Wine mingled with Myrrh,
given him; and when he was to be buried, he was laid in a mixture of Myrrh and
Aloes, to fit his Body for its Sepulcher: And what will thou do, O my Soul, to
express thy gratitude to this thy Redeemer, who is become thy Lord, and thy
God? But worship him, and Adore him, and give Thanks unto him, World without
end. Every day of his Life, was to him a day of Affliction and Suffering, from
his first appearance at Bethlehem, to his being Crucified on Mount Calvary; his
whole Age was one continued Good Friday; and should not every day of my Life be
an Easterday? He dyed daily, and should I not daily remember that Passion, and
celebrate the Praises of that Condescenton, and live to the Glory of that
Mercy? Should I not every day, if I may, be actually concerned in the showing
forth the Lord's Death till he come, or at least intentionally, and in
Preparations? Representing to my mind, my bleeding Savior, and mourning over
those Sins of mine which brought him to so much shame, and so much torture, and
rejoicing in the Salvation which he has wrought out for me? By this means the
subsequent Directions will serve as well for any other Week, as for the Holy
Week; and I shall always be in a readiness to communicate with my Master Jesus;
and blessed are those Servants, whom our Lord, when he comes, shall find so
doing.

The Collect.
HOly and immortal Savior, who did both Dye, and Rise again, that thou
might be Lord both of the Quick and Dead; and did Institute, and in thy
Holy Gospel command thy Church to continue a perpetual memory of that thy
precions Death, and glorious Resurrection, until thy coming again; Send thy
Grace unto me, and to all People, that we may Worship thee, Serve thee, and
Obey thee, as we ought to do; and be thou pleased to give us all things that be
needful, both for our Souls and Bodies: give us this day, and every day, that
heavenly Bread, the Spiritual Manna that comes down from above, and send thy
Holy Spirit into our Hearts, that we may be always in a fit Posture to receive
it; forgive us all our Sins, and preserve us from all Temptations, that we may
live for ever, to ascribe unto thee with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, the
Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever, and for ever. Amen.

PALM-SVNDAY.
Palm Sunday is the day on which our blessed Savior, being determined to
fulfill all that was spoken of him in the Law, and the Prophets, took his last
journey from Galilee to Jerusalem, to complete our Redemption by his
Sufferings, and his Resurrection; the People meeting him at Mount Olivet, with
Branches of Palms, Olives, and other Trees in their Hands (Emblems of his
Meekness, and his Triumphs) crying, Hosannah to the Son of David; blessed is he
that comes in the Name of the Lord: Hosannah in the highest; (...), among the
Greeks, Dominica Palmarum, Florum, atque ramorum, among the Latins.
and from this Original the day has its Name in all Churches; and the
Transactions of this day were so observable, that the Latin Church of the later
Ages turned this, as well as the other Festivals, into Pageantry, dressing up a
representative Savior, and carrying Palms before him, as if they welcomed him
into Jerusalem; and in the Greek Church they make up Branches of Olives, and
Palms into diverse forms, by which they keep up the memory of the Feast: the
Emperor, and the Patriarch (when that Empire was in its Glory) using to give at
this time great Largesses to the common People, which from the day were called
Palms; and now in Muscovy, the Patriarch rides in state, like our Savior, and
is met by the Grand Duke, and all the People, who represent the Jews,
entertaining him; but in To. 5. p. 541.
St. Chrisostome's time, 'the Greeks were better taught, for then the whole
Christian Church had their Processions, and went out to meet their Savior, not
decked with Palms, but adorned with Alms, and Mercifulness, and other Virtues,
with Fastings and Tears, and Prayers, and Watchings, and all sort of holy
deference to their Redeemer.

Aug. Ser. 46. de Verb. Dom. Ambr. Epist. 33. etc.
On this day anciently did the Persons who were to be baptized at Easter, give
in their Names to the Bishop, from which time, till their Baptism, they were
distinguished from the other Catechumens, and called Competentes; and to them
the Bishop (himself, if present, as he was seldom absent from his See at all
this Solemnity; but if absent, the Presbyters) in the Baptistery, expounded the
Creed ( Aug. Scr. 115. Id. de fide, and Symb. c. p. 1.
for the Creed was not in those Ages, read in the first Service, at which the
Catechumens were present) which Creed they were to learn the Week following,
and to give an account of it solemly on Conc. Laod. Can. 46.
Easter-Eve in the Latin-Church; but in the Greek-Church, on Maundy-Thursday;
and now probably were they also taught the Lord's prayer, which no unbaptized
Person was allowed to repeat; for how, says St. Austin, can he call God Father,
who was never regenerate? And lest the Persons to be baptized, should come to
the Laver of Regeneration, filthy, sordid, and sullied with their fastings, and
Lentpenances (at which time they used to cast Ashes on their Heads, and lie on
the bare Ground); on this day they washed the Heads of the Competentes, and from
hence the day was called Isidor. Etymol. li. 6. c. 18. etc.
Capito-Lavium. So careful were the Ancients, that at the time of our blessed
Savior's Resurrection, all things should be gay, and all Persons joyful.

The Epistle. Isa. 62.10, 11, 12.
GO through, go through the Gates, prepare ye the way of the People; cast up, cast up
the Highway, gather out the Stones, lift up a Standard for the People. Behold
the Lord has proclaimed unto the end of the World, say ye to the Daughter of
Zion, Behold thy Salvation comes; behold, his Reward is with him, and his work
before him, and they shall call them the Holy People, the Redeemed of the Lord;
and thou shall be called, Sought out, a City not forsaken.

The Gospel. Matthew. 21.5. etc.
TELL ye the Daughter of Zion, behold thy King comes unto thee, meek and
sitting upon an Ass, and a Colt, the fool of an Ass; and the Disciples went,
and did as Jesus commanded them, and brought the Ass, and the Colt, and put on
them their Clothes, and they set him thereon, and a very great multitude spread
their Garments in the way; others cut down Branches from the Trees, and strawed
them in the way; and the Multitudes that went before, and that followed, cried,
saying, Hosannah to the Son of David, blessed is he that comes in the Name of
the Lord; Hosannah in the highest. And when he was come into Jerusalem, all the
City was moved, saying, Who is this? And the Multitude said, This is Jesus the
Prophet of Nazareth of Galilee; and Jesus went into the Temple of God, and cast
out all them that sold and bought in the Temple, and overthrew the Tables of
the Money changers, and the seats of them that sold Doves; and said unto them,
It is written, My house shall be called the House of Prayer, but ye have made
it a Den of Theives.

The MEDITATION.
WHen our blessed Savior made his public appearance in the World, every thing
in him was excellent, and extraordinary; the Lineaments of his Face so
beautiful, that he was justly styled the fairest of ten thousand; but the
Qualifications of his Soul were so miraculous, that whatever of great or good
could be observed either in Men or Angels, was but a faint Representation of
his more stupendous Accomplishments; the charms of his Countenance were most
taking, the Eloquence and Reason of his Discourses most persuasive; but the
Holiness of his Conversation was transcendent; insomuch that his Friends loved,
and his very Enemies, tho they hated him, could not but admire him; his
converse was freeand obliging, his pity generous and noble; he accounted that
day lost, wherein he had not done some kindness; and was grieved to send any
man away from him sorrowful. He often neglected to mind himself, but he never
omitted his care of the Poor; and he, who had no house to reside in, no
maintenance but the Alms of well-inclined People, had yet a Bag, and a Treasury
for the indigent; he frequently forgot to eat, but he never forgot to Pray: so
wonderful was his Devotion, so universal his Charity, and so incomparable his
Obedience. His Soul was the Temple of Chastity and Temperance, the seat of
Prudence, the fortress of Courage, the Throne of Justice, the storehouse of
Humanity, the Sanctuary of Meekness; in a word, it was the residence of all
Virtues; and who could converse with such a Savior, and refuse to Love, and
Adore him? But never were his Accomplishments so Illustrious, as when he took
his last journey to Jerusalem, when all the Scenes of Treachery and Cruelty
were to end in the unparalled Murder of the Son of God: then he exerted all
his Vigor, for then the Son of God was to be glorified, and to be manifested to
be the only begotten of the Father, with Power, according to the Spirit of
Holiness by the Resurrection from the Dead; for his sufferings were his own
crown, and the cause of the worlds Salvation Perilous was the attempt, but the
combatant was invincible. His first Essay toward the completing of our
redemption, was on Palm Sunday, on this day of the week he made his entry into
Jerusalem like a Conqueror or rather like the King of the World; from hence I
date the Epoch of his Crucifixion, because on this day among the Jews the
Paschal Lamb was separated from the rest of the Flock, and with much solemnity
brought up to Jerusalem in order to its being Sacrificed; and on this day of
the week also he made a more pompous entry into the Holy City, when attended by
many Saints returning from their Graves to accompany his Resurrection; he made
it appear, that he had spoiled Hell, and saved mankind; both which entries were
made in despite of all the Opposition of the Scribes and Pharisees, his
implacable Enemies. And where, O my Soul, should thou wish thy self a place,
but among the Train of this Omnipotent Victor? Thou have been by him raised
from a sad estate, from being dead in sins and trespasses, and whom should
thou Love, and accompany, but thy best Friend? I will follow him therefore into
the High-priest's Palace, and to the Judgment Seat of Pilate; I will go with
him to Mount Calvary, and there I will dye with him; but first I will view his
Triumphs, and admire his Grandeur; I will first accompany him to the Jewish
Temple, and then to the Christian Altar, that is, to the Cross, on which he was
Offered as a Lamb without spot and blemish.

From the East came the Sun of Righteousness to Jerusalem, (for on that side of
the City lay Bethany) and rejoiced like a Giant to run his course, tho he
foresaw he should suffer a dismal Eclipse; and in this also he might be likened
to the Sun, that he appeared greater, and shone brighter than ordinary, just
before his setting. 'Twas required by the Mosaical Law, that every Male should
appear at Jerusalem three times a Year; nor would Jesus be (tho he was)
exempted from those attendances; for thus it behoved him to fulfill all
righteousness; and in this he was so punctual, that the best account which the
Christian World has, how long our Savior lived, appears from the Evangelists
recording how many Passovers he kept: The past years of his Life he went up to
the House of God in a State of Privacy, but now he resolves to approach the
City like a Prince, that is, like himself: But where is the Ceremony of this
Royal Parade? Where is the Gilt Chariot? Where the Purple Robes? Where are the
Armed Lifeguards, and where the Retinue of Nobles? Is the King of Israel no
better equip't than with an Ass, and that Ass borrowed? Are his most Eminent
Courtiers but Twelve poor Galileans, most of which were Fishermen, and one a
Publican? And has he no other Followers but the Multitude, the Dregs of the
People? It Is no Wonder, that at this sight all the People were moved: Never was
Prince in Exile worse attended? And can this be the King of the Jews? Is this
the Messiah? But remember, O my soul, that all this was Prophecy, and no word
of God is ever unfulfilled; his Poverty was a sign to the Shepherds to know him
by at his Birth; and the same sign is given to the Holy City at his Death;
Zech. 9.9
and she is called upon to rejoice, and to shout for joy, because her King
comes to her, a just Prince, and one that brings Salvation; but he comes in a
state of Humility, riding upon an Ass, and a Colt the Fool of an Ass; and must
God falsify his Word to comply with our impertinent notions of Greatness? And
is not the Condescension an Emblem of his Meekness? He came into the world to
conquer, not by the Sword, but by the Cross; not by fighting, but by dying; and
does not this Ass denote his Contempt of the World, and the lowliness of his
Mind? How mild and good, and how benign he should be, even to his worst
Adversaries? Besides, it was necessary his first coming into the World should
be distinguished from his second coming to Judgment: Nor was this but an
addition to his Honor, that the first Confessors of the Christian Religion,
were not many mighty, not many wise, not the Kings, or the Generals, or the
Philosophers of the World, but a few abject and contemptible men, rude and
unassisted, ill-clad and unlearned; and yet they converted the World: But this
is not all: see something that compleats the Wonder; for could there be a
greater instance of my Blessed Saviors Divinity than this, That
notwithstanding the wariness of the Roman Garrison, who to secure the Imperial
Title to Judea were ready to take Fire upon the notice of a new Kings Arrival
as a Competitor of the Government; notwithstanding all the Spite, Malice, and
Cunning of the Pharisees, Jesus makes this Triumphant Entry, preaches in the
Temple, casts out the Buyers and Sellers, and works many Miracles without any
disturbance; this was certainly the Finger of God, and a Specimen of the Divine
Power. Be not therefore scandalized, O my soul; this poor Savior is the Son of
God, and the Redeemer of the World, and his Poverty is his Churches Patrimony;
and this is the Day which many Kings and Prophets have longed for, but never
could see; join thy self therefore to the Company; and sing thy Hosannahs also
to the Lord of Life and Glory? It Is shameful to slight thy Savior when the
Multitude admires him.

Of the People, some followed Jesus from Bethany, while others met him from
Jerusalem, both joining together in one Company, of which, some went before
him, others followod the Messiah, who rode in the midst of them, under whom
they spread their Garments in they way (as was the Custom of many Nations, when
they entertained their Princes) and strowed Flowers and Leaves (for so were
Monarchs also treated at their Entrance into any City, the People meeting them,
and carrying Laurel and Roses in their Hands, and covering the streets with
them, by which they testified their acknowledgment and submission to their
Sovereigns Authority) and probably the Jews coming immediately from Mount
Olivet, carried Olive-Branches in their hands (as other Nations used to do on
such solemnities) Emblems of Peace and Union between a Prince and his Subjects,
and signs how ready great Persons should be to forgive Injuries; after which
manner they also carried Palms, as a good Omen of Victory: And all this was
done at this time, to denote that the true Messiah, the King of the Jews, was
now come to his own City of Jerusalem; a Meek and a Compassionate Savior, and
ready to triumph over the powers of darkness, and all the other Enemies of
Mankind. To him therefore the people sung their Hosannahs, wishing him all
happiness, and themselves all happy in him: Blessed is he that comes in the
name of the Lord: 'Most acceptable is his Person, most welcome is his Reign and
Kingdom; Hosannah in the highest: Let our Shouts reach Heaven: It Is the God who
dwells there, whom we praise; and may that God, whose Throne is there, make us
eternally happy in this Son of his Love; Peace in Heaven, Glory in the highest,
the Messiah is come, and our Fears are at an end: And who would not join in
Consort to this Heavenly Song? It Is one of the Anthems of the Angels, and some
of the Entertainment which God's Palace will afford us: The joy ought to dilate
my soul, tho it did not swell my Savior; and this also was another argument,
that he was the Son of God, and the Lord of Glory; that this extraordinary
reception did not transport him, but with the same evenness of temper he enjoys
all the various dispensations of Providence, his poverty never deprest him, his
disgraces never ruffled his quiet, nor can honors and pomp make him proud and
insolent.

But that which made no impression on the Son of God, made a very deep one upon
the Pharisees; for envy is a busy and restless Vice; they, when they saw they
could not curb the multitude, would have put our Savior upon checking and
repressing them: for as the covetous man cannot endure: a discourse of
voluntary poverty, nor the lascivious person a lecture of Chastity; as you
raise the passion of the Oppressor, when you preach to him the Laws of Justice,
and inflame the froward and the cruel, when you urge him to forgive Injuries,
and to love his Enemies; so to the proud and ambitious nothing is so killing a
sight as another man's Honor: But Jesus tells them, the meeting was not
procured by craft, nor were the people flattered (much less affrighted) into
the combination; the Oblation of Thanksgiving was voluntary, and an
accomplishment of a prophecy, God now intending out of the mouths of babes and
sucklings to perfect praise (for Virtue makes it self admirers where ever it
goes) and should these people hold their peace, the very stones would cry out,
and who dares check the Holy Spirit, and fight against God? But what need of
all this complaint? have patience, O ye Rulers of the Jews, and the people will
answer your desires, such is the vanity of all worldly fruitions, they, who to
day cry Hosannah, shall in a few days cry louder, Crucify him, Crucify him.
Now they sing, Blessed is the King that comes in the Name of the Lord; and
anon, We have no other King but Caesar. Now they spread their Garments in the
way, but then they shall strip him of his own raiment: Now they bless, and cry,
Master, but then they shall curse and despise him; such is all Secular Pomp and
Humane Applause, it depends upon popular Breatu, which, when it turns like the
Wind, it blows back again, and carries away all that before it brought.

Upon foresight of this sad sinful Change, see the Marks of a deep Sorrow on
the Face of Christ amidst all the Acclamations and other Testimonies of Public
Joy; Jesus (the Prince of Peace) was now at the foot of the Mount of Olives.
(the Emblem of peace) in view of Jerusalem, (whose name implies the Vision of
Peace) and yet he knowing their sins, and foreknowing God's Judgments, could
not forbear Tears, and the terrible denunciation of the Divine Vengeance upon
that City, that was now become the sink of all wickedness; and yet this weeping
was but the Prologue to the mightier grief of his upon the Cross, to which no
sorrow could be compared, when he offered up Prayers and Supplications to his
and our Father, with strong Cries and Tears, and was heard for that his Piety.
Now he mourns only the fate of one City, of one People, but then he wept over
and dyed for the sins of the whole World of Disobedient and desperate Wretches,
who doted upon ruin; all the Honor that could be given him, all the Grandeur
that could surround him, gave him no Pleasure in this Triumphant Entry, while
he saw the end of his designed death frustrated, and a whole Nation obstinate
to be undone, when the Son of God was most willing and most busy to save them:
Every Drop was of more Value than a Pearl, and the Streams that ran down his
Sacred cheeks, more precious than those Waters which bring down Gold from the
neighboring Mountains. And does my Savior weep, and can I dare to indulge to
immoderate Laughter? Can I rejoice when he is covered with Sorrows? Or live in
sensuality, when the chastisement of my peace is upon him? God forbid. Now
therefore, O my Soul, contemplate thy Savior in all his Offices; in his
Triumphs he shows himself a Prince; in his Mourning over Jerusalem he acts the
part of a Priest, whose Office it is to weep over and atone for the sins of the
People; and how does he declare himself to be a Prophet, when he foretells the
precise time of the ruin of the Jewish Nation, before the present Generation
should pass away?

In this disconsolate plight does our endearing Redeemer draw nigh to
Jerusalem; and to let the world know that his Kingdom is not of this world, he
balks the direct way over the Brook Kedron, to the fortress of Zion, and
diverting, passes through the Sheepgate which led to the House of God; he goes
not up to the Palace of the High Priest, nor to the Court of the Roman
Governor, but immediately hastens to the Temple, to teach us to begin every
Action with God, and to love the place where his Honor dwells, more than all
the Tents of ungodliness; to love the Gates of Zion more than all the dwellings
of Jacob; and to assure us, that he who would meet God comfortably, must
enquire for him in his Temple: For where should I seek for thee, O my dear
Savior; where should I find thee, but in thy Father's House? The Temple is thy
Palace, and the Chair of Moses thy Throne, thence thou did baffle the
Doctors, and from thence did thou dispense the Oracles of Heaven to the
world, rescuing the Doctrines of Religion from the Traditions, and the Duties
of it from the evil practices of the Pharisees; and to demonstrate, that thy
complaint of them was not without cause, thence did thou drive the buyers and
sellers, such was thy Zeal for the Habitation of God, when the Lord came to his
Holy Temple; and who could stand before thee, when thou did thus appear like
a Refiner's Fire, and like Fuller's Soap? Thus when Reformation is begun at the
house of God, there is great hope that the rest of the City will easily be
reformed.

At this Visitation, Jesus beheld all Things, not for Curiosity, but to see
what was amiss, and needed amendment; he looked into all the Corners of the
Temple, and diligently attended to all the performances of the Priests in their
several stations, how they kept up the Reputation of Religion, how exactly they
performed all their Service, a fit Employment for the great High Priest, and
Bishop of Souls. But why all this Severity? Why the Buyers and Sellers banished?
Why the Moneychangers Banks overthrown? Were not the Jews obliged to come
Three times a Year to Jerusalem? And when they came, were they to come empty?
Now to bring with them from the remotest parts of Judea, Sheep and Oxen, and
the first fruits of their Cattle, Wine and Oil, with orther Offerings, was
very troublesome; and to dispose of those things in kind in the Country, and
turning them into Money to buy the like at Jerusalem, was not only reasonable,
but agreeable to the Divine Command; and for this purpose had the Jews their
Markets and Banks, Deuteronomy. 14.24, 25.
in or near their Temples, as the Gentiles also had. Now the Practice having
the countenance of a Law, and tending so much to the ease of the People, and to
the Honor of God also, inviting all occasional Comers to buy, and offer
liberal Sacrifices (as an Exchange tempts Customers); it also making provision
for Proselites and strangers, of such Money as was current at Jerusalem, which
only was to be offered to the Lord, and for the poor, that they might borrow,
tho not on Usury, yet on Pawn, so as they might not comeempty handed before the
Lord; the place of this Traffic being only the outer Court of the Temple, into
which were admitted even the Gentiles and Uncircumcised? why was our Masters
Zeal so Fervent? With great Reason doubtless was this done, for all that Jesus
did, was by the guidance of the Infallible Spirit; nor was it without reason
that this Action was called the greatest of our Savior's Miracles, and one of
the most solemn Declarations, that he was the Son of God.

Was it not a great Affront to the Divine Majesty, to make a Butchers stall,
or a Bankers shop, of his House? To alienate it from its right use; and instead
of a house of Prayer, to make it a den of Thieves, of Publicans and
Extortioners, and of the Practicers of the Arts of Fraud, and the Methods of
Cheating? Was it not Irreligious to serve the Ends of Covetousness, more than
the designs of Piety? For these Markets were at first held only near the
Temple; but at last, through the greediness of the Priests were brought into
the first Court of it, to their no little gain, while they managed the Markets,
either by their own servants, or by exacting a Tribute of all those who there
erected stalls, and perhaps selling one and the same sacrifice over and again,
to several Persons: Now what could create in men's minds mean thoughts of
Religion, and depreciate the service of the Almighty, if such Actions did not?
And how could men choose but abhor the Offerings of the Lord? This therefore
incited the Zeal of our dearest Lord; and it was a sad Omen, that the Priests
themselves should in a little time be banished from the House of God, and turned
out of his service, because they had corrupted and huxter'd the Word of God,
and handled it deceitfully. And now, O my soul and my body, are not you the
Temple of God? And ought not the same measure of Zeal to be in me, that was in
my Redeemer? Ought I not to cleanse this Temple, and to expel thence all
brutish Affections, all covetous thoughts, all self love, and love of the
World, all pride and vain glory, and to keep my self undefiled in the World,
fit for the residence of God, and the indwelling of his Holy Spirit; for if a
man defile the Temple of God, shall not God destroy that sinner? I will
therefore devote my self entirely to my Maker: what he loves shall be my
delight, and I will honor him here in his Person, in his Will, in his
Ordinances, in his Habitation, in his Revenue, and in every thing else that
appertains to him, that I may hereafter enjoy him, and live with him for ever,
Amen.

The Collect.
ALmighty and most Merciful Savior, who in the height of thy Glories, wast
mindful of thy Humiliation, and thy sufferings, as thou were contented to be
made the Son of man, tho by an ineffable generation thou were the Son of God;
so new make me thy most unworthy because thy most disobedient Servant; create
in me a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within me, that my soul, whom
thou have redeemed, may always sing thy Praises; and celebrate thy bounty; that
all my faculties, and all my members being consecrated to thee and thy service,
my Zeal may be flaming and unquenchable, my love to thee victorious over all
self love, or love of the world; my love to my neighbors generous and
disinterested, and my constancy and resolutions to be thine unalterable, that I
may preserve thy living Temple free from all Pollation, till I come to the New
Jerusalem, where the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, are the Temple of it,
through, the Merits und Mediation of thee my only Savior and Redeemer, Amen.

The Anthem for Palm Sunday. ETERNITY.
I.
MY Eager Soul's upon the wing,
To view the Court of the Heavenly King.
So passionate it is those Joys to taste and know;
That it disdains all pleasures here below:
For what can this sad world impart,
To ease the longings of my Heart,
Which Heavenly Love has wounded with its Dart?
II.
The Palace Glorious was, where God
Made his perpetual abode,
E're his Omnipotent Word bad all Things be;
The Mighty Undivided Trinity
Resided in Eternal Light
Before the Sun appeared in sight,
Or Time was impt to make his earliest flight.
III.
With Joy the Father then looked on
The Beauties of his only Son
(Miraculous Child, whose great Sire cannot be Above his Son in Age or
Dignity.)
From both these did proceed the Dove,
Which gently up and down did move,
And filled the place with Harmony and Love.
IV.
In this vast space, the Equal THREE,
With mutual Sentiments did agree,
That God the Father should the World create,
The Son redeem, the Spirit regenerate;
Transcendent Fountain, whence did flow,
What infinite Pity could bestow,
To make men Gods, and bring down Heaven below.
V.
No longer can my Soul forbear;
It Sighs, and Wishes to be there;
That it may celebrate the Father's power,
Love Jesus, and the Holy Spirit adore;
For tho my Savior's Presence here,
My Soul to Scepters does prefer,
On Earth she dreads to lose him, there is no fear.
Monday before EASTER.
THE Monday before Easter, was called the Holy and Great Monday, or the second
day of the Paschal-week; and the whole week was called the Great week Chrysostom.
To. 5. p 541, etc.
, not because the days were longer than ordinary, but the blessings were
greater, because of the great and stupendous Blessings not to be comprehended,
or uttered, which God this Week conferred upon the World, in the Death and
Resurrection of our blessed Savior; and because it immediately preceded the
great Festival, as Easter is called, Joh. 19.31. or Bern. Ser. 3. in domin.
Palmar.
because of the four great Days in it, viz. The Procession of Talm-Sunday, the
Institution of the blessed Sacrament on Maundy-Thursday, the Passion on
Good Friday, and the continuance in the Grave on Saturday, which was the Eve to
our blessed Masters Resurrection. The Week also was styled the Passion-week,
the Week of Fastings, dry Diet, and Penances (in which the Devouter sort did
eat nothing but Bread and Salt, and drank nothing but Water) from which
strictness, no day was exempt except the Lords Day, on which it was a great
Crime to Fast Constit. App. l. 5. c. 17. alii.
. Every day of this Week, was a day of business; the whole time from the days
of the Apostles, being spent in Prayers, Watchings, and Mortifications Chrysostom.
ub Sup. and p. 586.
: Tribunals, and Courts of Justice were now shut up; no Pleadings, no Suits of
Law, no public Business, no Execution allowed; nothing but Preparation for the
approaching Solemnity of Easter. Nay, such Veneration was paid to that
Festival, that on this Week all Prisoners, except a few notorious Criminals,
were released, and in the Regions of Darkness (as their Dungeons were) Lights
were set up; the Ambr. Ep. 33. Cod. Theodos. li. 9. Tit. 9. l. 3, 4, etc.
Emperors forgave those who had forfeited their Lives to the Crown; and private
Persons released their Debtors; so that this Week was like the Jubilee, or the
seventh years release among the Jews; for this was the time when God forgave
the World their Sins, and released them from the Prison of Hell; now the War
was ended, that had been so long maintained between God and Man; now was Death
laid in Grave, and Buried; the Curse of the Law taken away, the Empire of the
Devil destroyed, and the hindrances of Reconciliation removed; and therefore
all devout People looked on themselves as bound to do something equivalent in
pardoning those who had offended them in Testimony of their gratitude Orig. l.
1. in Job. Ambr.ub. Supr.
. On this Week, the Church ordered the reading of the Book of Job, in which
History they had a plain example, in the Afflictions of Job, of our Savior's
Sufferings; and in his Restoration, of our Savior's Resurrection; and Chrysostom.
To. 5. page 542.
the subject of the Sermons at this time was the duties of Compassion, of
remitting Injuries, and forgiving Enemies, of which the time afforded them a
signal Example. And now also they used to sing the 146 Psalm, Praise the Lord,
O my Soul; while I live will I praise the Lord, etc. The men, the Women, the
aged Persons, and the Youth, all joining in this excellent Hymnody. And in
Smyth. of the Gr. Chapter p. 221.
the Greek Church to this day, as they read over the Psalter twice every Week
in Lent, so they read it over but once in this Week, ending it on Wednesday;
from which time to the Saturday, acccording to the Ancient Custom, it is wholly
omitted; for, from the day of our Masters apprehension, to the day of his
Resurrection, the mystical Body of Christ sympathized with its Head, was full
of sadness, and covered with the marks of a deep and solemn Sorrow; and
therefore intermitted the Psalms, which for the most part consist of
Thanksgivings and Exultations.

The Epistle. Isa. 42.1.
BEhold my Servant, whom I uphold; mine Elect, in whom my Soul delights. I have
put my Spirit upon him, he shall bring forth Judgment to the Gentiles: he shall
not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his Voice to be heard in the Street. A bruised
Reed shall he not break, and the smoking Flax shall he not quench: he shall
bring forth Judgment unto Truth; he shall not fail, nor be discouraged, till be
have set Judgment in the Earth, and the Isles shall wait for his Law.

The Gospel. Matthew. 21.33.
THere was a certain Householder, which planted a Vineyard, and Hedged it round
about, and dug a Winepress in it, and built a Tower, and let it out to
Husbandmen, and went into a far Country; and when the time of the Fruit drew
near, he sent his Servants to the Husbandmen, that they might receive the
Fruits of it; and the Husbandmen took his Servants, and beat one, and killed
another, and stoned another. Again, he sent other Servants, more than the
first, and they did unto them likewise. But last of all, he sent unto them his
Son, saying, They will reverence my Son; but when the Husbandmen saw the Son,
they said among themselves, This is the Heir, come let us Kill him, and let us
seize on his Inheritance; and they caught him, and cast him out of the
Vineyard, and slew him. When the Lord therefore of the Vineyard comes, what
will he do unto those Husbandmen? He will mis^rably destroy those wicked men,
and will let out his Vineyard unto other Husbandmen, who will render him the
Fruits in their seasons.

The MEDITATION.
GReat was the Wisdom of the Son of God, in adapting his Discourses to the
several Genius's, Capacities, and Needs of his Auditory; and tho he were
sometimes upbraided with his Birth, Education, and want of Learning; yet truth
at other times extorted this Confession from his Enemies, Whence has this man
this Wisdom, and these mighty Works? Nor could the-sharpest Philosopher, or the
most subtle Rabbi express himself with that Acumen and strength of Reason, that
the blessed Jesus often uses. What Stoic could entertain the World with such
Discourses of Self-denial, and Mortifying the Passions, as the Sermon on the
Mount affords us? What Platonist could Treat of Divine Love, as our dying
Savior does in his last Oration before his Passion? What Sophist argue with
that readiness and quick address, as Christ does, when he puzzles the Pharisees
with his Dilemma's about St. John's Baptism, and the Father of the Messiah?
What Scribe ever explained Moses, or interpreted the Prophets so clearly, as
the Son of God did? Nor was the matter only of his Discourses severe and
profound (as his Knowledge was Infinite and Unlimitted) but his very manner of
expressing himself had its peculiar Graces: sometimes his talk was mystical,
and his words a Prophetic Riddle (when there being no present need, the
Interpretation was left to the Spirit, who was to succeed him:) but for the
most part he expresses himself with a becoming plainess, using Similitudes and
Parables, than which there is no more speedy and effectual method to instruct
the Ignorant, who are desirous of Knowledge, but hardly drawn to pursue after
that Wisdom which is not without much Study acquired: for there cannot be a
plainner, because there cannot be a more familiar way of Instruction than this:
a Parable being commonly taken from things that are seen, and so is both a
Precept, and example at once: and by that means not only makes easy
impressions on the understanding, but as easily sways the Affections: and by a
certain secret kind of delight wins a man, before he is aware: but above all,
it insinuates a reproof without disgust, and causes a man insensibly to be the
accuser of his own Vices, while he condemns the like practices in another: and
in this manner are the Jews treated in this Parable: our Savior choosing this
method to induce them to a belief of his Doctrine, and an acknowledgment of
their own Enormties.

Wretched and Infatuated People! whom salvation it self cannot rescue from
ruin! Did God ever deal so graciously with any Nation as with the Jews? From a
mean and small Original (when they were the fewest of all People) they
insensibly multiplied into vast numbers under the hardships of slavery and
tyrannical usage; and when Israel was to be no longer a stranger in Egypt, by
what stupendous wonders did God deliver them? With what a strong Hand, and a
stretched-out Arm did he take them out of the House of Bondage; notwithstanding
the Anger of Pharaoh, and the Opposition of his Subjects? And when in the
Wilderness they went from one Nation to another people, how did he preserve
them, that no man could do them wrong? And how did he reprove, even Kings for
their sake? One Miracle brought them Bread; a second, Flesh from Heaven; a
third, Water out of the Flinty Rock, and their Clothes were kept from wearing
out, by the same extraordinary Power; an Angel was their Guide, and the Lord of
Hosts their King; with what terrible and affrighting sounds was the Law given
on the top of Mount Sinai? With what Wisdom, Eloquence, and Authority was it
explained by the Prophets? Who confirmed it by innumerable signs and wonders,
and foretold the Incarnation of the Son of God, who should fulfill the Law, and
all the Righteousness of it; and yet how obstinate and disobedient, how
untractable and sullen, how stubborn and rebellious is this People? Despising
the Divine Mercies, and denying the Lord who bought them, when he had
condescended to cloth himself with humane Nature, to be born in their Country,
of an Israelitish Stock, and of the Seed of King David, whose Name was by them
had in Everlasting Remembrance.

What could God have done more to his Vineyard, that he ever left undone? He
planted it in a fruitful soil, in a Land flowing with Milk and Honey; he
watered it with the Dew of Heaven, and cheered and warmed it with the Beams of
the Sun of Righteousness, he fenc't and secured it by an extraordinary
Providence, and the Guardianship of Angels ( Michael the Prince of those
Blessed Spirits being deputed to the Tuition) he manured it by the Ministry of
Kings and inspired Men, and by the peculiar Husbandry of his own Darling, and
with infinite Patience waited, till it would answer his Expectations, and pay
him with a Vintage that might recompense his Cost and his Labor; but instead
of Grapes it brought forth Briars and Thistles, it rewarded the pains of those
who cultivated it, with nothing but fruitless labor, which not only filled
them with melancholy Reflections on their unsuccessful Attempts, but cost many
of them their Lives; so cruel and barbarous is ingratitude, that it never is at
rest, till it imbrues its Hands in the Blood of its best Friends and
Benefactors; so inhumane were the Jewish Nation, so bent to the Destruction of
those whose sole business it was to save them from Destruction. It was the
Jewish Synagogue that was Gods Pleasant Plant; the Hedge was the Divine
Protection; the Winepress dug in it, was the Law which he gave them, written
with his own Finger, and which continually urged them with the necessity of
Obedience; the Tower which he erected was the Temple, the Beauty, and Honor,
as well as the safety of Jerusalem, (for nothing but Religion, and the true
Worship of God can make a people safe or happy, and when that is secured, all
other things are bestowed of course); the Husbandmen were the Governors of the
Nation, Spiritual and Civil, who upon a just return of God's Portion to him,
were to have a liberal share of the Fruits for themselves; and who could make a
wiser Provision? Upon this the Lord seems to take a Journey into another
Country, intrusting them with the managery; but lest they should forget, that
they were not Proprietors but only Usetructuaries, he frequently takes occasion
to send to them his Servants the Prophets, to mind them of their Trust and
their Obligations; but Michaiah and Jeremy they beat and imprisoned; Zechary
ths Son of Jehciada they stoned, Isaiah they sawed asunder, another Zechary
they slew between the Temple and the Altar, Ezekiel was murdered at Babylon for
reproving the Idolatry of the Governor of the People, Amos was slain with a
Sword, and John the Baptist beheaded; nay, who among the men of God escaped
their Malice? And what Prince is there, but resents the ill usage of his
Ambassadors, as hainously as if himself were in Person affronted?

But O the depth of the Riches of the Divine Mercy! He is not easily provoked,
nor does he delight in the Death of a sinner, but trys all methods to reclaim
and amend him; after so many messages that failed of success, he resolves to
try the last Experiment; he had one only Son, the Darling of his Bosom, and him
he deputes to this Embassy, believing that if their malice were not desperate
and incurable, they would reverence him who was the Heir to the Vineyard; but
when Jesus came into the World, a Preacher of the glad Tidings of Peace, all
their malice that before vented it self in parcels upon the Prophets,
concentered and fixed in him, tho they knew him to be the Messiah, and the only
begotten of the Father; now they join all their Forces, summon their Councils,
unite their different Factions, and determine to murder him, and then the
Inheritance would be their own; their Dignity, their Reven es, their Authority
secured to themselves and their Descendants for ever: But how empty and
insignificant are the Councils of men, when they oppose themselves to the
Wisdom of God? How easily does the Lord confound the Craft of the Wise, and
bring to naught the Understanding of the Prudent? Their very hopes are baffled,
and they are punished in kind according to the nature of their sin; for did
ever any man fight against Heaven and prosper? instead of securing their Title,
they ruined ^t; and instead of an imaginary greatness, which they expected to
last for ever, the fatal period of their Jurisdiction was fixed; their power
dwindled into the pageantry of Dominion, their supposed indefesable right to
the Divine Favor was swallowed up of Vengeance, and made a prey to an
Indignation that will not be easily atoned; their Patrimony was alienated, the
Title transferred to the Gentile World, in expectation that they would amend
when they saw the Example, and avoid the sins that brought down the Judgments.

It would melt a Tyrant into compassion, and soften the most obdutate Temper,
to view, or but hear of the miseries of that distracted City, whom their own
Iniquities and Gods Vengeance had devoted to ruin: To hear of the destruction
of the Temple; made the Apostles pity the dissolution of that insensible
Fabric, but to view the beautiful Pile all in a flame, the Holy of Holies
polluted, and the Blood of the Priests mingled with the Blood of their
Sacrifices, this would force Tears from a Heart of Flint, as it raised a strong
compassion in the mind of their very Conqueror; and at the same time to see
Mothers cramb their ravenous Stomachs with the Flesh of their own Children, to
see Brethren sheath their Swords in one another Bosoms; nothing but Rapine and
Sacriledg, Civil Dissentions and Murders among men of the same Faith and
Country, till the common Enemy broke in upon them, and involved the several
parties of a great and populous Nation in the same common desolation: These are
Reflections that puzzle Belief, and create Astonishment.

Did ever any of thy words, O my Redeemer, fall to the Ground without
Accomplishment? Did the Truth ever entertain the world with a Lie? 'Twas a
denunciation of the greatest Veracity, as well as of the deepest Horror, That
the present Generation should not pass away till all should be fulfilled, and
that even in similar circumstances: At the Passover they murdered the Messiah,
and at the same time of the Year, (when all the people of Judea were come up to
Jerusalem to worship) did the Roman Armies beleaguer the City. From the Mount
of Olives did the compassionate Jesus exhort them to know and consider, in the
day of their visitation, the things belonging to their peace: And on the same
Mountain, the first Tents of the Roman Army were pitched; the miseries of the
siege, when Famine and the Sword raged in every street, were very terrible; the
Sack of the Town more affrighting, when the Flames spread themselves over all
the beautiful Palaces, the public Buildings, and the Glorious Temple of God,
and blended their ruins with the common rubbish; but the most astonishing
Judgment is, That to this day that infatuated people have lost the privileges
of going up to the House of God, have never since had the face or show of a
Kingdom among them, and are scattered over all the world; and this probably was
a wise Providence, that the Gentiles might dread the like Ingratitude toward
God, which has made the Jews a visible spectacle of the Divine Vengeance to
all Nations, and to all ages. Israel of old was Gods Firstborn and his
Darling; they were a Holy Nation, a Kingdom of Priests, separated from the rest
of the world, the seed of Abraham, the Children of the Promise, and by natural
Birth the kindred of the Messiah; but now they are the off-scowring of the
Earth, and a proverb and byword to all Nations: For who can contemn the Son of
God, and be innocent? Who can disobey his word, neglect to be bettered by his
Sacraments, grieve his Spirit, and refuse to be convinced by his Miracles, and
hope to escape the Anger of God? With what greater reason then should thou
tremble, O my soul, and be in a great Agony, when my conscience is examined? My
fears are not of the loss of temporal privileges, of being disfranchis'd, of
losing my Liberty, my Estate or my Life, but of being cast into Hell, and
ruined for ever: The loss of a worldly Kingdom is no way comparable to the loss
of the Kingdom of God; Crowns and Scepters are but Trifles when put into the
Balance with the Favor of the Almighty; and how much more dreadful are the
inflictions reserved for those who have been blessed with greater privileges,
and yet have requited their Savior with more gross Offenses, and more
notorious Ingratitude? How shall they escape, who have neglected so great
Salvation? And is it not a greater Crime to affront, despise, and reject a
Savior now he is glorified, than it was, when he was a man of sorrow; and
acquainted with Grief? And is it not an addition to the offense, to continue in
the ways of disobedience, when so many examples of God's indignation are
visible to the world, how sharply he resents the contempt of his long
suffering? And am I not convinced, that the same Anger has already seized many
Churches of the Gentiles, that fell so heavy upon Jerusalem? In what a sad and
deplorable condition are the once famous Churches of Carthage, and the rest of
Africa? How is the once religious Egypt overrun with Mahometanism? And where
are the anciently venerable Seven Churches of Asia? If Antichrist has fixed his
Seat in the Temple of God, who can hear, and does not tremble? And what should
hinder, O my stubborn heart, but that thou should at last relent? Do not
these Examples unriddle thy Doom? and can there be more mercy reserved in store
for thee, than has been shown to those others, who were as much in Covenant
with their Maker, and more justly entitled to his Tuition? If no Church dare
presume on its privileges, no single person ought to think himself secure of
thy Favor, O my God, any longer than he obeys thy Commandments. Teach me
therefore, O my Savior, not to be high minded, but to fear, lest if God spared
not the natural Branches, he may be much less inclined to spare me, whose Title
is worse, and whose Enormities have been more notorious.

The Collect.
O Most Gracious Lord God, who have caused all the Divine Oracles to be written
for thy Churches Learning, and have recorded thy former punishments to affright
the sinners of the present Age from committing the like Offenses, bring to my
remembrance all the sins of my Youth, and enable me to mourn over them with a
sorrow never to be repented of; let thy Mercies and long-suffering lead me to
amendment of Life; and thy denunciations and judgments affright me from
continuing a proselyte to vice and folly, that I may live in awe of thy Power
and Justice, and secure my spiritual Interests with fear and trembling, that
nothing may separate me from the Love and Compassion of my God, through Jesus
Christ our only Lord and Savior, Amen.

Another.
ALmighty and incomprehensible Being, who, tho the Heaven of Heavens cannot
contain the Glory of thy Majesty, art pleased to stoop thy self to the meanest
of condescentions, to bespeak the contrite and humble Spirit for thy
Habitation, soften my obdurate heart, and give me that broken and penitent
frame of mind, which thou will not despise. Nothing is impossible to my
Almighty Savior, for he can raise up children to Abraham of the stones, give
me therefore a thorough sight of my sins, a true fear of thy Judgments, and a
repentance unto life: Teach me to comply with the great exemplar, for if he who
knew no sin, was yet a man of Sorrows, how much more should such a wretch as I,
who am nothing but Pollution, refuse to be comforted, till I have sorrowed to
repentance, and then let me partake of the merits of his Tears and Agonies, of
his Shame and Sufferings: Let thy Love and Condescentions prevail upon me to
make me penitent, but if they prevail not, awaken me by thy Thunders, wound and
affright me, rather than let me continue in this spiritual Lethargy, that tho
my present state be afflicted, my soul may be saved in the day of the Lord,
that I may serve thee with Humility and a true Grief, and offer up my
supplications with strong Cries, and wash thy Altar with my Tears. Every where
do I meet with Encouragements to this Compunction; within me a deplorable Frame
of mind, covered with shame and the Fears of thy Judgments; without me a giddy
world, making haste to Hell; before me an angry Judge, and behind me a dismal
Prison. Sanctify these Considerations unto me, that they may deter me from
being vicious, that I may no longer dare to continue in my Rebellions against
my Maker; that my present confusions may end in eternal Confidence; and I may
see that day with comfort, when they who sow in tears shall reap in joy, and be
made partakers of the Anthems of Angels, and glorified Spirits, through Jesus
Christ our only Mediator and Advocate. Amen.

The Anthem for Monday. The CREATION.
I.
THE Mighty God, long in his Palace dwelt,
Blessed without want of other Things,
E're Time had plumed his Silver Wings,
Or Heaven and Earth the powerful Voice had felt.
For ever happy in themselves alone,
Were the undivided Three and One,
E're sensual Transports or voluptuous Arts were known.
II.
But when the great Prolifick Word went forth,
Then every Thing began to be;
The Light broke from Obscurity:
Light which we use, but do not know its worth:
The spacious Tent of Heaven was smoothly spread,
Like Curtains to the Earths Green Bed.
With most Illustrious Torches richly furnished.
III.
The Waters which before made one great Deep,
And like a deluge did appear,
Floating confusedly every where;
Awed by the Almighty Word, their distance keep,
Part into the Earth's vast hollows did retreat,
While the rest in Heaven fix their seat,
But when the Showers fall, these distant Brethren meet.
IV.
In Heaven was placed the Prince of Day, the Sun,
Adorned with Beams of strongest Light,
While over the dull shades of Night,
The Stars bear rule, and over them the Moon,
Who does not only over the night preside,
But guards the motion of the Tide,
In which the turbulent Whale and all the lesser Fry do glide.
V.
The Earth was in her loveliest Verdure clad,
Her Fruits and Blossoms kindly grew
VVater'd with soft and balmy dew,
The Forests smiled, and every Field was glad:
Anumerous Herd covered this Fertile Space,
The Beasts of a more generous race,
And those that were for burdens made, here found a place.
VI.
In the expanded Air upon the VVing,
The Fowls did range, of which some flew
For shelter, others did pursue,
Some hoarsly sereecht, others did sweetly sing:
In that vast Region, Lightnings first take Fire,
There Winds and Thunders do conspire,
And Comets do forebode when Princes shall expire.
VII.
When all things thus were ordered, God made man,
Whose Ornaments of Soul and mien,
To Heaven declared him to be kin;
At first view all the Creatures round him ran;
Lord of the World was Adam at his birth,
His Territory the whole Earth,
And naught was in his Kingdom heard, but innocent mirth.
VIII.
In Eden did this mighty Prince keep house,
Eden, where every thing was gay,
And all the Year did look like May.
There did he fall in love with Eve his spouse:
But Heavens first blessing straight became a curse,
Of all his Evils, she the source,
Enticing him to fall, who could not fall by Force.
IX.
Thus shorter was deluded Adam's Reign,
Than Persian Kings their Slaves allow,
Whose three days Royalty's a show,
Which ended, the mock Monarch must be slain;
The difference lies in this, the Persian slave,
Unwillingly goes to his Grave,
But man refused to live, when Mercy would him save.
Tuesday before EASTER.
THis Day was called the Holy and great Tuesday, or the third Day of the great
Week; for the more solemn Festivals of the Christian Church, never wanted their
Appendages; they had their Antecedent Fasts; as Advent was to Christmas, and
the Lent to Easter (and perhaps this was the Reason why the Rogation week
preceeded Whitsuntide, whereas else the whole fifty Days ought to have been
days of Exultation and rejoicing); as also after the great Festivals, succeeded
the Octaves, which were eight days of Gladness, attendant on the extraordinary
Solemnity, when by the Laws of the Constit. Ap. li. 8. c. 33.
Church, and by the Authority of the V. Scalig de Emend. Temp. p. 730. and
Epiph. Haer. 70.
Empire, servants were exempted from Work, and all People kept Holyday,
according to a very Ancient Practice. Now as the whole forty days of Lent were
a preparation to the Paschal Festival, so the Offices suited to that time of
self-denial were doubled on this last week, that put a period to that Fast; and
that all such devout, and mortified Penitents might not want the ghostly
comfort which was requisite on such an occasion; on this week Cypr. Ep. 56.
the absent Bishops returned to their Churches (whatever had caused their
absence) that they might give the blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist to their
People, and that now Conc. Nic. c. 5.
also they might hold their yearly Synods at the time appointed, that all
disputes might be quieted, all quarrels reconciled, all abuses rectified, and
all hindrances removed that might obstruct a general receipt of the Holy
Communion. And because this Week was called the Passion Week, therefore in the
Ancient Church, as in ours, the History of our Blessed Redeemers sufferings, as
it is recorded by the Four Evangelists, was read to the People, that nothing
relating to that performance on our behalf, might be omitted, and that the
Congregation might be continually put in mind of their obligations to their
Savior.

The Epistle. Romans 8.1.
THere is therefore now no condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus, who
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit; for the law of the Spirit of
life in Christ Jesus has made me free from the law of sin and death; for what
the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his
own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the
flesh; that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not
after the Flesh, but after the Spirit.

The Gospel. John 14, 15.
IF ye love me, keep my Commandments; and I will pray the Father, and he shall
give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever; even the
Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it sees him not,
neither knows him; but ye know him, for he dwells with you, and shall be in
you. I will not leave you comfortless, I will come unto you? yet a little
while, and the world sees me no more, but ye see me; because I live, ye shall
live also.

The MEDITATION.
IT is the great Honor, as well as the Happiness of the Christian World, that
the good things which our Religion promises its Proselites, stoop not to our
senses, but gratify our Reasons, for were Pleasure all the Felicity of a pious
Man, how much better were it to be a Bruit, since the greatest Epicure never
lived so voluptuously as the Beasts that perish; they eat, they sleep, with an
uncontrollable freedom, and whenever their inclinations lead them to it; they
live above the restraint of Laws, and whatever they desire they pursue without
the fear of being countermanded in the Attempt by reason, or scourged
afterward by the lashes of Conscience; they are under no necessity of
Building, Planting, or Sowing; the liberal Provisions which Nature makes them,
are both their Palace and their Feast; they do not foresee dangers, nor make
their lives uneasy by studying to prevent them; nor do they destroy themselves
first with their Fears, before they actually fall into a Mischief that cannot
be avoided: and what man can pretend to such a state of ease and indolency?
When therefore the Son of God makes a Disciple, he calls him to the practice of
self-denial, to the contempt of the World, and all its vanities, to the
mortifying of his Passions, and the abjuration of Pleasures; that is, he bids
him live no longer like a Beast, but like a man, and a Christian; and in lieu
of these impertinencies, he promises him all that is great and good in a better
life; and this was the method he made use of, when he comforted the firstborn
of his Family, his Apostles, upon his departure; And what could be more
eloquent, rational, or p^rswasive, than such a discourse about patience from
him, who had his sufferings in inmediate prospect? For the thoughts of such
persons being fixed on Heaven, they talk of the place, as if they were there
already; their style is more brisk and vigorous than ordinary, and their words
make a deeper impression; such was our Saviors last Sermon, and such the
Epistles of the Apostles, which they wrote in their bonds.

Jesus having discovered Judas, forewarned Peter, and bound the rest of his
Disciples to mutual Love and Charity; at length tells them, that it was the
greatest Argument of the height of passion, and shortness of reasoning, to be
troubled at the adversities of this present life; that he who is strong in
Faith, is above the assault of secular dangers; and whoever is called to
embrace the Gospel, is out of the reach, and beyond the Fears of temporal
afflictions; that when you imprison him, you do not rob him of his Liberty; and
when you kill him, you cannot hurt him; for he that depends on the Crucified
Jesus for Salvation, is secure, that if he suffer with his Master, he shall
reign with him: Such a man is assured, that there is so large a provision made
for him in Heaven, that it baffles all carnal objections, and stifles the very
sense or remembrance of pain; for his Master is ascended to his Father's Right
Hand; not so much to glorify his own Body, as to intercede for us, that we may
be glorified; there he is now our Advocate, and from thence he shall come again
at the last day to be our guide, that where he is, we may be forever with him;
nor can any thing hinder our Union with him to Eternity, who have been united
to him here in the Offices of Piety; our natural corruptions cannot obstruct
the Union, our Savior is the way, nor can our ignorance do us injuries, he is
the Truth; and the Attempts of death it self are vain and of no force, he is
the Life: For as long as the Father and he are one (and so they shall be to
Eternity) all the Power and Wisdom of the Godhead must dwell in him bodily, and
who can resist Omnipotence, or outwit the only Wise God? Especially when it is
considered that his Goodness is commensurate to his Power and his Wisdom, so
that the meanest of his Servants, when he strengthens them, shall be able to do
all things; and the greatest of the Miracles that Christ himself did, shall be
less than what his Followers shall be able to do; nor is it to be doubted how
this can be; Since the Prayers of a good man, recommended in the Name, and upon
the account of the Merits of his Savior, answer all devout ends and purposes
(and for this end probably the afflictions of this life were made the Portion
of Christianity, that if our Duty did not, our needs might bring us often on
our Knees) for God denies nothing, where the love of the Supplicant is bright
and ardent, and makes it self illustrious in a life of Obedience; for upon such
a man the Holy Dove descends, and becomes his Comforter, his Companion and his
Friend; it instructs him when ignorant, it relieves him if oppressed, it
encourages and defends him when timorous, it bestows all that is good, and
protects from all that is evil; this Spirit is the Vicar unto the Bishop of
Souls, it was primarily designed to lead the Church into all Truth, and to
secure it from perishing under the persecutions of its Enemies, and to supply
the want of the bodily Presence of the Redeemer of Mankind; this Spirit was to
unriddle all the Mysteries of Religion, and to reveal what was hid from the
cognizance of Ages, to make those on whom it should descend, the darlings of
God, and to give them Heaven upon Earth in the Enjoyment of Holy Thoughts and a
quiet Mind, which none of the disturbances of this Life shall be able to ruffle
or discompose.

When the Soul is fixed on this Foundation, being put out of the Synagogue
signifies nothing, nor can Death dressed in its most formidable shape, create any
terrors; for our Master has told us, that as in the deepest of his sufferings,
the blessed Angels ministered unto him; so they shall to his obedient followers;
and that their resurrection shall succeed his; for the greatest instances of
mutual love are beneath the indearments that are berween Jesus and a good man:
the Branches are not so firmly joined to the Vine, as the devout Soul is to its
Savior; it is a Member of his Body, and as dear to him as his own Honor: This
Union, neither distance of Place, nor alteration of Circumstances can dissolve:
it is a Union cemented by the Blood of God, and is built on a Foundation that
stands most sure, it is built upon God's Knowledge who are his, and upon his
Servants departing from all iniquity: but it is a Union that is better felt
than described; and no one knows the happiness of it, but he who has
experimented it: As long as this Friendship lasts, the Christian is empowered
to do every thing that may glorify his Master, and benefit himself; and what
himself cannot do by his own Abilities, shall be supplied by the Interests of
his Savior, and procured by his own intense Supplications; but if any man
wilfully dissolve this Concord, like a Branch cut off from the stock, he
withers and dies, and becomes fit for nothing, but to be cast into Eternal
Flames: Now nothing can break this Union, but Vice and Iniquity; for that which
makes the Holy Jesus the only Beloved of his Father, is his Obedience to the
Divine Laws, and his Passionate love to the world, that engaged him to dye for
it; and whoever loves God and his Neighbor shall be made Partaker of all his
Favor, and his Heart shall be filled with Joy; and can there be a more cogent
Argument than this to endear Religion to a well inclined mind? To be made the
Friends of God, the Elect and Beloved of the Savior of the World, the Pupils
of the Spirit of Truth and Peace; to have one Comforter to redeem them, and
another to sanctify them; and to have the Honor of being God's Ambassadors,
and the Witnesses of Religion to an Infidel, Debauched, and Superstitious
World; for let Men and Devils combine against such Persons, and exert all their
Strength and Cunning to ruin them; they suffer no more than what their Master
has done already; nor can they perish, because they are under the Shadow and
Protection of the Almighty.

Not but that Christianity, like the Author of it, is and always will be
attended with Opposition, and the contrivances of the Kingdom of Darkness to
ruin it; but that man does not deserve the Privileges of the Kingdom of God,
that cannot be a Martyr for it, that cannot patiently suffer an unjust
Excommunication from the Synagogue, and from Life it self, that he may follow
his Savior. It is true, the Doctrine of the Cross is uncouth and uneasy, and
Men naturally are unwilling to court Ignominy and Tortures, especially when
their Bigoted Enemies shall by their uncharitable Censures, as much as lies in
them, destroy their Souls, as well as their Reputations and their Lives, by
pretending the Advancement of Religion, and God's Service, when they murder the
Professors of the best Religion that ever was or shall be in the World: But
these are the Terms of the Gospel Covenant, and this is owning our Master; (for
tho a Man may formally call Christ Lord, and yet be shut out of his Kingdom,
yet no man can say so effectually, but by the Holy Ghost); and he who will not
embrace the Hardships, must renounce the Advantages of this Religion: Nor is
this so disconsolate an Estate as Men imagine; for besides that it is better to
be afflicted here, than to be damned for ever, that man cannot be miserable
whom the Holy Ghost comforts; and tho in the World he shall unavoidably meet
with Tribulation, yet he ought to be of good Cheer, because he has Peace in
his Savior, who has by his Death and Resurrection overcome the World, and
emancipated the Sons of God from a state of Slavery, to enstate them into the
Glorious Liberty of the Gospel.

There was no need that the Son of God should have promised these Consolations
to his Apostles, while himself was with them; his own Presence was a sufficient
Blessing, great enough to supply all their wants; but this was a Felicity that
they were not always to enjoy, it being requisite that he should depart to make
way for the descent of the Comforter; who when he should come into the World,
should direct the Apostles in the discharge of their duty, giving them an
entire Account of the Nature, Excellency, and Extent of their Masters Kingdom,
and instruct them in all other things, which during their Masters Life time
their shallow Understandings were capable of comprehending; and who also should
solidly convince all their Enemies, that notwithstanding their Pride and
Confidence, they were in a state of sin, particularly guilty of Unbelief, and
that nothing but Faith in a Savior could render them acceptable to God; that
all their Righteousness, whether by the guidance of the Law, or by the strength
of Nature, was insignificant and of no value; and that nothing could reconcile
the World but the Death of Christ: but if this Holy Spirit could not persuade
men, it should at last assure them that they shall be judged for their
perverseness: for Satan is already condemned, and so shall all his Followers be.

This Spirit our Compassionate Savior engaged to bestow on his Apostles; and
as his Performances always outdo even his own Promises; so he filled them with
Wisdom and Power, and the other Gifts of the Holy Ghost, till they by the
incredible method of suffering and dying, overcame all Prejudices, and triumphed
in the Conquest of the World: And so shall all the other Servants of God, who
sincerely take Jesus for their Master, tho they may not be enabled by the Holy
Ghost to cure the desperately diseased, or to raise the dead; tho they cannot
allay Tempests, or cast out Devils, yet their Triumphs shall be as great, tho
of another Nature; the Blessed Spirit shall empower them to mortify their
Lusts, to resist Temptations, and to raise a Soul, dead in Trespasses and Sins,
to a state of new Life, and holy Performances; and this in Truth is a nobler
Honor, and a more beneficial enjoyment, than Ability to work Wonders; for many
that have called others from their Grave, have themselves dropped into Hell: But
he that has renounced himself, and despised sensualities, shall infallibly
enter into unspeakable Joys: And now what hinders, but that I also should be my
Redeemer's Disciple, and partake of his Grace? Why should any of thy Creatures,
O my God, love thee better than I? Why should any of thy Servants, tho
Prophets, Apostles, or Martyrs, be more conformable to thy Laws than I? Have
thou done more for them than me? Did thou not dye for me also? And have thou
not given me thy Gospel, thy Blood, thy Sacraments, and the Assistance of thy
Spirit? Nay, have thou not done more for me in forgiving me more and greater
sins, than ever they committed? And where there is much forgiven, should there
not also be a proportionable Degree of Love? I will therefore hearken
diligently to these passionate Words of my dying Savior, and I will remember
they are his last Will and Testament; and as I hope to enjoy the Legacies that
he has left me of inward Peace and Heavenly Bliss, so I will comply with his
Desires, and perform all that he enjoins me; and so, tho I here come behind the
Apostles in Age, in Knowledge, in Zeal, and Holiness, yet I shall overtake them
at the Day of the Retribution of all Things, when I shall be enabled to
understand all Mysteries, and to fulfill all Righteousness, and shall share in
the Crowns and Scepters that shall be the largesses of that happy time, which
shall end in Eternity.

The Collect.
HOly Savior, who did despise secular Pomp, and were the greatest Pattern of
Self-denial, I most humbly beg thee, give (...) thy holy Spirit to be my Guide,
my Instructor, and my Comforter, that I may pray by its Assistances, and be
heard for thy Merits; and because nothing on Earth can make me truly and
perfectly happy, I beg nothing more, but that Blessed Donative; I beg nothing
that may gratify my senses, that may please or profit me, but what may most
honor thee, and advance thy Glory, that I may love and serve thee, and obey
thy Commandments now and for evermore. Amen.

The Anthem for Tuesday. The NATIVITY.
I.
FRom the loved Mansions of the Blessed,
Where true Pleasures are possessed;
Where bright Angels always sing
Hallelujahs to their King,
The lovely Gabriel, who does Heaven adorn
The happy Tidings brought, Jesus was Born.
II.
Glorious were the Beams that shone,
Brighter than the Summer Sun;
Midnight had its Curtains drawn,
And the Morn was far from dawn,
When Beams of wondrous Luster did display
Beauties that baffle all the shine of day.
III.
The humble Shepherds stood amazed,
Awful Tremblings had them seized,
While they thought what they had seen,
Only had a Vision been.
Till the Seraphick Herald silence broke,
And in these taking words his message spoke.
IV.
'From you Palace am I sent,
'Built beyond the Firmament,
'Where the Almighty keeps his Court,
'And the indigent resort;
'Thence the obliging Jesus full of Loves,
'Full of Attractives, down to the dull Earth moves.
V.
'Cease your Tremblings and your Fears,
'Ill news Gabriel never bears;
'Haste to Bethlehem, there behold,
'Him the Prophets have foretold;
'What greater Instance can than this be given,
'How dear the ruined world has been to Heaven?
VI.
'To the Sacred Stable go,
'And before the Manger bow,
'The Infant-God adore and praise,
'Wrapt in Swath-bands there he lies,
'These are the marks to know your Savionrby,
'He came from Heaven to illustrate Poverty.
VII.
Lovely Gabriel scarce had done
Charming their attention,
When the humble shepherds viewed
The Seraphick multitude,
Who did themselves round the Archangel post,
The Archangel Captain of that Heavenly Host.
VIII.
Eyes they had that shot loves Darts,
Mien and Garb to captive Hearts,
Faces smooth as infant Light,
Ere the blustering winds durst fight,
Or Clouds durst interpose their obscure Skreen
To keep the useful Rays from being seen.
IX.
Their wings impt with Plumes so gay,
Gold such Luster cannot display,
Nothing could with them compare,
But the bright Curls of their Hair,
Which when the sportive blasts of Air did move,
Nothing could view but what must be in love.
X.
In the Air they gently hung,
There they danced, and there they sung,
'Glory be to God on High,
'Let Peace this sad Earth beautify,
'That men of the Divine Good Will may taste,
'And relish here below, Heavens Antepast.
XI.
Thus they danced, and thus they sung,
And the Sky with the Music rung,
Till the Day Star did appear,
Till the morning beams drew near;
The watchful Cock preclaim'd the Prince of Light,
Then they soared upward, and flew out of sight.
XII.
Happy Angels! your employ,
Brings you Honor, brings you joy;
While on Earth I sigh and grean,
Vastly distant from that Throne.
Grant Jesu, tho my voice be not so sweet,
My Notes in consort mixed with theirs may meet.
Wednesday before EASTER.
THE Ancients called this day the holy and great Wednesday, or the fourth day
of the Passion Week; and among our Forefathers it was called Tenable Wednesday,
on which Day the Consultation was held for our Blessed Savior's Apprehension
Constit. Ap. li. 5. c. 10.
, which being begun on Monday, was continued on Tuesday, but completed on
Wednesday, when they agreed with Judas to betray him (from which Treason of the
Son of Perdition it has its Name in the Latin Church, feria quarta in
proditione Judae): Now because on this Day the Sanhedrim were consulting how to
take the Messiah, the Ancients on the same Day were more than ordinarily
employed how to receive him; the Jews how to treat him unworthily; but the
Church how to give him due Entertainment: And for this cause, by the order of
the Apostles, the Clem. Alex. Strom. 7. Tertul. de jejun. c. 2. Epiph. compend.
c. 21. etc.
Catholic Bishops bound all Christians to a weekly observation of We dnesday
and Friday (on the first of which days our Savior was sold, as he was on the
last Grucified) as Days of Fasting, which they called their Station days;
because as a Sentinel dares not leave his Post till he be relieved, which is
seldom done, till after a Watch of Twelve or Twenty four Hours; so the
Primitive Christians would never at such times move from Church, till all the
Service were over, which was not finished till about Three a Clock in the
Afternoon; which Service was completed with the Reception of the Blessed
Eucharist in all Churches (except at Socrat. l. 5. c. 22. p. 287.
Alexandria, where they had Prayers, and a Sermon, but no Sacrament) and
probably in this Week of extraordinary Mortifications the Fast ended not till
Night. In the present Greek Church on this day, as on all the other days of
Lent, except the Saturdays, Sundays, and the Feast of the Annunciation, which
are Festivals) they do still receive the Sacrament about Three Afternoon, but
they receive it of those Elements that had been V. Bals. and Zon. in Can. 52.
Trullan.
consecrated before on the precedent Holy Day, and which are reserved for that
purpose; they at the same time observing our Blessed Saviors Institution of
imploring the Divine Blessing every day by the Oblation and Merit of this
Christian Sacrifice, and yet preserving the Severity and Solemnity of this
Christian Fast.

The Epistle. 2 Pet. 1.16.
WE have not followed cunningly devised Fables, when we made known unto you the
Power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his
Majesty; for he received from God the Father, Honor and Glory, when there came
such a voice to him from the excellent Glory, This is my beloved Son in whom I
am well pleased; and this Voice which came from Heaven, we heard when we were
with him in the Holy Mount; we have also a more sure Word of Prophecy,
whereunto ye do well that ye take heed.

The Gospel. Luke 9.28.
JESUS took Peter, and James and John, and went up into a Mountain to pray; and
as he prayed, the fashion of his countenance was altered, and his Raiment was
white and glistering, and behold there talked with him two men, which were
Moses and Elias, who appeared in Glory, and spoke of his Decease, which he
should accomplish at Jerusalem; and there came a voice out of a Cloud, saying,
This is my Beloved Son, hear him.

The MEDITATION.
IT was a lovely sight, and to be longed for, with Transports, to see the
Blessed Jesus in his meanest and most contemptible dress; for even then, when
he was covered with out sins and his own sorrows, he was the fairest among men;
but how Glorious, O my Soul, was his Appearance, when he was clothed with the
Robes of Immortality in the Holy Mount? How transcendent were those lively
Representations of the Joys of Heaven, and that foretaste of the Pleasures of
Eternity? Tabor was of it self a delightful place, on the Top of the Mountain
there was a spacious plain, whose fruits were breathed upon and cherished by a
most wholesome Air, and moistened with a perpetual Dew; the Vines and Olives, and
other Herbs and Trees cloathd it with a perpetual Verdure, affording a Prospect
that at once gratified both the sight and the smell, and by them affected the
mind; but never was the Hill so fertile as when the Son of God watered it with
his Tears, and warmed it with his Rays.

To the Mountain our Blessed Master retired when he offered his Sacrifices of
Suplications and Praise; from a Mountain did he preach the glad Tidings of the
Gospel, and on a Mountain was he Transsigured: there he prayed, not that the
highest Hill is nearer to Heaven than the deepest Valley, not that God hears a
Suppliant sooner from a place of Eminence, but because there he was most
sequestered from the World, free from noise and disturbances, and in the fittest
place to converse with God: From a Mountain he preached, not that he coveted
the highest seat in that spacious synagogue, but that he might be the more
easily heard by his Auditory, and that the New Law might be preached from as
eminent a Pulpit as the Old: and to the Mountain he retires to manifest his
Glory, not so much to tell his Disciples, that he who will be made Partaker of
Celestial Honor, must leave this lower world, as to conceal the Miracle to
avoid the imputation of vain glory, and the defires of secular applause: On
Mount Calvary was Jesus Crucified in the View of all the world, but he was
Transfigured on Mount Tabor, in the view of only Three of his Disciples: Thus
every Action of our Masters is beautiful in its season, he had just before
sadded his Disciples with an Account of his own sufferings, and the necessity
that they also must drink of the same bitter Potion; and that he who does not
take up his Cross and follow his Savior, is not worthy to enter into the
Kingdom of God: but lest this Discourse might dishearten them, a few days after
he carries the most eminent of his Domestics with him to the Holy Mountain,
there to confirm their Faith, and strengthen their Resolutions, by assuring
them that he who has once had a view of the Recompense of Reward, can never be
affrighted at the sight of the Cross; to see his afflicted Condition; and to
hear from his own Mouth, whose every Word was Oracle, that his state for the
Future should be more uneasy and deplorable, was a sad suggeston: For how can
this be? That he should save others who could not save himself? That he should
protect his Followers, who could not rescue himself from the shame and the
torture of his scourging, and his Crucifixion: But to see his Face shine like
the Sun in its Glory, and his Garments made whiter than Alabaster, and more
glittering than Gold, this was an irresistible Conviction, that the light
Afflictions that are but for a Moment, are not worthy to be compared with the
Glory that shall be revealed in us.

It was fit that this extraordinary Appearance should be kept secret for a
while, and therefore a place of retirement was the most proper Scene for this
Act; but it was requisite that some Persons should be present to attest the
Miracle, and those no less than Three, that according to the Law, in the Mouth
of Two or Three Witnesses the Truth might be established, when in due time the
World should be acquainted with it: As therefore Moses left the Elders and the
People at the bottom of Sinai, and took Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu with him, when
he went up to speak with God; so did Christ leave the Multitude, and the Nine
behind him, and took Peter, James and John with him to see and hear the Wonders
of his Transfiguration.

And why (if I may presume to ask my unerring Redeemer why) these Three before
the rest of the Apostles? Was not Andrew the first Convert, and the Elder
Brother to Simon? And was not James the Son of Alphaeus as much an Apostle as
James the Son of Zebedee? And was not Simon the Zelot as earnest an Asserter of
his Masters Honor as the Beloved Disciple? I must confess it does not become
humane ignorance to pretend to dive into the secrets of the Divine Wisdom; and
yet perhaps we are allowed to conjecture where we cannot be certain: These
Three Disciples were our Saviors Darlings and his Companions in all
extraordinary Occurrences; when Jairus's Daughter was raised from the Dead,
they only were admitted as Spectators; and when Jesus underwent his bitter
Agony in the Garden, they attended him to the Theater of Sorrows and
Sufferings; and to them he gave peculiar additional Names, which Honor he did
not vouchsafe to the rest of the Twelve: Simon he surnamed Peter, and the two
Sons of Zebedee he called Boanerges, i. e. Sons of Thunder: It was fit to be
revealed to Peter, who was chosen to a Primacy of Order in the College of the
Apostles; to James, because he was the first of all that immediate Family of
our Lord, who was to be Crowned with Martyrdom; and to John, not only because
he was the Beloved Disciple, and dyed a Virgin, but also because he was
designed to live longest of all the Twelve, that he might own and attest the
Miracle after the other Apostles were laid in their Graves, when the early
Heretics should deny the Divinity of our Lord.

In the view of these Persons was Jesus Transfigured; not that the Nature and
Substance of his Body was changed, but his Appearance, his Head was surrounded
with Rays, and his whole Body enlightened with the Beams of his Divinity; for
doubtless his Glory was greater and more conspicuous than that either of Moses
or Elias: But it is to be remembered, that these bright tokens did not signalize
him as soon as he ascended the Hill; but after he had retired himself and
prayed; for every happiness of another Life is a Recompense of Holiness in
this; and could it have been imagined that the Apostles should be drowsy,
while their Master watched unto Prayer? That they should fall asleep while they
were about to enjoy that sight that only was worth seeing on this side Heaven?
but so easily are we inclined to grow lazy and idle, to indulge to sloth and
sensuality, when the best example and the best encouragements incite us to
Devotion; for thus the same men did, when their Master was in his Agony, tho
they had just before received the venerable Sacrament, and knew their Master
was that Night to be betrayed; such is our humane Frailty, and so violent are
our Inclinations to forget our Duty; tho perhaps this sleep was rather an
Ecstasy, the brightness of the Apparition dazzling the Senses, and surprising
the Soul, which in all Prophetic Visions being unable to sustain the
Revelation, is astonished at the fight, and sinks under the Weight of it, as
the Eyes are too weak to gaze on the Sun; and this my Charity for those
Reverend men would incline me to believe: But whatever the sleep was, as soon
as ever the Apostles did awake, (as if it had been a just Punishment for their
sloth and negligence) the blessed Society broke up, and the Holy Men retired;
whom the Apostles knew to be what they were, not so much by their Discourse
(for during that Intercourse they were a sleep) as by their Masters
Condescension, who communicated the Notice to them by a Method best known to
himself.

Moses and Elias doubtless came in their own bodies, they were not represented
by Phantasms, or the intervention of Angels; for it was requisite, that as our
Blessed Savior took upon him our humane Nature in Truth and Reality, and not
in Appearance, so his Humiliation should be attended, not by imaginary, but by
real Witnesses: Moses came from his unknown Grave, and Elias from the place
whither his fiery Chariot had driven him, to accompany Jesus on the Holy Mount,
whence probably they went into Paradise together. Moses the great Lawgiver, and
Elias the representative of the Prophets; the one a Man of the meekest Temper,
the other a Man of the warmest Zeal; to assure the World, that this Jesus was
he of whom Moses and the Prophets spoke, the Lamb of God, and the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah. That neither Elias nor Moses, nor any other of the Ancient
Wondrous Men were deputed to be the Messiah, but only the Lord of Glory, the
Prince of the World, and that he came not to destroy the Law which Moses gave,
and Elias vindicated, but to fulfill it. Moses and Elias were present with
Jesus, two of his most immediate Representatives, with the great Redeemer, both
wrought stupendous Miracles, both fasted forty days and nights, and both
conversed with God in the Mount in the days of their Flesh.

Nor can thou, O my Soul, imagine that these great Persons had this interview
without some Conversation; and it is very remarkable, that they discoursed, not
of the ineffable Union of the Holy Trinity, nor of the Orders of the Holy
Angels; they discoursed not of the Songs of the Saints, nor of the Employment
of the Seraphim, of the hidden Decrees, or the Laws of Providence; but of the
Sufferings of Jesus at Jerusalem, of that very Article of the Christian Faith,
at which the Apostles were so startled: The Holy Redeemer of the World had
resolved to carry the Marks of his sufferings with him, his Scars and his
Wounds, when he ascended into Heaven, and therefore it could not be absurd for
those who dwelt there to discourse of them, for they also were Partakers of the
Benefits of his Crucifixion.

Peter as soon as he did awake, being all heat, had presently forgot the place
of his Nativity and of his Residence; no longer did he think upon his Wife and
Family, his Trade and Interests, the Mountain with such Company was preserable
to all the World in his Opinion; and he thought it better to be there than in
the Palace of Princes; and because he imagined that that Holy Society could not
subsist without some accomodations, he was for having Three Tabernacles built
there, as if glorified bodies needed earthly Conveniences: But his Devotion
made Compensation for his Ignorance, and his Master construed it as it was, a
well-meant mistake; tho what the Apostle wished, the Piety of succeeding Ages
performed: The devout Mother of the Great Constantine, St. Helena, built on
that Mountain a beautiful Temple, to which were added Two Monasteries, and so
the Tabernacles were erected, tho not for the use of the Persons that were
concerned in the Transfiguration, for they needed them not, but for the benefit
of those who were to imitate the meekness and humility of Moses, the
mortifications and zeal of Elias, and the Patience and Obedience of the Holy
Jesus: And this Piety was a greater Honor to the Church, than all that the
Apostle could project could have been to himself, or that Triumvirate of
blessed Persons; for irregular and misguided zeal commonly loses its reward, as
it happened to the Apostle, for immediately upon this Proposal, Moses and Elias
retired to their proper stations, and left our Holy Savior alone: And this
also had its just reason; for presently thereupon came a Voice from Heaven to
confirm the Apostles in the belief of their Master, telling them that he was
the beloved of God, and that they ought to hear and to obey him. Now had not
the Prophets retired, there might have been some ground for mistake; but when
Jesus was alone, the voice out of the Cloud could never deceive them: This was
the most sensible and public demonstration that a Company of men were capable
of; and thus begun our Redeemers Glorification on Earth. This Transaction was
for a while concealed even from our Masters blessed Mother and his brethren;
(to assure us, that it would have been of no advantage to the Holy Virgin to
have born him, had she not believed in him; nor to his Kindred to be allied to
him, had they not been his Disciples; because it is Grace, not Nature that
makes a Christian): but now that Privilege is conferred on all mankind, on us
of the Gentile World, that were without God, and without hope, that we might be
no longer strangers and foreigners, but fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and
of the Household of God. God forbid therefore, that I should desire to know any
thing but Jesus Christ, and him Crucified; it is the Theme of Angels and
Glorified Saints; and how can I distrust such a Savior, who in his deepest
Humiliation was crowned with so much Honor? This Consideration strengthens my
Faith, and secures my hope of Everlasting Life: For why should I despair, while
my Savior is my Friend, and has promised to be so, till I renounce and
forsake him? and what should incline me to be so brutish, since without him
every thing is miserable, and in his Company under his Influences, a Wilderness
is as the Garden of God? And how should I long for his Company in Heaven; for
if while he was here on Earth, the Place where he resided was from his
occasional residence called Holy, as Tabor is called the Holy Mount; what
preference ought I to give in my Opinion, my Esteem, my Love, to the place of
his fixed residence? To see him at his Fathers Right Hand, is a sight would
engage a man to be a Martyr to enjoy it; there are Moses and Elias, and all the
goodly Fellowship of the Prophets; there are Peter, James and John, and all the
Glorious Company of the Apostles; there is the Noble Army of Martyrs and
Confessors; and what should hinder, but that I a poor Sinner may make one of
that blessed Society, and sing the Praises of my Savior with them to Eternity?

The Collect.
HOly Jesus, who by thy Humiliation did not so much debase thy Divinity, as
magnify our humane Nature, and who in thy lowest State and Condition were
always glorious: Grant me thy Grace, that I may sequester my self from the
World, may pray often and fervently, and be made partaker of thy influences;
reveal thy self unto me, O my holy Savior, and incline my heart to accept of
thee, as my Priest, my Prophet, and my King, that I may here enjoy in Hope and
Expectation, in imitation, and wish the society of Saints, and of the King of
Glory: and hereafter may be happy in the Vision of what I now long for, and may
for ever remain with thee my Blessed Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

Another.
O Most Glorious Savior, incomprehensible in thine Essence, incomparable in
thine Attributes, and wonderfully Gracious in thy Dispensations to sinners, how
great is thy goodness, and how great is thy beauty? All my services are a due
Tribute to the most perfect of Beings, and yet thou rewardest them with
infinite happiness: Teach me therefore to love thee for thy Excellencies, to
worship and obey thee for thy Bounty, and to consecrate my powers and
faculties, my strength and time to my Saviors honor; give me that true love
that casts out fear, that tramples upon dangers, and rescues from despair, that
is the fulfilling of the Law, and stronger than death it self, that I may taste
and see how good the Lord is, and that there is no unrighteousness in him: that
the greatest difficulties may not lessen my affection, nor fear nor flattery
separate me from thy favor, but that I may maintain a Holy Communion with
thee, till I come to dwell with thee in the habitations of Love and Peace. Amen.

The Anthem.
The Life of Jesus.
I.
WHen Jesus first appeared abroad,
The Divine Man, the Incarnate God:
In whom both Natures were entwined;
Say, my Soul, was he not designed,
T'eclipse the accomplishments of all mankind?
II.
A Virgin Mother could lie in
Of nothing but what was Divine,
Destined a Miracle from the Womb,
From his warm Cradle to's cold Tomb,
From his first smiles, unto his sorrowful Doom.
III.
The beauteous Youth had not yet seen,
The day that bad him write Thirteen,
When all the Scribes and Doctors gazed,
And the Pharisees stood amazed,
(...) his worst Enemies his acuteness praised.
IV.
Such Wisdom shone in his Discourse,
In all his Arguments such force;
Such the charms of's sprightly face,
So smart his Words, so smooth his Grace:
Moses himself never so became the place.
V.
This Essay past, he humbly staid,
Laboring hard at's Fathers Trade,
Where mindful in whose stead he stood,
With sweat he earned his daily Food,
And learned the obliging art of doing good.
VI.
Till he unto the age attained,
When Priests before the Altar stand:
Then at his Baptism the holy Dove,
In State descended from above,
To crown him with the marks of 's Fathers love.
VII.
Jordan, thy streams that smoothly flow,
Till now were never hallowed so;
Not when Joshua traveled through,
The fertile Canaan to subdue:
Jordan, thy streams are sacramental now.
VIII.
Jesus next to the desert goes,
To combat there the worst of 's Foes,
There Satan used his utmost skill,
To stoop our Savior to his will,
But the loved Jesus is victorious still.
IX.
He to the Infernal Powers gives law,
Nature of him too stands in awe:
At his command water turns wine,
Wild Tempests do their rage resign,
And winds and seas to peaceful calm incline.
X.
He cures the blind, recalls the dead,
Feeds thousands with celestial Bread;
What can oppose his word or will,
Who multplies by Miracle
Five Loaves, till the Fragments do twelve Baskets fill?
XI.
How useful was he, and how good?
Yet never was well understood,
Not when his sacred Lips dispense,
Strong Reason urged with Eloquence,
And every word does Oracle commence.
XII.
Not when his time and strength were spent,
To rescue man from punishment;
Nor when his beauteous Eyes and mien
Powerful incentives should have been,
TO endear him unto all that had him seen.
XIII.
Despised, but useful Virtue, how
Durst profligate man treat thee so?
Must scorn and torture be thy meed?
My soul, it is often thus decreed,
The innocent do for the guilty bleed.
XIV.
Jesus by Judas is betrayed,
Whom Jesus an Apostle made;
Seized by the rabble of the Jews,
Who this great Prince with scorn do use,
While perjured Witnesses the truth abuse.
XV.
Pilate, tho much inured to blood,
Rapine, and fraud, the Jews withstood,
Till tired with noise, and awed with fear,
Lest his ill menage should appear,
Condemns the Saint, and quits the Murderer.
XVI.
Thus this illustrious Sun did rise
With Beams that dazzled weaker eyes;
Did sometimes shine, and sometimes shroud
His bright Rays in a gloomy cloud,
Setting long ere his course was done, in blood.
Thursday before EASTER.
THe Day on which our Blessed Master was apprehended, was justly styled the
great and holy fifth day of the Passion-Week, on which the Savior of the World
having his Crucifixion in view, preached his last most Passionate and Heavenly
Sermon to his Disciples, in which he earnestly recommends them to God's Love,
Protection, and Favor, and as earnestly recommends to them the Love of God,
and of one another: And because this was the Day when the Son of God was seized
on in order to his paying a Ransom for our Offenses, P. Innoc. Ep 1. ad Decent.
c. 7. Ambr. li. 5. Ep. 33. Hier. Epit. Fabiol.
and completing our Redemption, therefore did hte Church on this day solemnly
reconcile Penitents (not all that were under censures; for some were never
admitted to entire Communion, till after Twelve, Fourteen, or Twenty Years
Penance; and some not till they lay on their Deathbeds: But such who having
past through those methods of Repentance which the Church prescribed, were
thought fit to be admitted to the Sacrament of God's Table; whereas now on the
contrary, in the Church of Rome on this day they anathematize and ourse all the
Enemies either of their Faith or Grandeur; and among them not only the
Protestant Heretics, as they call them, but even the King of Spain himself:
And whereas the Holy Eucharist was on the Evening of this Day instituted to be
a lasting Rite in the Christian Church, therefore the Day was styled by way of
Excellency, Aag. Ep. 118.
Caena Domini, the Lord's Supper, the day of mysteries, and the birthday of
the holy Chalice; to denoto, besides the Original Appointment of the Sacrament,
the Mystical Sacrifice that is made on the Altar of our Blessed Savior, who
was the Prince of the Martyrs, the days of whofe sufferings were called their
Birth-days; for the sufferings of our Lord began the Evening of the Thursday,
tho they were not completed till the Evening of the Friday; and for this
reason this day is called the day before the Preparation, and the Evening is
called the Vigil of the Passion, which among Dr. Smyth of the Gr. Chapter p. 42.
the Greeks is wholly spent in reading the History of Christ's sufferings, and
meditating thereon, in severe Fastings, intense Devotion, watching all night in
the Church, and other acts of mortification; no one, unless in case of absolute
necessity, eating or drinking any thing till after Sunset on Friday, others not
till Easter Eve after midnight, Eusebius. hist. li. 2. c. 17.
and this acccording to the Primitive Practice.

It was of old time observed, Chrysostom. to. 5. p. 547.
that those indevout and careless Persons who slighted the Holy Eucharist all
the rest of the Year, would in great numbers on this day, when that Holy
Ordinance was first instituted, come to the Holy Table: And then the Church
contrary to her usual Custom of receiving these My steries in the Morning, did
every Chrysostom. Aug. ub. supra, etc.
where communicate in the Evening, because our great Master at that season
first gave Being to the Sacrament, dispensing with Peoples eating before they
received, which at other times was not allowed: And Aug. Ep. 118.
in some of the African Churches they celebrated the Eucharist twice on this
day, in the morning for the sake of those who intended to dine, and in the
evening for the sake of those who fasted; and in the Ludolph. li. 3. c. 6. alii.
Aethiopick Churches to comply the more exactly with the practice at the
Institution, they use unleavened Bread, whereas all the rest of the Year they
celebrate in Leaven: And the Prateol de Haer. p. 202 Guide. Car. Alph. a Castro,
etc.
Greeks are persuaded that the Sacrament consecrated on Maundy-Thursday, is of
more Virtue and Efficacy than when it is consecrated at any other time; and
therefore they (and the Moscovites in imitation of them) reserve some of the
Sacramental Bread consecrated on this day, to be administered to the sick the
whole Year following; and it is not a little remarkable, that among the
Roman Catholics in Holland (and as Ep. Vossio init. Ep. Ecclesiast: and
Theolog. Ep. 557. p. 807.
Grotius thinks elsewhere time out of mind, until now on this day after Supper,
the Father or Master of the Family (in imitation, I suppose, of the Jewish
Custom, after the eating of the Passover) having read the History of the
Sacrament out of the Gospel, gives to every one of his Family a piece of bread
dipped in Wine.

This day is also called among the High-Germans, Green Thursday; among the
Low-Germans, White Thursaday; and among our Forefathers, Sheer Thursday, as it
was generally, and among all the Western Christians Lavipedium, and
Maundy-Thursday, either because of the Maundy or Alms that were given this day
to the Poor, by Princes, Bishops, and religious Persons; or rather because of
the Mandate or Command, John 13.34. A new Commandment I give unto you, that ye
love one another; (which Passage is the Antiphona for this day in the W^stern
Churches); an Instance of which Love and Condescension our Blessed Savior then
gave, when-he washed his Disciples Feet, (which in the East was the Office of
Servants toward their Masters); and this Custom also is not only continued in
the Smith. p. 40, 41.
Greek Church, and among the other Oriental Christians, but in the Latin Church
also, the Bishop performing this Office to his inferior Clergy, and the
Governor of every Religious House to those of his Fraternity; the custom being
Ancient and Apostolical, V Conc. Aquisgr. c. 20. Aug. Ep. 119. c. 18.
tho the practice as to circumstances were not uniform in all Churches; and on
this day the King of England (anciently in his own Person, now by Proxy, the
Grand Almoner supplying the place) does wash the feet of as many poor men as he
is Years old; to whom also he gives an Alms (as the Bishops do on the same
occasion) which was wont to be called the Anastas. in Adrian. P.P. p. 112.
Paschal Alms, or the Easter Charity.

The Lessons on this day (if I mistake not the Fathers) were the Book of Ambr.
ub. supr.
Jonas; a very proper Portion of Scripture to set forth the Divine Pity, and
inclinations to forgive; and the Chrysostom. ub supr.
History of Judas's Treason, together with the Account of the Institution of
the Blessed Sacrament.

The Epistle. 1 Cor. 10.16.
THE Cup of Blessing, which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of
Christ? The Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of
Christ? for we being many, are one Bread, and one Body, for we are all
Partakers of that one Bread.

The Gospel, out of the Evangelists, and St. Paul.
THE Lord Jesus the same Night in which he was betrayed, after his Disciples
had eaten (the Paschal Lamb) took Bread and when he had given Thanks, and
Blessed it, be brake it, and gave it to them, and said, Take, Eat, This is my
Body which is broken and given for you, This do in remembrance of me; after the
same manner also, when he had supped, he took the Cup, and when he had given
Thanks, he gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it, for this is my Blood of
the New Testament, which is shed for you, and for many for the remission of
sins; This do, as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me: Verily, verily, I
will no more drink of the Fruit of the Vine, until I drink it new with you in
my Father's Kingdom; and they all drank of it: And having sung an Hymn, they
went out to the Mount of Olives.

The MEDITATION.
THE Condition of Mankind in this Life is relative, and made up of dependancies
upon Heaven; nor could Adam in his best Estate subsist without the Benediction
of his Maker; Communion with God is the End of Religion, and was the Employment
of Paradise: nor can any thing else make the World happy: But because God who
is a pure Spirit, cannot converse with men without condescending to treat us
according to our Capacities, therefore Truth, when it visits us, is content to
be dressed in our Habits; when God speaks to us, he entertains us not with his
own Losty and Majestic Expressions, but with modes of Speech, and
Representations of Things, that we are acquainted with. It is true, had we been
made without Flesh and Blood, our Graces had come to us like themselves, not
wrapped up in Emblems and Figures; but because we cannot live without our senses,
and are most affected with what we hear and see, theresore God speaks to our
outward man in visible ministrations, the Almighty Wisdom treating the World
with sensible Objects, the better to lead them to the Contemplation of those
things that are invisible; and this was the cause why Rites and Ceremonies were
instituted in the Church, as marks of Communion, and incentives of Devotion.
Angels, we know, who are not clogged with a load of Flesh and Blood, and whose
dwelling is above, have no need of Sacraments: they who have the Honor of a
clear Vision of the Almighty, and the freedom of a more immediate Converse with
him, need not these remoter Encouragements to Piety (and such also shall be the
Happiness of God's Servants after they dye) but man in his best and most
innocent Estate wanted them; and therefore God planted, and by a particular
sanction constituted the two Trees in Eden to be two Sacraments, outward and
visible sings of the Favor which Adam should partake of, if he performed the
conditions of obedience which God required from him, they representing to him
the state of Wisdom and Felicity, which was reserved for him in Heaven, and
serving to inform him, that to attempt the knowledge of the highest Mysteries to
the prejudice of the Divine Commands, is not the way to Life and Immortality.

To maintain this Union with God, Adam was endued with Original Righteousness,
he had no Appetites to mortify, no Lusts to conquer, no Doubts to be resolved:
his Understanding was clear, and his Will regular; and there was need of
nothing but an external Law to guide him, and the two Trees to be his
instructors: And when Paradise was lost, Adam and his followers still retained
their peculiar Ceremonies; they had their set places, and times of Divine
Worship, and the eldest of the Family was deputed to the Priesthood; till the
generality of Mankind corrupting themselves, the Divine Vengeance swept them
away, drowning the Old World, and sealing a Covenant of Mercy with the New,
ratified by the Sacramental Sign of the Rainbow, that God would no more bring a
Deluge on the Earth. Out of this new Race of Men did God select the Jews; among
whom he was resolved more solemnly, and in an extraordinary manner to fix his
dwelling, the Divine Majesty refiding over the Mercy-Seat. This Seed of Jacob
he singled out to be a Holy Nation, and marked them as his own People by
Circumcision, which was a Character of Genealogical Sanctity; and having united
them into one numerous brotherhood, instituted the Passover, which was a
public Foederal Rite of their Union with their Maker: And to this purpose he
required them to furnish him continually with a Table, whereon should be Bread,
and Salt, and the Flesh of the Morning and Evening Sacrifices, with the
Drink Offerings, which they were obliged to tender him: Not that God did either
need, or actually devour these Oblations, or lived on the steam of the Blood,
or the souls of slain beasts, as the Gentiles imagined; nor that hereby a
contrivance might be made for the easier maintenance of his Priests (this was
the custom of the Temple of Baal) but because eating and drinking together, was
looked on as a Confirmation of Friendship, and one of the strongest engagements
to love and kindness, as to trespass the Laws of Hospitality, to eat of a Man's
bread, and then to lift up his Heel against him, was accounted the Character of
a most profligate and vile person.

But this was only a temporary institution, and to last no longer than till the
true Passover came, till the Lamb of God, who takes away the sins of the World,
should be offered on the Cross; for the Sacraments of the Jews were only
Emblems of the Christian Sacraments, which were ancienter than that Polity: for
the Fathers speak a great truth, when they assert, that the Evangelical
Sacraments began under Melchisedech, who brought out Bread and Wine to Abraham
the Father of the Faithful, in whose Seed all the Nations of the Earth were to
be blessed, to inform us that the Christian institutions as they were to last
longer, so they began sooner than those of the Jews.

And it is very observable, that tho our great Master came into the world to
institute a new Religion, and in pursuance of that design, to abolish all the
typical ceremonies, yet he was pleased to adopt almost all the other Rites of
the Jews, and to make them free of the Christian Church; thus he chose to
complete his most excellent prayer out of the usual forms of the Synagogue: and
as he established the government and jurisdiction which he left behind him,
according to the different Orders of the Priesthood: So especially he ordained,
that as they Baptized their proselites, so all that were admitted into the
Society that he purchased with his Blood, should be washed in the Laver of
Regeneration; and as after the Paschal Lamb was eaten, the Master of the Family
took Bread into his hands, and lifting it up from the Table, that all who were
in the House, might see it, blessed it by calling upon the name of the Lord;
and when that was distributed, took the Cup in like manner: so did our blessed
Savior. And whereas the Jewish Masters did not only allow the people when they
did eat the Passover, to mix, and dilute their rich and generous Wines, thereby
to correct the strength and heat of them, Misch. Beracoth, c. 7.
but would not permit them to bless the Wine, till they had put Water to it;
our Master probably did so in the Eucharist, as all the Ancients believed, and
according to that example practiced; and when the Office was over, he sang the
great Thanksgiving, as their Rubricks required; condescending in all things to
the Jewish customs; that by these methods, he might the more easily induce them
to become Christians, and to correct the scrupulous squeemishness of some of
his followers, who, he knew, would take unjust offense at the conforming the
Ecclesiastical ceremonies to foreign observances.

This was the institution of this tremendous mystery; nor was it only a
temporary institution; for our Savior being willing that his Disciples should
always carry about with them the marks of his love, and always have in
remembrance the benefits of his crucifixion, not only gave this Sacrament to
his Apostles, but enjoined them himself to take Bread, to bless it, break it,
and distribute it, as their Master did, to the worlds end; and obliged also the
Laity by the mouth of St. Paul to take, eat and drink the Body and Blood of
their Savior until his second coming; for as often as they did it, the whole
action was a remembrance of the dying Jesus, a commemoration of his sufferings
for an undone world, and of his sacrificing himself to the Divine justice. The
first Sacrifice that our blessed Master made, was the Eucharist, but that was
but a type of what was to be done the next day, when himself was offered on the
Cross on a new and unheard of Altar. And there ought to have been an Altar
erected, such as the world never knew of, because the Sacrifice was such as was
never before heard of; for himself was the Sacrifice and the Priest too. He was
not therefore to be offered at the Temple, but without the Gates, because to be
numbered among the Transgressors; and the Altar was erected on high, that he
might purge the Air, and drive the Prince of it thence; and that his Blood
streaming from him to the Ground, might wash and cleanse the Earth also,
polluted with the sins of its inhabitants: Had this Sacrifice been offered at
the Temple in Jerusalem, the Jews might have pretended a sole claim to it: but
it was offered without the City, that all the world might partake of its
benefits. This was the primary sacrifice to which we owe our Peace, and our
hopes of Salvation: and this Sacrifice is again slain and offered, when the
Holy Man stands at the Lords Table; for the Eucharist is not only an Emblem of
spiritual refreshments (how much the soul is nourished by Grace and good
resolves) nor is it only a representation of the joys of Heaven (when we shall
feast on the everlasting Supper of the Lamb), but it is truly a Feast, in which
we make a Covenant with God by Sacrifice: it is a Feast upon that Sacrifice,
and that a Sacrifice for sin, a Sacrifice which our Redeemer once offered to
cleanse the world from their sins, and we offer as often as we communicate,
setting that Immaculate Lamb before the Eyes of God, and by that entreating him
to have Mercy upon us: For our Savior commanded us to do, as he did at the
Institution, in remembrance of him; not only to our selves and our Neighbors,
but to God also, as the Ancients, and the most judicious of the Modern Writers
affirm: For tho my Savior was many Hundred Years since Crucified yet he is the
Sacrament represented, as if his Passion commenced at the same time in which
the Holy Office is performed; and what should hinder my receiving the benefits
of his sufferings, tho so long since undergone? For if by reason of my share in
the first Adam's Transgression, notwithstanding the vast distance of Time and
Place, I and every one that is born is infected with Original Sin; what should
hinder, but that the Crucifixion of my Savior, tho transacted so many Ages
past, and in a Country so remote as Judea, should be available to my
Salvation? For as by one man's sin, many were made Offenders, so by the
Obedience of one, many are made Righteous. The Priest therefore offers a
Sacrifice at Gods Altar, a commemoration of that one, full, perfect and entire
Sacrifice, which was once offered on the Cross: And at the same time Jesus our
High Priest offers in Heaven, pleads his VVounds, and the merits of his Death,
and implores the Divine Pardon, and the assistances of Grace for all his
Servants.

And this is as much as the Church can pretend to, while it is Militant: so
under the Old Law, the Priests who had admittance into the Temple, were denied
entrance into the Holy of Holies, thither only the High Priest went once a
Year: but they were not denied the Liberty to direct the smoke of their incense
toward that sacred Place: and their Prayers and their Incense had access where
themselves could not come: And so is it in the Christian Congregration; for
when the Oblation is made, we that are concerned in the Offertory, cannot reach
Heaven, while we are in this state of Imperfection, but our High Priest is
there already, and gives his People liberty thither to address their
supplications, and the sweet Odours of their Devotion: this is the Honor, and
these the Privileges that are purchased for the Church by that Sacrifice, and
secured to it in this Sacrament. Blessed Eucharist! Glorious things are spoken
of it in the Writings of the good men of old; It is called the Supernatural
Bread, the Divine Mysteries, the Sacrifice of Sacrifices, the Honorable, the
Holy, the Heavenly, the unspeakable Gifts, the Sacrament of Sacraments, the
Holy of Holies, the food which gives Life and Salvation, the nourishment which
endears a man to his God, which recovers those that languish, which recals
those who are in error, which raises them that are fallen, and secures to the
dying penitent the rights of Immortality; and by way of eminency it is called
the Sacrament; the blessed and holy Sacrament; when we eat of it, we feed on
the fatness of the Lord's Body; and when we drink of it, we taste the immortal
Blood of our dying Savior.

If Manna were Angels food, this is the Bread of God; and what an honor is it
to receive my Savior? If Joseph's Tomb, tho but a little and narrow place,
when it entertained the Body of our crucified Lord, was by that means made more
venerable and august than the Palace of Kings; and became more glorious by
containing the Son of God, than by being the residence of the Angels, who there
took up their station; how much more excellent is my enjoyment, when I give my
dear Savior a lodging in my heart, and my bosom becomes an habitation for the
Lord of Life? With trembling therefore will I approach the Altar of God, I will
admire the Mystery, and contemplate the circumstances of his Passion (in which
every word that he spoke was a Sermon, for his Cross was his Pulpit, and Mount
Calvary the House of Prayer; for there he prayed for his enemies, and from
thence he preached patience and submission to his Friends) and I will remember
his last actions; for tho in all his discourses he spoke so as never Man spoke
like him; yet he never entertained the world with so eloquent and convincing a
Sermon, as when he went dumb before his persecutors, and opened not his mouth;
when he carried his Cross silently, and bore the marks of his adversaries
cruelty without murmuring: I will remember this my greatest and best Friend; I
will remember his last words and dying injunctions, and I will communicate with
him in the benefits of his Passion till his second appearance to judgment, when
the just shall eat of the Tree of Life in a better Paradise; at that time all
Signs shall cease, all distant methods of conversation shall expire; for in
Heaven there are no Sacraments; so that at the dawning of the day, which the
Lord himself shall enlighten, when no other beams shall be needful but those of
the Sun of Righteousness to make it glorious for ever, then all Types and
symbolical emblems shall be accomplished, then I shall be united to my Jesus,
and personally enjoy that immediate communion, of which these Mysteries are but
shadows and remote representations.

The Collect.
BLessed Lord, who bast so graciously invited me to partake of the merits of
the Death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ conveyed to me in the blessed
Sacrament; grant that I may receive it to the remission of my past sins, and to
the preservation of my Soul against future temptations, to the correcting of
the deformities of my mind, and the rooting out all evil customs out of my
heart; to the inlightening of my understanding, to the strengthening of my
faith, and that I may be able to give a good account at the dreadful seat of
thy judicature; help me to spend this day, and every day in thy fear, and in
the offices of holy Religion; let thy Mercy pardon me, thy Angels guard me, and
thy Goodness lead me to repentance, that I may live and dye thine for Jesus
Christ's sake our only Mediator and Advocate, Amen.

The Anthem.
PETER Mourning.
IN a cold, dark, and melancholy night,
To gloomy shades, which did augment the sright;
Where dismal horrors and confusion dwell,
And ghastly sights, that made the place like Hell;
The trembling Peter tends, and with swollen eyes
Deeply laments his fear and cowardice.
Wretch that I am! thus to deny my Lord!
Fit to be scorned by men, by God abhorred;
Disconsolate and sad, where shall I fly
T'escapte the lightnings of my Master's eye?
That glance, that passionate and killing look,
When Jesus turned his head, me thunder struck.
Sufficient was the warning which was given
By the infallible Oracle of Heaven.
Peter, said my wise Master, boast no more;
The rich in brags are in performance poor.
In vain thou promisest with me to dye,
Thou, e're the morning break wilt me deny
With execrations, and with perjury.
Weak was the attempt, and impotent the hand,
That did my resolutions countermand,
While an impertinent Girl me kept in awe,
Who singly durst before the rabble draw;
How easily, when the criminal does begin,
Does time engage him to grow bold in Sin?
Till what at first is but a single lie,
At the next act commences blasphemy.
Of all my Master's sufferings, tho accursed,
Ill treated, and contemned, this was the worst.
Of only twelve Disciples one betrayed him;
Ten more deserted him, and I denied him,
Leaving the Innocent to dye alone,
While we deserved the crucifixion.
Thus down the stream I went, and on had swom,
Forgetting Jesus and his Martyrdom,
Had not my dearest Savior looked about
When the shrill voice advised me to go out;
The Cock that calls the early Lark to sing
Mattens to the praise of the eternal King,
All cheerfulness does from my Soul expel,
As if his voice had been my Passing Bell.
Had I a full swollen River in each eye,
I Would mourn till I had wept the Fountains dry;
Can man be unconcerned, when God must dye?
Ingratitude is here a Prodigy.
But to assist thee, were but to affront,
The Martyr Jesus does no seconds want.
Conquer by suffering, and when thou art gone,
Carried by brightest Angels to thy Throne,
Poor Peter armed with courage will defy
The next temptation, and thy Martyr dye,
Inverted on his Cross, that there may be
An humble difference betwixt him and thee.
GOOD-FRYDAY.
ON this day was the greatest act of Villainy and injustice committed, that ever
the Sun beheld; for on this day was the Son of God Crucified (and therefore it
is called, the Paschal Solemnity of the Crucifixion, the great and holy
Preparation, the day of the most holy Passion, and the day on which our blessed
Savior suffered); but this day also was the happiest time that ever mankind
could enjoy or long for, because our Redeemers sufferings were the cause of our
freedom from Sin, and Death, and Hell, and therefore we call it Good Friday (of
old, the Great Friday) because it was the day on which the World received all
that was good, all that God could bestow, or the World want, in a dying
Savior, who by his once offering of himself, put an end to the numerous,
diverse and ineffectual Sacrifices required by the old Law. On this day of the
Week Adam was created, clothed with the Image of God, and constituted the Lord
of the World, and on this day too sadly he fell, and was driven out of
Paradise; but on this day also the same Adam and all his Children were
redeemed, and the sorrow for the Fall was out done by the joy of the
Restoration; and yet because the Sins of men were the only cause of our blessed
Masters sufferings, who knew no sin himself, therefore Chrysostom. to. 5. p. 907.
this day was indispensably made a day of Fasting through the whole Christian
Church ( Aug. cont. Epist. Fund. c. 8.
the Manichees being for this, among many other their wicked practices,
condemned, that they observed the day of the Martyrdom (as they called it) of
their Master Manes, but neglected the observation of Good Friday) and tho all
the Lent was properly a Fast before Easter, yet this day, and the Saturday that
followed it, were called the Tert. ^d Vx. l. 2. Cypr. Ep. 53. v. Chrysostom. to. 5.
p. 940.
solemn days before Easter, i.e. the more eminent times of Fasting; upon which
days as our Savior was Crucified, and Buried, so his Apostles (who were then
his Church) were covered with sorrow, and hid themselves for fear of
Persecution (and for this Reason it is called by the Germans Still-Friday, and
by the Saxons Long-Friday, because the Fast was extended beyond the usual hour)
And as our Master lay three days in the Grave, so did the Church think fit to
Fast three days till the time of his Resurrection; for if the Sun then lost its
light, and the Rocks were rent, was there not greater reason, that the Church
of Christ, his Spouse, and his mystical Body should be concerned at his
Crucifixion? And tho the blessed Eucharist were usually given on every day
through the rest of the year, yet on Good Friday, and the Great Saturday it was
probably omitted. From De brat. c. 14.
Tertullian it is plain, that they omitted the Kiss of Peace and Charity, which
was always given at the Sacrament; and Capit. Lothar. l. 4. tit. 46. l. 7. tit.
371.
in after Ages the celebration of the Eucharist was expressly forbidden. And now
in the Romish Durand. Rat. l. 6. c. 72, 77.
Church they ring no Bells, but knock with a Wooden Mallet on a Table-board, to
give notice of the hours of Prayer; they omit several parts of the office,
particularly the Doxology and the Salutation, The Lord be with you; they read
the Lesson of the New Testament in a faint, low voice; and the Priest, who
reads the History of the Passion, does it barefoot; their Altars are hid, for
then there is no Sacrament celebrated; and the Lights are put out, to represent
the obscurity of the night in which our blessed Savior was apprehended, and
the wondrous darkness that attended his Crucifixion (from whence the time is
called Tenebrae, or the days of darkness;) and in the Greek Church, they by an
Image represent our blessed Savior's sufferings, and his taking down from the
Cross; on this day also did the Constit. Apost. l. 5. c. 12, 14.
Primitive Church (as does the Church of England) pray for all Jews, and
Infidels, etc. in imitation of our dear Redeemer who wept over Jerusalem,
(because they knew not the day of their Visitation) and on the Cross prayed for
his enemies.

The observation of the day was very Orig. Cont. Cells. l. 4.
Ancient, and I believe Apostolical. By Eas. Vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 18. p. 534.
Constantine the Great it was commanded to be observed with as much respect as
the Lord's Day: The Aug. Ep. 118.
Fathers call this day, the Saturday following, and Easter day, the Most holy
three days of our Savior's Crucifixion, continuance in the Grave, and
Resurrection, and sometimes the Chrysostom. to. 5. p. 940.
Passover. And in the Conc. Tolet. 4. c. 6, 7.
Western Church on Good Friday the Holy Priests were obliged to Preach to the
people the Mysteries of Christ's sufferings, all people (except Children, old,
and sick persons) being bound under the penalty of being kept from the Lord's
Table at Easter, to tarry at Church, and to Fast, till the Priest toward
evening with a loud voice did pronounce the public Absolution, that by such a
testimony of their true repentance for their sins, and by the assistance of the
Priestly Absolution, the people might be the better fitted to keep the Feast of
Easter, and to eat the Christian Passover. Theod. Lect. lib. 2. Collect.
On this day the Bishop in person, if present, was obliged to Catechize those
who were Candidates for Baptism; and on this day was the Nicene Creed solemnly
recited in defiance to all Heretics; which Creed, till the time of Timotheus
Patriarch of Constantinople, was never used as a part of the Eastern Liturgy,
but on this one day only in the year. In which Church also, according to an
Ancient Constitution, Chrysostom. to. 5. p. 563 Pallad. vid. Chrysostom. p. 82.
they were wont on Good Friday to celebrate all the holy Offices in some
particular Church, and that commonly in some Oratory erected over the Grave of
some eminent Martyr without the Walls of the City, because our blessed Savior
suffered without the Gates. In some of the Churches Sozom. l. 7. c. 19. p. 100.
of Palestine they used to read the Apocryphal Book called the Revelation of
St. Peter; but in other Churches of the East they read out of the Old Testament
the History of Job, the liveliest Type of Christ's Sufferings and Triumphs; and
out of the New, in the Rupert. de Divin. offic. l. 6. c. 6.
Western Churches, the Gospel of St. John. because St. John was an eyewitness
of our blessed Master's Sufferings: but in the African Aug. Ser. 141. de temp.
Church they read St. Matthew's Gospel. Thus did the good men of old spend this
day, calling themselves to an account for their offenses, and humbling
themselves in the sight of God; and is it not, even in this Age, very
requisite, that every Christian should call himself to an account for those
sins which brought the Son of God to so much shame and torture? and should
mourn, and fast, and pray earnestly for that forgiveness which was purchased
thereby?

I take it therefore for granted, that on this day it is requisite to use more
than ordinary severity, because on this day our Plessed Savior was murdered,
and to this purpose, besides the usual Prayers, reading, and Meditations (which
are parts of the preparation for other days) on Good Friday it will be
necessary to subjoin some acts of the deepest Humiliation and Sorrow for sin:
To which purpose every good man ought strictly to examine himself (of which
sort of Examen I have subjoined a Specimen) after which the use of the
Penitential Psalms is very proper, particularly Ps. 38. or 51. with this
Caution; That I understand by my Enemies, not my worldly adversaries (for they
are my Brethren, and them I must bless and pray for) but the Devil, and my own
Lusts; and by bloodguiltiness, etc. my new crucifying my Savior, my murdering
of my own Soul, and being accessory to the destruction of what ever good and
virtuous thoughts the Spirit of God has put in my mind: To which Penitentials
the 22d Ps. will very fitly be added, because it is an entire Prophecy of the
sufferings of the Son of God, and cannot but raise in me a deep sense of his
Sorrows, and the cause of them, when I remember they are some of the last words
which our Blessed Savior spoke before his Death: when we are infallibly
assured that he begun, and probably convinced that he went through the whole
Psalm. The most proper posture to repeat these Psalms in, is Kneeling, or
prostration, because they are solemn and humble acknowledgments of my heinous
Offenses, which have undone my self, and Crucified my Redeemer.

The Examen.
I Am this day to examine my self, and to adjust the Accounts between God and
my own Soul: it is easy to be another man's flatterer, but it is natural to be
my own; and therefore I am resolved impartially to state my affairs, and to
rejoice or mourn proportionable to the condition in which I find my self: And
tho the enquiry be terrible and affrighting, yet I had rather pass this private
scrutiny, than have my Offenses exposed to the view of Men and Angels: It is
the greatest of happiness to be innocent, and never to offend; but the next
instance of Felicity is to be penitent; I am conscious to my self, that I have
been a Criminal, but I am resolved not to continue in my Crimes; I will call my
Transgressions to remembrance, that God may blot them out of his Memory; and I
will judge my self in this World, that I may escape in the day of the Lord: To
this End therefore, that I may put my self into a capacity to obtain God's
Pardon for my sins, whose number is unaccountable, whose burden is
intolerable, and whose remembrance is very grievous to me; and that I may not
approach the tremendous Feast without the Wedding Garment, I thus interrogate
my self with all severity and exactness.

'Say, O my Soul, art thou in God's Favor, or have thou merited thy Saviors
Frowns? What Proficiency have thou made in thy Christian Calling since thy last
accounting with thy Master? What Temptations have thou conquered? What
Passions mortified? What holy Opportunities improved? What Virtues gotten or
increased? How conformable have thou been to Jesus? and what progress have thou
made in the way to Heaven?

If I find any of these beautiful Lineaments in my mind, I will rejoice with
joy unspeakable, and be exceeding glad, as men rejoice when they divide the
spoil: But if I have been an Apostate from my vows, and broken the Covenant of
my Youth: If I have prostituted my Soul to Satan, defacing the Image of God,
and defiling his Holy Temple, let my heart within me mourn, and refuse to be
comforted; let it make lamentation, as one that is grieved for his only Son,
and is in bitterness for his Firstborn; let my head be waters, and mine eyes a
fountain of tears, that I may weep day and night over my sin and my shame, that
I may wash my bed, and water my Couch with my tears, because it is a terrible
thing to fall into the hands of the Living God: For who can dwell with
everlasting burnings, and a consuming Fire?

Now to help forward, and make easy this work, that I may diligently inspect
all my offenses (with all their aggravating circumstances) since my last
renewal of my vows on the day of my last solemn Humiliation, a memorial of all
my actions in Writing is very useful, that what is there recorded may be a help
to my Memory, which is most apt to forget my offenses: Upon the inspection of
which the most regular Examination will be made according to the method of our
Church Catechism, wherein are included the Principles and fundamentals of Faith
and Manners, which I have engaged to observe, and from which if I have swerved,
I cannot without a true Repentance expect God's Pardon and Mercy. Now the
Catechism being an Explanation of the Doctrine of Repentance, Faith, Obedience,
Prayer, and of the due receiving of the Holy Sacraments, the Examination must
be proportionate, and the inquiries strict: What wanderings from the rule of
Repentance? What sins against the Creed, Commandments, Lords Prayer, or the
Sacraments, have I been guilty of, since my last Account?

An Examination according to the rule of Repentance.
HAve I embraced all the Opportunities of Repentance that God has given me?

Have I fasted often, and subdued my flesh by frequent acts of Mortification?

Have I repented sincerely and entirely, and do I intend to continue in a state
of unwearied obedience to Gods Laws?

Have I renounced the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, so as never more to be
reconciled to them?

Have I been troubled as heartily for my Transgressions, as I have been for
worldly Crosses?

Have I not oftener sorrowed for the Punishment of my sins, than for my sins;
and have I not been more concerned that God has been just with me, than that I
have offended him?

How often have I broken my vows, and relapsed into my old sins?

Have I ever seriously considered the danger of such a return to my former
vicious habits?

Do I not tremble, when I reflect, that perhaps this present moment may be the
last which God will allow me either to live or to repent?

To every of which Enquiries, if I find my self guily, I subjoin,

Lord be merciful to me a sinner; accept of my imperfect and weak repentance,
and enable me for the future to perfect holiness in the fear of the Lord.

An Examination according to the Creed.
I Thank thee, And here I mention not any acts of speculative infidelity,
because very few are guilty in that kind; but those who are, may without
particular directions call themselves to account according to this method.
O my God, for thy assistances, that I can say with satisfaction, that I have
hitherto continued in the Profession of this most holy Faith in opposition to
all Heresies, Ancient and Modern: I believe the Trinity in Unity, and the Unity
in Trinity; that the Three Persons are Coessential, Coequal, and Coeternal;
that they made the World, and are willing it should be saved; that the Laws of
Providence are just, and that there is a state of futurity reserved for all
mankind: in this Faith I have hitherto lived, and hope, if there be need, I
shall have the Grace and the Will to be a Martyr for it: But have I not the
greatest reason to condemn my self, and to be heartily troubled that I have not
made this belief of mine subservient to practice? that I have lived as if these
Articles had never been written?

Have I adored that God as I ought, whom I have professed to own?

Have I not neglected to reverence his Majesty, and to dread his Power, whom I
have acknowledged to be Almighty?

Have I not called God Father, when I have refused to obey him?

When I have professed that God made all things, have I seriously reflected upon
what I owe him for my own Being, and wellbeing?

Have I not called Jesus Master, while I have blasphemed his name? and confessed
his Dominion, while I have trampled on his Laws?

Have I not acknowledged his holy and immaculate Incarnation and Nativity,
while my Soul has defiled her self with all sort of impurities?

When I have professed my belief of his Death, Resurrection and Ascension, have I
dyed to my Sins, and risen again to newness of Life, and dwelt in Heaven in
resolution and affection?

Have I lived as if I were persuaded that Jesus would come again to judge both
the quick and dead?

Have I given up my self to the guidance of the Holy Ghost, in whom I believe?

Have I heartily joined in the Services of the holy Catholiek Church, which is
the Communion of Saints? and have I not neglected the opportunities of frequent
Praying, and frequent Communicating?

Have I not lived still, and resolved to continue to live in those Sins, of
which I profess my hope of forgiveness?

And when with my lips I have said, I look for the Resurrection of the Dead,
and the Life of the World to come, have I not in my heart and actions put far
from me the thoughts of that day, and demeaned my self, as if there were no
account to be given of my Stewardship?

Have I not also been guilty of delighting too much in curious and unnecessary
speculations? of making inquiry into the consubstantiality of the Trinity, the
filiation of the Son, and the procession of the holy Spirit, and other such
admirable, but unintelligible Mysteries, while I have slighted the methods of
true Wisdom, neglecting the study, how to unite my self to the Trinity by Faith
and a holy Conversation; how to be conformed to Jesus in newness of Life, and
how to walk according to the dictates of the Spirit of Peace and Truth, that
would lead me into the paths of obedience?

To each of these I subjoyn,

Wretched Sinner, that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death?

Lord have mercy upon me, pardon all these enormities, cure this vanity of
mind, and give me Grace for the future, that with the heart I may believe unto
Righteousness, and with the mouth make confession unto Salvation.

An Examination according to the Commandments.
1. Com. HAve I not broken the first Commandment in thought, word, or deed, by
neglecting to believe in God, to fear him, to love him, and to trust in him as
I ought?

Have I had that high esteem of the Deity which I am bound to have?

Have I given him the obedience of my Soul, and the Reverence of my Body?

Have I patiently and thankfully submitted to all his inflictions?

Have I ever preferred any passion of my own, or any other thing, to my God and
his Service?

2. Com. Have I not broken the second Commandment in thought, word, or deed, by
not worshipping my Maker according to his own prescriptions?

Have I been guilty of Superstition or Idolatry? Have I followed the
imaginations of my own heart, or Sacrilegiously robbed God of any thing
dedicated to his Honor?

3. Com. Have I not broken the third Commandment in thought, word, or deed, by
not making the Divine Honor the end of all my actions? or by not esteeming
places, things, or persons dedicated to Religion?

Have I profaned God's holy Name by Oaths, Cursings, Perjuries, Blasphemies, or
any such crime?

Have I spoken slightly of God, or scoffed at Religion? or by loose and
Atheistical talk, prostituted the mysteries of Christianity, or used the name
of God vainly and to evil ends?

4. Com. Have I not broken the fourth Commandment in thought, word, or deed, by
not abstaining every day from my sins, and every seventh day from my labors?

Have I duly observed the Festivals and Fasts of the Church? and have I set
apart and strictly kept the solemn times of my private humiliation, and
mortifying my Lusts?

Have I behaved my self reverently in God's House? have I prayed fervently, and
with humility, and read the Scriptures awfully, and heard the Word of God
conscientiously, and communicated devoutly?

Have I ever made Religion a pretense for Vice, or neglected to know or do my
duty?

Have I not offended my Neighbor, whether stranger or relative, by encouraging
him to be vicious, either by my example or authority; by my advice or
allurements; or by neglect of reproof and correction?

5. Com. Have I not broken the fifth Commandment in thought, word, or deed, by
refusing to give due honor, maintenance, and other rights to my superiors in
Church or State? have I murmured against their authority, scrupled their just
commands, or exposed their jurisdiction?

Have I contemned the person, age, or injunctions of my natural Parents, not
praying for them, not relieving their wants, not valuing their blessing, not
hearkening to their counsels?

Have I embraced any Heresy or Schism in the Church, or been of any party or
faction in the State?

Have I been unthankful to my Benefactors, or of a morose and rugged demeanor
toward those amongst whom I converse?

6. Com. Have I not broken the sixth Commandment in thought, word, or deed, by
not loving my enemies, by not living peaceably, by harboring malice and anger
in my heart, by using my tongue to speak evil, or by hurting the body of my
neighbor either openly or secretly, either by my own hand or another; by
quarrelling my self, or inciting others to do so?

7. Com. Have I not broken the seventh Commandment in Thought, Word, or Deed,
by unclean desires, obscene discourses, or filthy Songs, by lascivious glances,
or impure Dreams (the result of my waking Thoughts) or by any act of corporal
uncleanness?

Have I indulged to Luxury or Excess, that I might pamper my body, or provoke
my Lusts? Have I been fond of a loose, and immodest Garb, or wanton Company?

8. Com. Have I not broken the Eighth Commandment in thought, word, or deed, by
violence, or fraud, by covetousness, or extortion, by not paying my debts, or
spoiling the goods of my neighbor, by not being just in my dealings, faithful
to my trust, or Charitable to the poor and indigent?

9. Com. Have I not been guilty of the breach of the Ninth Commandment in
thought, word, and deed, by lessening, or blasting any Man's reputation, either
by my self, or my encouraging others to slander him, by harboring and
countenancing tale-bearers, or spreading false news?

Have I not past rash judgment, and contemned the weak and ignorant, and
rejoiced at my Neighbors hurt?

Have I ever refused to testify the truth, or ever given false witness? have I
neglected my own, and busied my self in other men's affairs?

10. Com. Have I not broken the Tenth Commandment in thought, word, or deed, by
being discontent with the station in which God has placed me, by envying the
prosperity of others, by entertaining ambitious thoughts, and being greedy of
honor and preferment?

Have I sought to be great by unlawful means, to the prejudice of my Neighbor,
pursuing either my profit or my pleasure?

And have I not been guilty of sinning against my own Soul? have I not been
possessed with pride and vainglory, and a high conceit of my self, of the gifts
of nature, or the acquisitions of study or industry?

Have I not sought my self, and the praise of men, more than the praise of God?

Have I not been rash and inconsiderate, or negligent of my best interests?
have I not resisted the holy Spirit, and defiled the Temple of God, and spent
my time ill?

Have I not indulged to too much sleep, or been irregular in my diet, apparel,
or recreations, or averse to peace and reconciliation?

To which may be subjoined, if the Examinant be in such a state,

Have I ever broken the bonds of Matrimony, in point of honor, love,
maintenance and advice?

Have I neglected my Children in their Education, or making provisions for
them? have I ever given them a bad example, or other encouragement to be
vicious, or not reproved and punished their faults?

Have I been harsh, cruel, or unjust to my Servants, not instructing them, not
reclaiming them when irregular?

Have I been unjust or false to my Friendship?

Have I omitted my duty in any thing to my superiors, equals and inferiors?

If I find my self guilty, after every general head I subjoyn,

Lord have mercy upon me, pardon my violation of these Laws for the time past,
and for the future incline my heart to keep them to the end.

An Examination according to the Lord's Prayer.
HAve I not either wholly omitted my Prayers, or not been so often at Prayers
as I should? have I not performed them coldly, being often on my knees, but
seldom at my devotion? have I not performed them irreverently, without bodily
humility, or the compunction of my Soul, without Faith, and without Purity?

Have I not defiled my Mind, which was designed a Temple for the Spirit, and a
house of Prayer, by making it a den of Thieves, and the residence of unclean
thoughts and wicked resolutions?

Have I been thankful for the liberal provisions of my most Merciful Father?

Have I fixed my affections on Heaven, where my Father dwells?

Have I glorified the Divine Majesty as I ought, or have I hindered others from
so doing?

Have I not broken the most holy Laws by which his Kingdom is governed?

Have I, with the meekness, sincerity, cheerfulness and constancy of Angels,
done his will?

Have I not preferred my daily Bread to the food of my Soul, and been more
concerned for the things of this life, than for the honor of approaching to
God's Table? and have not the necessities (and often my wanton appetites) taken
up that time which should have been bestowed on Eternity?

Have I not begged God to forgive me those Sins which I have resolved to
continue in? and have I been so merciful to others, as I have desired God to be
to me?

When I have begged God either to preserve me from, or to deliver me out of
temptations, have I not been either a tempter to my self, seeking occasions of
sinning, or else have entertained the injections of my ghostly adversaries with
delight and complacency?

Have I diligently used the grace which has been given me, to the mortifying
of my Lusts, and rescuing my Soul from the Divine anger?

Have I not made a League with Satan, fallen in love with Death, and hastened
toward destruction?

Have I not been a rebel in God's Kingdom, an opposer of his Power, a
dishonourer of his Name and Glory? and when my lips have said Amen, has not my
heart contradicted my supplications?

And have I said this Prayer as heartily for others, as I do for my own Soul?

To which I subjoyn,

Lord have mercy upon me; Teach me to pray, and teach me to practice, that my
prayers may ever be acceptable in thy sight here, and my person for ever
hereafter.

An Examination according to the Sacraments.
Baptism. HAve I been truly thankful to God for my being called to a state of
Salvation through Jesus Christ our Lord?

Have I duly considered what an honor it is to be a Christian?

How often have I broken my baptismal Vow, and defeated and made void the
endeavors of my Godfathers and Godmothers, and other my instructors in the
Faith of Christ?

Have I not neglected to acquaint my self with the Principles of Christian
Religion, or the due preparations for Confirmation? or have I slighted the
Prayers and Benediction of God's Priest?

Have I wholly forsaken Satan, or rather am I not still under his power, by
being a slave to the habits of folly and disobedience?

Have I ever at any time used Charms or Amulets, or consulted Witches or
Conjurers?

Am I not yet in love with the pomps and vanities of the World, a great
frequenter of sports, to the hindrance of Religious Duties, and do I delight in
profane and lascivious representations? and are not my Lusts yet unmortified?
and have I not derogated from the honor of the Captain of our Salvation by
cowardice and negligence?

Eucharist. Have I not profaned the holy Supper of the Lord, by not acquainting
my self with the nature of the Mystery, and the necessity of preparation, or by
coming to it without Faith and Repentance, without an universal charity, and a
through reconciliation to God and my enemies? without examination, without a due
sorrow and amendment of Life?

Have I not often received that Sacrament without those ardors of devotion
which I am obliged to, or without that bodily reverence which the most Sacred
and Heavenly Mysteries require?

Have I not made rash promises, when I have received, and never minded them
afterward?

Have I not suffered the House to lie idle, when it has been so swept and
garnished, to encourage Satan to take with him seven other Spirits worse than
himself, and to come and dwell in my Soul, till its later estate be more
deplorable than its first?

To which I subjoyn,

Lord be merciful to me a sinner, and so strengthen me by thy Grace, that I may
perform my Vows, and keep the robes of my Baptism unspotted; and tho I have
approached thy Table without the Wedding Garment, yet cast me not into outer
darkness, whence there is no deliverance.

Now these and all other Transgressions are either heightened or lessened by
their circumstances; the Examinant therefore ought to consider

1. The Time when he offended; Was it on the Lord's day, Here additions and
alterations may be made by the devout penitent according to his own state.
or any other public Festival; on a public Fasting day, or the days of my own
private humiliation; during the hours of Prayer, either at the Temple, or in my
Closet? either at or immediately before or after the receipt of the holy
Sacrament? and have I often committed one and the same sin? for these
circumstances argue a perverse frame of mind, and that it is not infirmity, but
wilfulness, that makes the offender.

2. The place where the sin was committed. Was it in the Church, at the holy
Table, or in my Closet? or in any public place where the offense became
scandalous, encouraging the vicious, and offending my weaker brethren?

3. The state and condition of the Offender. Am I not in Holy Orders, one of
God's Priests that Minister at his Altar? have I not more knowledge, and a
better acquaintance with my duty? has not God afforded me more convictions,
greater light, and frequenter opportunities of doing good? was the sin
committed when I was under some affliction of mind; body, or estate? or after
some sudden deliverance out of some severe judgment on me for my former
failings? has not God by his holy Spirit laid many hindrances in my way to
ruin, and have I not overcome all difficulties, and often been my own tempter?
have I not continued to be wicked after many checks of Conscience, and many
solemn Vows to the contrary? after the experience of much mercy, many
deliverances, and great tenderness, compassion, and long-suffering in my
Savior toward me?

4. The persons injured. Are not my sins committed against my God, my Master,
my Savior, my best and only Friend? have I robbed the House of God of its ho
nour or revenue? have I ground the face of the Poor, or robbed the Fatherless
and Widows? have I given evil counsel to the ignorant, or those that cannot
discern the fallacy? have I been unjust to my Children, or Relatives, who are
nearest to me, and as it were, parts of my self?

Among all which sins, I must particularly mourn over, and detest those to
which I have been most inclined by natural temper or custom, and resolve to
avoid all provocations and temptations, and whatever has or may promote such
evil habits, and to practice the contrary virtues.

To which I subjoyn.

Lord, I have caused thy Name to be blasphemed among the enemies of Religion
and Piety; but be thou pleased to pity and pardon me the greatest of sinners,
and give me thy Grace that I may do so no more.

Besides all which, I am bound to reflect on my many secret sins, and forgotten
offenses, and to subjoin,

Lord, who can understand how often he offends? O cleanse thou me from my
secret faults; and keep back thy Servant from presumptuous sins, lest they get
the dominion over my Soul; so shall I be innocent from the great offense.

The Collect.
ALmighty Lord, and everlasting God, Grant, I most humbly beseech thee, to thy
distressed Servant, Pardon and Peace; and vouchsafe to direct, sanctify, and
govern both my heart and body in the ways of thy Laws, and in the works of thy
Commandments, that through thy most mighty protection, both here and ever, I
may be preserved in body and soul, through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
Amen.

To this I add the 38 Psalm, or the 51. or some other penitential; and after
that the 22 Psalm.

Then follows the Litany, much agreeable to the former method.
LORD, let thy Ear be attentive to the Prayer of thy Servant, who desires to
fear thy name.

O God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in him the Father of Mercies,
have mercy upon me the most miserable of sinners.

O God the Son, the Redeemer of the World, and the lover of Souls, have mercy
upon me the most miserable of sinners.

O God the Holy Spirit of Peace and Love, the giver of every Grace and every
good Gift, have mercy upon me the most miserable of sinners.

O Holy, Powerful, and Compassionate Trinity, three persons and one God, have
mercy upon me the most miserable of sinners.

O Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon me.

O Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world, grant me thy Peace.

Lord hear, Lord forgive, hearken, O Lord, and do, and defer not for thine own
sake, O Lord our God.

From polluting the robes of my Baptism, and making new leagues with Satan;
from a feigned sorrow, and an outside repentance,

Good Lord deliver me.

From sin and shame, from the paths of folly and destruction, from great
boasting and little performance, and from a vain and empty frame of mind, from
stoath and idleness, and the neglect of my best concerns,

Good Lord deliver me.

From Self-Love, and love of the World, from being busy about nothing, and
slighting the thoughts of Eternity; from deferring my repentance, and putting
off my accounts to the day of my death,

Good Lord deliver me.

From sins of Ignorance, and sins of Malice, from impatience under reproof, and
the eagerness of an angry Mind, from sensual and polluted Fancies, from the
Specter of the Night, and unbecoming Dreams,

Good Lord deliver me.

From being engaged in the pursuits of a proud and perverse Generation, and
from the World, that lies in wickedness,

Good Lord deliver me.

From disbelief of the Mysteries of Religion, and walking contrary to my
Profession; from calling God Father, and yet cbeying the Devil and from praying
to him with my Lips, when my Heart is far from him,

Good Lord deliver me.

From a fondness for secular Wisdom and Learning, and the neglect of the Word;
from hearkening to the Suggestions of Satan, and slighting the Counsels of the
blessed Spirit; from vain and inconsiderate Talk, and rash Resolutions,

Good Lord deliver me.

From Atheism and Impiety, from worshipping any thing in my mind, or practices
in Opposition to my Maker, and from all Hypocrisy and Superstition,

Good Lord deliver me.

From taking thy Name in Vain, by Oaths, or Blasphemy, by idle and rash Talk,
and Curses, and from slighting thy Temple and Service, thy Day and Ordinances,

Good Lord deliver me.

From disobedience to my Superiors, and neglect of my Parents; from Envy,
Hatred and Malice, from evil Speaking and Slandering, Clamor and Reviling, and
from Blood and Murder, and all Revenge,

Good Lord deliver me.

From unchaste and wanton Thoughts, from lewd and intemperate Discourses, from a
lustful Eye, and all sort of carnal Pollutions,

Good Lord deliver me.

From pride and vain Glory, from lying and false Witness, from Slandering and
Perjury, from Covetousness and Ambition, and from being discontented at my
present Condition; from all evil Thoughts, and a vain Conversation,

Good Lord deliver me.

From having my Portion in this Life, and an uninterrupted Felicity; from Anger
and Provocations to Uncharitableness; from nauseating the means of Salvation,
and from a hardened Heart,

Good Lord deliver me.

From a polluted mind, and a love of Dissension; from forsaking thy Interest,
to maintain my own, and from following a multitude to do evil,

Good Lord deliver me.

From neglecting thy Holy Table, and slighting the invitation of my Savior,
from a want of due preparation, and from eating and drinking damnation to my
self,

Good Lord deliver me.

From the snare of a slanderous tongue, and the lips that speak lies, from the
malice of hypocrites, from the rage and fury of Zealots, and from the cunning
and power of Satan,

Good Lord deliver me.

From the follies of my youth, and the sins of my riper years, from the sins
which I have committed my self, and those which I have encouraged others to
commit; from the defilements of my Body, and the pollutions of my Soul,

Good Lord deliver me.

From my secret and open sins, from what I have done to please my self, and
what I have done to please others; from the sins which I remember, and those
which I have forgotten,

Good Lord deliver me.

From those sins Here the penitent may reckon the particular sins he has
committed.
to which temper, and inclination, use and custom, and evil company have
addicted me,

Good Lord deliver me.

From the evil both of vice and punishment, from the lashes of Conscience and a
distracted mind, and from a sudden, painful and unexpected death; from a place
on the left hand, and a portion among the Goats; from the chains of darkness
and the bottomless pit,

Good Lord deliver me.

By thy unspeakable generation as God, and thy wonderful birth as Man, by thy
circumcision, and acceptance of the adorations of the wise men, the first
fruits of the Gentiles,

Good Lord deliver me.

By thy wisdom in baffling the Scribes and Pharisees, by thy humility in
stooping to a mean condition, and by thy obedience to thy Parents,

Good Lord deliver me.

By thy Baptism, forty days Fast, and victory over the Devil in the
Wilderness; by thy surprising but useful Miracles; by thy plain, but convincing
Discourses, and by thy winning and exemplary Conversation,

Good Lord deliver me.

By the wonderful and mysterious representation of thy bloody passion in the
blessed Eucharist, and by thy unexpressible love to thy Church, by thy bitter
Agony, thy wondrous Sweat, and fervent Prayers in the Garden,

Good Lord deliver me.

By the variety of thy sufferings which are recorded, and by thy unknown pangs
and tortures which we cannot describe, and by thy strong crying and tears when
thou prayedst for thine enemies,

Good Lord deliver me.

By thy mercy to dye for us, thy power to rise again, and thy compassion to
intercede for us, and to be our Advocate, and by whatever else is dear to thee,
and of use to the world,

Good Lord deliver me.

In the days of my prosperity, and in the times of suffering, in the troubles
of my mind, and the weakness of my body, in the hour of my death, and in the
terrible day of thy coming to judgment,

Good Lord deliver me.

Jesu Master, thou Son of David, have mercy on me:

That it may please thee to illuminate thy Holy Church with the spirit of
truth, amity and concord, that all that are called Christians may be united in
one holy Faith, and may retain the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace,
and in righteousness of life,

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and defend our gracious Sovereign from all
his enemies separately and conjunctly, that his days may be many, his Reign
prosperous, and his end everlasting Life,

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That the Royal Family may be happy in thy service, the Clergy honored with
thy protection, the Nobility guided by thy Holy Spirit, the Gentry Firm and
Loyal, and the Commons of the Realm humble and obedient,

I beseech thee etc.

That all men may be saved, Heretics made Converts to Truth, Schismatics to
Peace, Rebels to Loyalty, and Jews, Mahometans and Infidels, become Disciples
to the Son of God,

I beseech thee etc.

That Widows may be protected, and Orphans provided for; the sick healed, the
oppressed defended, the naked clothed, the hungry fed, the ignorant instructed,
the refractory reclaimed, and that all Prisoners, and whoever is appointed to
dye, may taste of thy Fatherly pity,

I beseech thee etc.

That it may please thee to succor and ease all that labor under the weight
of an evil and disturbed Conscience, and to give the rewards of Martyrdom to
those who suffer for a good one,

I beseech thee etc.

That it may please thee to pardon and amend all mine enemies, and teach me not
only to forgive, but to forget injuries,

I beseech thee etc.

That it may please thee to give me, and all thy Servants, true quiet and
liberty, and protection from sin and wickedness all the days of our lives,

I beseech thee etc.

That an Angel of Peace, a faithful guide, may be the Guardian both of my Soul
and Body,

I beseech thee etc.

That my past sins may be entirely forgiven, and the rest of my life spent in
the works of repentance,

I beseech thee etc.

That the end of my life may be Christian, without pain, and without shame, if
thou see fit; and that I may be able to render a good account, when I shall
stand before thy dreadful Tribunal,

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

From mine enemies defend me, O Christ.
Graciously look upon my afflictions.
Pitifully behold the sorrows of my heart.
Favorably with mercy hear my Prayers.
Mercifully forgive the sins of thy Servant.
O Son of David, have mercy upon me.
Both now and ever, vouchsafe to hear me, O Christ.
Graciously hear me, O Christ; graciously hear me, O Lord Christ.
O Lord, let thy mercy be showed upon me.
As I do put my trust in thee.
Pardon, O Lord, the guilt of my sins, remove the punishment, and wash out the
pollutions; keep me from the shame, and the suffering due to them, and rescue
me from the dominion of Satan, the tyranny of my own Lusts, and from
everlasting destruction, Amen.

Bp. Andrews BLessed Jesu, Interpose between God and my Soul, thy Priesthood
and Sacrifice; between my self and Satan, thy Kingdom and Conquest; between my
Soul and my Sins, thy Innocence; between my Soul and my Concupiscence, thy
Charity; between my Soul and the punishments due to a Sinner, thy Passion, and
the satisfaction of thy Blood; between my Soul, and my Conscience, and God's
Tribunal, thy Advocateship; between my Soul and its want of Righteousness, thy
absolute and complete Obedience; between my Soul and its want of desert, thy
alsufficient Merits; between my Soul and its want of fervor in Devotion, thy
Intercession; between my Soul and its want of s^rrow and repentance, thy Agony
and bloody Sweat; for what thou did, and what thou suffered'st, O my dearest
Savior, O my best of Masters, was done, and suffered in my stead, and for my
benefit, Amen.

Id. LET the Soul of Christ sanctify me; the Body of Christ strengthen me; the
Blood of Christ redeem me, the Water that came out of his side cleanse me; the
Stripes of Christ heal me; the Sweat of Christ refresh me; the Wounds of Christ
save me; the Poverty of Christ enrich me; and the Sufferings of Christ preserve
me from eternal damnation, Amen.

Bp. Tailor. GIve me the beauties of Wisdom, the brightness of Chastity, the
health of Temperance, the peace of Meek persons, and the reputation and joy of
the Charitable, Amen.

A Collect for the Assistance of the Holy Spirit.
O God, who know that we are set in the midst of so many and great dangers,
that the Temptations of Satan are very prevalent, the vanities of the World
very deceitful, and our own corruptions very strong; help and assist me, and
all thy servants with the succors of thy holy spirit; Give me the spirit of
Truth, of Wisdom and Understanding, to keep me from all error and infidelity;
the spirit of Counsel to guide me in all difficulties; the spirit of Might and
Power to preserve me from all Apostasy; the spirit of knowledge and of the fear
of the Lord, to keep me from all sin and wickedness; Let the Holy Ghost be my
comforter in my distresses, the assistant of my devotion, the quieter of my
conscience, and let it bear witness with my spirit, that I am one of the Sons
of God; that neither the wiles nor frowns of the Devil, the fears of suffering,
or the hopes of wealth and honor may sway me to neglect my duty; but that I
may continue thine for ever, and that thou may be my protector and guide, my
friend and advocate now, and in the agonies of death, and at the day of
judgment, Amen.

OUR Father, which art in Heaven, etc.

MAY the Power of God the Father protect me, the Wisdom of God the Son
inlighten me; the operations and assistances of the holy Spirit quicken me; and
may the holy Trinity keep me under the shadow of their wings till I come to the
palace of Glory, Amen. Amen.

The Epistle, Heb. 12.1.
WHerefore seeing we also are compassed about with so great a cloud of
witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so easily
beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us, looking
unto Jesus the author and finisher of our Faith, who for the joy that was set
before him, endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the
right hand of the Throne of God; for consider him that endured such
contradiction of sinners against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your
minds.

The Gospel. Luke 22.41.
AND being withdrawn from them about a stones cast, he kneeled down, and
prayed, saying, Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me:
nevertheless, not my will, but thine be dene. And being in an agony he prayed
more earnestly; and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down
to the ground.

The MEDITATION.
THO every thing that is good and virtuous has its attractives, yet when
virtue is attended with power, it is in its exaltation, and makes as many
Votaries as it has spectators, and every one looks on it with admiration and
surprise, and addresses to it with resolutions, either to become good, or to
beg its protection from evil, because Piety so assisted proves a great
exemplar, and a puissant shelter. And such was the holy Jesus, who was
wonderful in all his achievements; for nothing less than unspotted Innocence
and Omnipotence conjoined, could furnish the World with a Savior. The whole
Life of Jesus was a miracle of Love and Compassion, and the attempts of the
Patriarchs appear mean and inconsiderable, when compared with the transcendent
performances of the Son of God; for if to consult the wants of mankind, and to
relieve them; if curing their Bodies, and instructing their Souls; if feeding
them with temporal food, and giving them the Bread of Heaven be demonstrations
of a large and a divine Soul, then that title is peculiarly to be ascribed to
the Redeemer of the world, whose actions were one continued series of benefits
and mercies. I will therefore love the examples of good men, but I will admire
and adore Jesus; I will make reflections on their excellent lives; but I must
fix my thoughts on the conversation of my Savior, who, when he requires my
adverting to his Pattern and his Laws, enjoins me to look off from all other
objects, and to settle my eyes on him who loved me, and bought me with his own
most precious blood; for they are but a cloud of witnesses, but Jesus is the
Sun of Righteousness; and as when the Sun arises, the little handful of Clouds,
and dusky vapors dwindle and vanish; so when the glorious God appears in
competition, he eclipses all humane perfections: For that which sustained the
great Apostle when he was ready to be poured out as a drink offering for the
truth of the Gospel, 2 Timothy 4.6.
and what excited other Divine Men to such extraordinary undertakings, was
nothing but the remembrance of the Great Captain of our Salvation, who led the
Van of the Noble Army of Martyrs; together with the powers of that Grace which
he endowed them with, and the Crown that he held out to them from Heaven. What
could discourage or affright those who saw the Son of God engaged by no
necessity, but acted only by his disinterested love, so freely to undertake,
submit to, and glory in the Cross and the Purple-robe, in the Gall and the
Vinegar, in the Scoffs and Crown of Thorns, and at last make a triumphant Stage
of his Cross? Who can forbear dying for such a Savior, who so freely laid
down his life for us? The distant prospect of a Messiah to come, inflamed the
Patriarchs, gave them life, and inspired them with vigor to subdue Kingdoms,
to work Righteousness, to stop the mouths of Lions, to quench the violence of
the Fire, to escape the edge of the Sword; when tortured, not to accept of
deliverance; to be content to be Stoned, to be Sawn asunder, to be slain with
the Sword, to wander about in Sheepskins and Goat Skins, being destitute,
afflicted, tormented, that they might obtain a better resurrection in him, who
is the first fruits from the dead. And so did their Successors demean
themselves, who saw Christ, and acknowledged him come in the flesh; they
willingly chose to hunger and thirst, to be naked, and buffeted, and to have no
certain dwelling place; to be persecuted, defamed, and accounted the
off-scowring of the World; in fine, to be made like their Master, a Spectacle
to the World, to Angels, and to Men.

Blessed Jesu, these are patterns of courage and love to God that I am amazed
at, and am afraid I want courage to imitate; but, Lord, by the help of thy
Grace I will endeavor to make my zeal as ardent and as acceptable as theirs;
and whereas thou have hitherto given me my lot in thy Church at such a time,
when Peace is an attendant on Religion (and may God of his Mercy long continue
it) I will be a Martyr in that way, which thou art better pleased with (because
I may give my body to be burnt, and not be a Martyr) I will make an oblation to
thee of my self, I will sacrifice my passions, and mortify my members that are
on the earth, and will lay aside every weight, and the sin that does so easily
beset me, that I may run with patience the race that is set before me. (For
when I crucify the old Man, and abandon the paths of disobedience, then only am
I truly to be said to follow Jesus) And if providence think fit so to order it,
and my blessed Savior enable me, I will dye for his interests, and seal my
vows with my blood; for what should hinder but that I should exert the same
resolution that was the glory of the Primitive Ages? Do not I look for the same
reward? am I not a member of the same Church, and a Disciple to the same
Savior? Their zeal and patience, their cheerfulness and contempt of the World,
their fortitude and constancy made it appear, that they put an estimate on
nothing but the Service of God, and the concerns of Eternity; and why should
not I, as they did, look steadfastly upon Jesus, for he is the author and
finisher of our Faith, the sole institutor of our Religion, who for the joy
that should accrue to him in the redemption of a ruined World from Sin, and
Death, and Hell, in the glorification of his Body, and the establishment of his
Empire over all the Sons of Men, was content to be made vile and of no
reputation, to endure the Cross, and to despise the shame, and to submit to all
the sufferings and indignities, that either his Father's anger, or Satan's
malice, or the witty and inventive cruelty of sinful men could inflict upon
him; for what could be greater than the Cross and the shame, but the courage
that underwent them, and the Love of Jesus which was stronger than death?

Luke 12.20. I have a Baptism, says Jesus, to be baptized with; and I am
straightened, and in pain, till it be accomplished: I am under great struglings,
death looks formidable to the eyes of nature, and that makes me wish the Cup
may pass from me; but my love makes me resolve to drink it, and to wish it were
accomplished. There is a warm conflict between my resolutions to redeem the
World, and my humane infirmities: between my love to men, and my natural
desires of self-prefervation. And why (if a poor despicable sinner may
expostulate with his Maker) why these struglings a few days before thy
apprehension? Was not thy whole Life one continued act of Martyrdom? Was not
the Tragedy begun at Bethlehem, tho the last scene was acted on Mount Calvary?
Was not this bloody Baptism administered to thee in thy Infancy; and did not thy
Crucifixion begin in thy Cradle? was not thy Circumcision the
morning-sacrifice? and was not the completory oblation made in that dismal
evening in which thou were Crucified? for tho thou wentest not into thy Grave
till about the Thirty fourth year of thy Age, yet thou did dye daily, and
thine agonies were commensurate to thy Life; they begun the first hour thou
saw the light in the Stable, and they lasted to the moment in which thou
gave up the ghost at Golgotha: every day was a Good Friday, a day of sorrow
and sufferings. Only herein lies the difference, under all his antecedent
sufferings, the Life of the Son of God was still preserved, but at his
apprehension that also was to be sacrificed, and he who was only sprinkled with
blood at his Circumcision, was now to be truly baptized and drenched in it on
his Cross: but this Cross he endured, and the appendent shame he despised;
under which terms are included all his sufferings, the torment and the ignominy
of his exinanition.

If the torment that he endured be considered, his pains were acute, and to any
but Jesus insufferable; the uneasiness of his poor estate, the trouble of
having no house or shelter, and the many attempts upon his Life, were but the
prologue to the fatal scenes which begun in the Garden; every circumstance of
that Agony is productive of wonder; 'Twas in a cold night, when the
High-priest's Servants could not be without a fire within doors, while he was
abroad in the cold Air, and lay prostrate on the cold Earth; where being alone,
no violence, but what proceeded from his love, could be offered him; and yet
there he Sweat, till that Sweat was Blood, and that not a faint Sweat of a few
thin drops rarefied and spirituous, but great drops, congealed lumps and
gobbets of blood, and those in so great a quantity, that they went through
clothes and all, and ran in a great stream to the ground, till the Garden was
the fittest place about Jerusalem to be called the Field of Blood. Immediately
after this, he was dragged by the rude and incensed multitude into the City,
and there hurried up and down to all the Judicatories in it; he was buffeted
and scourged, the Plowers plowed long furrows on his back; he was Crowned with
Thorns, and laden with his Cross, having been condemned by clamor and
importunity, by restless and unsatisfied malice, when Pilate his proper Judge
had confessed him Innocent. To his Cross, both his hands and feet, which by
reason of their being full of Nerves are the most sensible parts of the Body,
were fastened, being pierced through with sharp Nails; the whole weight of his
Body, stretched out as on a Rack, resting on his expanded Hands; there he
languished under an insufferable thirst, occasioned by his being so violently
transported from place to place, by his cruel Agony in the Garden, by his loss
of so much Blood in that Sweat, in his scourging, in his being Crowned with
Thorns, and nailed to his Cross, to which both his hands and feet were fastened
that he could no way relieve himself; he was exposed to the Sun and the Wind,
which searched his wounds, and made his pains more grievous; his Mother and his
beloved Disciple were standing by his Cross in the posture of persons
distracted by their sorrows, and this increased his torment, not only as they
were his near Relations, but as they represented his Widowed and disconsolate
Church.

And when it might have been expected that his Soul should have received
comfort, while his body was on this rack, this was so far from being the
portion of Jesus, that his Soul felt more fearful convulsions, than his
tortured Body when all his bones were out of joint; all the anger of God was
upon him at once; now was the Curtain drawn between the rational faculties of
his Soul, and God, (whereas before there was only a skreen between his
sensitive faculties and his Father) now was the beatifical Union suspended, and
his God had forsaken him when he stood in most need; and when he cried aloud to
his Father for help, the rude Soldiers study to increase his sorrows, they give
him Vinegar to drink, which was proper to stop his bleeding, and to lengthen
his life and torments; and that Vinegar mingled with the bitter juice of
Hyssop, to make the draught more irksome and unpalatable, (unless we may
believe a modern Heins. Arist. in Jo. 19 29. (...).
Critic, That they gave him the Vinegar on a Sponge of the coarsest Wool, to
do him the greater dishonor). Almost a whole day and night was he under
continued tortures, from his entry into the Garden, to his yielding up the
ghost, whereof six whole hours he was hanging on the Cross; and then he died
while his Spirit was whole within him; (and while being in the vigor of his
youth, his heart within him was like melting wax) for in the height of all his
acute pains he cried with a loud voice, and yielded up the ghost: his Body
being more sensible of pain than usually malefactors are; for he had a
beautiful shape, and was of a fine and pure make, and of a delicate
constitution, born of a Virgin, not subject to, and so never harrast with
diseases; and the pains of his Soul bore proportion to his bodily sufferings,
for he well knew how grievous and insupportable the anger of God is, which we
are insensible of; he dreaded the burden of those sins which we delight in,
and the severity of those punishments which we deride; his notions of things
were clear, his apprehension quick, and the bent of his mind most strongly
inclinable to pity and compassion. Thus were his sorrows augmented, and his
sufferings made intolerable, while the rigor of his enemies left no sound
part in him; for he suffered in his Soul in his bitter Agony; in his whole Body
in his Sweat; his Head was crowned with Thorns: his Eyes were a fountain of
tears: his Ears inured to mockings: his Palate disgusted with the Vinegar, and
the Wine mixed with Myrrh: his Face spit upon: his Neck and Shoulders laden
with the burden of a heavy Cross: his Back and Sides scourged: his Heart
pierced with the Spear: his Hands and Feet nailed to the accursed Tree: his
Flesh torn, and his Blood spilt: that he might most justly exclaim, I am the
man that has seen affliction by the Rod of God's Wrath: Is it nothing to you,
all ye that pass by? Behold, and see, was there ever sorrow like my sorrow
which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his
fierce anger? Nor were these all his sufferings, for the consideration and
foresight, that all these mercies should be bestowed on an ungrateful and
rebellious World, the greatest part of which would be hypocrites and
unbelievers, would trample on his Blood, as an unholy and profane thing, and
would frustrate the end of his death, and the designs of his mercy; this
doubtless made his sorrows exquisite, and so transcendent, as nothing could
parallel but his Love and his Patience.

Here the devout Christian may put a stop to his Meditations for a while, and
subjoin this

COLLECT.
O Lord, who were pleased in the fullness of time to send thine only begotten
Son into the World, made of a Woman, made under the Law, that he might become a
curse for us, and reconcile the World unto thee our Father, by his bitter Agony
and cruel Death; and who have assured us, that thou scourgest every son whom
thou receivest; grant that I may be conformable to the image of thy beloved Son
and our dearest Savior; that his sufferings may be the propitiation for my
sins, his Blood may cleanse my Soul, and I may have life through him; and
grant, that as Jesus offered up himself to thy justice, so I may offer my self
and all my enjoyments a Sacrifice of praise for the Mercies of God the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost, now, and for evermore, Amen.

After which, the devout Christian, at what time his strength and occasions
will best permit, may continue his Meditation.

Proportionate to the torments which Jesus endured, was his shame and ignominy,
than which nothing is more insufferable to an ingenuous nature. His birth was
mean, his Mother a poor Virgin, he was born in a Stable, and Cradled in a
Manger; he was brought up at the mean and laborious Trade of his reputed Father
Joseph; his many Journies were performed on foot; he had no settled habitation,
and very few Friends, and those poor, ignorant and contemptible Galilean
Fishermen, whose very Country was ominous; and at his last essay was he not
apprehended as a vile malefactor, and that not by a party of men of Honor, not
by the Guards of the Captain of the Temple, or the Roman Governor, but by the
Rabble, the meanest of the people tumultuously gathered together, armed with
Clubs and Swords, the hasty weapons their fury could lay hold on. He was
treated as a public Nuisance, tho as free from sin as truth and innocence could
make him; dragged from the Garden to the Palace of Amas, thence to the House of
Calaphas, and thence to Pontius Pilate, who sent him to Herod: Herod used him
with all sort of scorn, clad him in Mock-purple, and remanded him to the Roman
Procurator, where the Soldiers and common people spit on him, blinded him,
smote him, and ironically bid him prophecy who did it; he was whipped like a
slave, while the multitude in their esteem, prefer to him Barabbas, a Traitor,
a Thief, a Murderer, a Captain to those seditious persons with whom he made
his insurrection, one publicly and notoriously guilty of the crimes laid to
his charge, and looked on as a pernicious wretch, and one of the pests of the
Kingdom.

And when he was thus covered with blood and sweat, with stripes and the marks
of cruelty, with an uneasy Crown, and ridiculous purple, he was brought out
and exposed to public view; he was crucified (a death by which none but slaves
and the vilest malefactors were punished) and that naked, no regard being had to
modesty or the rules of decency; and in the midst of the Thieves, as the worst
of all the malefactors. The Highpriests mocked him, the common people shook
their heads, his fellow sufferers upbraided him, and all that past by did shoot
out their Arrows, even bitter words; which affronts were not the Ephemerous
product of sudden fury, but the continuation of former injuries; for all his
life long he was censured; his poor parentage thrown in his Teeth, is not this
the Carpenter? His Doctrine misrepresented, as if he spoke against Moses and
the Temple, and introduced false Doctrine; his Miracles belied, as if he cast
out Devils by compact with Satan; his conversation mistook, as if his innocent
and necessary freedom were herding with the profligate, and making friendship
with publicans and sinners. Nothing could be more temperate, and yet he is
impeached of being a Glutton and a Drunkard; nothing more Chaste, and yet he is
affronted with the title of a companion of Harlots; no man more sedate and
grave, and yet his nearest Relations say he is besides himself; nothing was
more Loyal, and yet he is accused as an enemy to Caesar; nothing more Pious,
and yet he is condemned for Blasphemy: If he be benign and free in his
converse, then he is popular and seditious; if retired, he has a Devil; and
let him cry down hypocrisy never so zealously, he is reputed an Impostor: Thus
they affronted him in all his capacities. Was he designed our High Priest, to
redeem the world by the sacrifice of himself? They mock him on the Cross with
his Office, If thou be the Son of God, save thy self and us. Was he sent to be
the great Prophet, to declare the Will of God to mankind? They first blind,
then smite him, and afterward bid him prophecy who struck him. And had God
designed him to be a King? They cloth him in Purple, put on his Head a Crown
of Thorns, and a Reed in his right hand instead of a Scepter. Such was the ill
entertainment the holy Jesus found, such the rudeness of men to their greatest
benefactor, that he, that came into the World only to do good, was above all
others in it worst treated. All which indignities could not but sit more
uneasily upon an innocent person, than they would have done on a hardy
criminal, who usually takes shelter in impudence. And to make the shame
exquisite, remember, O my Soul, that this Son of Man was at the same time the
Son of God.

When therefore I represent to my self my bleeding Savior nailed to the
accursed Tree, and view the sadness of his countenance disfigured with his
Sweat, his Blood, and his Tears; when I look upon his wounded side, his hands
and feet pierced, his head crowned with Thorns, Is not this sight enough to
strike me dumb? enough to strike me dead? when I consider that my sins have
wounded him, and were more troublesome than his adversaries malice? Shall the
Jews be up at midnight to apprehend him, and shall I not break my sleep to
serve him? shall the sinner take more pains to be damned, than I to work out my
salvation with fear and trembling?

What shall I first admire in thee, O my dying Redeemer! for thou art all
wonderful. I admire thy willingness to submit, for no compulsion could force
thee to bear the weight of thy Father's anger; it is indisputably true, that
Jesus could fall by no hand but his own; and that his Love had slain him,
before the Spear pierced his side; and if we may believe the Vision in St.
Dennis, thou art ready yet to come down again, and to dye anew, were it any way
conducive to the salvation of mankind? I admire the miraculousness of the
contrivance, That he, who grasps the World in his fist, should be confined to a
Cradle; and he, who sustains Angels, should suck the Breasts of a Virgin! that
Vigor it self should languish, Eternity become mortal, that Life should give
up the ghost, and God be crucified, and the same person at the same time in
Hell and in Paradise! I admire the intireness of his resignation, who without
any articles or capitulation, gave himself up to the managery and conduct of
his Father, submitting the habit and the acts of his Will to God, and resolving
to obey in whatever manner he should require. Nor can I forbear admiring and
celebrating the earnestness of his Love, who was in great distress till he had
paid our ransom; but I cannot avoid particular reflections on the advantages of
his being crucified publicly, that the matter of fact might be undeniable, and
that the Apostles might have no cause to be ashamed of their Doctrine, or the
World of their Faith, nor both of their Savior. What a pattern of resignation
and submission, of meekness, and patience, of compassion, and love to the worst
of enemies had the Christian world been deprived of, if our bessed Savior had
suffered in a Corner, or been strangled in a Prison? It was out of design to
make his virtues as well as his sufferings illustrious, that he chose to suffer
at Jerusalem the Metropolis of the Country, and at the Passover, when all the
Nation were come up to the holy City. Let therefore the Cross of Christ be to
the Jews an offense and scandal (who expect to share with the Messia in the
grandeur of a secular Kingdom) and let it be to the Greeks foolishness (who
relish no notions, but what comport with their ease and profit, and think it
madness to slight present miseries, and stand in awe of future sufferings) I
will look upon it as the greatest instance of the Divine Wisdom and Goodness,
that God was pleased to teach his Son Obedience, and to make the world happy by
the things which he suffered. And am I not indispensibly obliged to follow this
pattern, and to imitate this my best Friend? Can I be ashamed of a naked
crucified Savior, who, when he was stripped of his Garments, was covered with a
robe of honor purpled in his own blood? And should it not be my greatest
honor to be conformed to the Image of his sufferings? Has Jesus carried with
him, not only our humane nature, but the marks of his wounds that were given
him on Earth, into that Heaven which he opened unto all believers; and do I not
long to go to that my greatest benefactor, into that Heaven which his wounds
have purchased? And am I not redeemed from my former vain conversation by the
Blood of God? And shall I continue in sin, because Grace has abounded, or dare
to damn that Soul for which Christ died? No, I will endure the contradiction of
sinners, and I will resist, if God see fit, unto blood; Jesus shall be my
darling, and I will love him as I love my life and Heaven.

The Collect.
BLessed Savior, who for our sakes were clothed with ignominy and dishonor,
and did patiently digest all the injuries and affronts, which thy malicious
enemies could put upon thee; enable me also to endure the Cross, and to despise
the shame, and to rejoice when thou shall count me worthy to suffer for thy
name. Let my sins no longer dishonor thy Religion, and bring discredit to my
dear Master, but enable me to live to thy glory, O my crucified Redeemer; that
when I come to dye, I may share in thy triumphs world without end, Amen.

The Anthem.
An ALTAR.
GReat and good Savior, could my frozen heart
Melt into tears equal to thy desert,
Nature, and all its mournful sons I Would call
To Attend and grieve at th'wondrous funeral.
So when, dear Jesu, thou did dye.
The Earth groaned sadly, Heaven did cry;
The Sun retired as one aghast,
To see the Almighty breathe his last;
And the famed Temple's basis shook,
When God, who dwelt there, it forsook;
While men more hardened, and more rude
Than those Pillars, senseless stood,
As they unconcerned had been
At the cruel frightful scene;
Astonished at their scorn, I raise
This Altar to my Savior's praise,
Cever'd with wounded Loves, and bleeding Hearts,
For who can live in the World, when God departs?
Accept the Votary, and the Inscription hallow,
And teach the Priest the great Exemplar still to follow.
EASTER-EVE.
AS the solemn Festival of Easter drew nearer, the Ancients bound themselves to
stricter observances, enlarging their Fasts, increasing their Devotions, and
doubling their preparations for the approaching Christian Passover (because
nothing but perseverance gives a title to a Crown of Glory; and the end of all
labor and industry, Prayers and Fastings, Alms and Discipline, is only to
enable the devout Christian to bring a pure Conscience, and void of offense, to
the participation of the benefits of the Lord's-Table) and for this reason
Easter-eve, even in those Churches, where the Saturday was admitted to an equal
honor with the Lord's Day, and always celebrated as a Festival; was made a day
of the strictest abstinence and mortification. It is called the Great Saturday
in the account of P. 19. V Constable. App. l. 8. c. 33.
S. Pelycarp's Martyrdom (and it could not but be a great encouragement to that
good Bishop to dye cheerfully at the same time when his Master did, that he
might, from the place of Execution, go to Heaven, to keep the Feast of Easter
for ever) it is also called the holy Saturday, the Paschal Vigil, the Holy
Night, whose obscurity is illuminated with a glorious light (the devout people
watching and praying all night, and singing Hymns unto God, nay, those who
seldom else came to Church, Eus. devit. Constable. l. 4. c. 22. p. 536. Chrysostom. to.
5. p. 541. and to. 7. p. 156. Gr. Naz. Orat. 42 p. 676.
now were compelled by shame and interest to Fast and Pray, the House of God
being filled with Torches and lights, and sometimes the Streets of the City so
adorned, in expectation of the joyful morning of Christ's Resurrection) it was
also styled the Pallad. vit. Chrysostom. p. 85.
Angelical night, in which the Evil Angels tremble, their kingdom being
destroyed, and the Good Angels rejoice that the World is redeemed; for now were
the holy Quire busy to attend the Sepulcher, and to give the Disciples the
blessed news of their Savior's Resurrection. This day, some Fathers assure us,
Christ went down into Hell, dismantled its fortifications, and by his presence
made that miserable dungeon Heaven; for wherever Jesus is, there is Heaven.
All the day was a strict Fast, and all the night a Vigil, at least till
midnight Hier. in Matt. c. 25.
(the Congregation not being dismissed till then) it being the Tradition of the
Church, That our Savior rose a little after midnight, but in the East, till
the Constable App. l. 5. c. 14, 17, 18. Dionys. Alex. Ep. Basil.
Cockcrowing; the time being spent, say the Apostolical Constitutions, in
watching, prayers and supplications, in reading the Law and the Prophets, in
expounding the Holy Scriptures, and in Baptizing the Catechumens, and therefore
it Eusebius. Hist. l. 2. c. 17. and l. 6. c. 9.
is called the All-night Vigil of the great Feast, and the great watching
before the Christian Passover. In the Latin Church Rupert. de divin. offic. c.
35. alii.
on this day the Water for the Font is blessed, and reserved for the use of the
persons to be Baptized the year following, which Custom is a shadow of the
Ancient usage; for on Easter-Eve were the Catechumens Baptized Chrysostom. to. 5. p.
585.
by the Bishop himself, if present, and able to do the Office; for no
Presbyter, or Deacon, without his leave durst do it; for the Church had select
times for the Baptizing of adult Converts (Children being baptized at all
times) of which Easter was the chiefest; for which reason the number of the
Candidates for that initiatory Sacrament in the greater Churches, was very
large, Pallad. vit. Chrysostom. p. 86
Three Thousand being made Christians at Constantinople on this day: Ambros. de
Sacramen. li 3. cap. 1.
the Bishop in some Churches of the West, (at Millian I conjecture, for at Rome
the practice was otherwise) immediately after his conferring the Sacrament of
Baptism, using to wash the feet of those whom he had newly made Christians.
Smith of the Gr. Chapter p. 124, 125.
In the Greek Church through the Sundays of Lent, they use the Liturgy of St
Basil, and on Thursday and Saturday in the Holy Week, which being longer than
St Chrysostom's, is esteemed fitter for the times of Fasting, but on the other
days of Lent, Conc. Trul. can. 52.
except Saturdays, and the Feast of the Annunciation, they use the Liturgy of
the Presanctificata; So mindful are they to suit all their Offices to the
designs of Religion, and the promoting of Mortification, and true Contrition.

The Epistle. Eccles. 7.3.
SOrrow is better than laughter, for by the sadness of the countenance the
heart is made better; the heart of the wise is in the house of mourning, but
the heart of fools is in the house of mirth: it is better to hear the rebuke of
the wise, than for a man to hear the song of fools; for as the crackling of
thorns under a pot, so is the laughter of the fool.

The Gospel. Mat. 9.14.
THen came to him the Disciples of John, saying, why do we and the Pharisees
fast often, but thy Disciples fast not? And Jesus said unto them, can the
children of the Bridechamber mourn, as long as the Bridegroom is with them? but
the days will come, when the Bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then
shall they fast. No man puts a piece of new cloth into an old garment; for
that which is put in to fill it up, takes from the garment, and the rent is
made worse. Neither do men put new wine into old bottles, else the bottles
break, and the wine runs out, and the bottles perish; but they put new wine
into new bottles, and both are preserved.

The MEDITATION.
SAD and disconsolate must needs have been the state of the Infant Church, when
its Tutor and Guardian was taken from it; nor could the Disciples but sit in
darkness, and in the shadow of death, who were deprived of the light and warmth
of the Sun of Righteousness; they had lost one Comforter, and had only the
remote expectations of another; their Master had established a Kingdom which
they knew not what to make of; they could not apprehend how a Prince could make
himself Glorious, and yet trample upon the Pomps and Vanities, the Crowns and
Purple which this world adorns its Monarchs with; nor how he who had not so
much as a House which he could call his own, could be Lord of the whole Earth;
nor did they understand how this could be the Messiah who should redeem all
Israel, who could not rescue himself from the Torture and Ignominy of the
Cross; these were amazing Considerations, and such as filled their hearts full
of sorrow; these thoughts confined the Apostles, during the time that their
Master lay in the Grave, to retirement and privacy, they sighed and bewailed
the loss of their hopes, which they imagined were buried in the same Sepulcher
with their Lord, past any possibility of a Resurrection. As long as they
expected to share in the Grandeur of the Messiah, and under him to govern
Principalities, how willingly did they follow him? but when they saw all those
satisfactions which they promised themselves, vanish like the Idea's of a
dream, sorrow could not but fill their hearts: And is not this, O my soul, the
general practice of Mankind? how fond are we of the Glories of Christ's
Kingdom, but how weary of his Cross? how ready to follow him to Mount Tabor,
but how unwilling to accompany him to Mount Calvary? We run eagerly to the
Plain to eat Bread multiplied by Miracle, but we dread the way that leads to
the Mountain, where by day he preached his Excellent Sermons, and spent the
whole Night in Prayers.

But is there not also, O my Soul, much to be said in the behalf of these
Apostles, which we can never plead to excuse our own negligence? Their Master
was now in the Grave, the work of their Redemption not yet perfected, and the
Holy Spirit was not yet given, which alone could fill them with Knowledge and
Fortitude; in such a distressed condition who can blame their fears and their
cowardice? but as soon as ever they had seen the Lord return from the dead, and
the Blessed Spirit had descended on them at Pentecost, their hearts were filled
with joy and resolution, they then courted the dangers, which before they
studiously shunned; and with assurance accosted the Sanhedrim, from whom before
they hid themselves; then they looked upon the Chains which they wore for the
sake of the Blessed Jesus, as Ornaments of their Hands and Legs; a Prison was a
Palace to them, the Blood that followed their scourgings, the Purple which they
wore, and the place of Execution a Room of State; the Cross was a Throne, and
the Flames a Royal Chariot to convey them to Heaven. Armed with those
assistances not only Peter and Paul smiled on Martyrdom, and were in love with
dying, but even Women and Children, Persons of strong sears and weak powers, of
violent Passions and shallow Reasons, went in such multitudes to the Tribunals
to acknowledge themselves Christians, that they tired their Judges with
pronouncing Sentences of Death, and their Executioners with inflicting them:
and what is it, O my Soul, that hinders thee from exerting the same Gallantry
and Resolution? who besides all the assistances which they enjoyed, have also
the advantage of their Examples.

Often have I wondered how those Excellent Persons became such admirable
Proficients in the school of the Son of God? How their Piety, their Charity,
their Justice, and Sobriety, their Love of God, and love to Mankind could be so
conspicuous in the eyes of their Heathen Adversaries, while they contended
earnestly for the Faith, when nothing but Bonds, Imprisonment, and Death,
nothing but Shame and Sufferings were their Portion? Whereas now, when the
Christian Religion is countenanced and cherished by Authority, and the good
things of this life are its reward as well as the joys of a better, we are more
profane and irreligious, more unjust and uncharitable, more lustful and
intemperate than the vilest Heathens: And perhaps this is not the worst reason
that can be given of it, that in those days the greater part of Christians were
converted after they came to years of discretion, when the Church required from
them all sorts of testimonies of their virtue and their constancy before they
were admitted into it; bringing them up, when Catechumens, under a severe
Discipline, acquainting them with the strictness of the Laws of Religion,
inuring them to Fastings and Abstinencies, to frequent Prayers, and frequent
Watchings, and other such hardships; to a public and solemn renouncing of
their own lusts, and a generous contempt of the world; for by this means
Religion was indeared to them, who before their admission to the privileges of
it, had conquered all their Passions, and were crucified to the World, and had
upon the maturest deliberation chosen Jesus and the Cross, before the Honors,
Wealth, and Voluptuousness of this life. Whereas now our admission is in our
Infancy, when our sponsors promise of course for us, what we never care to make
good: and we are admitted to the privileges before we understand the duties of
Christianity; so that we take up our Religion as we do our Clothes, or our
Customs, because they were the practices of our Forefathers, and are the garb
of the present time: And perhaps it is also considerable, that prosperity often
cheats us, when we are proof against all the temptations of adversity; worldly
ease softens us, while a state of affliction and trouble becomes a great
benefit. And so in truth is it, a Christian not deserving his name, till he be
a Convert from sensuality to a crucified Savior: So when the Sons of Zebedee
coveted places of Trust and Honor in an imaginary Monarchy, Mat. 20.21.
our Blessed Redeemer told them, that the preferments of his Court old not
consist in fitting at his Right and left Hand, but in drinking of his Cup, and
being baptized with his Baptism. And when St. Paul was called to an
Apostleship, Acts 9.16.
the Lord told Ananias in a Vision, that his Mission was not designed to
Triumph over the Gentile World, nor should his Revelations discover to him,
what Kingdoms he should convert (tho that he did) but I will show him, says
God, what great things he must suffer for my Names sake. And this that Apostle
well understood; 2 Cor. 12.12.
for when he reckons up the signs of an Apostle, he begins with his Patience
under affliction, as if that generosity of mind, that slighted the Tribulations
attendant on the Gospel, was a more eminent and surer sign of his Apostleship
than all his power of working Signs and Wonders, and mighty deeds: for to be
afflicted was to be clad in the best Livery of the great Bishop and Shepherd of
Souls. I will therefore resolve to imitate those admirable guides of the Church
in their sorrow. I will lament the death of my Savior, and hate my sins that
crucified him. I will as they did, retire from the World and love it no longer,
because it despised my dear Redeemer: And I will also imitate them in their
Patience and their Courage. I will endure all things for the sake of my friend,
who died for me; and nothing shall fright me from following the pattern, and
treading in the steps of his first and best servants.

The Collect.
ALmighty and Immortal Savior, who were victorious in thy sufferings, and
triumphant upon the Cross, and were always present with thy Church either in
thy Person, or by thy substitute, the Holy Ghost; keep and defend thy flock
from all Heresy and Schism, from mistakes in matters of Faith, and all
irregularities in practice, from desponding under afflictions, and from
carelessness in prosperity. Arm all thy servants with an invincible courage and
resolution to live and dye thine: let the consideration of thy Passion engage
us to bewail our Transgressions: but let the consideration of thy Resurrection
defend us, that we may not sorrow as men without hope, but that we may pass the
time of our sojourning here on Earth in fear, and finish it with joy, through
thy Merits and Intercession, O our only Mediator and Advocate. Amen.

The Anthem.
The Descent into Hell.
A Dialogue between Mary Magdalen, at the Sepulcher, and an Angel.
I.
Magd. APpear dear Jesus unto me,
I love, I long for none but thee.
Whither is my Beloved gone,
And left me here sad and alone?
My soul breaths nothing else but sigh;,
Since Jesus fell a Sacrifice.

Ang. Down to the Prison of the Fiends
The dying Conqueror descends,
And over those rebel spirits his Victories extends.

II.
With courage and resistless might
Alone he undertakes the fight,
Meets whole Legions and defies
Hells Guards, and her Auxiliaries,
Scales the VValls, and storms the Gates,
Razes the Towers, revers'th men's Fates;
And into the Dungeon Lucifer precipitates.
III.
Magd. But tell me, Angel clothed with light,
Did not my Jesus show his might,
When upon the Cross he stood,
Like a Rock that braved a flood?
Did not his Patience and his Cries,
His VVounds, his Thirst and Agonies,
Complete his glorious Conquest, and our Sacrifice?

IV.
Ang. 'Twas done when Jesus bowed his head,
And told the world 'twas finished,
Then Satan was discomfited,
And all his baffled forces fled:
But he lest men might doubt his love
Or Victories, did the scene remove,
Pulled Satan from his Throne, and from his Kingdom drove.

V.
Magd. If so, what keeps my Jesus there?
What stops the Almighty Conqueror?
Thy Pupils do thy presence want
TO instruct the blind and ignorant,
To charm the froward, and defend
The weak who on thy Strength depend.
And guide poor wandering me unto my journeys end.
Appear, dear Jesu, unto me,
I love, I long for none but thee.

EASTER- DAY.
THO the Christian Church had many Festivals, yet some of them were days of
greater Eminency than others, Christmas, Easter, and Whitsuntide being
frequently called in the Writings of the Fathers by way of excellency, (...).
the Christian Solemnities; because as the Jews were obliged three times a year
on their three great Festivals of the Passover, Pentecost, and of the
Tabernacles, to go up to Jerusalem to worship: So anciently, the body of the
people of every Diocese met at those times at the Mother Church, where the
Bishop Preached to them in person, and gave them the Holy Sacrament: And on
those days, if the Church could not hold all the Communicants at once, the
Offices were repeated, the Prayers renewed, and the Eucharist Leo. M. Epist.
71. p. 149.
a second time consecrated and given. Now among these great days, Easter Day
was the day on which the Son of God returned from Hell, rose from the Grave,
and being attended with his holy Angels, and the bodies of many just persons,
who left their Tombs to accompany their Savior, brought Life and Immortality
to light. This was the day which the Lord made, in which all wise and devout
persons do rejoice; and therefore without all doubt the Ancients, after their
long Fasting till near daybreak, Constable. Ap. li. 5. c. 18.
retired home, laid aside their Sackcloth and Ashes, and other habits of
mortification, and having washed and clothed themselves in their best apparel,
came again early to Church, and sang the praises of the Lord. And for this
reason this Feast is called Cypr. Laetitia Paschalis.
The Paschal joy, or the Paschal solemnity of the Resurrection, Chrysostom. to. 5.
p. 587.
the bright and glorious day of Christ's rising from the dead, the noblest of
the Christian solemnities, Eusebius. vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 22. p. 536, etc.
the holy and venerable day that brought Life into the World; the holy
Convention and Festival, the Queen of Feasts, the Festival of Festivals, the
great and holy Sunday, the day in which the hopes of Eternity were confirmed to
us; and the Great day, in which Salvation was given to the World. The Constit.
Ap. l. 7. c. 37.
Apostles injoining the Observation of it to all Christians; and probably, when
we are bid to keep the Feast, 1 Cor. 5.8. it belongs rather to the Annual than
to the Weekly Feast of the Resurrection. As some Wise and Learned men think,
that the Lord's Day, mentioned Rev. 1.10. does not so much mean a Sunday at
large, as Easter Day (for Procop. de bell. Perfic. l. 1. c. 18.
this day was honored by the Christian World above all other days) Chrysostom. to.
5. p. 583.
this day is a day of rejoicing on Earth, and it is a Holy Day in Heaven too:
for if the conversion of one Sinner gives the Angels joy, how much more eminent
must the exultations needs be, when the whole World is rescued from the tyranny
of the Devil? At this news, doubtless the Angels and the Archangels leapt for
joy, the Cherubim and Seraphim kept a Festival, and the Son of God himself was
infinitely pleased, that our Redemption was completed. Nay, the dull Earth it
self rejoices: for the Ambr. de mist. Pasch. c. 2. Chrysostom. to. 5. p. 585.
Christian Passover is the beginning of the year to us, when Flovvers and
Fruits do bud and blossom, when the Clouds and cold of Winter are driven
away, and the Spring introduces the vvarm Sun; to emblem to us, that we also
should be merry and joyful, that we should be no longer barren, but bring
forth fruits worthy of our Savior's Resurrection; that only the beams of the
Sun of Righteousness gives true life and heat, and that we must not date our
happiness from the day of our natural birth, but of our Regeneration.

This Chrysostom. to. 5. p. 587.
is the beloved and saving Festival, the foundation of our Peace, the end of
our Differences, the destruction of Death, the ruin of the Devil; this day men
were admitted to the Society and Anthems of Angels, for this day was a period
put to the tyranny of Satan, the bonds of Death were loosed, and the powers of
Hell routed; and now the Church was able to say, O death, where is thy sting? O
grave, where is thy victory? Now that this day might be duly observed, the Leo
M. Ep. 64. ad Martian. Aug.
Holy Fathers of the venerable Nicene Council, in pursuance of an ancient
custom, took care that the Patriarch of Alexandria, (which City was famous for
its University, especially the Study of Astronomy, the Sky being perpetually
clear, and the Country fit for such observations) should in his Circular
Letters (commonly called Paschal Epistles) which Cassian. 10.2.
were at first sent about Christmas, afterward sooner Conc. Carthag. 4.7.
by the one and twentieth of August every year, give an account to all other
Christian Churches, on what day Easter fell; upon the receipt of which Letters
Conc. Aurel. 4. 1. Braccar. 2. 9.
the Bishop of every Church was obliged to give notice of the Festival to his
Clergy, and every Priest in his Parish Church (as the Bishops and Metropolitans
were bound to do in their Cathedrals) on Christmas Day after the reading of the
Gospel, was to inform the people, that no one might plead ignorance of the holy
time; and when the day came, the persons who had been baptized the night
before, were clothed in white garments (which for eight days after they were
obliged to wear) and with many Torches brought into the Church to take their
place among the Fideles, or complete Christians (and hence perhaps Baptism was
called Illumination, and hence doubtless the Festival was called Chrysostom. to. 5.
p. 939. Theophan. orat. 26. p. 187.
the Splendour of the Virgin Torchlight, and the day of White Garments) the
newly baptized being obliged to be at Church every day of the Paschal Week to
learn their duties; for which end, through the Octaves of Easter were read
Chrysostom. to. 5. p. 586.
every day and every day there was a Sermon and a Sacrament. For in truth every
day was as it were a Sunday; but of most especial observance were the Monday
and Tuesday of the Week (as they are in our Church) from whence the Feast is
sometimes called Nyss. (...) de Pasc^ (...). del. D. 22 (...).
the Three days Solemnity; and at this time, at Christmas, the Epiphany, and
other greater Festivals, the Clergy, on pain of Excommunication, were bound to
be present on their Cures.

The new-made Christians Microlog. c. 56. Honor. 3. 137. alii.
were also particularly bound to come that day Twelvemonth on which they had
been baptized, to the Church, and to bring with them their Sponsors, and to
celebrate the day of their Regeneration, their spiritual birthday, and to
offer to God their oblations for that great favor and blessing. And by a Synod
Exon. an. 1287.
Canon of one of our old Synods, every person was obliged to make an oblation
to his Church four times a year, whereof Easter was one: and to this day it is
not only a Collar-day at Court, but an Offeringday, and a Houshold-day too,
when the Bezant is given by the Lord Steward, or some other White-staff
Officer: and this is done in imitation of an ancient Custom; for the great
Constantine, on Easter Day, studying to imitate the Charity and Compassion of
our Holy Savior, distributed many large alms, and gave rich gifts to all the
people, and to all the Provinces of the Empire. And as our Princes imitate the
ancient Christian Emperors in their Charity, so they imitated them in their
Pity. Anciently at this time Malefactors were pardoned, and by the Laws of the
Confessor, Easter, and eight days after were exempted from Executions.

In Smyth. ub. sup. p. 44.
the Greek Church at three afternoon of the Saturday, devout people go to
Church, most of whom continue there all night. Toward break of day they sing
the Hymn, Glory in the highest: after which the Patriarch begins, and is
followed by the Quire singing this excellent Hymn, Christ is risen from the
dead, having by his death trampled on death, and given life to them that were
in their graves, which they repeat Twelve times together. And if on Easter
morning, or within three days after a Ryc. Present State of the Gr. Chapter p. 140.
Greek meets any of his acquaintance, he salutes him with these comfortable
words, Christ is risen; to which the other answers, He is risen indeed; and
then they kiss three times, once on the Mouth, and once on each Cheek, and so
depart; which custom is also observed among Olear. l. 2. p. 53.
the Muscovites; and no person, of whatever sex, condition, or quality soever
he be, dares refuse this Ceremony. At Sozom. li. 7. c. 19. p. 734.
Rome the Hallelujah was anciently never sung but on Easterday (it being a
usual Asseveration among the Romans, So may I live to hear, and sing the
Hallelujah at Easter (and on this day at Id. p. 735.
Constantinople the Patriarchs read the Gospel: in which Church probably Chrysostom.
to. 5. p. 587.
the Hundred and sixth Psalm (as we reckon it) was a part of the Service, as in
our own Church the Paschal Homily of Abbot Aelfrick was by a Synod commanded to
be read to the people before the celebration of the Holy Communion. To all
which Observations we may subjoin St. Austin's Mystical Remark, That the
Fathers ordained that Easter should not be kept till the Lord's day after the
Full-moon, because the Moon is then returned to her conjunction with the Sun;
to intimate to us, that Man, who was in a state of opposition and enmity to God
before Christ's Passion, is by his Resurrection put into a state of favor, and
a capacity to return, and to be reconciled to his maker. And God grant that his
whole Church may be reconciled to their Savior, and to each other, that they
may duly keep the Feast, and live in love and unity here, till they all triumph
together in Heaven, Amen.

The Epistle. Philip. 3.8.
YEA doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have suffered the loss of all
things, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ, and be found in him,
not having mine own righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is
through the Faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by Faith: that I
may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his
sufferings, being made conformable unto his death, if by any means I might
attain unto the resurrection of the dead.

The Gospel. Luke 24.13.
BEhold, two of them went the same day to a Village called Emmaus; and while
they communed together, Jesus drew near, and went with them, but their eyes
were holden that they should not know him: and he said unto them, What manner
of communications are these which ye have one to another, as ye walk, and are
sad? They said unto him, concerning Jesus of Nazareth, whom the chief Priests
and our Rulers have delivered to be condemned to death, and have crucified.
Then said Jesus unto them, Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and
to enter into his glory? And beginning at Moses, and at the Prophets, he
expounded to them in all the Scriptures the things concerning himself. And he
was known to them in breaking of bread.

The MEDITATION.
AMong all our Blessed Savior's unhappinesses, the incapacities of his
Disciples understandings was not the least; by reason of which, tho their
Master was the Wisdom of the Father, and endowed with the Holy Ghost without
measure, which enabled him to speak, not only with the greatest authority, but
with the greatest veracity and plainness; yet they were always unwilling to
give entire credit to his sayings. Some of them they could not understand, and
others they would not believe. So, when he discoursed of the great mystery of
the Sacrament, and averred, that no Man could have life in him, except he did
eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood; many of his followers
apprehended that he would oblige them to turn Canibals, and so went back, and
vvalked no more with him. Among whom St. Mark himself, say the Ancients, was
disgusted, and left that holy Society: and had not St. Peter opportunely
reclaimed him, the Church had lost that Evangelist. Nor was St. Peter himself
free from this crime; for when our blessed Savior gave the Twelve an account
of his sufferings, and that the redemption of the World was to be accomplished
by his Crucifixion, he, whose mind was possessed with other notions of the
Kingdom of the Messiah, was scandalized at the declaration, and rebuked his
Lord, not knovving that our Savior's Cross was to be his Throne, and by his
Agonies only he was to merit Crowns and earn Triumphs. Nor could all that
their infallible Guide could say to inform them better, drive out this notion
out of the heads of the rest of the Apostles, no not when they savv him
crucified, dead and buried, and could not but remember that he promised to rise
again the Third day. The Women, more officious than wise, had brought Spices
to embalm him, as if the Lamb of God had fallen like a common Sacrifice, as if
the Lord of Hosts had been captivated by the Grave, his Powers baffled, and
his Promises canceled And tho the empty Sepulcher, the sight of the
Grave-cloaths orderly laid up, and the testimony of the Angel were undeniable
proofs, that Jesus was not there, but was risen; yet their admiration was
stronger than their Faith, and the Disciples of both sexes were surprised, they
hardly believed their eyes (for as yet, they knew not the Scriptures, that he
must rise from the dead) and wondered at all that was come to pass.

In the head of those devout female proselites was Mary Magdalene, who, tho
once an Angel of darkness, had now the purity and zeal of one of the Seraphim;
she was all ardor and resolution, she was the first who went to the Sepulcher
on the day of the Resurrection; she was earlier up than the beloved Disciple,
who lay in his Master's bosom, and for that reason should have afforded his
Master a place in his own heart, in his memory, and in his love; and she had
more courage than Peter, tho a man of extraordinary fervor; she dreaded not the
guards, nor the shadows of the night that had not yet given place to day, but
hastens her steps to the venerable Tomb; and when she beheld the empty
Sepulcher, how deep is her concern at the loss of her Savior? She wept
bitterly, as if she would have softened the Rock, and made the most insensible
and obdurate parts of the Creation mourn with her the death of her best Friend.
And tho these were sad disappointments, and the sight had affrighted all that
followed her, yet there she still continues, she was the last who returned from
that awful Garden; nor did she at length miss of her expectations, for they who
sow in tears, shall reap in joy. The Angels first confirm her hopes, and
immediately after, the Lord of the Angels gave her a view of his sacred Person.

Remember, O my Soul, the first appearance of our Savior after his
Resurrection was to the most sinful Magdalene; nor do thou despair, but that
thou may also be admitted to a share in his favor; but remember also, that
this honor was vouchsafed to the penitent Magdalene, to Magdalene transported
with the ardors of Divine Love, that had destroyed all the heats of Lust. If
thou longest therefore to be blessed with such privileges, rise early, and begin
betime to serve thy Maker; weep over thy follies that have deprived thee of the
company of thy Savior; and these methods will recall thy departed Redeemer;
and thy sins, which are many, shall be forgiven, because thou have loved much.
To Mary Magdalene, among the softer Sex, was the first appearance vouchsafed;
and among the men the next was to St. Peter; the first, a Woman of the loosest
manners, and most profligate conversation; the second, a Man of strong
boastings, and a weak faith, who, when he promised to dye with his Master,
denied him; thus the worst of sinners had the preference in this discovery; and
why should I doubt, but that there is mercy also for me, and my Savior has
the same compassion for my Soul as he had for Mary Magdalen's or St. Peter's.
Magdalene was our Savior's first Apostle after his Resurrection, she had a
commission to instruct St. Peter himself, and the beloved Virgin too, and to
tell them their Lord had left the shadows of the Grave, and would meet that
disconsolate Family of his on one of the Mountains of Galilee: And tho she
faithfully discharged that Embassy, yet such is the power of prejudice, that
they knew not how to believe her. They were amused at what they saw and heard,
but they did not understand the mystery; the wonderful transactions of that day
took up all their thoughts, and, wherever they went, this part of the sacred
History was the subject of their discourses.

Two of the followers of Jesus, probably two of the seventy Disciples, of which
one was Cleophas (who perhaps was the same with Alpheus) and the other is
conjectured to be either Simeon his son, or Nathanael, or St. Luke himself, or
some other of our Lord's Disciples, being unhappily defeated of their
expectations of worldly pomp, and overwhelmed with sorrow for the ignominious
death of their Lord, and full of fears, lest the power of the Sanhedrim, that
had crucified their Master, might also extirpate his whole family (for by this
time the Soldiers having revealed the miracle, had been bribed by the
Highpriests to say, that his Disciples came by night and stole him away while
they slept) resolved to divert their griefs, and secure their persons by a
short journey to Emmaus, whence, probably having given up all their hopes of
ever seeing the Messiah again, they resolved to retire into Galilee (if Emmaus
were not the birthplace of Cleophas, as is affirmed) for they trusted, that he
had been the Redeemer of Israel, and that under him, they, who were his kindred
according to the flesh, should have met with places of honor, trust and
profit, and under the shadow of such a Prince grown great and glorious; all
which hopes vanishing, they resolved to retire to their old abodes and
employment. And yet they had not so put off their respects and affection to
their heavenly Instructor, but that they entertain themselves with his History,
their resentments of his sufferings being quick and passionate; the death of
Jesus was the discourse of Jerusalem; for such a Prophet so mighty in word and
deed could not fall silently and in the dark; but his widowed Family talked of
it feelingly; and every circumstance of his shame, and of his tortures, pierced
the heart of the Relator, and filled it full of grief and astonishment before
it reached the ears, and moved the pity of the Auditors. Nor does Piety ever
want its reward; he who meditates or discourses of heavenly things, is seldom
without an Angel to be his assistant and companion; but here the Prince of the
Angels condescends to be a fellow traveller and instructor.

And now the good men may cease their dispute, there is no longer any need of
arguing whether the Redeemer be risen or not, when himself demonstrates the
necessity, both of his sufferings and his triumphs, out of the unerring
Oracles; when both Moses, and all the other Prophets testify, that the Son of
Man ought to have suffered these things, and then to enter into his glory. And
can thou doubt, O my Soul, of the truth of any of the sublimer mysteries of
Religion, when thy Savior reveals them? How easily may my shallow reason be
imposed upon? but the Wisdom of God can neither deceive, nor be deceived.

Chearing and Comfortable were those discourses to Cleophas and his companion;
and as pleasant and acceptable, as the Perfume that is made by the art of the
Apothecary; they were sweet as Honey in the mouth, and as Music at a banquet
of Wine. The conversation was so charming and advantageous, that it lessened
the way, and brought them easily to the Gates of Emmaus. And when Jesus made
show, as if he would have gone farther, they, knowing themselves to be obliged
in gratitude to treat him who had so plentifully fed their minds with heavenly
dainties, constrain him by their civilities to tarry with them; and as
Abraham's hospitality gave him an opportunity of entertaining the Son of God
and his Angels, so the friendly invitation of the two Disciples, was the
occasion of their being longer blessed with their Savior's company. With them he
sat at Table, and when he had taken Bread and blessed it, when he had broken and
distributed it to them, then their eyes were opened, then they knew the Lord of
Life. Perhaps this blessing and breaking of Bread did only relate to the common
meal which they were then making; and yet it no way interferes with the Laws of
Religion (nor does it indeed maintain the Sacrilege of the half-communion) if
it be understood of the blessed Eucharist, which is a lively representation of
the Crucifixion; and most likely it is, that, this being one of the great
mysteries of Christianity, his Disciples easily distinguished him from other
men by the use of this Rite. And where can I expect to meet my Savior with
comfort, but at his Table? That Sacrament gives light and grace, that Sacrament
will better my knowledge, and strengthen my faith, and secure my hopes. I will
therefore covet all opportunities of conversing with my Savior at his own
Table. 'Twas the highest honor that could be given to St. John on earth, to
lie in his Savior's bosom (the most valued and best beloved person in the
company, being allowed a place next to the Master of the Feast) and the
privileges of Heaven are described by a place in Abraham's bosom: But is it
not a greater honor, when Christ shall descend to lie in my bosom, to enter
into my mouth, and to become the food of my soul?

This was such ravishing and unexpected news, that (tho Jesus presently on this
manifestation of himself disappeared out of their sight, miraculously
withdrawing himself from the Table) they immediately returned to Jerusalem to
communicate this news to their sorrowful brethren; and there they met with new
confirmations, for Peter had also seen his Lord; and while they were thus
discoursing of this miraculous return from the Grave, lo, their Master conveys
himself unseen into the Room, and standing in the midst of them, by his
seasonable consolations, scatters the clouds that eclipsed their joys, raised
their dejected spirits, invigorates them with new courage, promises them his
own presence for forty days, and after his Ascension, the continual presence
and assistances of the blessed Spirit: For all these were the Largesses which
the Conqueror bestowed on his followers; these were the products of his
Resurrection. How ignorant were the Apostles before this time, of the Person
and Kingdom of the Messiah, and the other mysteries of Religion? But when Jesus
visited them in his return from the gloomy shades, how were they filled with
all wisdom, and knowledge, and joy in the Holy Ghost? Wisdom, not only to
understand the state of Christianity but to confront the Philosophers at Rome
and Athens, to baffle the Scribes and Pharisees at Jerusalem, and to convert
the whole World from sin and wickedness, to be Proselytes to the Laws of
Christ. Before their Master's Crucifixion, how dastardly and low-spirited were
even the very Apostles, tho they lived, and daily conversed with him? their
courages were impaired by their sears, they betrayed, deserted, and denied him;
but his Resurrection did beget in the mind of the Christian World a true
generosity and fortitude, able to subdue and trample on all dangers, in as much
as men of no breeding, no natural valor, of no interests, or friends, durst
prefer the confession of their Savior and his Gospel to their Country and
Relations, to their quiet and security, and to life it self, and passionately
to choose scourges and prisons, and the various methods of death, before all
sorts of voluptuous enjoyments. But what is more and more acceptable than all
knowledge, and all power; the Resurrection of Christ gave the Holy Ghost to the
World; for the blessed Spirit could not be given till Christ was risen. Thus
this one act of the Almighty Redeemer of mankind baffled all the fears of his
servants, completed the satisfaction for their sins, and secured unto them the
company of the Spirit of Truth and Peace here, till they should be carried into
his Kingdom on the wings of Angels. And what greater blessings can thou wish
than these, O my soul? Give the riches and the honors of this life, O my
dearest Savior, to others, I will never envy their fruitions, so thou give me
thy Self; let me partake of the benefits of thy Resurrection in the pardon of
my sins, in the indwelling of the Comforter in my mind, and in the first fruits
of obedience, in frequent approaches to thy Table, and other acts of devout
converse with thee, and (leaving the manner of my death to thy disposal, for on
these terms in what sort, or at what time soever it shall be, I shall not be
disturbed) I shall be happy in the remembrance, that when my Master comes, and
finds me so doing, he will give me a share in his joys.

The Collect.
ALmighty God, who through thine only begotten Son Jesus Christ have overcome
Death, and apened unto us the gate of everlasting Life; we humbly beseech thee,
that as by thy special grace preventing us, thou do put into our minds good
desires; so by thy continual help, we may bring the same to good effect through
Jesus Christ our Lord, who lives and reigns with thee, and the Holy Ghost,
ever one God, world without end, Amen.

The Anthem.
The Resurrection, and Aseension.
I.
COme, holy Spirit, from above;
Come, warm me with Seraphick love,
That I may the triumphant Jesus sing,
Whose resurrection heaven to earth did bring,
And put thee longed-for peaceful Dove upon the wing.
II.
Jesus is risen, mount, my mind,
And leave this sordid earth behind.
God made thy body dust, but Sin a grave;
Let thy Soul too its Resurrection have;
No longer be thy Lusts, the Worlds, or Satan's slave.
III.
Attend the Conqueror to his Throne,
Who from the lower world is flown;
Make, tho the meanest, one in that parade;
The bleeding Jesus did my heart in vade,
And none can heal the wound, but he whose hand it made.
IV.
View yonder Arch inscribed above,
Sacred to Celestial Love,
There the incomparable Jesus dwells,
Jesus, who charms thee by the strengest spells,
Love him with transports, O my passions, and none else.
V.
See the bright Angels, how they glide
Up and down by's Chariot's side;
See, where ten thousand hover, and attend,
To guard the Conqueror to his journies end,
Whose Chariot does directly to God's right hand bend.
VI.
There Jesus fixes, and from thence
Sheds his benignest influence;
And, like triumphant Victors, does bestow
His donatives on us who dwell below,
That we in time our Triumphs may accomplish too.
VII.
You Angels, you who dwell above,
Spend all your time in songs and love,
While I who sadly want your light and fire,
Detained in sensual fetters, would mount higher,
And wish to do what I can only now admire.
VIII.
You Guardians are by Heaven designed
To awe and to protect Mankind;
When Jesus rose, you did the news relate;
When he ascended, you did on him wait:
That I might triumph so, give me my Saviors Fate.
Rules of Conduct for Easter Day, and the Sacrament.
. 1. It is taken for granted, that the devout Person has humbled himself in
the sight of God for his sins, the Week aforegoing, more particularly on
Good Friday and the Holy Saturday; and it is requisite he should watch a great
part of (if not all) the Saturday night, which time should be spent in more
intense Supplications, and more ardent Meditations; the Vigils of the Ancient
Church were an excellent Institution, and Watching and Prayer are joined by our
Savior; and we are bid to be sober, and to watch unto Prayer by the Apostles;
that is, to fast, to watch, and to pray; it is true, the Vigils at last gave
offense, and were for that reason almost all prohibited, because such
promiscuous meetings of men and women under the covert of the night, did
administer to many Exorbitances: But the Vigils of Easter, and the greater
Festivals, were always kept up, and are so still in the Churches of the East;
and tho our Church does not expressly injoin the observation, yet it mentions
them in her Rubricks, and leaves every man to his own liberty to watch in his
Closet, where there can be no such temptation as gave occasion to the disuse of
that practice. And whenever the Christian Penitent goes to bed, it is requisite
to rise very early on Easter day, because our Blessed Master rose Joh. 20.1.
while it was yet dark.

. 2. After the private devotions are performed, and the necessary duties of the
Family (if any) considered and attended, the good man goes to Church; nor will
he choose to receive any other where, but at his own Parish Church, if there be
a Sacrament there, which on this Festival is expressly enjoined to be celebrated
over all Christendom. Can. 6.
The Council of Gangra denounced a solemn Anathema against the Erecters of
private Conventicles, that those who disliked the public Assemblies, might
communicate at home in private: And by the old Ludov. 1. tit: 101. Lothar. l.
1. tit. 357, etc.
Capitulars every Priest was ordered to be degraded, every Layman to be
excommunicate, who lest his own Parish to receive the Blessed Eucharist in
another, unless extraordinary business, or a Journey, called them that way, or
they had a dispensation so to do from their Superiors.

. 3. But if the devout Person be hindered by sickness, or some other inevitable
obstruction, he bears the loss with Patience, but looks on it as a great
affliction, and longs to go up to the House of the Lord, and to communicate
with his Saints; and that he may not lose all the benefit of the solemnity, his
thoughts are present, and go along with the Service; and he begs God earnestly
to accept of his willing mind, and to send him his Blessing, and his Holy
Spirit, as much as if he actually communicated: Thus the Buxtorf. Synag. Jud.
c. 13.
Jew who could not possibly go up to Jerusalem at the Passover, had the
allowance to kill a Lamb at Home, and to call upon the Name of the Lord;
praising him for the deliverance out of Egypt.

. 4. But if by any means he can go to Church, he chooses to be there some time
before the Holy Offices begin, that he may the better compose himself,
recollect his Thoughts, and review his Vows; for he who wilfully slips the
opportunity of being at the beginning of the Prayers, is in the way to lose all
the advantages of his coming thither; for he who does not confess heartily,
cannot communicate worthily. Early therefore the good man goes to Church, and
he takes care to come fasting, that nothing may enter into his mouth before the
Body of God; for for this cause the Ancients transferred their Love Feasts from
being eaten before the Sacrament, to be eaten after it, not only to prevent
excess, but to do Honor to this Heavenly Food, by preserring it to all our
temporal necessaries: And yet the good man is not so scrupulous to believe,
that if, while he washes his mouth, a drop of water casually trickle down his
Throat, that that breaks his Fast, and disables him to communicate that day.

. 5. The spare time before the service begins, is spent in holy reflections,
and renewed vows of obedience, such as these:

In the name of Jesus who loved me, and was crucified for me, I renounce my
self, and all my own desires, that I may love my Savior, and do him service:
May his Cross and Passiion save me, may his Grace keep and direct me in the
paths of Peace, world without end.

Be glad and rejoice, O my soul, and give Honor to the Lord God Omnipotent,
for the Marriage of the Lamb is come; Blessed are all they who are called to
the Marriage-Supper of the Lamb: These are the true sayings of God. Nothing in
this world can be comparable to it, nothing but the vision of God above it.

To which is subjoined this Meditation.

6 I am come into the Temple of God to receive his Injunctions, and to partake
of his Blessings; I entertain the tidings with Joy and the Exultations of a
glad heart: this is the day which the Lord has made, I will tejoice and be
glad in it: this is the Lords day, and this his Habitation, where it pleases
him to dwell: O how amiable are thy dwellings, O thou Lord of Hosts? Here the
Angels wait and worship, and if they veil their faces, being ravished at the
Transporting and Majestic Sight, how cold and negligent am I in my
preparations to entertain the lover of Souls, my comforter in this world, and
my bliss in that which is to come; the guide of those who travel to Zion, and
the revvard of whoever attains to the Heavenly country? Had I the Meekness of
Moses, and the Patience of Job, the Zeal of Elijah, and the Purities of the Man
after Gods own heart, yet were I not meet to approach Gods Holy Table. Could
the Seraphim transfer to me their ardours, or the bright Angels cloth me with
their innocence, yet it would be infinite Condescension in my God to admit me.
Lord! What then shall I do? If I come, I am afraid of presumption; but if I
refuse to come, I slight thy invitation, I contemn thy Ordinances, and affront
thy Goodness; I break thy Commandments, and throw off my subjection. I will
therefore come, tho I bring not with me the entire preparation which the
Sanctuary requires; for he who despises thy Table, is as guilty in thy sight,
as he who eats and drinks unworthily.

Lord, I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof, and yet thon
biddest thy self to be my Guest, and intreatest to be admitted into my Bosom:
the greatest Prince condescends to visit his meanest subject, and the Holiest
God to dwell with the most sinful Wretch. Lord, I have sinned, and done
exceeding wickedly: And can my God look savourably on such an abominable
Transgressor as I am? Can thy Mercy incline thee to take the Childrens Bread,
and to give it to such a Dog? I acknowledge I am an Intruder, but Mary
Magdalene, whom thou lovedst, and to whom thon forgavest much, when she made
her first Addresses to thee, O Blessed Jesu, came unbidden to the house of a
supercilious Pharisee; when the Meat was on the Table, and without taking
notice of any body else, laid hold of thee whom she earnestly sought, at thy
feet she throws her self, and washes them with her penitential Tears; she was
ashamed of her sins, but not of her approaches to her Savior; and so am I: Oh!
how am I grieved that I am yet so far from the power of Godliness, so entangled
with the love of vanity, so fond of the world, and so negligent of Heaven; so
prodigal of my time, and such a niggard of my Charity; so vain in my
imagination, so inconsiderate in my discourses, so indevotional in the most
solemn acts of Religion, but so intent to things of no moment; so concerned
about my daily Bread, but so careless of getting the Bread of Angels; so
inclinable to be angry with others while I want that indignation that becomes
me against my own transgressions. May the good Lord be merciful to me, and to
every one who prepares his heart to seek the Lord God, the God of our Fathers,
although he be not cleansed according to the Purification of the Sanctuary.

7. After this, it is taken for granted, that the good Man who is Gods
Minister, and the Peoples Priest, is come to Church, and has begun the Divine
Service, at which the devout Christian earnestly attends, praying with all
fervency, Receiving the Absolution with all Contrition and Humility.
praising God with all heartiness; repeating the Creed with his utmost vigor,
because it is a confirmation of the truth of his profession; and tho he takes
all occasions when there is any pause, as frequently there is in the
Celebration of the Eucharist, to put up his own private Prayers to God, yet he
never dares suffer them to interfere with the public worship; for 1 Cor. 14.26.
when the Apostle reproves the men of Corinth, that at their solemn Meetings,
every man had his Psalm, and every one his Doctrine, i.e. one was preaching
while another was praying, and a third singing, and tells them that this could
not edify; he looks upon that reproof as a lesson of advice and duty to the
whole Church, and a general Rule of demeanor in the House of God.

. 8. When the devout Christian observes the Holy Man of God (for such is every
Priest, or such he ought to be) standing at the Altar, he looks on him with
Reverence, because he ministers in Holy Things, and represents Jesus
consecrating at the first Institution. And for him thus he prays.

Lord let thy Priests be clothed with righteousness, and let thy Saints sing
with joyfulness.

Hosannah to the Son of David; blessed is he that comes in the Name of the
Lord; Peace in Heaven, and Glory in the Highest.

9. When the devont Christian is invited to draw near to the Holy Table, he
uses one or more of these Sentencs,

Lord I have looked for thee in Holiness, that I might behold thy Power and
Glory.

How dreadful is this Place? this is no other but the House of God, and the
Gate of Heaven.

This is the Lords Mercy-Seat, which the Cherubim of Glory shadow; this is the
Altar of Jesus, round which the Angels, clad in their bright Robes, stand.

This is the Altar where Jesus is crucified, let all the Angels of God, and all
the Sons of Men worship him.

I will come into thy House upon the multitude of thy Mercies, and in thy fear
will I hold up my hands, and worship toward the Mercy-Seat of thy Holy Temple.

I will exalt the Lord my God, and will worship at his Footstool, for he is
Holy; I will fall down, and adore, for I know, that God is here of a truth.

10. When the good man comes up, and kneels before the Altar, he says, Lord, I
most thankfully receive this gracious Invitation, which thou have afforded me,
to come to thy Holy Table; and tho the number and weight of my Transgressions
might justly deter me, yet I am resolved to embrace the opportunity, because
thou have bidden all who are weary and heavy laden, to come unto thee.

Will Jesus, whom the Heavens must contain till the consummation of all things,
be content to dwell with his poor servant?

Oh, that I could entertain thee in my Soul with the same joy that the Holy
Virgin did at thy incarnation; with the same Exultations that the Infant
Baptist did, when he danced before he was Born, at the approach of a Savior;
with the Hosannah's of the Devout Jews before thy Passion, and with the Authems
of Angels at thy Ascension.

For who deserves my praises, but my Savior? Worthy is the Lamb who was slain
to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor, and Glory,
and Blessing.

My Soul therefore shall join consort with every Creature, which is in Heaven,
and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the Sea, when they
say, Blessing, and Honor and Glory, and Power be unto him that sits on the
Throne, and unto the Lamb for evermore.

11. While the Priest himself is receiving, the good man prays for him,

The Lord hear thee, the name of the God of Jacob defend thee; send thee help
from the Sanctuary, and strengthen thee out of Zion; Remember all thy
offerings, and accept thy Sacrifice; Grant thee thy hearts desire, and fulfill
all thy mind.

12. After which, if the time will permit, he Exercises this, or the like act
of contrition: but if he wants time, he does it in his Closet at his return.

Lord, I am the greatest of sinners, but here is the Lamb of God that takes
away the sins of the World. His Blood speaks better things than that of Abel,
and he is the propititation for our sins.

My sins, dearest Jesu, brought thee to all thy shame, and all thy sufferings;
but that satisfaction was necessary for the Redemption of the World; I am
troubled above measure for thy sorrows, and will revenge thy death on my vices,
which were the cause of it.

Melt me, O God, into a soft temper fit to receive thy impressions; give me an
entire detestation of my sins, and an indignation that may engage me to forsake
my transgressions, and to love the paths of virtue.

13. To which he subjoins this, or the like act of Faith:

Jesus is my God and my Savior, he is the Angel of the Covenant, I will not
leave him till he bless me.

This is Jesus, whom the Jews slew, and hanged on a Tree; him has God exalted
with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance to Israel,
and forgiveness of sins.

If God has given us his Son, how shall he not with him give us all things?
for his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed. Lord, I believe
that thou art present in the Sacrament, but in a manner spiritual and
ineffable; to think that thou art here corporeally, bids defiance to my senses
and my reason, and debases thy glorified humanity; and to imagine that I
receive nothing more than bare signs, is to rob my self of the benefit of
communicating with thee: Let me feel the truth of that mystery which I admire
and believe, but cannot prove; and let me experiment the glorious effects of
this Sacrament, tho I am unacquainted with the particular manner how they are
derived to me. Thou have convinced me that the flesh profits nothing, but thy
Words are spirit and life; as therefore thou have made it, so I humbly and
thankfully receive it. Let it be unto thy servant according to thy word: and
grant that the days may come shortly, when Faith shall be swallowed up of
Vision, Amen.

14. If many others Communicate before him, the good man employs that leisure
in reflecting upon the Office of Consecration; and because he could not without
disturbance interpose his ejaculations, while the Priest was saying the Prayer
of Consecration, he takes this occasion to say,

When the Priest carries the Patin,

As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness for the cure of the wounded
Israelites, so was our dearest Savior lifted up on the Cross for the
redemption of a world of sinners.

Lord, evermore give me this bread. When the Priest breaks the Bread, he says,

So was the Body of Jesus mangled, so was his flesh torn, till there was no
whole place in his body.

When the Priest pours out the Wine, he says,

So when Jesus was in his Agony, so when he was scourged, crowned with Thorns,
and nailed to the accursed Tree, did the Blood run down: so Jesus loved us, and
washed us from our sins in his own blood.

When the Priest carries the Chalice, he says,

It is the Blood of Jesus that makes atonement, being shed for me, and for many
for the remission of sins.

I will cleave to the Cross of my bleeding Savior and will drink his Blood.

Enable me, O my God, to overcome all my ghostly enemies by the blood of the
Lamb.

15. When the Priest takes the Elements in his hands to give them to the devout
Christian, he remembers, that so God offers his Son to be the Author of Eternal
Salvation to every believer; so has God fitted Jesus a body, and endowed him
with the spirit above measure, that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish, but have everlasting life.

16. When the Priest delivers the Elements to the worthy Communicant, he
considers that there are two parts in the form of distribution, a Prayer, and
an Advice; the Prayer in these words, The Body (the Blood) of our Lord Jesus
Christ preserve thy Body and Soul unto everlasting Life; to which, with much
devotion, and an audible voice, he heartily says Amen, as a testimony of his
strongest desires that it may be so; and of his firm belief, that God will make
it so. The Advice in these words, Take, and eat, or drink, this in remembrance,
etc. And this puts him in mind (...) duty, what faith and thankfulness he ought
to exercise at the reception of this blessed Sacrament: And therefore he says,

Lord, thou have said it, behold the Son of thine handmaid, let it be unto me
according to thy word.

I desire to know nothing, but Jesus Christ, and him crucified; and to learn
nothing but a conformity to his death and resurrection.

The word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we have seen his glory, the
glory as of the only begotten Son of God, full of Grace and Truth.

. 17. Tho the devout Communicant brings with him unsatisfied ardors, yet he
takes care to receive decently and reverently, not to snatch at the Bread, nor
to drink greedily, for it is a Feast of temperance; and therefore the Bread is
given in a little piece, and the Wine was anciently mixed with Water, as for
other reasons, so for this, that it might not offend the Head. He therefore
eats, not as one whose antecedent fastings have made him hungry, but as one who
is little concerned how his Body be provided for, so the longings of his Soul
be satisfied with spiritual food; and he drinks, not with the men of Corinth,
to be drunk at this Feast of Charity, nor so much to allay his natural thirst,
as to satisfy the intense desires of his mind, inflamed with love to his
Savior and the Holy Sacrament: For at God's Table we are to eat and drink, not
to the satisfaction of our sensual appetites, but to the sanctification of our
Souls.

. 18. While the mysteries are distributeing to those who receive after him, the
good man examines his obligations to God's bounty in giving him one opportunity
more of serving him in the beauties of holiness. He remembers, that Jesus being
made a little lower than the Angels, for the suffering of death was crowned
with glory and honor; and considers, that now he is crucified with Christ,
that he might live to God, and that the life that he now leads in the flesh, he
lives by the faith of the Son of God, who loved him, and gave himself for him.
He offers himself a sacrifice to God, and for the future looks on himself as
something consecrated, and that can no longer, without most prodigious
Sacriledg, be put to any profane use. For how shall he dare to defile that
which God has sanctified? For if Belshazzar were punished for quaffing in the
Vessels of the Temple, how much more shall that man be plagued that pollutes
the residence of the Son of God? And how shall that man presume to appear again
before God, that sins against him after the receipt of such blessings?

. 19. After this, considering, that this Sacrament is called the Cup of
blessing, and a holy Eucharist, he expresses his gratitude in solemn
Thanksgivings, saying either Constit Ap. l. 8. c. 13.
Psalm. 34. which the Ancient Church used at this solemnity, or Psalm. 111.
rendering verse 6. thus, He has showed his people the power of his works, and
given us the bread of Angels. Or this that follows,

Give thanks, O my Soul, unto God the Lord, in the Congregation from the ground
of the heart.

Say unto God, how wonderful art thou in thy works? How glorious are the things
which thou in thy goodness have prepared for the poor!

Thou have prepared a Table for me; my Cup did overflow, and I have tasted and
seen how good the Lord is.

I have eaten the Bread of God with joy, and drunk his Wine with a merry heart,
for God has accepted me.

My Soul is filled as it were with marrow and fatness, and my mouth shall
praise thee with joyful lips.

Blessed is he whom thou chusest, and receivest unto thy self; he shall dwell
in thy Courts, and shall be satisfied with the pleasures of thy House, even of
thy holy Temple.

As long as I live will I magnify thee in this manner, and lift up my hands in
thy name; for thy loving kindness is better than life it self.

An offering of a free heart will I give thee, and praise thy name, because it
is so comfortable.

I will love the Lord, as do all his Saints: I will bless him, and magnify him
for ever.

For this God is our God for ever and ever: He shall be our guide unto death.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

. 20. To this he subjoins an act of love and resignation.

I will love thee, O Lord my God, for the Lord is my defense, and my refuge; I
will devote unto thee my body, soul, and spirit, which are thine, for thou have
redeemed them, thou God of Truth.

Jesus has loved me, and laid down his life for me, therefore will I adore
him.

He is the Priest, the Sacrifice, and the Altar, on him will I depend for
salvation.

He has given me the Sacrament as a confirmation of his former love, and as a
pledge of future favors, therefore will I reverence and worship him world
without end.

Lord, I give my self to thee, and I know whom I have believed, and am
persuaded that he is able to keep what I have committed to him against that
day.

Write in my heart the laws of love and thankfulness, that I may no longer dare
to sin against thee.

For how shall I now escape, if I neglect so great salvation?

. 21. To which may be added this prayer out of the Liturgy of St. Clemens.

GRant, Blessed God, that we, and all thy Servants who have been admitted to
communicate with Jesus by Faith, and the participation of the Sacramental
mysteries, may obtain remission of our sins, and be so confirmed in the ways of
godliness, and rescued from the dominion and impositions of Satan, that being
filled with thy Holy Spirit, we may here be made worthy Members of Christ's
Body, and at last become heirs of everlasting life, through the merits and
mediation of Jesus Christ our Savior, Amen.

. 22. Just before his leaving the Church, the good man thus prays,

Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in peace according to thy word, for
mine eyes have seen thy Salvation.

Which thou have prepared before the face of all people.

To be a light to lighten the Gentiles, and to be the glory of thy people
Israel.

After which he speaks courteously and friendly to all his fellow-communicants
(for they are his brethren, and the Eucharist is the bond of that unity) and
this serves him instead of the Kiss of Charity, which was anciently given at
this Sacrament, tho now the custom be antiquated. And because the Love Feasts
succeeded the Eucharist (which are also now disused) that he may do something
that is equivalent thereunto, he invites one or more of his poorer Neighbors
(for the rich are in no need of it) to dine with him, treating them with all
affability, and humble carriage, relieving their bodily wants, and instructing
their minds, and by this means earning their Prayers: And this he does over and
above what he has given at the Offertory, where he has liberally according to
his ability, offered unto God and the Poor, remembering that a thinking Heathen
never came in sight of an Altar, tho but occasionally, but he tendered something
thereon, if it were but a little Salt, or a handful of Flower; and thought
himself also obliged to provide for the indigent, as for his brethren.

. 23. At his return he does not think fit to go immediately to his own dinner,
but retires to his Closet; Scalig. de Emendat. temp. l. 6.
the Jews were obliged that night on which they did eat the Passover, to taste
nothing after it for the whole night, that the relish of the Paschal Lamb might
continue in their mouths a long time: and the reason holds good in the
Christian Church; for our Blessed Savior, after he had eaten of this Supper,
resolved never to eat more till he had accomplished our redemption: for, says
he, I will drink no more of the fruit of the Vine, till I drink it new in my
Father's kingdom. In the Closet the good man recollects the proceedings of the
day, and in his thoughts acts over again the solemnities of that glorious
triumph; for he dares not spend any part of this day but in holy Offices, in
Meditations and Prayers, in acts of Faith and Love, of Piety and Charity, in
Reading and Conference, and in all other exercises, that may serve to increase
his virtues both in number and degree, especially in holy praises, and solemn
thansgivings to God for all his benefits.

. 24. And after this manner he expresses himself.

I am thine, and nothing shall separate thee from my love: on the Cross every
member of thy body, every faculty of thy soul had its sufferings, and its
agonies for my sins, and should I reserve any thing from thee? No, my most
obliging Savior, I make an entire oblation of my self to thee, a whole
burnt-offering sacrificed in the flames of holy love, and this I do with all my
might and power: nothing could atone for my sins but thy sufferings; nor can
any thing testify my gratitude, but the devoting of my self to thy service.
Thou have redeemed me, thou God of Truth, and I will be thy servant for ever.

My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit rejoiceth in God my Savior. For
I have found him whom my soul loves, Jesus the Messiah, of whom Moses in the
Law, and the Prophets did write.

What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits? I will receive the Cup
of Salvation, and will praise the name of the Lord.

I will go into thy House with my offerings, and will pay my Vows which I
promised with my lips when I was in trouble.

. 25. To which he subjoins.

Lord, my single praises make but an insignificant and low sound; they are the
poorest of recompenses, and the most disproportioned to thy Majesty and thy
Merits; I therefore call in the assistances of Angels, and of the whole host of
Heaven, of Sun, Moon and Stars, of the Earth and Sea, and all that is therein,
to join with me in the magnifying of my Redeemer. Let all the World worship
thee, sing of thee, and bless thy name: let every thing that has breath praise
the Lord, for great is the Glory of the Lord; and let all the Earth be filled
with the knowledge of his Glory, for his Name alone is excellent, and his Glory
above Heaven and Earth, Amen. Amen.

Glory be to the Father, etc. Then follows the Trisagios.

Holy God, Holy and Powerful, Holy and Immortal, have mercy upon us.

. 26. After which he thus expresses himself.

How unwillingly have I left the place where my blessed Savior dwells, and how
well pleased should I be, could I live and communicate with him always? How
amiable is that Palace where my dear Friend fixes his residence? And how do I
long to be treated continually at the Supper of the Lamb? Oh that I could dye
this very moment, if it were but pleasing in the sight of my Heavenly Father,
and pass immediately from this antepast of joys, to the entire entertainment of
that Glorious Feast! And would my Redeemer affist me, how readily would I be
this moment his Martyr: How acceptable would a Prison, or the Rack, the Flames,
or a Sword be to me, so I could by any means embrace an opportunity to let my
beloved Jesus know, how dear he is to me, how much I value him, and how ready I
am to offer him my Blood, who has shed his own Blood for me upon the Cross,
and sed me with it at his Table? And if that be an Honor that I am not worthy
of, (and perhaps not capable of) yet, O Lord, let me always be thy Martyr in
resolution; and since there is so much happiness in communicating with thee,
let me never leave the World so suddenly, but that I may have the assistance of
a good Priest to give me, in thy name, Absolution, and to strengthen me in the
agonies of death with the blessed Sacrament.

. 27. After which Meditation the worthy Communicant uses this Prayer, taken out
of the Ps. 8. c. 14.15.
Constitutions, commonly called the Apostles.

How ready and willing is my soul, which has been cherished and fed with the
most Precious Body and Blood of my Savior, to offer him the thanks which I can
pay, tho neither what he deserves, nor what I ought, since he has vouchsafed
me the honor to partake of his holy Mysteries. Grant, holy Jesu, that it may
be for my Health, not for my Ruin; for my Happiness, not for my Condemnation;
for the Security of my Soul and Body, for the increase of Piety, for the
remission of Sins, and for the introducing me into thy Palace; for thy Name is
called upon me, and into thy Family I am adopted among thy faithful Servants.
Strengthen me and them by thy Holy Spirit, inlighten our ignorance, and supply
all our defects, and confirm us in the resolutions of a holy Life; rescue and
defend us from Satan, and all our enemies ghostly and bodily; sanctify and
protect, help and keep us in our going out, and in our coming in, and at last
assemble us in thy Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with thee
and the Holy Ghost be all Glory, Honor, and Worship, now and for ever, Amen.

To which he adds this other Collect.
ALmighty God, who have united the Christian World in one common Brotherhood by
the Holy Sacrament, that we being many might be one body, because we are all
partakers of that one Bread; let me be partaker this day of the Prayers of all
that this day have communicated, whereover thy Church be dispersed over the
face of the whole earth; and let my Petitions be available in thy sight for all
mankind, especially for the household of faith, through Jesus Christ our Lord,
Amen.

May the Blessing of God Almighty, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be with me,
and remain with me now and for evermore, Amen.

. 28. And because the blessings of an Easter are very valuable, and deserve
extraordinary returns, the good Christian thinks fit, after the Evening Service
at Church is over, to return again to his Closet, to converse with his holy
Savior, and to exercise those acts of Love, of Faith, of Contrition, and Hope,
and other Graces, which for want of leisure, or other conveniences, could not
so well be performed in the House of God; to which he subjoins this or the like
Meditation.

The MEDITATION.
. 30. I Am now returned from that happy place that is preferable to Paradise,
where I have been treated with a Feast of fat Things, and Wine well refined;
and what does my Lord require of me in point of Gratitude for these his
inestimable benefits, but to do Justice, to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with
my God? For every thing in this Sacrament obliges me to holiness of Life, the
Institutor of it was the undefiled High Priest of our Profession, who did bear
all sins, but committed none; the end of its Celebration is to show forth his
Death, which when we receive unworthily, we act over again, we new crucify the
Lord of Life, who has bought us, and bring on our selves the most horrid and
affrighting guilt that we can incur; the preparation is nothing less than a
strict examination of our Consciences, than strong Prayers and Cries, ardent
resolutions of being better, and a constant course of pious and charitable
Actions. This Sacrament actually enters us into Covenant with God, and what
agreement can there be between Light and Darkness? It is an Emblem of our holy
Profession, which calls us to an exemplary Conversation; it is a bond of
Christian Communion, and obliges to Charity; it is a representation of our
Savior's Crucifixion, and so calls to the practice of Patience, Forgiveness,
and Holy Resolution; and it is a solemn Sacrifice of Praise, and so obliges to
practical Gratitude.

How wide are thy Wounds, O my dying Savior, and how sorrowful thy
Countenance? Oh thy bitter Agony! Oh thy shameful Cross! And all occasioned by
my sins; and shall I continue in the same Transgressions out of despite to my
Savior? Lord, let me never be in any capacity to do so any more; for how shall
I dare to eat with thee, and to lift up my heel against thee? In this Sacrament
I renew the Vow which I made in my Baptism, and have so often shamefully
broken, and thereby forfeited the blessings which were promised me upon the
performance of my duty. Now this Covenant, as on Gods part it entitles me to
his Protection, and his love, to the Merits of his Son, and the indwelling of
his Holy Spirit; so on my part it engages me to accept of that Son of his in
all his Offices, obliging me to receive him as my Sovereign, and to obey his
Commands, and to depend upon him; to receive him as my High Priest, and to
believe that his Sacrifice of himself, if I repent and amend, shall cleanse me
from all sin, but if I continue in my disobedience, shall avail me nothing; and
to give my self up to his Instruction as a Prophet, learning from him all the
particulars of the Divine Will, that are necessary to make me wise to
Salvation, and perfect unto every good Work. But how often have I broken that
Covenant, rebelled against this my Sovereign, made my self unworthy of the
blessing of this my High Priest, and cast all his Laws behind my back?

Before my Repentance, my bosom was a Den of Thieves, and a Cage of unclean
Birds; but now it is cleansed, and I am become a new Creature; now know I that
I am the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in me; but if any man
defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy, for the Temple of God is holy,
which Temple I am. There is a particular Veneration paid to the places where
Princes usually entertain themselves; and every House where any of the
Blood Royal of Persia is born, is afterward converted to a Sanctuary; and
wherever any of their Princes lodges in a Journey, the place is reputed for
the future, sacred; and ought not the place where my God takes up his
Habitation, to be for the same reason separate from profane and common uses?
And if some of the School-Doctors who assert Transubstantiation, tell us, that
as soon as the consecrated Host grows moldy, the Body of God retires from it,
and it is again changed into its old substance of bread: can I think that God
will pitch his Tents in a polluted Soul infected with the Leprosy of Vice? I
do therefore resolve, and it shall from henceforward be the employment of my
time and my strength so to live in thy fear, and to thy service, that I may dye
in thy favor, and rest in thy Peace, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

. 31. At the end of this Meditation, this Collect is fitly subjoined.

BLessed and most bountiful Savior, as thou have honored me, and made me
happy this day, so vouchsafe me the same measures of Grace, the same ardors of
Mind, and the same holy opportunities all the days of my Life; fix my thoughts
upon the things of Heaven; strengthen and inflame my love to my dying Savior,
increase and support my Faith, confirm and secure my Hopes, and give me
frequent occasions to exercise all the other Virtues of my Christian Calling;
and as thou have filled my soul with the most ravishing and transporting
pleasures, so make me for ever careful that I neither quench thy Blessed
Spirit, nor stifle its Motions, but that I may improve all the seasons of
Mercy, and all the tendries of Grace to the best ends and purposes, to the
advancement of thy Glory and my own Salvation, through thy Merits and
Mediation, who with the Father and the Holy Ghost, live and reignest ever one
God, world without end, Amen.

. 32. After this the devout man is all Rapture, and all Joy, and cannot forbear
praising God afresh for all his spiritual blessings in Heavenly Places, in this
or the like Hymn.

O God, my heart is ready, my heart is ready, I will sing, and give praise with
the best Member that I have.

I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, among the people, and I will sing
praises unto thee among the Nations.

For thy mercy is greater than the Heavens, and thy truth reaches unto the
Clouds.

Through God shall we do great acts, and it is he that shall tread down our
enemies.

Truly God is loving unto Israel, even unto such as are of a clean heart.

Oh how amiable are thy dwellings, thou Lord of Hosts! my soul has a desire
and longing to enter into the Courts of the Lord, my heart and my flesh rejoice
in the Living God.

Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee, in whose heart are thy ways.

Blessed are they who dwell in thy House, they will always be praising thee.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

To which he subjoins this Act of Love to 'Jesus.

I love and admire thee, my dearest Jesus, I honor and adore thee above all
things: the most glorious and useful things in nature are contemptible in
comparison of thee: to know thee is beyond all notion, and to love thee better
than triumphs. I am poor without thee, comfortless and forlorn, but Heaven it
self, did not thou reside there, would lose its amiableness. Oh the dearest
name of my adorable Savior, how sweet is it beyond the taste of delicacies to
my pallat, how pleasant beyond the Harmony of Angels to my ears: how does the
sound of those syllables refresh and cheer my drooping soul? And when Satan
urges to me the remembrance of my sins, how do I affront and baffle all his
attempts by the powerful Name of Jesus? I can tender thee nothing, O my most
obliging and benign Savior, as a recompense of the infinite and miraculous
testimonies of thy Compassion, but a few impotent vows, and verbal
acknowledgments; my whole stock of services, were my powers as great, and my
life as long as that of Angels, would never repay one half of the debt which I
owe thee: but if love and adoration will make thee satisfaction, I will love
and adore thee for ever: I will religiously preserve thee in my memory, where
nothing shall efface the characters: From this day I renounce all other loves,
and turn Apostate from the world, to be a Convert to Jesus: Oh that I had no
necessities of nature to gratify, no distractions of the World to divert me,
that I might always celebrate, and always love my Jesus. How much time should I
redeem from impertinencies, and consecrate to Religion, and the service of my
Redeemer: and what a Heaven upon Earth would this be! I am content to be poor,
and a Pilgrim, to be despised and persecuted, so I may enjoy thee, for where
thou art, there is Heaven; and where thou art not, there is Hell: and Death and
Destruction seize that man whom thou desertest. Lord, keep me firm to these
resolutions, that I may live with thee, and love thee for ever. Amen.

. 33. This Act of Love is also accompanied with the following Act of
Resignation.

So amiable is the fairest of Ten Thousand, and so beneficial are his
injunctions, that I should baffle my interests as well as my Reason and my
Conscience, should not I devote my self to his service; from this day forward,
therefore, I make Jesus my Master, his Majesty will I reverence, and his
sanctions obey, and into his hands do I resign my own will, the faculty and
powers, the acts and exercise of it. What my dearest Master loves shall be my
delight, and I will detest what his soul abhors, and he alone shall be my
guide, who is my best friend: my Redeemer came from Heaven to show mankind the
way thither, and thither after a short stay on earth he returned, that he might
open that Kingdom to all Believers: I can never wander when he conducts me; I
can never hunger when I am treated with the Bread of Life, nor thirst while the
Fountain of Salvation is near me, nor be naked while his Righteousness clothes
me: how shall I doubt, who am instructed by unerring Wisdom, or fear, who am
protected by Omnipotency? I will therefore live and dye in the service of
Jesus, that I may experiment the satisfactions and comfort of a good Conscience
here, and of a Crown of Glory in Heaven. Amen.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the Communion of
the Holy Ghost; be with me, and with all the Servants of God, now and for
evermore, Amen. Amen.

FINIS.

