L. ANNAEUS SENECA


SENECA'S MORALS ABSTRACTED: IN THREE PARTS. I. Of Benefits: II. Of a Happy
Life, Anger, and Clemency. III. A Miscellany of Epistles.
By ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

LONDON: Printed by T. N. for Henry Brom, at the Gun in St Paul's Churchyard.
MDCLXXIX.

SENECA'S MORALS By way of ABSTRACT. Of Benefits. PART I. By R. L'ESTRANGE.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb for Henry Broom, at the Gun in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1678

THE Contents.
Chap. I. OF Benefits in General Page 1. Chap. II. Several sorts of Benefits p.
5. Chap. III. A Son may oblige his Father, and a Servant his Master p. 9. Chap.
IV. It is the Intention, not the Matter, that makes the Benefit p. 18. Chap. V.
There must be Judgment in a Benefit, as well as Matter, and Intention, and
especially in the Choice of the Person. p. 24. Chap. VI. The Matter of
Obligations, with its Circumstances. p. 29. Chap. VII. The Manner of Obliging
p. 37. Chap. VIII. The Difference, and Value of Benefits p. 46. Chap. IX. An
honest Man cannot be outdone in Courtesy p. 57. Chap. X. The Question
discussed, whether or no a Man may Give, or Return a Benefit to himself p. 64
Chap. XI. How far one Man may be Obliged for a Benefit done to another p. 69.
Chap. XII. The Benefactor must have no By-ends p. 75. Chap. XIII. There are
many Cases wherein a Man may be Minded of a Benefit, but it is very rarely to
be Challenged, and never to be Upbraided. p. 90. Chap. XIV. How far to Oblige,
or Requite a Wicked Man. p. 103. Chap. XV. A General view of the Parts, and
Duties of the Benefactor. p. 116 Chap. XVI. How the Receiver ought to behave
himself p. 125. Chap. XVII. Of Gratitude p. 138. Chap. XVIII. Gratitude
Mistaken p. 147. Chap. XIX. Of Ingratitude p. 154. Chap. XX. There can be no
Law against Ingratitude p. 164.
TO THE READER.
IT has been a long time in my Thought to turn Seneca into English: But,
whether as a Translation, or an Abstract, was the Question. A Translation I
perceive it must not be, at last, for several Reasons. First, It is a thing
already done to my hand, and of above Sixty years standing; though with as
little Credit perhaps to the Author, as Satisfaction to the Reader. Secondly,
There are a thousand things in him, that are wholly foreign to my Business: As
his Philosophical Treatises of Meteors, Earthquakes, the Original of Rivers;
several frivolous Disputes betwixt the Epicureans, and the Stoics, etc. to say
nothing of his frequent Repetitions of the same thing again in other words,
(wherein he very handsomely excuses himself, by saying, That he does but
Inculcate over, and over the same Counsels, to those that over and over commit
the same Faults.) Thirdly; His Excellency Consists rather in a Rhapsody of
Divine, and Extraordinary Hints, and Notions, than in any Regulated Method of
Discourse; so that to take him as he lies, and to go thorough with him, were
utterly inconsistent with the Order, and Brevity which I propound; my Principal
design being only to digest, and Commonplace his Morals, in such sort, that
any Man, upon occasion, may know where to find them. And, I have kept my self
so close to this Proposition, that I have reduced all his scattered Ethiques to
their proper Heads, without any Additions of my own, more than of absolute
Necessity for the Tacking of them together. Some other Man, in my Place, would,
perchance, make you twenty Apologies, for his want of Skill, and Address, in
governing this Affair, but these are Formal, and Pedantique Fooleries: As if
any Man that first takes himself for a Coxcomb in his own Heart, would
afterward make himself one in Print too. This Abstract, such as it is, you are
extremely welcome to; and I am sorry it is no better, both for your sakes and
my own: for, if it were written up to the Spirit of the Original, it would be
one of the most valuable Presents that ever any private Man bestowed upon the
Public: And this too, even in the Judgment of both Parties, as well Christian
as Heathen: of which in its due place.

Next to my Choice of the Author, and of the Subject, together with the Manner
of handling it, I have likewise had some regard in this Publication, to the
Timing of it, and to the Preference of this Topique of Benefits above all
others, for the Groundwork of my first Essay. We are fallen into an Age of vain
Philosophy; (as the Holy Apostle calls it) and so desperately overrun with
Drolls and Scepticks, that there is hardly any thing so Certain, or so Sacred,
that is not exposed to Question, or Contempt. Insomuch, that betwixt the
Hypocrite, and the Atheist, the very Foundations of Religion, and good Manners
are shaken, and the Two Tables of the Decalogue dashed to pieces, the one
against the other: The Laws of Government are Subjected to the Phansies of the
Vulgar; Public Authority to the Private Passions and Opinions of the People;
and the Supernatural Motions of Grace confounded with the Common Dictates of
Nature. In this State of Corruption, who so fit as a good honest
Christian-Pagan, for a Moderator betwixt Pagan-Christians?

To pass now from the General Scope of the Whole work, to the particular
Argument of this following Discourse; I have pitched upon the Theme of
Benefits, Gratitude and Ingratitude, to begin withal, as an Earnest of the
Rest, and a Lecture expressly Calculated for the Unthankfulness of these Times:
the foulest undoubtedly, and the most execrable of all others, since the very
Apostasy of the Angels: Nay, if I durst but suppose a Possibility of Mercy for
those Damned Spirits, and that they might ever be taken into Favor again, my
Charity would hope even better from them, than we have found from some of our
Revolters, and that they would so behave themselves, as not to incurr a Second
Forfeiture. And, to carry the Resemblance yet one point further, they do Both
of them agree in an Implacable Malice against those of their Fellows that keep
their Stations. But Alas! What could Ingratitude do, without Hypocrisy? the
Inseparable Companion of it; and, in Effect, the Bolder, and the Blacker Devil
of the Two? For Lucifer himself never had the Face to lift up his Eyes to
Heaven, and talk to the Allmighty at the Familiar Rate of our Pretended
Patriots, and Zelots: and at the same time, to make him Party to a Cheat. It Is
not for nothing, that the Holy Ghost has denounced so many Woes, and redoubled
so many Cautions against Hypocrites; plainly intimating, at once, how dangerous
a Snare they are to Mankind, and no less Odious to God himself: which is
sufficiently denoted in the force of that dreadful expression, And your Portion
shall be with Hypocrites. You will find in the Holy Scriptures (as I have
formerly observed) that God has given the Grace of Repentance to Persecuters,
Idolaters, Murderers, Adulterers, etc. but I am mistaken, if the whole Bible
affords you any one Instance of a Converted Hypocrite.

To descend now from Truth it self, to our own Experience: Have we not seen,
even in our days, a most Pious (and almost a Faultless) Prince, brought to the
Scaffold by his own Subjects? The most Glorious Constitution upon the Face of
the Earth, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, torn to Pieces, and dissolved? The
Happyest People under the Sun Enslaved; Our Temples Sacrilegiously profaned;
and a License given to all sorts of Heresy, and Outrage? And by whom, but by a
Race of Hypocrites, who had nothing in their Mouths all this while, but The
Purity of the Gospel; The Honor of the King; and, The Liberty of the People:
assisted underhand with Defamatory Papers, which were levelled at the King
Himself, thorough the sides of His most faithful Ministers? This PROJECT
succeeded so well against One Government, that it is now again set a foot
against Another; and by some of the very Actors too in that TRAGEDY, and after
a most Gracious Pardon also, when Providence had laid their Necks, and their
Fortunes at His Majesty's Feet. It is a wonderful thing, that Libells, and
Libellers, the most infamous of Practices, and of Men; the most Unmanly,
Sneaking Methods, and Instruments of Mischief: the very Bane of Humane Society,
and the Plague of all Governments: It is a wonderful thing (I say) that these
Engines, and Engineers, should ever find Credit enough in the World to engage a
Party: But it would still be more wonderful, if the same Trick, should pass
twice upon the same People, in the same Age, and from the very same IMPOSTORS.
This Contemplation has carried me a little out of my way, but it has at length
brought me to my Text again; for there is in the bottom of it, the highest
Opposition imaginable, of Ingratitude, and Obligation.

By this Taste, the Reader will in some Measure be able to judge what he is
further to expect: that is to say, as to the Cast of my design, and the
simplicity of the Style, and Dress; for that will be still the same; only
accompanied with variety of Matter. Within a Term, or two, I do propound (God
willing) to follow This, with another Manual; and so to go on till I have
finished the whole. Whether it pleases the World or not, the Care is taken: And
yet I could wish that it might be as delightful to others upon the Perusal, as
it has been to me in the Speculation. Next to the Gospel it self ^ do look upon
it as the most Sovereign Remedy against the Miseries of Humane Nature; and I
have ever found it so in all the Injuries and Distresses, of an Unfortunate
Life. You may read more of him if you please in the Appendix, which I have here
Subjoined to this Preface, concerning the Authority of his Writings, and the
Circumstances of his Life; as I have extracted them out of Lipsius.

OF SENECA'S WRITINGS.
IT appears that our Author had, among the Ancients, three Professed Enemies.
In the first place Caligula; who called his Writings, Sand without Lime;
alluding to the starts of his Fancy, and the Incoherence of his Sentences. But
Seneca was never the worse for the Censure of a Person that propounded even the
suppressing of Homer himself; and of casting Virgil and Livy out of all Public
Libraries. The next, was Fabius; who Taxes him for being too bold with the
Eloquence of former times, and failing in that point himself; and likewise for
being too Queint and Finical in his Expressions: which Tacitus imputes, in
part, to the freedom of his own particular Inclination, and partly to the
Humor of the Times. He is also charged by Fabius as no profound Philosopher;
but with all this, he allows him to be a Man very Studious, and Learned; of
great Wit, and Invention; and well read in all sorts of Litterature; a severe
Reprover of Vice; most Divinely Sententious; and well worth the Reading; if it
were only for his Moralls; Adding, that if his Judgment had been answerable to
his Wit, it had been much the more for his Reputation: but he Wrote whatever
came next: so that I would advise the Reader (says he) to distinguish, where
He Himself did not: for there are many things in him, not only to be approved,
but admired, and it was great Pity, that he that could do what he would, should
not always make the best Choice. His Third Adversary is Agellius, who falls
upon him for his Style, and a kind of Tinkling in his Sentences; but yet
commends him for his Piety, and good Counsels. On the other side, Columella
calls him A Man of excellent Wit and Learning; Pliny; The Prince of Erudition;
Tacitus gives him the Character of a Wise Man, and a fit Tutour for a Prince.
Dio reports him to have been the greatest Man of his Age.

Of those Pieces of his that are Extant, we shall not need to give any
Particular Account: and of those that are lost, we cannot, any further than by
Lights to them from other Authors; as we find them cited much to his honor; and
we may reasonably compute them to be the greater part of his Works. That he
wrote several Poems in his Banishment, may be gathered, partly from himself;
but more expressly out of Tacitus, who says, That he was reproached with his
applying himself to Protry, after he saw that Nero took pleasure in it, out of
a design to Curry-Favour. St. Jerome refers to a Discourse of his concerning
Matrimony. Lactantius takes notice of his History, and his Books of Moralities:
St. Augustine quotes some Passages of his out of a Book of Superstition: Some
References we meet with, to his Books of Exhortations. Fabius makes mention of
his Dialogues: And he himself speaks of a Treatise of his own, concerning
Earthquakes, which he wrote in his Youth. But the Opinion of an Epistolary
Correspondence that he had with St. Paul, does not seem to have much Color
for it.

Some few Fragments however of those Books of his that are wanting, are yet
preserved in the Writings of other Eminent Authors; sufficient to show the
World, how great a Treasure they have lost, by the Excellency of that little
that is left.

Seneca, says Lactantius, That was the sharpest of all the Stoics, How Divin.
Instit. Lib. 1. Cap. 4.
great a Veneration has he for the Allmighty? As for Instance; discoursing of a
Violent Death: Do you not understand, says he, the Majesty, and the Authority
of your Judge? He is the Supreme Governor of Heaven and Earth, and the God of
all our Gods; and it is upon him that all those Powers depend which we Worship
for Deities. Moreover in his Exhortations. This God, says he, when he laid the
Foundations of the Universe, and entered upon the greatest, and the best Work
in Nature, in ordering of the Government of the World; though he was himself
all in all, yet he substituted other Subordinate Ministers, as the Servants of
his Commands. And, How many other things does this Heathen speak of God, like
one of Us?

Which the Acute Seneca (says Lactantius again) saw in his Exhortations. Cap.
7.
We, says he, have our Dependence elsewhere, and should look up to that Power
unto which we are indebted for all we we can pretend to that is good.

And again, Seneca says very well in his Morals; they Worship the Lib. 2. Cap.
2.
Images of the Gods, says he, Kneel to them, and Adore them; they are hardly
ever from them, either plying them with Offerings, or Sacrifices; and yet after
all this Reverence to the Image, they have no regard at all for the Workman
that made it.

Lactantius again. An Invective, ( says Seneca Lib. 3. Cap. 15.
in his Exhortations) is the Masterpiece of most of our Philosophers: and if
they fall upon the Subject of Avarice, Lust, Ambition, they lash out into such
Excess of Bitterness, as if Railing were a Mark of their Profession. They make
me think of Gally-Pots in an Apothecaries Shop, that have Remedies without, and
Poison within.

Lactantius still. He that would know all things Lib. 5. Cap. 9.
let him Read Seneca; the most lively Describer of Public Vices, and Manners,
and the smartest Reprehender of them.

And again: As Seneca has it in his Books of Moral Lib. 6. Cap. 17.
Philosophy; He is the Brave Man, whose Splendour, and Authority, is the least
part of his Greatness: that can look Death in the Face, without Trouble, or
Surprise; who, if his Body were to be broken upon the Wheel, or Melted Lead to
be poured down his Throat, would be less concerned for the Pain it self, than
for the dignity of bearing it.

Let no Man, says Lactantius, think himself the safer in his wickedness Lib.
6. Cap. 14.
for want of a Witness; for God is Omniscient; and to him nothing can be a
secret. It is an admirable Sentence that Seneca concludes his Exhortations
withal. GOD, says he, is a Great, ( I know not what) an Incomprehensible
Power: It is to him, that we Live; and to him, that we must approve our selves.
What does it avail us, that our Consciences are hidden from Men, when our Souls
lie open to God? What could a Christian have spoken more to the purpose in this
Case, than this Divine Pagan. And in the Beginning of the same WORK says
Seneca, What is it that we do? To what end is it to stand contriving, and to
hide our selves? We are under a Guard, and there is no escaping from our Keeper.
One Man may be parted from another, by Travel, Death, Sickness: But there is no
dividing us from our selves. It Is to no purpose to creep into a Corner, where
no body shall see us. Ridiculous Madness! Make it the Case that no Mortal Eye
could find us out? He that has a Conscience gives Evidence against himself.

It is truly, and excellently spoken of Seneca, says Lib. 6. Cap. 25.
Lactantius, once again, Consider, says he, the Majesty, the Goodness, and the
Venerable Mercies of the Allmighty: A Friend that is always at hand. What
delight can it be to him, the slaughter of Innocent Creatures, or the Worship
of Bloody Sacrifices? Let us purge our Minds, and lead Virtuous and Honest
Lives: His Pleasure lies not in the Magnificence of Temples, made with Stone,
but in the Piety and Devotion of Consecrated Hearts.

In the Book that Seneca wrote against Superstitions, De Civ* Del. Lib. 6. Cap.
10.
treating of Images, says St. Austin, he Writes thus, They represent the Holy,
the Immortal, and the Inviolable Gods, in the basest Matter; and without Life
or Motion: In the Forms of Men, Beasts, Fishes* some, of mixed Bodies; and
those Figures they call Deities, which, if they were but animated, would
affright a Man, and pass for Monsters. And then a little farther, treating of
Natural Theology; after citing the Opinions of Philosophers, he supposes an
Objection against himself* Some body will perhaps ask me: Would you have me
then to believe the Heavens, and the Earth, to be Gods; and some of them above
the Moon, and some below it? Shall I ever be brought to the Opinion of Plato,
or of Strato the Peripatetick: the one of which would have God to be without a
Body, and the other without a Mind? To which he replies; And, Do you give more
Credit then to the Dreams of T. Tatius, Romulus, and Hostilius, who caused,
among other Deities, even Fear, and Paleness, to be worshipped? The vilest of
Humane Affections; The one being the Motion of an affrighted Mind, and the
other, not so much the Disease, as the Color of a disordered Body. Are these
the Deities that you will rather put your Faith in, and place in the Heavens?
And speaking afterward of their Abominable Customs. With what Liberty does he
Write? One, says he, out of Zeal, makes himself an Eunuch; another Lances his
Arms: If this be the way to Please their Gods, What should a Man do if he had
a Mind to Anger them? Or, if this be the way to please them, they do certainly
deserve not to be Worshipped at all. What a Phrensy is this, to imagine, that
the Gods can be delighted with such Cruelties, as even the worst of Men would
make a Conscience to inflict? The most Barbarous and Notorious of Tyrants; some
of them have perhaps done it Themselves, or Ordered the tearing of men to
pieces by Others; but they never went so far, as to command any man to Torment
himself. We have heard of those that have suffered Castration, to gratify the
Lust of their Imperious Masters: but never any Man that was forced to Act it
upon himself. They Murder themselves in their very Temples, and their Prayers
are offered up in Blood. Whosoever shall but observe what they do, and what
they suffer, will find it so mis-becoming an honest Man, so unworthy of a
Freeman, and so inconsistent with the Action of a Man in his Wits, that he must
conclude them all to be Mad; if it were not that there are so many of them; for
only their Number is their Justification, and their Protection.

When he comes to reflect, says St. Augustine, upon those Passages, which he
himself had seen in the Capitol. He censures them with Liberty, and Resolution:
and no Man would believe that such things would be done, unless in Mockery, or
Phrenzy. What Lamentation is there in the Egyptian Sacrifices for the loss of
Osiris? And then what joy for the finding of him again? which he makes himself
sport with, for in truth it is all a Fiction: and yet those People that neither
lost any thing, nor found any thing, must express their Sorrows, and their
Rejoycings, to the highest degree: But there is only a Certain time, says he,
for this Freake, and once in a Year people may be allowed to be Mad. I came
into the Capitol, says Seneca, where the several Deities had their several
Servants, and Attendants, their Lictors, their Dressers, and all in Posture,
and Action, as if they were executing their Offices: Some to hold the Glass,
others to Comb out Juno's and Minerva's hair; one to tell Jupiter what a Clock
it is; Some Lasses there are, that sit Gazing upon the Image, and Phansy
Jupiter has a kindness for them. All these things, says Seneca, a while after,
a Wise Man will observe for the Law's sake, more than for the Gods; and all
this Rabble of Deities, which the Superstition of many Ages has gathered
together, we are in such manner to adore, as to consider the Worship to be
rather Matter of Custom, than of Conscience. Whereupon St. Augustine observes,
That this Illustrious Senator, Worshipped what he Reproved; Acted what he
Disliked; and Adored what he Condemned.

SENECA'S LIFE and DEATH.
IT has been an Ancient Custom, to Record the Actions, and the Writings of
Eminent Men, with all their Circumstances; and it is but a Right that we owe to
the Memory of our Famous Author. Seneca was, by Birth, a Spaniard of Cordova (a
Roman Colony of great Fame and Antiquity) He was of the Family of Annaeus; of
the Order of Knights; and the Father, Lucius Annaeus Seneca, was distinguished
from the Son, by the Name of the Orator. His Mothers Name was Helvia; a Woman
of Excellent Qualities. His Father came to Rome in the time of Augustus; and
his Wife and Children soon followed him, our Seneca yet being in his Infancy.
There were three Brothers of them, and never a Sister. Marcus Annaeus Novatus,
Lucius Annaeus Seneca, and Lucius Annaeus Mela. The first of these changed his
Name for Iunius Gallio, who adopted him; to him it was, that he Dedicated his
Treatise of Anger, whom he calls Novatus too; and he also Dedicated his
Discourse of a Happy Life to his Brother Gallio. The youngest Brother ( Annaeus
Mela) was Lucan's Father. Seneca was about Twenty years of Age in the Fifth
year of Tiberius, when the Jews were expelled Rome. His Father trained him up
to Rhetoric, but his Genius led him rather to Philosophy; and he applied his
Wit to Morality, and Virtue. He was a great Hearer of the Celebrated Men of
those times; as Attalus, Sotion, Papirius Fabianus, (of whom he makes often
mention) and he was much an Admirer also of Demetrius the Cynique, whose
conversation he had afterward in the Court, and both at home also, and abroad,
for they often Traveled together. His Father was not at all pleased with his
humor of Philosophy, but forced him upon the Law, and for a while he Practiced
Pleading. After which, he would needs put him upon Public Employment: and he
came first to be Quaestor, and then Praetor; and some will have it that he was
chosen Consul; but this is doubtful.

Seneca finding that he had ill Offices done him at Court, and that Nero's
Favor began to cool; he went directly and resolutely to Nero, with an Offer to
refund all that he had gotten. Which Nero would not receive; but, however, from
that time, he changed his Course of Life; received few Visits; shunned Company;
went little abroad; still pretending to be kept at home, either by
Indisposition, or by his Study. Being Nero's Tutor, and Governor, all things
went well, so long as Nero followed his Counsel. His two Chief Favorites, were
Burrhus and Seneca, who were both of them Excellent in their ways. Burrhus in
his care of Military Affairs, and severity of Discipline; Seneca for his
Precepts, and Good Advice in the matter of Eloquence, and the Gentleness of an
Honest Mind: assisting one another in that slippery Age of the Prince (says
Tacitus) to invite him, by the Allowance of Lawful Pleasures, to the Love of
Virtue. Seneca had two Wives; the Name of the first is not mentioned; his
second was Paulina, whom he often speaks of with great Passion. By the former
he had his Son Marcus.

In the first year of Claudius he was Banished into Corsica, when Iulia the
Daughter of Germanicus was accused by Messalina of Adultery, and Banished too:
Seneca being charged as one of the Adulterers. After a matter of Eight years,
or upwards, in Exile, he was called back, and as much in favor again as ever.
His Estate was partly Patrimonial, but the greatest part of it was the Bounty
of his Prince. His Gardens, Villa's, Lands, Possessions, and Incredible Sums of
Money are agreed upon at all hands; which drew an Envy upon him. Dio reports him
to have had 250000 l. Sterling at Interest in Brittany alone, which he called
in, all at a Sum. The Court it self could not bring him to Flattery; and, for
his Piety, Submission, and Virtue, the Practice of his whole Life witnesses for
him. So soon, says he, as the Candle is De Ira, Lib 3.
taken away; my Wife, that knows my Custom, lies still, without a word
speaking: and then do I Recollect all that I have said, or done that day, and
take my self to shrift. And why should I conceal, or reserve any thing, or make
any Scruple of enquiring into my Errors, when I can say to my self, Do so no
more, and, for this once, I Will forgive thee? And again, What can be more Pious,
and Self-denying, than this Passage, in one Ep. 96.
of his Epistles? Believe me now, when I tell you the very bottom of my Soul:
In all the Difficulties and Crosses of my life, this is my Consideration: Since
it is God's Will, I do not only obey, but assent to it; nor do I comply, out of
Necessity, but Inclination.

Here follows now, says Tacitus, the Death of Seneca, to Nero's Annal. Lib.
15. Cap. 14.
great satisfaction: Not so much for any pregnant Proof against him, that he
was of Piso's Conspiracy; but Nero was resolved to do that by the Sword, which
he could not Effect by Poison. For, it is reported, that Nero had corrupted
Cleonicus (a Freeman of Seneca' s) to give his Master Poison; which did not
succeed: whether that the servant had discovered it to his Master; or that
Seneca by his own caution, and Jealousy, had avoided it; for he lived only
upon a simple Diet, as the Fruits of the Earth; and his Drink was most commonly
River-water.

Natalis, it seems, was sent upon a Visit to him (being indisposed) with a
Complaint, that he would not let Piso come at him; and Advising him to the
Continuance of their Friendship, and Acquaintance, as formerly. To whom Seneca
made Answer, That frequent Meetings, and Conferences betwixt them, could do
neither of them any Good; but that he had a great Interest in Piso's welfare.
Hereupon Granius Silvanus (a Captain of the Guard) was sent to examine Seneca
upon the Discourse that passed betwixt him, and Natalis, and to return his
Answer. Seneca, either by Chance, or upon Purpose, came that day from Campania,
to a Villa of his own, within four Miles of the City; and thither the Officer
went the next Evening, and beset the Place. He found Seneca at Supper with his
Wife Paulina, and two of his Friends; and gave him immediately an Account of
his Commission. Seneca told him, that it was true, that Natalis had been with
him, in Piso's Name, with a Complaint, that Piso could not be admitted to see
him; and that he exous'd himself by reason of his want of health; and his
desires to be quiet, and private; and that he had no reason to prefer another
Man's Welfare before his own. Caesar himself, he said, knew very well that he
was not a Man of Complement, having received more Proofs of his Freedom, than
of his Flattery. This Answer of Seneca's was delivered to Caesar in the
Presence of Poppaea and Tigellinus, the Intimate Confidents of this Barbarous
Prince: and Nero asked him, Whether he could gather any thing from Seneca, as
if he intended to make himself away? The Tribunes Answer was, That he did not
find him one jot moved with the Message; but that he went on roundly with his
Tale, and never so much as changed Countenance for the matter. Go back to him
then, says Nero, and tell him, That he is Condemned to Die. Fabius Rusticus
delivers it, that the Tribune did not return the same way he came, but went
aside to Fenius (a Captain of that Name) and told him Caesar's Orders; asking
his Advice, whether he should obey them, or not; who bad him by all means to do
as he was Ordered. Which want of Resolution was fatal to them all; for Silvanus
also, that was one of the Conspirators, assisted now to serve, and to increase
those Crimes, which he had before complotted to revenge. And yet he did not
think fit to appear himself in the business, but sent a Centurion to Seneca, to
tell him his Doom. Seneca, without any surprise, or disorder, calls for his
Will; which being refused him by the Officer, he turned to his Friends, and
told them, That since he was not permitted to requite them as they deserved, he
was yet at liberty to bequeath them the thing of all others that he esteemed
the most, that is the Image of his Life: which should give them the Reputation
both of Constancy, and Friendship, if they would but imitate it: exhorting them
to a firmness of Mind; sometimes by Good Counsel; otherwhile by Reprehension,
as the occasion required. Where, says he, is all your Philosophy now? all your
Premeditated Resolutions against the violences of Fortune? Is there any Man so
Ignorant of Nero's Cruelty, as to expect, after the Murder of his Mother, and
his Brother, that he should ever spare the Life of his Governor, and Tutor?
After some General Expressions to this Purpose; he took his Wife in his Arms,
and having somewhat fortified her against the Present Calamity, he besought,
and conjured her to moderate her Sorrows, and betake her self to the
Contemplations, and Comforts of a Virtuous Life; which would be a fair, and an
ample Consolation to her for the loss of her Husband. Paulina on the either
side, tells him her determination to bear him Company, and Wills for the
Executioner to do his Office. Well, says Seneca, if after the sweetness of
Life, as I have represented it to thee, thou had rather entertain an
honorable Death, I shall not envy thy Example; consulting, at the same time,
the Fame of the Person he loved, and his own tenderness, for fear of the
Injuries that might attend her when he was gone. Our Resolution says he, in
this Generous Act* may be equal, but thine will be the greater Reputation.
After this, the Veins of both their Arms were opened, at one and the same
stroke. Seneca did not bleed so freely, his spirits being wasted with Age, and
a thin Diet, so that he was forced to cut the Veins of his Thighs, and
elsewhere, to hasten his dispatch. When he was far spent, and almost sinking
under his Torments, he desired his Wife to remove into another Chamber, least
the Agonyes of the one might work upon the Courage of the other. His Eloquence
continued to the last, as appears by the Excellent Things he delivered at his
Death; which being taken in Writing from his own Mouth, and published in his
own words, I shall not presume to deliver them in any other. Nero, in the mean
time, who had no particular Spite to Paulina, gave Orders to prevent her Death,
for fear His Cruelty should grow more, and more Insupportable, and Odious.
Whereupon the Soldiers gave all freedom, and encouragement to her Servants, to
Bind up her Wounds, and stop the Blood, which they did accordingly, but whether
she was sensible of it or not, is a Question: For, among the Common People, who
are apt to judge the worst, there were some of Opinion, that as long as she
despaired of Nero's Mercy, she seemed to Court the Glory of dying with her
Husband for Company, but that upon the likelihood of better Quarter, she was
prevailed upon to outlive him; And so, for some years, she did survive him,
with all Piety and Respect to his Memory: but so miserably pale and wan, that
every body might Read the Loss of her Blood, and Spirits, in her very
Countenance.

Seneca finding his Death slow, and lingering, desires Statius Annaeus (his old
Friend, and Physician) to give him a Dose of Poison, which he had provided
beforehand, being the same Preparation which was appointed for Capital
Offenders in Athens. This was brought him, and he drank it up, but to little
purpose, for his Body was already chilled, and bound up against the force of
it. He went at last into a hot Bath, and sprinkling some of his servants that
were next him; This, says he, is an Oblation to Jupiter the Deliverer. The
fume of the Bath soon dispatched him, and his Body was Burnt, without any
Funeral solemnity, as he had directed in his Testament: though this Will of his
was made in the height of his Prosperity, and Power, There was a Rumor that
Subrius Flavius, in a Private consultation with the Centurions, had taken up
this following Resolution, (and that Seneca himself was no stranger to it) that
is to say, that after Nero should have been slain by the help of Piso, Piso
himself should have been killed too: and the Empire delivered up to Seneca; as
one that well deserved it, for his Integrity and Virtue.

BOOKS Printed for, and sold by H. Brom, since the dreadful Fire of LONDON
1666, to 1677.
Divinity.
BIshop Wilkins of Natural Religion. M Cumber's Companion to the Temple, being
a Paraphrase on the Common Prayer. 3 Vol. Bishop Cosen's Devotions. Bishop
Taylor's Holy Living and Dying. Mr. Fowler's Design of Christianity. Mr.
Patrick's Witnesses to Christianity in 2 Vol. -- His Advice to a Friend. Dr.
Spark's Devotions on the Feasts and Fasts of the Church. Dr. Du Moulin's
Prayers. Holy Anthems of the Church. The Saints Legacies. The Reformed
Monastry, or the Love of Jesus. Mr. Farindon's Sermons. Bona's Guide to
Eternity, And his Precepts and Practical Rules for a Christian Life. Several
Sermons at Court, etc. Dr. Duport's Three Sermons on May 29. Nov. 5. Ian. 30.
Histories.
The Life of the great Duke of Espernon, being the History of the Civil Wars of
France, beginning 1598. Where D'Avila leaves off, and ending in 1642. by
Charles Cotton Esquire The Commentary of Mr. Blaiz de Montluc the great Favorite
of France, in which are contained all the Sieges, Battles, Skirmishes, in three
Kings Reigns, by Charles Cotton Esquire Mr. Rycaut's History of Turkey. The History
of the Three last Grand Seigniors. The History of Don Quixot, Fol. Bishop
Wilkins's Real Character, Fol. Bishop Cosens against Transubstantiation. Dr.
Guidots Hist. of Bathe, and of the hot Waters there. The Fair one of Tunis, a
Romance. Domus Carthusiana, or the History of the most Noble Foundation of the
Charter House in London, with the Life and Death of Tho. Sutton Esquire The History
of the Sevarites, a Nation inhabiting part of the third Continent.
Physic.
Dr. Glisson de Ventriculo and Intestinis. De Vita Naturae. Dr. Barbet's
Practice, with Dr. Deoker's Notes. Sir Ken. Digby's Excellent Receipts in
Physic, Surgery, and Cookery. The Anatomy of the Elder-tree, with its
approved Virtue.
Miscellanies.
Vossius of the Wind and Seas. Dr. Skinner's Lexicon. The Planters Manuel.
Treatise of Humane Reason. The Complete Gamester. Toleration discussed, by R.
L'Estrange Esquire England's Improvement, by R. Coke Esquire Leyburn's Arith.
Recreations. Geographical Cards describing all parts of the World, and a
Geographical Dictionary.
School-Books.
Screvelius Lexicon, in Quarto. Centum Fabulae, in Octavo. Nolens Volens, or
you shall make Latin. Radyns Rudimenta Artis Oratoriae. Pools Parnassus. The
Scholars Guide from the Accidence to the University. Erasmus Coll. English.
Lipsius of Constancy, English.
Controversies.
Considerations touching the true way to suppress Popery; to which is added an
Historical account of the Reformation here in England. Lex Talionis, being an
Answer to Naked Truth. The Papists Apology answered. And several Tracts in
Defense of the Church of England.
SENECA OF Benefits.
CHAP. I. Of Benefits in General.
IT is perhaps, one of the most pernicious Errors of a Rash, and Inconsiderate
Life; the Common Ignorance of the World in the Matter of exchanging Benefits.
And this arises from a Mistake; partly, in the Person that we would Oblige; and
partly, in the thing it self. To begin with the Latter; A Benefit is a good
Office, done with Intention, and Judgment: that is to say, with a due regard to
all the Circumstances, of What; How; Why; When; Where; to whom; how much; and
the like. Or otherwise; It is a Voluntary, and Benevolent Action, that delights
the Giver, in the Comfort it brings to the Receiver. It will be hard to draw
this Subject, either into Method, or Compass; the one, because of the infinite
variety, and Complication of Cases; the other, by reason of the large Extent of
it: For the whole Business (almost) of Mankind in Society, falls under this
Head: The Duties of Kings and Subjects; Husbands, and Wives; Parents, and
Children; Masters, and Servants; Natives, and Strangers; High, and Low; Rich,
and Poor; Strong, and Weak; Friends, and Enemies. The very Meditation of it
breeds good Blood, and generous Thoughts; and instructs us in all the Parts of
Honor, Humanity, Friendship, Piety, Gratitude, Prudence, and Justice. In short;
the Art, and Skill of conferring Benefits, is, of all Humane Duties, the most
absolutely necessary to the well-Being, both of Reasonable Nature, and of every
Individual; as the very Ciment of all Communities, and the Blessing of
Particulars. He that does good to another Man, does good also to himself; not
only in the Consequence, but even in the very Act of doing it; for the
Conscience of well-doing is an ample Reward.

OF Benefits in General, there are several sorts; As Benefits Necessary,
Profitable, and Delightful.
Necessary, Profitable, and Delightful. Some things there are, without which we
Cannot Live; Others, without which we Ought not to live; and some again,
without which we Will not live. In the first Rank are those, which deliver us
from capital Dangers, or Apprehensions of Death: And the favor is rated
according to the hazard; for the greater the Extremity, the greater seems the
Obligation. The next is a Case wherein we may indeed Live, but we had better
Dye: As in the Question of Liberty, Modesty, and a good Conscience. In the
third place, follow those things which Custom, Use, Affinity, and Acquaintance
have made dear to us; As Husbands, Wives, Children, Friends, etc. Which an
honest Man will Preserve at his utmost Peril: Of things Profitable there is a
large Field; as Money, Honor, etc. to which might be added Matters of
Superfluity, and Pleasure: But, we shall open a way to the Circumstances of a
Benefit, by some previous, and more General deliberations upon the thing it
self.

CHAP. II. Several Sorts of Benefits.
WE shall divide Benefits into Absolute, and Benefits Absolute and Vulgar.
Vulgar; the One, appertaining to Good Life; the Other, is only Matter of
Commerce. The former are the more Excellent, because they can never be made
void: whereas all Material Benefits are tossed back, and forward, and change
their Master. There are some Offices that look like Benefits, but are only
desirable Conveniences; as Wealth, Title, etc. and These a Wicked Man may
receive from a Good, or a Good Man, from an Evil. Others again, that bear the
face of Injuries, which are only Benefits ill-taken; as Cutting, Lancing,
Burning, under the hand of a Surgeon. The greatest Benefits of all, are those
of good Education, which we receive from our Parents, either in the State of
Ignorance, or Perverseness; as their Care and Tenderness in our Infancy; Their
Discipline in our Childhood, to keep us to our duties by fear; and, if fair
means will not do, their Proceeding afterward to severity, and Punishment,
without which we should never have come to good. There are Matters of great
value many times, that are but of small price; as Instructions from a Tutor;
Medicines from a Physician, etc. And there are small matters again which are of
great consideration to us: the Gift may be small, and the consequence great, as
a Cup of cold Water in a time of need, may save a Man's Life; some things are of
great Moment to the Giver; others to the Receiver; One Man gives me a House;
another snatches me out, when it is falling upon my head; One gives me an
Estate; Another takes me out of the Fire; or casts me out a Rope when I am
sinking: Some good Offices we do to Friends; Others, to Strangers; but, those
are the noblest that we do without Predesert. There is an Obligation of Bounty;
and an Obligation of Charity: This, in case of Necessity; and That, in point of
Convenience. Some Benefits are Common; Others are Personal: as if a Prince (out
of pure Grace) grant a Privilege to a City; the Obligation lies upon the
Community, and only upon every Individual as a Part of the whole; but if it be
done particularly for my sake, then am I singly the Debtor for it. The
cherishing of Strangers is one of the duties of Hospitality; and exercises it
self in the Relief, and Protection of the Distressed. There are Benefits of
good Counsel, Reputation, Life, Fortune, Liberty, Health; nay, and of
Superfluity, and Pleasure. One Man obliges me out of his Pocket: Another gives
me Matter of Ornament, or Curiosity: a Third, Consolation. To say nothing of
Negative Benefits; for there are, that reckon it an Obligation if they do a
Body no hurt; and place it to Account, as if they saved a Man, when they do not
undo him. To shut up all in one word; as Benevolence is the most sociable of
all Virtues, so is it of the largest Extent; for, there is not any Man either
so great, or so little, but he is yet capable of giving, and of receiving
Benefits.

CHAP. III. A Son may Oblige his Father; and, a Servant his Master.
THE Question is (in the first Place) Whether it may not be possible for a
Father to owe more to a Son, in other respects, than the Son How far a Son may
Oblige a Father.
owes to his Father for his Being? That many Sons are both Greater, and Better
than their Fathers, there is no Question: as there are many other things that
derive their Beings from others, which yet are far greater than their Original.
Is not the Tree larger than the Seed? The River, than the Fountain? The
Foundation of all things lies hid, and the Superstructure obscures it. If I owe
all to my Father, because he gave me Life, I may owe as much to a Physician
that saved his Life; for, if my Father had not been Cured, I had never been
Begotten: Or, if I stand indebted for all that I am to my Beginning; my
Acknowledgment must run back to the very Original of all Humane Beings. My
Father gave me the Benefit of Life, which he had never done, if his Father had
not first given it to him. He gave me Life, not knowing to whom, and when I was
in a Condition neither to feel Death, nor to fear it. That Is the great Benefit,
to give Life to one that knows how to use it; and that is capable of the
Apprehension of Death. It Is true, that without a Father, I could never have had
a Being; and so without a Nurse that Being had never been improved; but I do
not therefore owe my Virtue either to my Nativity, or to her that gave me Suck.
The generation of me was the least part of the Benefit: For to Live, is common
with Brutes; but, to Live well is the main business; and that Virtue is all my
own, saving what I drew from my Education. It does not follow that the first
Benefit must be the greatest, because without the first, the greatest could
never have been. The Father gives Life to the Son, but once; but if the Son
saves the Fathers Life often, though he do but his duty, it is yet a greater
Benefit. And again, the Benefit that a Man receives is the greater, the more he
needs it; but, the Living has more need of Life, than he that is not yet born:
So that the Father receives a greater Benefit in the Continuance of his Life,
than the Son in the Beginning of it. What if a Son deliver his Father from the
Rack; or, which is more, lay himself down in his place? The giving of him a
Being, was but the Office of a Father; a simple Act; a Benefit given at a
venture; beside that he had a Participant in it, and a regard to his Family. He
gave only a single Life, and he received a happy one. My Mother brought me into
the World Naked, exposed, and void of Reason; but, my Reputation, and my
Fortune, are advanced by my Virtue. Scipio (as yet in his Minority) rescued his
Father in a Battle with Hannibal; and afterward from the Practices, and
Prosecution of a Powerful Faction; covering him with Consulary Honors, and the
Spoils of Public Enemies. He made himself as Eminent for his Moderation, as
for his Piety, and Military Knowledge: He was the Defender, and the Establisher
of his Country; He left the Empire without a Competitor; and made himself as
well the Ornament of Rome, as the Security of it: and, Did not Scipio, in all
this, more than requite his Father barely for Begetting of him? Whether did
Anchises more for Aeneas, in dandling the Child in his Arms, or Aeneas for his
Father, when he carried him upon his Back through the Flames of Troy, and made
his Name famous to future Ages, among the Founders of the Roman Empire? T.
Manlius was the Son of a Sour, and Imperious Father, who banished him his House
as a Blockhead, and a scandal to the Family: This Manlius, hearing that his
Fathers Life was in Question, and a day set for his Trial, went to the Tribune
that was concerned in the Cause, and discoursed him about it: the Tribune told
him the appointed time, and withal (as an Obligation upon the young Man) that
his Cruelty to his Son would be part of his Accusation: Manlius, upon this,
takes the Tribune aside, and presenting a Poniard to his breast, Swear, says
he, that you will let this Cause fall, or you shall have this Dagger in the
heart of you; and now it is at your choice, which way you will deliver my
Father. The Tribune Swore, and kept his Word; and made a fair Report of the
whole matter to the Council. He that makes himself Famous by his Eloquence,
Justice, or Arms, illustrates his Extraction, let it be never so mean; and
gives inestimable Reputation to his Parents. We should never have heard of
Sophroniscus, but for his Son Socrates; nor of Aristo, and Gryllus, if it had
not been for Xenophon, and Plato.

THIS is not to discountenance the Veneration we owe to Parents; nor to make
Children the worse, but the better; and to stir up generous Emulations: for, in
Contests of good Offices, both Parts are happy; as well the vanquished, as
those that overcome. It is the only honorable dispute that can arrive betwixt a
Father and a Son, which of the two shall have the better of the other in the
Point of Benefits.

IN the Question betwixt a Master, and a Servant; we must distinguish betwixt A
Servant may oblige his Master.
Benefits, Duties, and Actions Ministerial; By Benefits we understand those
good Offices that we receive from Strangers, which are voluntary, and may be
forborne without blame. Duties are the Parts of a Son, and Wife; and incumbent
upon Kindred, and Relations. Offices Ministerial belong to the Part of a
Servant. Now, since it is the Mind, and not the Condition of the Person, that
Prints the Value upon the Benefit, a Servant may oblige his Master, and so may
a Subject his Sovereign, or a Common Soldier his General, by doing more than he
is expressly bound to do. Some things there are, which the Law neither commands,
nor forbids; and here the Servant is free. It would be very hard for a Servant
to be chastised for doing less than his duty, and not thanked for it when he
does more. His Body, it is true, is his Masters, but his Mind is his own: and
there are many Commands which a Servant ought no more to obey, than a Master to
impose. There is no Man so great, but he may both need the help, and service,
and stand in fear of the Power and Unkindness, even of the meanest of Mortals.
One Servant Kills his Master, another Saves him; nay preserves his Masters
Life, perhaps with the loss of his own. He exposes himself to Torment and
Death; he stands firm against all threats and flatteries: which is not only a
Benefit in a Servant, but much the greater for his so being.

WHEN Domitius was besieged in Corfinium, and the Place brought to great
extremity; he pressed his servant so earnestly to Poison him, that at last he
was prevailed upon to give him a Potion: which, it seems, was an innocent
Opiate, and Domitius outlived it: Caesar took the Town, and gave Domitius his
Life; but it was his Servant that gave it him first.

THERE was another Town besieged, and, when it was upon the last pinch, two
Servants made their escape, and went over to the Enemy: Upon the Romans entering
the Town, and in the heat of the Soldiers fury, these two Fellows ran directly
home, took their Mistress out of her house, and drove her before them, telling
every body how barbarously she had used them formerly, and that they would now
have their Revenge: when they had her without the Gates, they kept her close
till the danger was over; by which means, they gave their Mistress her Life,
and she gave them their Freedom. This was not the Action of a Servile Mind, to
do so Glorious a thing, under an appearance of so great a Villainy; for, if they
had not passed for Deserters, and Parricides, they could not have gained their
End.

WITH one Instance more (and that a very brave one) I shall conclude this
Chapter.

IN the Civil Wars of Rome, a Party coming to search for a Person of Quality
that was proscribed, a Servant put on his Masters Cloths, and delivered himself
up to the Soldiers, as the Master of the House; he was taken into Custody, and
put to death, without discovering the Mistake. What could be more glorious,
than for a Servant to dye for his Master? in that Age, when there were not many
Servants that would not betray their Masters? So generous a tenderness in a
Public Cruelty; So invincible a Faith in a General Corruption; What could be
more glorious, I say, than so exalted a Virtue, as rather to choose death for
the Reward of his Fidelity, than the greatest advantages he might otherwise
have had for the violation of it?

CHAP. IV. It is the Intention, not the Matter, that makes the Benefit.
THE Good will of the Benefactor is the Fountain of all Benefits: nay, it is
the Benefit it self; or, at least the Stamp that makes it valuable, and
current. Some there are, I know, that take the Matter for the Benefit; and tax
the Obligation by weight and measure. When any thing is given them, they
presently cast it up; What may such a House be worth? Such an Office? Such an
Estate? As if that were the Benefit, which is only the Sign, and Mark of it:
For, the Obligation rests in the Mind, not in the Matter; And, all those
Advantages which we see, handle, or hold in actual possession by the Courtesy
of another, are but several Modes, or Ways of Explaining, and putting the Good
Will in Execution. There needs no great subtilty, to prove, that both Benefits
and Injuries receive their value from the Intention, when even Brutes
themselves are able to decide this Question. Tread upon a Dog by chance, or put
him to pain upon the dressing of a Wound; the one, he passes by as an Accident;
and the other, in his fashion, he acknowledges as a Kindness; but, offer to
strike at him, though you do him no hurt at all, he flies yet in the face of
you, even for the Mischief that you barely meant him.

IT is further to be observed, that all All Benefits are good.
Benefits are good; and (like the distributions of Providence) made up of
Wisdom and Bounty: whereas the Gift it self is neither good, nor bad, but may
indifferently be applied, either to the one, or to the other. The Benefit is
Immortal, the Gift Perishable: For, the Benefit it self continues, when we have
no longer, either the Use, or the Matter of it. He that is dead, was alive; He
that has lost his Eyes, did see; and, whatsoever is done, cannot be rendered
undone. My Friend (for Instance) is taken by Pirates; I redeem him; and, after
that, he falls into other Pirates hands: his Obligation to me is the same
still, as if he had preserved his Freedom. And so, if I save a Man from any one
Misfortune, and he falls into another; if I give him a Sum of Money, which is
afterward taken away by Thieves; it comes to the same Case. Fortune may deprive
us of the Matter of a Benefit, but the Benefit it self remains inviolable. If
the Benefit resided in the Matter, that which is good for one Man, would be so
for another; whereas many times the very same thing given to several Persons,
works contrary effects; even to the difference of Life, or Death; and, that
which is one bodies Cure, proves another bodies Poison. Beside that the Timeing
of it alters the value; and, a Crust of Bread upon a pinch, is a greater
Present than an Imperial Crown. What is more Familiar, than, in a Battle, to
shoot at an Enemy, and kill a Friend? Or, in stead of a Friend, to save an
Enemy? But yet this disappointment in the Event, does not at all operate upon
the Intention. What if a Man cures me of a Wen, with a stroke that was designed
to cut off my head? Or, with a Malicious blow upon my Stomach, breaks an
Imposthume? or, What if he save my Life, with a Draught that was prepared to
Poison me? The Providence of the Issue does not at all discharge the Obliquity
of the Intent* And, the same Reason holds good even in Religion it self: It is
not the Incense, or the Offering that is acceptable to God, but the Purity, and
Devotion of the Worshipper. Neither is the bare Will, without Action,
sufficient; that is, where we have the Means of Acting; for, in that Case, it
signifies as little to wish well, without well- doing, as to do good without
willing it. There must be Effect, as well as Intention, to make me owe a
Benefit; but, to will against it, does wholly discharge it. In fine, the
Conscience alone is the Judge, both of Benefits and Injuries.

IT does not follow now, because the Benefit rests in the The Good Will must be
accompanied with Judgment.
Good Will, that therefore the Good Will should be always a Benefit; for, if
it be not accompanied with Government, and Discretion, those Offices which we
call Benefits, are but the Works of Passion, or of Chance; and, many times, the
greatest of all Injuries. One Man does me good by Mistake; another, Ignorantly;
a third upon force; but, none of these Cases do I take to be an Obligation, for
they were neither directed to me, nor was there any kindness of Intention: We
do not thank the Seas for the Advantages we receive by Navigation; or the
Rivers, for supplying us with Fish, and flowing of our Grounds; we do not thank
the Trees either for their Fruits, or Shades; or the Winds for a fair Gale:
And, What Is the difference betwixt a reasonable Creature, that does not know,
and an Inanimate, that cannot? A good Horse saves one Man's Life; a good Suit
of Arms Another's; and, a Man perhaps, that never intended it, saves a Third.
Where Is the difference now betwixt the Obligation of the one, and of the other?
A Man falls into a River, and the fright cures him of an Ague; we may call this
a kind of lucky Mischance, but not a Remedy. And so it is with the Good we
receive, either without or beside, or contrary to Intention. It is the Mind,
and not the Event, that distinguishes a Benefit from an Injury.

CHAP. V. There must be Judgment in a Benefit, as well as Matter, and
Intention; and especially in the Choice of the Person.
AS it is the Will, that Designs the Benefit; and the Matter, that Conveys it;
So it is the Judgment that perfects it: which depends upon so many Critical
Niceties, that the least Error, either in the Person, the Matter, the Manner,
the Quality, the Quantity, the Time, or the Place, spoils all.

THE Consideration of the Person is a The Choice of the Person is a Main Point.
Main Point; for, we are to give by choice, and not by hazard. My Inclination
bids me oblige one Man; I am bound in Duty, and Justice, to serve another; here
it is Charity, there it is Pity; and, elsewhere perhaps Encouragement. There are
some that want, to whom I would not give; because, if I did, they would want
still. To one Man I would barely offer a Benefit; but, I would press it upon
another. To say the truth, we do not employ any Money to more profit, than that
which we bestow: and it is not to our Friends, our Acquaintances, or Countrymen;
nor to this, or that Condition of Men, that we are to restrain our Bounties;
but, wheresoever there is a Man, there is a Place, and Occasion for a Benefit.
We give to some that are good already; to others, in hope to make them so; but,
we must do all with discretion: for, we are as answerable for what we give; as
for what we receive: Nay, the Misplacing of a Benefit is worse, than the not
Receiving of it: For, the one is another Man's fault; but, the other is mine.
The Error of the Giver does oft-times excuse the Ingratitude of the Receiver;
for, a Favor ill-plac'd is rather a Profusion, than a Benefit. It is the most
shameful of Losses, an Inconsiderate bounty. I will choose a Man of Integrity,
Sincere, Considerate, Graceful, Temperate, Wellnatur'd; neither Covetous, nor
Sordid. And, when I have obliged such a Man, though not worth a Groat in the
World, I have gained my end. If we give, only to receive, we lose the fairest
objects for our Charity; the Absent, the Sick, the Captive, and the Needy. When
we oblige those that can never pay us again in kind; as a Stranger upon his
last Farewell; or a Necessitous Person upon his Deathbed, we make Providence
our Debtor; and rejoice in the Conscience even of a Fruitless Benefit. So long
as we are affected with Passions, and distracted with hopes, and fears; and
(the most unmanly of Vices) with our Pleasures, we are incompetent Judges where
to place our Bounties. But, when Death presents it self, and that we come to
our Last Will and Testament, we leave our Fortunes to the most worthy. He that
gives nothing but in hopes of receiving, must dye Intestate. It is the Honesty
of another Man's Mind that moves the Kindness of Mine; and I would sooner oblige
a Grateful Man, than an Ungrateful: but, this shall not hinder me from doing
good also to a Person that is known to be Ungrateful: Only with this
difference, that I will serve the one in all Extremities with my life, and
fortune; and the other, no further than stands with my Convenience. But, What
shall I do, you will say, to know whether a Man will be grateful, or no? I will
follow Probability, and hope the best. He that Sowes, is not sure to Reap; nor
the Seaman to reach his Port; nor the Soldier to win the Field. He that VVeds
is not sure his Wife shall be honest; or, his Children dutiful: but, Shall we
therefore neither Sow, Sail, bear Arms, nor Marry? Nay, if I knew a Man to be
incurably thankless, I would yet be so kind as to put him into his Way, or let
him Light a Candle, or Draw Water at my Well, which may stand him perhaps in
great stead, and yet not be reckoned as a Benefit from me; for I do it
carelessly, and not for his sake, but my own; as an Office of Humanity, without
any Choice, or Kindness.

CHAP. VI. The Matter of Obligations, with its Circumstances.
NEXT to the Choice of the Person, follows that of the Matter; wherein a regard
must be had to Time, Place, Proportion, Quality; and, to the very Nicks of
Opportunity, and Humor. One Man values his Peace above his Honor; Another,
his Honor above his Safety; and, not a few there are, that (provided they may
save their Bodies) never care what becomes of their Souls. So that Good Offices
depend much upon Construction. Some take themselves to be obliged, when they
are not, Others will not believe it, when they are; and some again take
Obligations, and Injuries, the one, for the other.

FOR our better direction, let it be noted, That A Benefit is a Common Tie
betwixt Giver and Receiver.
a Benefit is a Common Tie, betwixt the Giver, and the Receiver, with a respect
to both. Wherefore, it must be accommodate to the Rules of Discretion; for all
things have their Bounds, and Measures, and so must Liberality among the rest;
that it be neither too much for the One, nor too little for the Other; the
Excess being every jot as bad as the Defect. Alexander bestowed a City upon one
of his Favorites; who modestly excusing himself, That it was too much for him
to receive: Well; But, says Alexander, it is not too much for me to give: a
haughty, certainly, and an imprudent Speech; for, that which was not fit for
the one to Take, could not be fit for the other to Give. It passes in the World
for Greatness of Mind, to be perpetually giving, and loading of People with
Bounties: but, it is one thing to know how to give, and another thing not to
know how to keep. Give me a heart that is easy and open, but I Will have no holes
in it; let it be bountiful with Judgment, but I Will have nothing run out of it I
know not how. How much greater was he that refused the City, than the other
that offered it? Some men throw away their Money as if they were Angry with it,
which is the Error commonly of weak Minds, and large Fortunes. No Man esteems
of any thing that comes to him by Chance; but, when it is Governed by Reason, it
brings Credit both to the Giver, and Receiver; whereas those favors are, in
some sort, scandalous, that make a Man ashamed of his Patron.

IT is a Matter of great Prudence, for the Benefactor to Suit the Benefit to
the Condition of the b A Benefit must be suited to the Condition of the
Receiver.
Receiver; who must be, either his Superior, his Inferior, or his Equal, and
that which would be the highest Obligation imaginable to the one, would,
perhaps, be as great a Mockery, and Affront to the other: As a Plate of broken
Meat (for the Purpose) to a Rich Man, were an Indignity, which to a Poor Man is
a Charity. The Benefits of Princes, and of Great Men, are Honors, Offices,
Moneys, Profitable Commissions, Countenance, and Protection; The Poor Man has
nothing to Present, but Good Will, Good Advice, Faith, Industry, the Service,
and Hazard of his Person, an early Apple peradventure, or some other cheap
Curiosity: Equals indeed may correspond in Kind; but, whatsoever the Present
be, or to whomsoever we offer it, this General Rule must be observed, That we
always design the good, and satisfaction of the Receiver; and, never grant any
thing to his detriment. It Is not for a man to say, I was overcome by
Importunity, for when the Fever is off, we detest the man that was prevailed
upon to our destruction. I will no more undo a man with his Will, then forbear
saving him against it. It is a Benefit in some Cases to Grant, and in others to
deny; So that we are rather to consider the Advantage, than the Desire of the
Petitioner. For, we may, in a Passion, earnestly beg for (and take it ill to be
denied too) that very thing, which, upon second thoughts, we may come to curse,
as the occasion of a most Pernicious Bounty. Never give any thing that shall
turn to Mischief, Infamy, or Shame. I will consider another Man's want, or
safety; but so, as not to forget my own; Unless in the case of a very excellent
Person, and then I shall not much heed what becomes of my self. There Is no
giving of Water to a Man in a Fever; or putting of a Sword into a Mad-Mans
hand; He that lends a Man Money to carry him to a Bawdy House, or a Weapon for
his Revenge, makes himself a Partaker of his Crime.

HE that would make an An Acceptable Present.
acceptable Present, will pitch upon something that is desired, sought for, and
hard to be found; that which he sees no where else, and which few have; or at
least not in that place, or season; something that may be always in his Eye,
and mind him of the Benefactor. If it be lasting and durable, so much the
better; as Plate, rather than Money; Statues, than Apparel; for it will serve
as a Monitor, to mind the Receiver of the Obligation, which the Presenter
cannot so handsomely do. However, let it not be improper, as Arms to a Woman;
Books to a Clown; Toys to a Philosopher: I will not Give to any Man that which
he cannot receive; as if I threw a Ball to a man without hands; but I will make
a Return, though he cannot receive it; for, my business is not to oblige him,
but to free my self: Nor any thing that may reproach a man of his Vice, or
Infirmity: as false Dice to a Cheat; Spectacles to a man that is blind. Let it
not be unseasonable, neither: as a furred Gown in Summer; an Umbrella in
Winter. It enhances the value of the Present, if it was never given to him by
any body else, nor by me to any other; for, that which we give to every body,
is welcome to no body. The Particularity does much, but yet the same thing may
receive a different Estimate from several Persons; for, there are ways of
marking, and recommending it in such a manner, that if the same good Office be
done to twenty people, every one of them shall reckon himself peculiarly
obliged: as a cunning Whore, if she has a thousand Sweet-hearts, will persuade
every one of them, that she loves him best. But, this is rather the Artifice of
Conversation, than the virtue of it.

THE Citizens of Megara sent Ambassadors to Let the Present be singular.
Alexander in the Height of his Glory, to offer him, as a Complement, the
Freedom of their City. Upon Alexander's smiling at the Proposal, they told him,
That it was a Present which they had never made, but to Hercules, and Himself:
Whereupon, Alexander treated them kindly, and accepted of it; not for the
Presenters sakes, but because they had joined him with Hercules; how
unreasonably soever: For, Hercules Conquered nothing for himself, but made it
his business to vindicate, and to protect the miserable, without any private
Interest, or Design: But this intemperate young man (whose Virtue was nothing
else but a successful Temerity) was trained up from his youth in the Trade of
violence: The Common Enemy of mankind; as well of his Friends, as of his Foes;
and one that valued himself upon being terrible to all Mortals: never
considering, that the dullest of Creatures are as dangerous, and as dreadful,
as the fiercest; for, the poison of a Toad, or the Tooth of a Snake, will do a
Man's business as soon as the paw of a Tiger.

CHAP. VII. The Manner of Obliging.
THERE is not any Benefit so glorious in it self, but it may yet be exceedingly
sweetened, and improved by the Manner of conferring it. The Virtue, I know,
rests in the Intent; the Profit, in the Judicious application of the Matter;
but, the Beauty, and Ornament of an Obligation lies in the Manner of it; and it
is then Perfect, when the dignity of the Office is accompanied with all the
Charms, and Delicacies, of Humanity, good Nature, and Address: and with
Dispatch too; for, he that puts a Man off from time to time, was never right at
heart.

IN the first place, whatsoever we give, let us do it Give Frankly.
frankly; A kind Benefactor makes a Man happy as soon as he can, and as much as
he can. There should be no delay in a Benefit, but the Modesty of the Receiver.
If we cannot foresee the Request, let us however immediately grant it, and by
no means suffer the Repeating of it. It is so grievous a thing, to say, I BEG;
the very word puts a Man out of Countenance: and it is a double Kindness to do
the thing, and save an honest man the Confusion of a Blush. It comes too late,
that comes for the Asking; for, nothing costs us so dear, as that which we
purchase with our Prayers: It is all we give, even for Heaven it self; and even
there too, where our Petitions are at the fairest, we choose rather to present
them in Secret Ejaculations, than by word of Mouth. That is the lasting, and
the acceptable Benefit, that meets the Receiver half way. The Rule is, we are
to Give, as we would Receive; cheerfully, quickly, and without hesitation; for
there is no Grace in a Benefit that sticks to the Fingers. Nay, if there should
be occasion for delay, let us, however, not seem to deliberate: for demurring
is next door to denying; and, so long as we suspend, so long are we unwilling.
It is a Court-humour, to keep People upon the Tenters; their Injuries are
quick, and sudden, but their Benefits are slow. Great Ministers love to wrack
men with Attendance; and account it an Ostentation of their Power to hold their
Suitours in hand, and to have many Witnesses of their Interest. A Benefit
should be made acceptable by all possible means, even to the end that the
Receiver, who is never to forget it, may bear it in his Mind with satisfaction.
There must be no mixture of Sourness, Severity, Contumely, or Reproof, with our
Obligations; nay, in case there should be any occasion for so much as an
Admonition, let it be referred to another time. We are a great deal apter to
remember Injuries, than Benefits; and, it is enough to forgive an Obligation,
that has the Nature of an Offense.

THERE are some that spoil a good Office Give Cheerfully.
after it is done; and others, in the very instant of doing it. There must be
so much Entreaty and Importunity: nay, if we do but suspect a Petitioner, we
put on a sour face; look another way; pretend Haste, Company, Business; talk of
other Matters, and keep him off with Artificial Delays, let his Necessities be
never so pressing; and when we are put to it at last, it comes so hard from us,
that it is rather Extorted, than Obtained; and not so properly the giving of a
Bounty, as the quitting of a Man's hold upon the Tugg, when another is too
strong for him: so that this is but doing one kindness for me, and another for
himself; He gives for his own Quiet, after he has tormented me with
difficulties, and delays. The Manner of Saying, or of Doing any thing, goes a
great way in the value of the thing it self. It was well said of him, that
called a good Office that was done harshly, and with an ill will, A Stony Piece
of Bread; it is necessary for him that is hungry, to receive it; but, it almost
chokes a Man in the going down. There must be no Pride, Arrogance of looks, or
tumor of Words in the bestowing of Benefits; no Insolence of Behavior, but a
Modesty of Mind, and a diligent care to catch at occasions, and prevent
Necessities. A Pause, an Unkind Tone, Word, Look, or Action, destroys the
Grace of a Courtesy. It corrupts a Bounty when it is accompanied with State,
Haughtiness, and Elation of Mind in the giving of it. Some have the Trick of
shifting off a Suitor with a point of Wit, or a Cavil. As in the Case of the
Cynick that begged a Talent of Antigonus; That Is too much, says he, for a
Cynick to ask; and when he fell to a Penny, That Is too little, says he, for a
Prince to give. He might have found a way to have compounded this Controversy,
by giving him a Penny, as to a Cynique; and a Talent, as from a Prince.
Whatsoever we bestow, let it be done with a Frank and Cheerful Countenance; a
Man must not give with his Hand, and deny with his Looks; he that gives
quickly, gives willingly.

WE are likewise to Accompany Good Deeds with good Words.
accompany Good Deeds with Good Words; and say (for the Purpose) Why should you
make such a Matter of this? Why did not you come to me sooner? Why would you
make use of any body else? I take it ill that you should bring me a
Recommendation; Pray let there be no more of this; but when you have occasion
hereafter, come to me upon your own account. That Is the glorious Bounty, when
the Receiver can say to himself, What a blessed day has this been to me! never
was any thing done so generously, so tenderly, with so good a Grace. What is it
I would not do to serve this Man? a thousand times as much another way could
not have given me this satisfaction. In such a Case, let the Benefit be never
so considerable, the manner of conferring it is yet the noblest part. Where
there is harshness of Language, Countenance, or Behavior, a Man had better be
without it. A flat denial is infinitely before a vexatious delay; as a quick
Death is a Mercy, compared with a lingering Torment. But, to be put to
Waytings, and Intercessions, after a Promise is past, is a Cruelty Intolerable.
It Is troublesome to stay long for a Benefit, let it be never so great; and he
that holds me needlessly in pain, loses two precious things, Time, and the Proof
of Friendship. Nay, the very hint of a Man's wants comes many times too late. If
I had Money, said Socrates, I would buy me a Cloak. They that knew he wanted
one, should have prevented the very Intimation of that want. It is not the
Value of the Present, but the Benevolence of the Mind, that we are to consider.
He gave me but a little; but, it was generously, and frankly done; it was a
little, out of a little: he gave me it without asking; he pressed it upon me; he
watched the opportunity of doing it; and took it as an Obligation upon himself.
On the other side, many Benefits are great in show, but little, or nothing
perhaps in effect; when they come hard, slow, or at unawares. That which is
given with Pride and Ostentation, is rather an Ambition, than a Bounty.

SOME Favors are to be conferred in Some Favors in Public, others in Private.
Public; others in Private. In Public, the rewards of great Actions; as
Honors, Charges, or whatsoever else gives a Man Reputation in the World; but,
the good Offices we do for a Man in Want, Distress, or under Reproach; these
should be known only to those that have the Benefit of them. Nay, not to them
neither, if we can handsomely conceal it from whence the favor came: For the
Secrecy in many Cases, is a main part of the Benefit. There was a good Man that
had a Friend, who was both Poor, and Sick, and ashamed to own his Condition: He
privately conveyed a Bag of Money under his Pillow, that he might seem rather
to find, than receive it. Provided I know that I give it, no matter for his
knowing from whence it comes that receives it. Many a man stands in need of
help, that has not the face to confess it: if the discovery may give offense,
let it lie concealed; He that gives to be seen, would never relieve a man in
the dark. It would be tedious to run through all the Niceties that may occur
upon this Subject. But, in two words; he must be a Wise, a Friendly, and a
Well-bred man, that perfectly acquits himself in the Art, and Duty of Obliging,
for, all his Actions must be squared according to the Measures of Civility,
Good Nature, and Discretion.

CHAP. VIII. The Difference and Value of Benefits.
WE have already spoken of Benefits in General; the Matter, and the Intention;
together with the Manner of conferring them. It follows now, in Course, to say
something of the Value of them; which is rated, either by the Good they do us,
or by the Inconvenience they save us, and has no other Standard than that of a
judicious Regard, to Circumstance, and Occasion. Suppose I save a Man from
Drowning, the Advantage of Life is all one to him, from what hand soever it
comes, or by what means: but, yet there may be a vast difference in the
Obligation. I may do it with Hazard, or with Security; with Trouble or with
Ease; Willingly, or by Compulsion; upon Intercession, or without it: I may have
a Prospect of vain Glory, or Profit; I may do it in Kindness to Another; Or, a
hundred By-Ends to my self; and every point does exceedingly vary the Case. Two
Persons may part with the same Sum of Money, and yet not the same Benefit; the
One had it of his own; and it was but a little out of a great deal; the Other
borrowed it; and bestowed upon me that which he wanted for himself. Two Boys
were sent out to fetch a certain Person to their Master: The one of them hunts
up and down, and comes home again aweary, without finding him; the other falls
to play with his Companions at the Wheel of Fortune, sees him by chance passing
by, delivers him his Errant, and brings him. He that found him by chance
deserves to be punished; and he that sought for him, and missed him, to be
rewarded for his good Will.

IN some Cases we value We value the Thing, the Labor, or Attendance.
the Thing; in others, the Labor, and Attendance. What can be more precious
than Good Manners, good Letters, Life, and Health? and yet we pay our
Physicians, and Tutours, only for their Service in their Professions. If we buy
things cheap, it matters not, so long as it is a Bargain: it is no Obligation
from the Seller, if no body else will give him more for it. What would not a Man
give to be set a shore in a Tempest? For a House in a Wilderness? A Shelter, in
a Storm? A Fire, or a bit of Meat, when a Man's pinched with Hunger, or Cold? A
Defense against Thieves, and a Thousand other Matters of great Moment, that
cost but little? And yet we know, that the Skipper has but his freight for our
Passage; and the Carpenters and Bricklayers do their Work by the day. Those are
many times the greatest Obligations, in truth, which, in vulgar Opinion are the
smallest: as Comfort to the Sick, Poor, Captives; good Counsel; keeping of
People from Wickedness, etc. Wherefore we should reckon our selves to owe most
for the Noblest Benefits. If the Physician adds Care, and Friendship, to the
duty of his Calling, and the Tutor; to the common method of his business; I am
to esteem of them as the nearest of my Relations: for, to watch with me; to be
troubled for me; and, to put off all other Patients for my sake, is a
particular kindness: and so is it in my Tutor, if he takes more pains with me,
than with the rest of my fellows. It is not enough, in this Case, to pay the
One his Fees, and the other his Salary; but I am indebted to them over and
above for their Friendship. The meanest of Mechaniques, if he does his work
with Industry, and Care, it is an usual thing to cast in something by way of
reward, more than the bare Agreement: And, Shall we deal worse with the
Preservers of our Lives, and the Reformers of our Manners? He that gives me
Himself (if he be worth taking) gives the greatest Benefit: And, this is the
Present which Aeschines, a poor Disciple of Socrates, made to his Master, and,
as a Matter of great Consideration; Others may have given you much, says he,
but I am the only Man that has left nothing to himself: This Gift, says
Socrates, you shall never repent of, for I will take care to return it better
than I found it: So that a brave Mind can never want Matter for Liberality in
the meanest Condition; for, Nature has been so kind to us, that where we have
nothing of Fortunes, we may bestow something of our own.

IT falls out often, that a Benefit is followed with an A ^eresit foll^w'd with
an Injury.
Injury; let which will be foremost, it is with the latter, as with one Writing
upon another; it does in a great measure hide the former, and keep it from
appearing, but it does not quite take it away. We may, in some Cases, divide
them, and both Requite the One, and Revenge the Other: Or otherwise compare
them, to know whether I am Creditor, or Debtor. You have obliged me in my
Servant, but wounded me in my Brother; you have saved my Son, but you have
destroyed my Father: In this Instance, I will allow as much as Piety, and
Justice, and Good Nature will bear; but I am not willing to set an Injury
against a Benefit. I would have some respect to the Time; the Obligation came
first; and then perhaps, the one was designed, the other against his will;
under these Considerations, I would amplify the Benefit, and lessen the
Injury; and extinguish the One with the Other; nay, I would pardon the Injury
even without the Benefit, but much more after it. Not that a Man can be bound
by one Benefit to suffer all sorts of Injuries, for, there are some Cases
wherein we lie under no Obligation for a Benefit; because a greater Injury
absolves it. As for Example: A Man helps me out of a Law-Suite, and afterward
commits a Rape upon my Daughter; where the following Impiety cancells the
antecedent Obligation. A Man lends me a little Money, and then sets my House on
fire: the Debtor is here turned Creditor, when the Injury out-weighs the
Benefit. Nay, if a Man does but so much as repent of a good Office done, and
grow Sour and Insolent upon it, and upbraid me with it: if he cid it only for
his own Sake, or for any other Reason, than for mine; I am in some degree,
more, or less, acquitted of the Obligation. I am not at all beholden to him
that makes me the Instrument of his own Advantage. He that does me good for his
own sake, I Will do him good for mine.

SUPPOSE a Man makes Suit for a The Case of a Conditional Redemption.
Place, and cannot obtain it, but upon the ransom of ten Slaves out of the
Gallyes. If there be Ten, and no more, they owe him nothing for their
Redemption, they are yet endebted to him for the Choice, for he might have
taken Ten others as well as these. Put the Case again, that by an Act of Grace
so many Prisoners are to be released; their Names to be drawn by Lot, and mine
happens to come out among the rest: One part of my Obligation is to him that
put me in a Capacity of Freedom; and, the other is to Providence, for my being
one of that Number. The greatest Benefits of all, have no Witnesses, but lie
concealed in the Conscience.

THERE IS a great difference betwixt a Common Obligation, and a Particular;
Obligations Common and Personal.
he that lends my Country Money, obliges me, only as a Part of the Whole. Plato
crossed the River, and the Ferry-Man would take no Money of him: he reflected
upon it as an honor done to himself; and told him, That Plato was in his debt.
But Plato, when he found it to be no more than he did for others, recalled his
Word, For, says he, Plato will owe nothing in particular, for a Benefit in
Common; what I owe with others, I will pay with others.

SOME will have it, that the Necessity Obl^gations upon Necessity.
of wishing a Man well, is some abatement to the Obligation in the doing of him
a good Office. But, I say, on the Contrary, that it is the greater, because the
good will cannot be changed. It Is one thing to say, That a Man could not but do
me this or that Civility, because he was forced to it; and another thing, That
he could not quit the good Will of doing it. In the former Case, I am a Debtor
to him that imposed the force; in the other, to himself. An Unchangeable good
Will is an indispensable Obligation: and, to say, that Nature cannot go out of
her Course, does not discharge us, of what we owe to Providence. Shall he be
said to Will, that may change his Mind the next moment? And, Shall we question
the Will of the Almighty, whose Nature admits no change? Must the Stars quit
their Stations, and fall foul one upon another? Must the Sun stand still in the
middle of his Course, and Heaven and Earth drop into a Confusion? Must a
devouring Fire seize upon the Universe; the Harmony of the Creation be
dissolved; and the whole Frame of Nature swallowed up in a dark Abyss? and,
Will nothing less than this serve to convince the World of their audacious and
impertinent Follies? It is not to say, that, These Heavenly Bodies are not made
for us; for, in part they are so; and we are the better for their Virtues and
Motions, whether we will or no: though undoubtedly the Principal Cause, is the
unalterable Law of God. Providence is not moved by any thing from without; but,
the Divine Will is an Everlasting Law; an Immutable Decree; and the
Impossibility of Variation proceeds from God's purpose of persevering; for he
never repents of his first Counsels. It is not with our Heavenly, as with our
Earthly Father. God thought of us, and provided for us, before he made us:
(for, unto him all future events are present:) Man was not the Work of Chance;
his Mind carries him above the flight of Fortune, and naturally aspires to the
Contemplation of Heaven, and Divine Mysteries. How desperate a Phrensy is it
now, to undervalue; nay, to contemn, and to disclaim these Divine Blessings,
without which we were utterly incapable of enjoying any other?

CHAP. IX. An Honest Man cannot be Outdone in Courtesy.
IT passes in the World for a Generous, and a Magnificent saying, that, ' It Is a
shame for a Man to be outdone in Courtesy: And, it is worth the while to
examine both the Truth of it, and the Mistake. First, there can be no shame in
a Virtuous Emulation; and, Secondly, there can be no Victory, without crossing
the Cudgels, and yielding the Cause. One Man may have the Advantages of
Strength, of Means, of Fortune; and this will undoubtedly operate upon the
Events of good Purposes, but yet without any diminution to the Virtue. The good
Will may be the same in Both, and yet One may have the Heels of the Other; For,
it is not in a good Office, as in a Course, where he wins the Plate that comes
first to the Post: And even there also, Chance has many times a great hand in
the Success. Where the Contest is about Benefits; and that the One has not only
a Good Will, but Matter to work upon, and a Power to put that Good Intent in
Execution: And the Other has barely a Good Will, without either the Means, or
the Occasion of a Requital, if he does but affectionately wish it, and
endeavor it; the latter is no more Overcome, in Courtesy, than he is in
Courage, that dies with his Sword in his Hand, and his Face to the Enemy, and,
without Shrinking, maintains his Station: For, where Fortune is Partial, It Is
enough that the Good Will is Equal. There are two Errors in this Proposition:
First, to imply, that a good Man may be Overcome; and then, to imagine, that
any thing Shameful can befall him. The Spartans prohibited all those Exercises
where the Victory was declared by the Confession of the Contendent. The 300
Fabii were never said to be Conquered, but Slain; nor Regulus to be Overcome,
though he was taken Prisoner by the Carthaginians. The Mind may stand firm
under the greatest Malice, and Iniquity of Fortune; and yet the Giver, and the
Receiver, continue upon equal Terms: As we reckon it a drawn Battle, when two
Combatants are parted, though the One has lost more Blood than the Other. He
that knows how to Owe a Courtesy, and heartily wishes that he could Requite
it, is Invincible; So that every Man may be as Grateful as he pleases. It Is
Your Happiness to Give, it is My Fortune, that I can only Receive. What
advantage now has your Chance over my Virtue? But, there are some Men that have
Philosophiz'd themselves almost out of the sense of Humane Affections; as
Diogenes, that walked Naked, and Unconcerned, through the middle of Alexanders
Treasures; and was, as well in other Men's Opinions, as in his Own, even above
Alexander himself, who, at that time, had the whole World at his Feet: for,
there was more that the One scorned to Take, than that the Other had in his
Power to Give; And, it is a greater Generosity for a Beggar to Refuse Money,
than for a Prince to Bestow it. This is a remarkable Instance of an immovable
Mind; and there is hardly any contending with it; but a Man is never the less
valiant for being worsted by an Invulnerable Enemy; nor the Fire one jote the
weaker, for not consuming an Incombustible Body; nor a Sword ever a whit the
worse for not cleaving a Rock that is impenetrable; neither is a Grateful Mind
overcome for want of an Answerable Fortune. No matter for the Inequality of the
things Given, and Received, so long as, in point of good Affection, the two
Parties stand upon the same Level. It Is no Shame not to overtake a man, if we
follow him as fast as we can. That Tumor of a Man, the Vainglorious Alexander,
was used to make his Boast, that never any man went beyond him in Benefits; and
yet he lived to see a poor fellow in a Tub, to whom there was nothing that he
could Give, and from whom there was nothing that he could take away.

NOR is it always necessary for a poor A Wise Friend is the Noblest of Presents.
Man to fly to the Sanctuary of an Invincible Mind, to quit scores with the
Bounties of a Plentiful Fortune; but, it does often fall out, that the Returns
which he cannot make in kind, are more than supplied in dignity, and value.
Archelaus, a King of Macedon, invited Socrates to his Palace; but he excused
himself as unwilling to Receive greater Benefits than he was able to Requite.
This perhaps was not Pride in Socrates, but Craft; for he was afraid of being
forced to accept of something which possibly might have been unworthy of him:
beside that he was a Man of Liberty, and loath to make himself a voluntary
Slave. The truth of it is, that Archelaus had more need of Socrates, than
Socrates of Archelaus; for, he wanted a Man to teach him the Art of Life, and
Death, and the Skill of Government; to Read the Book of Nature to him, and show
him the Light at Noon day: He wanted a Man, that, when the Sun was in an
Eclipse, and he had locked himself up in all the horror, and despair
imaginable; he wanted a Man, I say, to deliver him from his apprehensions, and
to expound the Prodigy to him, by telling him, That there was no more in it,
than only that the Moon was got betwixt the Sun, and the Earth, and all would
be well again presently. Let the World Judge now, whether Archelaus his Bounty,
or Socrates his Philosophy, would have been the greater Present: He does not
understand the Value of Wisdom, and Friendship, that does not know a wise
Friend to be the Noblest of Presents. A Rarity scarce to be found, not only in
a Family, but in an Age; and no where more wanted than where there seems to be
the greatest store. The greater a Man is, the more need he has of him; and the
more difficulty there is both of finding, and of knowing him. Nor is it to be
said, that, I cannot requite such a Benefactor, because I am poor, and have it
not; I can give good Counsel; a Conversation, wherein he may take both Delight,
and Profit; Freedom of Discourse without Flattery; kind attention, where he
deliberates; and Faith inviolable where he trusts; I may bring him to a love,
and knowledge of Truth; deliver him from the Errors of his Credulity, and teach
him to distinguish betwixt Friends, and Parasites.

CHAP. X. The Question discussed, Whether or no a Man may Give, or Return a
Benefit to himself.
THERE are many Cases wherein a Man speaks of himself as of another. As for
Example. I may thank my self for this. I am angry at my self; I hate my self
for That. And this way of Speaking has raised a Dispute among the Stoics,
Whether or no a Man may Give, or Return a Benefit to himself. For, say they, if
I may hurt my Self, I may oblige my Self; and, that which were a Benefit to
another Body, Why is it not so to my Self? And, Why am not I as Criminal in
being Ungrateful to my Self, as if I were so to another body? And, the Case is
the same in Flattery, and several other Vices; as on the other side, it is a
point of great Reputation, for a Man to Command himself. Plato thanked Socrates
for what he had Learned of him; and, Why might not Socrates as well thank Plato
for that which he had Taught him? That which you want, says Plato, borrow it
of your Self. And, Why may not I as well Give to my Self, as Lend? If I may be
Angry with my Self, I may Thank my Self; and, if I Chide my Self, I may as well
Commend my Self, and do my Self Good, as well as Hurt: There Is the same reason
of Contraries. It Is a Common thing to say, Such a Man has done himself an
Injury. If an Injury, Why not a Benefit? But, I say, that no Man can be a
Debtor to himself; for, the Benefit must naturally precede the Acknowledgment;
and, a Debtor can no more be without a Creditor, than a Husband, without a
Wife. Some body must Give, that some Body may Receive: and, it is neither
Giving, nor Receiving, the passing of a thing from one hand to the other. What
if a Man should be Ungrateful in the Case? there is Nothing lost; for, he that
gives it, has it: and he that Gives, and he that Receives, are one and the same
Person. Now, properly Speaking, no Man can be said to bestow any thing upon
himself, for he obeys his Nature, that prompts every Man to do himself all the
good he can. Shall I call him Liberal, that gives to himself; or Good Natured
that pardons himself; or Pitiful, that is affected with his own Misfortunes?
That which were Bounty, Clemency, Compassion, to another, to my Self, is
Nature. A Benefit is a voluntary thing; but, to do good to my Self, is a thing
Necessary. Was ever any Man commended for getting out of a Ditch, or for
helping himself against Thieves? Or, What if I should allow, that a Man may
conferr a Benefit upon himself? yet he cannot owe it, for he returns it in the
same ins^ant that he receives it. No Man Gives, Owes, or Makes a Return, but to
Another. How can one Man do that, to which two Parties are requisite in so many
respects? Giving, and Receiving must go backward, and forward, betwixt two
Persons. If a Man Give to himself, he may Sell to himself: But, to sell, is to
alienate a thing, and to translate the right of it to Another; now, to make Man
both the Giver, and the Receiver, is to Unite Two contraries. That Is a Benefit,
which, when it is Given, may possibly not be Requited; but he that Gives to
himself, must necessarily Receive what he Gives; beside that all Benefits are
Given for the Receivers sake; but, that which a Man does for himself, is for
the sake of the Giver.

THIS is one of those Subtilties, which, though hardly worth a Man's while, yet
it is not labor absolutely lost neither. There is more of Trick, and Artifice
in it, than Solidity; and yet there is matter of diversion too; enough perhaps
to pass away a Winters Evening, and keep a Man Waking that is heavy-headed.

CHAP. XI. How far one Man may be obliged for a Benefit done to Another.
THE Question now before us, requires Distinction, and Caution. For, though it
be both Natural, and Generous, to wish well to my Friends Friend; yet, a
Second-hand Benefit does not bind me any further, than to a Second-hand
Gratitude: So that I may Receive great Satisfaction, and Advantage, from a Good
Office done to my Friend, and yet lie under no Obligation my self. Or, if any
Man thinks otherwise; I must ask him in the first place, Where it begins; and,
How far it extends? that it may not be boundless. Suppose a Man Obliges the
Son; Does that Obligation work upon the Father? and, Why not upon the Uncle
too? The Brother? The Wife? The Sister? The Mother? Nay, upon all that have any
Kindness for him? and, upon all the Lovers of his Friends? and upon all that
love them too? and so in Infinitum. In this Case we must have Recourse, as is
said heretofore, to the Intention of the Benefactor; and fix the Obligation
upon him, unto whom the Kindness was directed. If a Man Manures my Ground;
keeps my House from burning, or falling, it is a Benefit to me, for I am the
better for it, and my House and Land are Insensible. But, if he save the Life
of my Son, the Benefit is to my Son. It is a Joy, and a Comfort to me, but no
Obligation. I am as much concerned as I ought to be in the Health, the
Felicity, and the Welfare of my Son; as happy in the Enjoyment of him; And, I
should be as unhappy as is possible in his Loss; but, it does not follow, that
I must of necessity lie under an Obligation, for being either happier, or less
miserable, by another bodies means. There are some Benefits, which, although
conferred upon one Man, may yet work upon others; as a Sum of Money may be
given to a poor Man for his own sake, which, in the Consequence, proves the
Relief of his whole Family, but still the immediate Receiver is the Debtor for
it; for, the Question is not, To whom it comes afterward to be transferred;
but, Who is the Principal? and, upon whom it was first bestowed? My Son's Life
is as dear to me as my own; and, in saving him, you preserve me too: In this
Case I will acknowledge my self Obliged to you; that is to say, in my Son's
Name: for in my own, and in strictness, I am not: but, I am content to make my
self a Voluntary Debtor. What if he had borrowed Money? My paying of it, does
not at all make it my Debt. It would put me to the blush perhaps, to have him
taken in Bed with another Man's Wife; but, that does not make me an Adulterer.
It Is a wonderful Delight, and Satisfaction that I receive in his Safety: but,
still this Good is not a Benefit. A Man may be the better for an Animal, a
Plant, a Stone; but, there must be a Will, and Intention, to make it an
Obligation. You save the Son, without so much as knowing the Father; Nay,
without so much as thinking of him; and, perhaps, you would have done the same
thing even if you had hated him. But, without any farther Altercation of
Dialogue; the Conclusion is this, if you meant him the Kindness, he is
answerable for it; and I may enjoy the fruit of it, without being Obliged by it.
But if it was done for My Sake, then am I accomptable. Or, howsoever, upon any
Occasion, I am ready to do you all the Kind Offices imaginable; not as the
Return of a Benefit, but as the Earnest of a Friendship: which you are not to
challenge neither, but to entertain as an Act of Honor, and of Justice, rather
than of Gratitude. If a Man find the Body of my dead Father in a Desert, and
give it Burial; if he did it as to my Father, I am beholden to him; but, if the
Body was Unknown to him, and that he would have done the same thing for any
other Body, I am no further concerned in it, than as a Piece of Public
Humanity.

THERE are moreover, some Cases, wherein an Unworthy Person may be An unworthy
Person may be obliged, for the sake of those that are more worthy.
obliged, for the sake of others; and the sottish Extract of an ancient
Nobility may be preferred before a better Man, that is but of yesterdayes
standing. And, it is but reasonable, to pay a Reverence, even to the Memory of
eminent Virtues. He that is not Illustrious in Himself, may yet be reputed so
in the Right of his Ancestors. And there is a gratitude to be Entailed upon the
Offspring of famous Progenitors. Was it not for the Fathers sake, that Ci^ero
the Son was made Consul? And, was it not the Eminence of one Pompey, that
raised and dignified the rest of his Family? How came Caligula to be the
Emperor of the World? a Man so Cruel, that he spilt Blood as greedily as if he
were to drink it; the Empire was not given to Himself, but to his Father
Germanicus; A braver Man deserved that for him, which he could never have
challenged upon his own Merit. What was it that preferred Fabius Persicus?
(whose very Mouth was the Uncleanest part about him;) What was it, but the 300
of that Family that so generously opposed the Enemy, for the safety of the
Commonwealth?

NAY, Providence it self is gracious to the Wicked Posterity of an Honorable
Race.
Providence it self is gracious to the Wicked Posterity of an Honorable Race.
The Counsels of Heaven are guided by Wisdom, Mercy, and Justice. Some Men are
made Kings for their proper Virtues, without any respect to their Predecessors.
Others, for their Ancestors sakes, whose Virtues, though neglected in their
Lives, come to be afterward rewarded in their Issue. And, it is but Equity,
that our Gratitude should extend as far as the Influence of their Heroical
Actions, and Examples.

CHAP. XII. The Benefactor must have no By-Ends.
WE come now to the main point of the Matter in Question; that is to say,
Whether or no it be a thing desirable in it self, the Giving, and Receiving of
Benefits? There is a Sect of Philosophers, that accounts nothing Valuable, but
what is Profitable; and so makes all Virtue Mercenary: An Unmanly Mistake, to
imagine, that the Hope of Gain, or Fear of Loss, should make a Man either the
more, or the less Honest. As who should say, What shall I Get by it, and I Will be
an honest Man? Whereas, on the Contrary, Honesty is a thing in it self to be
purchased at any rate. It is not for a Body to say, It will be a Charge; a
Hazard; I shall give Offense, etc. My Business is to do what I ought to do:
All other Considerations are foreign to the Office. Whenever my duty calls
me, it is my part to attend, without Scrupulizing upon Forms, or Difficulties.
Shall I see an honest Man oppressed at the Bar, and not assist him, for fear
of a Court-Faction? Or not second him upon the Highway against Thieves, for
fear of a Broken-head? And choose rather to sit still, the quiet Spectator of
Fraud, and Violence? Why will Men be Just, Temperate, Generous, Brave, but
because it carries along with it Fame, and a good Conscience? And for the same
Reason, and no other (to apply it to the Subject in hand) let a Man also be
Bountiful. The School of Epicurus, I Am sure, will never swallow this Doctrine:
(That Effeminate Tribe of Lazy, and Voluptuous Philosophers) They Will tell you,
that Virtue is but the Servant and Vassail of Pleasure. No, says Epicurus, I am
not for Pleasure neither, without Virtue. But, Why then for Pleasure, say I,
before Virtue? Not that the Stress of the Controversy lies upon the Order
only; for, the Power of it, as well as the Dignity, is now under debate. It is
the Office of Virtue to Superintend, to Lead, and to Govern; But, the parts you
have assigned it, are, to Submit, to Follow, and to be under Command. But this,
you will say, is nothing to the purpose, so long as both sides are agreed, that
there can be no Happiness without Virtue: Take away That, says Epicurus, and
I Am as little a Friend to Pleasure as you. The Pinch, in short, is this:
Whether Virtue it self be the Supreme Good, or only the Cause of it? It is not
the inverting of the Order that will clear this Point; (though it is a very
preposterous Error, to set that first which should be last.) It does not half
so much offend me, the Ranging of Pleasure before Virtue, as the very Comparing
of them; and the bringing of two Opposites, and professed Enemies, into any
sort of Competition.

The Drift of this Discourse is, to support the Cause of Benefits; and, to
prove, that it is a Mean, and Dishonorable thing, to Give, for any other End,
than for Give only for Giving sake.
Giving-sake He that Gives for Gain, Profit, or any By-End, destroys the very
Intent of Bounty; For, it falls only upon those that do not want; and perverts
the Charitable Inclinations of Princes, and of Great Men, who cannot reasonably
propound to themselves any such End. What does the Sun get by traveling about
the Universe; by visiting, and comforting all the quarters of the Earth? Is the
whole Creation made, and ordered for the good of Mankind, and every particular
Man only for the good of himself? There passes not an hour of our Lives,
wherein we do not enjoy the Blessings of Providence without Measure, and
without Intermission. And, What Design can the Almighty have upon us, who is in
himself full, safe, and inviolable? If he should Give only for his own Sake,
What would become of Poor Mortals, that have nothing to return him at best, but
Dutiful Acknowledgments? It Is putting out of a Benefit to Interest, only to
Bestow where we may place it to Advantage.

Let us be Liberal then, after the Example of our Great Creator; and Give to
others, with the same Consideration that he gives to us. The Epicureans deny a
Providence, the Stoics assert it.
Epicurus his Answer will be to this, That God gives no Benefits at all, but
turns his back upon the World; and, without any Concern for us, leaves Nature
to take her Course: And, whether he does any thing himself, or nothing, he
takes no notice however, either of the Good, or of the Ill that is done here
below. If there were not an Ordering, and an Overruling Providence; How comes
it (say I, on the other side) that the Universality of Mankind should ever have
so Unanimously agreed in the Madness of Worshipping a Power that can neither
Hear, nor Help us? Some Blessings are freely given us; Others, upon our
Prayers, are granted us; and every day brings forth Instances of great, and of
Seasonable Mercies, There never was yet any Man so Insensible, as not to Feel,
See, and Understand a Deity in the ordinary Methods of Nature; though many have
been so obstinately Ungrateful, as not to confess it: Nor is any Man so
wretched, as not to be a Partaker in that Divine Bounty. Some Benefits, it is
true, may appear to be unequally divided. But, it is no small matter yet that we
Possess in Common; and, which Nature has bestowed upon us in her very self. If
God be not Bountiful, whence is it that we have all that we pretend to? that
which we Give, and that which we Deny; that which we Lay up, and that which we
Squander away? Those innumerable delights, for the Entertainment of our Eyes,
our Ears, and our Understandings? Nay, that Copious Matter even for Luxury it
self? For, care is taken, not only for our Necessities, but also for our
Pleasures, and for the Gratifying of all our Senses, and Appetites. So many
pleasant Groves, Fruitful, and Salutary Plants; so many fair Rivers, that serve
us both for Recreation, Plenty, and Commerce; Vicissitudes of Seasons;
Varieties of Food, by Nature made ready to our hands; all sorts of Curiosities
and of Creatures; and the whole Creation it self Subjected to Mankind for
Health, Medicine, and Dominion. We can be thankful to a Friend for a few Acres,
or a little Money, and yet for the Freedom, and Command of the whole Earth, and
for the great Benefits of our Being, as Life, Health, and Reason, we look upon
our selves as under no Obligation. If a Man bestows upon us a House, that is
delicately beautifyed with Paintings, Statues, Gildings, and Marble, we make a
mighty business of it, and yet it lies at the Mercy of a Puff of Wind, the
Snuff of a Candle, and a hundred other Accidents to lay it in the dust. And, Is
it nothing now to sleep under the Canopy of Heaven, where we have the Globe of
the Earth for our place of Repose, and the Glories of the Heavens for our
Spectacle? How comes it that we should so much value what we have, and yet at
the same time be so unthankful for it? Whence is it that we have our breath,
the comforts of light, and of heat, the very blood that runs in our veins? The
Cattle that feed us, and the Fruits of the Earth that feed them? Whence have we
the Growth of our Bodies, the Succession of our Ages, and the Faculties of our
Minds? So many Veins of Mettles, Quarries of Marble, etc. The Seed of every
thing is in it self, and it is the blessing of God that raises it out of the
dark into Act, and Motion. To say nothing of the charming Varieties of Music;
beautiful Objects, Delicious Provisions for the Palate; Exquisite Perfumes
which are Cast in over and above to the common Necessities of our Being.

ALL this, says Epicurus, we are to ascribe to God and Nature are one and the
same Power.
Nature. And, Why not to God, I beseech ye? As if they were not both of them
one and the same Power working in the whole, and in every part of it. Or, if
you call him the Almighty Jupiter; the Thunderer, the Creator, and Preserver
of us all; it comes to the same Issue: Some will express him under the Notion
of Fate; which is only a Connection of Causes, and himself the Uppermost, and
Original, upon which all the rest depend. The Stoics represent the several
Functions of the Allmighty Power under several Appellations. When they speak of
him as the Father, and the Fountain of all Beings, they call him Bacchus: and,
under the Name of Hercules, they denote him to be Indefatigable, and
Invincible: And, in the Contemplation of him in the Reason, Order, Proportion,
and Wisdom of his Proceedings, they call him Mercury: So that which way soever
they look, and under what Name soever they Couch their Meaning, they never fail
of finding him: for he is every where, and fills his own Work. If a Man should
borrow Money of Seneca, and say that he owes it to Anneus, or Lucius, he may
change the Name, but not his Creditor; for, let him take which of the three
Name^ he pleases, he is still a Debtor to the same Person. As Justice,
Integrity, Prudence, Frugality, Fortitude, are all of them the Goods of one and
the same Mind, so that whichsoever of them pleases us, we cannot distinctly
say, That it is This, or That, but the Mind.

BUT, not to carry this Digression too far, that which God himself does, we are
sure is well done; and, we are no less sure, that The Divine Bounty expects no
Return.
for whatsoever he gives, he neither Wants, Expects, nor Receives any thing in
Return: So that the only end of a Benefit ought to be the Advantage of the
Receiver; And that must be our scope without any By-regard to our selves. It is
objected to us, the singular caution we prescribe in the Choice of the Person,
for, it were a Madness, we say, for a Husbandman to Sow the Sand: Which, if
true, say they, you have an eye upon Profit, as well in Giving, as in Plowing,
and Sowing. And then they say again, That, if the conferring of a Benefit were
desirable in it self, it would have no dependence upon the choice of the Man,
for, let us give it When, How, or Wheresoever we please, it would be still a
Benefit. This does not at all affect our Assertion: for the Person, the Matter,
the Manner, and the Time, are Circumstances absolutely necessary to the Reason
of the Action; there must be a right Judgment in all respects to make it a
Benefit. It is my duty, to be true to a Trust, and yet there may be a time, or
a place, wherein I would make little difference betwixt the Renouncing of it,
and the Delivering of it up, and, the same Rule holds in Benefits; I will
neither render the One, nor bestow the Other to the Damage of the Receiver. A
wicked Man will run all risques to do an Injury; and to compass his Revenge;
and, Shall not an Honest Man venture as far to do a Good Office? All Benefits
must be Gratuitous; A Merchant sells me the Corn, that keeps me and my Family
from starving; but, he sold it for his Interest, as well as I bought it for
mine, and so I owe him nothing for it. He that Gives for Profit, Gives to
Himself, as a Physician, or a Lawyer gives Counsel for a Fee, and only makes
use of me for his own Ends; as a Grasier fats his Cattle, to bring them to a
better Market. This is more properly the driving of a Trade, than the
Cultivating of a generous Commerce. This for That, is rather a Truck than a
Benefit; and he deserves to be Cousen'd, that Gives any thing in hope of a
Return. And, in truth, What End should a Man honorably propound? Not Profit
sure; That Is Vulgar, and Mechanique, and he that does not Contemn it, can never
be Grateful. And then for Glory, it is a mighty matter indeed for a Man to boast
of doing his Duty. We are to Give, if it were only to avoid not Giving; If any
thing comes on it, it is Clear Gain; and, at worst, there is nothing left; beside,
that one Benefit well placed, makes amends for a Thousand Miscarriages. It is
not that I would exclude the Benefactor neither, for being himself the better
for a good Office he does for another. Some there are that do us good only for
their own sakes; Others, for Ours; and some again for both. He that does it for
me in Common with himself, if he had a prospect upon Both in the doing of it, I
am obliged to him for it; and glad with all my heart that he had a share in it.
Nay, I were ungrateful, and unjust, if I should not rejoice, that what was
Beneficial to me, might be so likewise to himself.

TO pass now to the Matter of Gratitude, and All Men detest Ingratitude, and
love the contrary.
Ingratitude; there never was any Man yet so wicked, as not to approve of the
One, and detest the Other; as the two things in the whole World, the one to be
the most Abominated, the other the most Esteemed. The very Story of an
Ungrateful Action puts us out of all Patience, and gives us a loathing for the
Author of it. That Inhumane Villain, we cry, to do so horrid a thing: Not that
Inconsiderate Fool, for omitting so profitable a Virtue, which plainly shows
the sense we naturally have, both of the One, and of the Other, and that we are
led to it by a Common Impulse of Reason, and of Conscience. Epicurus Phansies
God to be without Power, and without Arms; above fear himself, and as little
to be feared. He places him betwixt the Orbs Solitary, and Idle, out of the
Reach of Mortals, and neither hearing our Prayers, nor minding our Concerns;
and allows him only such a veneration, and respect, as we pay to our Parents.
If a Man should ask him now, Why any Reverence at all, if we have no Obligation
to him? Or rather, Why that greater Reverence to his fortuitous Attomes? His
Answer would be, that it is for their Majesty, and their Admirable Nature, and
not out of any hope, or Expectation from them. So that by his proper
Confession, a thing may be desirable for its own worth. But, says he,
Gratitude is a Virtue that has commonly profit annexed to it. And, Where Is the
Virtue, say I, that has not? but still the virtue is to be valued for it self,
and not for the Profit that attends it; There is no Question, but Gratitude for
Benefits received, is the ready way to procure more; and, in requiting one
Friend, we encourage many; but, these Accessions fall in by the By, and, if I
were sure that the doing of good Offices would be my Ruin, I would yet pursue
them. He that Visits the Sick, in hope of a Legacy, let him be never so
Friendly in all other Cases, I look upon him in this to be no better than a
Raven, that watches a weak Sheep, only to peck the Eyes Out. We never Give with
so much Judgment, or Care, as when we consider the Honesty of the Action,
without any regard to the Profit of it; for, our Understandings are Corrupted
by Fear, Hope, and Pleasure.

CHAP. XIII. There are many Cases wherein a Man may be Minded of a Benefit, but
it is very rarely to be Challenged, and never to be Upbraided.
IF the World were as Wise, and as Honest as it should be, there would be no
need of Caution or Precept, how to behave ourselves in our several Stations,
and Duties; For, both the Giver and the Receiver would do what they ought to do
of their own accord: The one would be Bountiful, and the other Grateful; and,
the only way of minding a Man of one good turn, would be the following of it
with another. But, as the Case stands, we must take other Measures, and consult
the best we can, the Common Ease, and Relief of Mankind.

As there are several sorts of Diverse sorts of Ingratitude.
Ungrateful Men, so there must be several ways of dealing with them: either by
Artifice, Counsel, Admonition, or Reproof, according to the humor of the
Person, and the degree of the Offense; Provided always, that as well in the
Re-minding a Man of a Benefit, as in the Bestowing of it, the Good of the
Receiver be the principal thing intended. There is a Curable Ingratitude, and
an Incurable: there is a Slothful, a Neglectful, a Proud, a Dissembling, a
Disclaiming, a Heedless, a Forgetful, and a Malicious Ingratitude; and, the
Application must be suited to the Matter we have to Work upon. A gentle Nature
may be reclaimed by Authority, Advice, or Reprehension; A Father, a Husband, a
Friend, may do good in the Case. There are a sort of Lazy, and Sluggish People,
that live as if they were asleep, and must be Lugg'd and Pinched to awaken
them. These Men are betwixt Grateful, and Ungrateful; they will neither deny an
Obligation, nor return it, and only want quickening. I will do all I can to
hinder any Man from ill doing; but especially a Friend, and yet more especially
from doing ill to me. I will rub up his Memory with new Benefits: if that will
not serve, I Will proceed to good Counsel, and from thence to Rebuke: If all
fails, I Will look upon him as a desperate Debtor, and even let him alone in his
Ingratitude, without making him my Enemy: for, no Necessity shall ever make me
spend time, in wrangling with any Man upon that point.

Perseverance in Obliging.
ASSIDUITY of Obliging Strikes upon the Conscience, as well as the Memory, and
pursues an Ungrateful Man, till he becomes Grateful. If one good Office will
not do it, try a Second, and then a Third. No Man can be so thankless, but
either Shame, Occasion, or Example, will, at some time or other, prevail upon
him. The very Beasts themselves, even Lions, and Tigers, are gained by good
usage: beside, that one Obligation does naturally draw on another; and a Man
would not willingly leave his own Work imperfect. I have helped him thus far,
and I Will even go through with it now. So that over and above the delight, and
the virtue of Obliging, one good turn is a Shooing-horn to another. This, of
all Hints, is perhaps the most effectual, as well as the most Generous.

IN some In some cases a Man may be minded of a Benefit.
Cases it must be carried more home; as in that of Julius Caesar, who, as he
was hearing of a Cause, the Defendant finding himself pinched. Sir, says he,
Do not you remember a Strain you got in your Ancle, when you Commanded in
Spain; and that a Soldier lent you his Cloak for a Cushion, upon the top of a
Craggy Rock, under the shade of a little Tree, in the heat of the day? I
remember it perfectly well, says Caesar, and that when I was ready to choke
with Thirst, an honest Fellow fetched me a draught of Water in his Helmet. But,
that Man, and that Helmet (says the Soldier) Does Caesar think that he could
now know them again if he saw them? The Man perchance I might (says Caesar,
somewhat offended) but not the Helmet; but, What Is this Story to my Business?
You are none of the Man: Pardon me, Sir, says the Soldier, I am that very Man;
but Caesar may well forget me, for I have been Trepanned since, and lost an Eye
at the Battle of Munda, where that Helmet too had the honor to be cleft with a
Spanish Blade. Caesar took it as it was intended; and, it was an Honorable, and
a Prudent way of refreshing his Memory. But, this would not have gone down so
well with Tiberius; for, when an Old Acquaintance of his began his Address to
him, with You Remember Caesar. No, says Caesar, (cutting him short) I do not
Remember what I WAS. Now, with him, it was better to be Forgotten, then
Remembered: for, an Old Friend was as bad as an Informer. It is a Common thing
for Men to hate the Authors of their Preferment, as the Witnesses of their Mean
Original.

THERE are some People well enough disposed to be Some People would be Grateful
if they had a Prompter.
Grateful, but they cannot hit upon it without a Prompter: they are a little
like School-boyes, that have Treacherous Memories; it is but helping them here
and there with a word, when they stick, and they will go through with their
Lesson; they must be taught to be Thankful, and, it is a fair step, if we can
but bring them to be willing, and only offer at it. Some Benefits we have
neglected; some we are not willing to remember. He is is Ungrateful that
Disownes an Obligation; and so is he that Dissembles it, or, to his Power, does
not Requite it; but, the worst of all is, he that forgets it. Conscience, or
Occasion may revive the rest, but here, the very Memory of it is lost. Those
Eyes that cannot endure the light are weak, but those are stark blind that
cannot see it. I do not love to hear People say, Alas! poor Man, he has
forgotten it: As if that were the Excuse of Ingratitude, which is the very
cause of it: For, if he were not Ungrateful, he would not be Forgetful, and lay
that out of the way which should be always uppermost, and in sight. He that
thinks, as he ought to do, of requiting a Benefit, is in no danger of
forgetting it. There are indeed some Benefits so great, that they can never
slip the Memory; but, those which are less in value, and more in number, do
commonly escape us. We are apt enough to acknowledge, That, such a Man has been
the Making of us; so long as we are in possession of the advantage he has
brought us; but, new Appetites deface old Kindnesses, and we carry our Prospect
forward to something more, without considering what we have obtained already.
All that is past we give for lost; so that we are only intent upon the future.
When a Benefit is once out of Sight, or out of Use, it is buried.

IT is the Freak of many people, they cannot do a good Office, but they are
presently There must be no upbraiding of Benefits.
boasting of it, Drunk or Sober; and about it goes into all Companies, what
wonderful things they have done for this Man, and what for the other. A foolish,
and a dangerous vanity, of a doubtful Friend, to make a certain Enemy. For,
these Reproaches, and Contempts, will set every Bodies Tongue a Walking; and
People will conclude, that these things would never be, if there were not
something very extraordinary in the Bottom on it. When it comes to that once,
there is not any Calumny but fastens more, or less; nor any falsehood so
incredible, but in some part or other of it, shall pass for a Truth. Our great
Mistake is this, we are still inclined to make the most of what we Give, and
the least of what we Receive; whereas we should do the clean contrary. It might
have been more, but he had a great many to oblige. It was as much as he could
well spare; he will make it up some other time, etc. Nay, we should be so far
from making publication of our Bounties, as not to hear them so much as
mentioned, without sweetening the matter; As, Alas! I owe him a great deal
more than that comes to. If it were in my Power to serve him, I should be very
glad on it. And, this too, not with the Figure of a Complement, but with all
Humanity, and Truth. There was a Man of Quality, that, in the Triumviral
Proscription was saved by one of Caesar's Friends, who would be still twitting
him with it, who it was that preserved him, and telling him over and over, You
had gone to Pot, Friend, but for me. Pray'e, says the Proscribed, let me hear
no more of this, or even leave me as you found me: I am thankful enough of my
self to acknowledge, That I owe you my life; but, it is Death to have it rung in
my Ears perpetually as a Reproach: It looks as if you had only saved me, to
carry me about for a spectacle. I would fain forget the Misfortune that I was
once a Prisoner, without being led in Triumph every day of my Life.

OH! Some Bounties are bestowed with Insolence.
the Pride, and Folly of a great Fortune, that turns Benefits into Injuries!
That delights in Excesses, and disgraces every thing it does. Who would receive
any thing from it upon these terms? The higher it raises us, the more sordid
it makes us. Whatsoever it Gives, it Corrupts. What is there in it that should
thus puff us up? By what Magic is it that we are so transformed, that we do no
longer know our selves? Is it Impossible for greatness to be liberal without
Insolence? The Benefits that we receive from our Superiors are then welcome,
when they come with an Open Hand, and a clear Brow: Without either contumely,
or State: and so as to prevent our Necessities. The Benefit is never the
greater for the making of a bustle, and a noise about it; but, the Benefactor
is much the less for the Ostentation of his good deeds; which makes that Odious
to us, which would be otherwise Delightful. Tiberius had gotten a Trick, when
any Man had begged Money of him, to refer him to the Senate, where all the
Petitioners were to deliver up the Names of their Creditors. His End perhaps
was, to deter Men from Asking, by exposing the Condition of their Fortunes to
an Examination. But, it was however a Benefit, turned into a Reprehension; and,
he made a Reproach of a Bounty.

BUT, In what Case a Man may be reminded of a Benefit.
it is not enough yet to forbear the Casting of a Benefit in a Man's Teeth; for,
there are some, that will not allow it to be so much as challenged. For, an Ill
Man, say they, will not make a Return, though it be demanded, and a Good Man
will do it of himself. And then the Asking of it seems to turn it into a Debt:
It is a kind of Injury to be too quick with the former; for, to call upon him
too soon, reproaches him, as if he would not have done it otherwise. Nor would
I Recall a Benefit from any Man, so as to force it; but, only to receive it. If
I let him quite alone, I make my self guilty of his Ingratitude; and undo him
for want of Plain-Dealing. A Father Reclaimes a Disobedient Son. A Wife
Reclaimes a Dissolute Husband; and one Friend excites the languishing Kindness
of another: How many Men are lost for want of being touched to the quick? So
long as I am not pressed, I will rather desire a Favor, than so much as
mention a Requital; but, if my Country, my Family, or my Liberty be at Stake,
my Zeal and Indignation shall overrule my Modesty, and the World shall then
understand, that I have done all I could not to stand in need of an Ungrateful
Man. And, in conclusion, the Necessity of receiving a Benefit shall overcome
the shame of Recalling it. Nor is it only allowable upon some Exigents, to put
the Receiver in Mind of a Good Turn, but it is many times for the Common
Advantage of both Parties.

CHAP. XIV. How far to Oblige, or Requite a Wicked Man.
THERE are some Benefits, whereof a Wicked Man is wholly Incapable: of which,
hereafter. There are others, which are Bestowed upon him, not for his own sake,
but for Secondary Reasons; and, of these, we have spoken, in part, already.
There are moreover certain Common Offices of Humanity, which are only allowed
him as he is a Man, and without any regard, either to Vice, or Virtue. To pass
over the First Point: the Second must be handled with Care, and Distinction,
and not without some seeming Exceptions to the General Rule: As first, Here Is
no Choice, or Intention in the Case, but, it is a good Office done him for some
By-Interest, or by Chance. Secondly, There Is no Judgment in it neither, for
it is to a Wicked Man. But, to shorten the Matter; without these Circumstances
it is not properly a Benefit; or, at least, not to him: for, it looks another
way. I rescue a Friend from Thieves, and the other escapes for Company. I
Discharge a Debt for a Friend, and the other comes off too, for they were both
in a Bond. The Third is of a great Latitude, and varies, according to the
degree of Generosity on the one side, and of Wickedness on the other. Some
Benefactors will Supererogate, and do more than they are bound to do: And, some
Men are so lewd, that it is dangerous to do them any sort of Good; no not so
much as by way of Return, or Requital.

How to oblige an Ungrateful Man.
IF the Benefactors Bounty must extend to the Bad, as well as to the Good; Put
the Case that I promise a good Office to an Ungrateful Man; We are first to
distinguish (as is said before) betwixt a Common Benefit, and a Personal;
betwixt what is given for Merit, and what for Company. Secondly, Whether or no
we know the Person to be Ungrateful, and can reasonably conclude, that his Vice
is Incurable. Thirdly, A Consideration must be had of the Promise, how far that
may oblige us. The two first Points are cleared both in one: We cannot justify
any particular Kindness for one that we conclude to be a hopelesly wicked Man:
So that the force of the Promise is the single Point in Question. In the
Promise of a good Office to a Wicked or Ungrateful Man, I am to blame if I did
it knowingly; and, I am to blame nevertheless, if I did it otherwise: but, I
must yet make it good (under due Qualifications) because I promised it: that is
to say, Matters continuing in the same State, for no Man is answerable for
Accidents. I Will Sup at such a Place, though it be cold; I Will rise at such an
hour, though I be sleepy; but, if it prove tempestuous, or that I fall sick of
a Fever, I Will neither do the one, nor the other. I promise to second a Friend
in a Quarrel, or to plead his Cause; and, when I come into the Field, or into
the Court, it proves to be against my Father, or my Brother: I promise to go a
Journey with him; but, there is no Traveling upon the Road for Robbing; my
Child is fallen sick; or my Wife in Labor: These Circumstances are sufficient
to discharge me; for, a Promise against Law, or Duty, is void in its own
Nature. The Counsels of a Wise Man are Certain; but Events are uncertain. And
yet if I have passed a rash Promise, I will in some degree punish the Temerity
of making it, with the damage of keeping it. Unless it turn very much to my
shame, or detriment; and then I Will be my own Confessor in the Point, and rather
be once guilty of Denying, than always of Giving. It is not with a Benefit as
with a Debt; It is one thing to trust an ill Play Master, and another thing to
oblige an unworthy Person: The one is an ill Man, and the other only an ill
Husband.

THERE was a Valiant Fellow in the Army, that Philip of Macedon took particular
Notice of; and he gave him several considerable Marks of the Kindness he had
for him. This Soldier puts to Sea, and was cast away upon a Coast, where a
Charitable Neighbor took him up half dead; carried him to his House, and there
at his own Charge maintained, and provided for him Thirty days, till he was
perfectly recovered: and, after all, furnished him over and above with a
Viaticum at parting. The Soldier told him the mighty matters that he would do
for him in Return, so soon as he should have the honor once again to see his
Master. To Court he goes, tells Philip of the Wreck, but not a Syllable of his
Preserver, and begs the Estate of this very Man that kept him alive. It was
with Philip, as with many other Princes, that give they know not what,
especially in a time of War. He granted the Soldier his Request, contemplating
at the same time the Impossibility of satisfying so many revenous Appetites as
he had to please. When the good Man came to be turned out of all, he was not so
Mealy-mouthed as to thank his Majesty for not giving away his Person too, as
well as his Fortune; but, in a Bold, Frank Letter to Philip, made a just report
of the whole Story. The King was so Incensed at the Abuse, that he immediately
commanded the Right Owner to be restored to his Estate, and the Unthankful
Guest and Soldier to be Stigmatized for an Example to others. Should Philip now
have kept this Promise? First, he owed the Soldier nothing. Secondly; It would
have been Injurious, and Impious, and lastly, a President of dangerous
Consequence to Humane Society. For, it would have been little less than an
Interdiction of Fire and Water to the miserable, to have inflicted such a
Penalty upon Relieving them. So that there must be always some tacit
Exception, or Reserve: If I can, If I may; or, if matters continue as they were.

The Case of an Obligation from one that afterward betrays his Country.
IF it should be my Fortune to receive a Benefit from one, that afterward
Betrays his Country, I should still reckon my self obliged to him for such a
Requital as might stand with my public duty. I would not furnish him with
Arms, nor with Money, or Credit, to Levy or Pay Soldiers; but, I should not
stick to Gratify him at my own expense, with such Curiosities as might please
him one way, without doing mischief another; I would not do any thing that
might contribute to the Support, or Advantage of his Party. But, What should I
do now in the Case of a Benefactor, that should afterward become, not only
mine, and my Countries Enemy, but the Common Enemy of Mankind? I would here
distinguish betwixt the Wickedness of a Man, and the Cruelty of a Beast:
betwixt a limited, or a particular Passion, and a Sanguinary Rage, that
extends to the hazard, and destruction of Humane Society. In the former Case I
would quit Scores, that I might have no more to do with him; but, if he comes
once to a delight in Blood, and to act Outrages with greediness: to study, and
invent Torments, and to take pleasure in them, the Law of Reasonable Nature has
discharged me of such a Debt. But, this is an Impiety so rare, that it might
pass for a Portent, and be reckoned among Comets, and Monsters. Let us
therefore restrain our Discourse to such Men as we detest without horror; such
Men as we see every day in Courts, Camps, and upon the Seats of Justice: to
such Wicked Men I will Return what I have Received, without making any
Advantage of their Unrighteousness.

Providence is gracious even to the Wicked.
IT does not divert the Almighty from being still Gracious, though we proceed
daily in the abuse of his Bounties. How many are there that enjoy the Comfort
of the Light, that do not deserve it, that wish they had never been born; and
yet Nature goes quietly on with her Work; and allows them a Being, even in
despite of their unthankfulness. Such a Knave, we cry, was better used than I.
And, the same Complaint we extend to Providence it self. How many Wicked Men
have good Crops, when better than themselves have their Fruits blasted? Such a
Man, we say, has treated me very ill. Why what should we do, but that very
thing which is done by God himself? That is to say; Give to the Ignorant, and
Persevere to the Wicked. All our Ingratitude, we see, does not turn Providence
from Pouring down of Benefits, even upon those that question whence they come.
The Wisdom of Heaven does all things with a regard to the Good of the Universe,
and the Blessings of Nature are granted in Common, to the VVorst, as well as to
the Best of Men; for, they live promiscuously together; and, it is Gods Will,
that the Wicked shall rather fare the better for the Good, than that the Good
shall fare the worse for the Wicked: It Is true, that a Wise Prince will confer
peculiar Honors only upon the Worthy; but, in the dealing of a public Dole,
there is no Respect had to the Manners of the Man, but a Thief, or a Traitor,
shall put in for a share as well as an Honest Man. If a Good Man, and a Wicked,
sail both in the same bottom, it is impossible that the same Wind, which
favors the one, should cross the other. The Common Benefits of Laws,
Privileges, Communities, Letters, and Medicines, are permitted to the Bad, as
well as to the Good, and no Man ever yet Suppressed a Sovereign Remedy, for
fear a Wicked Man might be cured with it. Cities are built for both sorts, and
the same Remedy works upon both alike. In these Cases we are to set an Estimate
upon the Persons, there is a great difference betwixt the Choosing of a Man, and
the not Excluding him; The Law is open to the Rebellious, as well as to the
Obedient: There are some Benefits, which, if they were not allowed to all,
could not be enjoyed by any. The Sun was never made for me, but for the Comfort
of the World, and for the Providential Order of the Seasons; and yet I am not
without my Private Obligation also. To conclude, he that will not Oblige the
Wicked, and the Ungrateful, must resolve to Oblige no body; for, in some sort
or other, we are all of us Wicked, we are all of us Ungrateful, every Man of us.

WE have been Discoursing all this while, how far a Wicked d A Wicked Man is
Incapable of a Benefit.
Man may be Obliged, and the Stoics tell us, at last, that he cannot be
Obliged at all: For, they make him Incapable of any Good, and consequently of
any Benefit. But, he has this Advantage, that if he cannot be Obliged, he
cannot be Ungrateful: for, if he cannot receive, he is not bound to a Return.
On the other side, a Good Man, and an Ungrateful are a Contradiction: So that
at this rate there is no such thing as Ingratitude in Nature. They compare a
Wicked Man's Mind to a Vitiated Stomach; he Corrupts whatever he Receives, and
the best Nourishment turns to the Disease. But, taking this for granted, a
Wicked Man may yet be so far Obliged as to pass for Ungrateful, if he does not
Requite what he Receives. For, though it be not a perfect Benefit, yet he
Receives something like it. There are goods of the Mind, the Body, and of
Fortune. Of the first sort Fools, and Wicked Men, are wholly Incapable; to the
rest they may be admitted. But, Why should I call any Man Ungrateful, you will
say, for not Restoring That which I deny to be a Benefit? I answer, That if the
Receiver take it for a Benefit, and fails of a Return, it is an Ingratitude in
him; for, that which goes for an Obligation among wicked Men, is an Obligation
upon them: and, they may pay one another in their own Quoin; the Money is
Current, whether it be Gold, or Leather, when it comes once to be Authorized.
Nay, Cleanthes carries it farther; He that is wanting, says he, to a kind
Office, though it be no Benefit, would have done the same thing if it had been
one; and, is as guilty, as a Thief is, that has set his Booty; and, if already
Armed, and Mounted, with a purpose to seize it, though he has not yet drawn
Blood. Wickedness is formed in the heart; and, the Matter of Fact is only the
Discovery, and the Execution of it. Now, though a wicked Man cannot either
Receive, or Bestow a Benefit, because he wants the Will of doing good, and for
that he is no longer wicked, when Virtue has taken possession of him; yet we
commonly call it one, as we call a Man Illiterate that is not Learned, and
Naked, that is not well clad; not but that the one can Read, and the other is
Covered.

CHAP. XV. A General View of the Parts, and Duties of the Benefactor.
THE three main Points in the Question of Benefits, are, First, A Judicious
Choice in the Object; Secondly, in the Matter of our Benevolence; And, Thirdly,
a Gracious Felicity in the Manner of expressing it. But, there are also
incumbent upon the Benefactor other Considerations, which will deserve a Place
in this Discourse.

IT is not enough to do one Good Turn, and to do it with a Good Grace too,
unless we follow it with more; and without either Obligations must be followed,
without Upbraiding, or Repining.
Upbraiding, or Repining. It is a Common shift, to charge that upon the
Ingratitude of the Receiver, which, in truth, is most commonly the Levity, and
Indiscretion of the Giver; for, all Circumstances must be duly weighed, to
Consummate the Action. Some there are that we find Ungrateful; but, what with
our Frowardness, Change of Humor, and Reproaches, there are more that we make
so. And, this is the Business: We Give with Design, and, Most to those that are
able to give Most again. We Give to the Covetous, and to the Ambitious; to
those that can never be thankful; (for their desires are Insatiable) and to
those that will not. He that is a Tribune, would be a Praetor; the Praetor a
Consul; never reflecting upon what he was, but only looking forward to what he
would be. People are still Computing, Must I lose this, or that Benefit? if it
be lost, the fault lies in the ill bestowing of it; for, rightly placed, it is
as good as Consecrated; if we be deceived in another, let us not be deceived in
our selves too. A Charitable Man will mend the Matter; and say to himself,
perhaps he has forgot it; perchance he could not; perhaps he will yet Requite
it. A Patient Creditor will, of an ill Play Master, in time, make a good
Creditor; an Obstinate Goodness overcomes an ill disposition; as a Barren Soil
is made Fruitful by Care and Tillage. But, let a Man be never so Ungrateful, or
Inhumane; he shall never destroy the Satisfaction of my having done a good
Office.

We must persevere in doing good.
BUT, What if others will be wicked? Does it follow that we must be so too? If
others will be Ungrateful, Must we therefore be Inhumane? To Give, and to Lose,
is Nothing; but; to Lose, and to Give still, is the Part of a great Mind. And
the others, in effect, is the greater Loss; for, the one does but lose his
Benefit, and the other loses himself. The Light shines upon the Profane, and
Sacrilegious, as well as upon the Righteous. How many disappointments do we
meet with in our Wives, and Children, and yet we couple still? He that has lost
one Battle, hazards another. The Mariner puts to Sea again after a Wreck. An
Illustrious Mind does not propose the Profit of a good Office, but the Duty. If
the World be Wicked, we should yet persevere in Well-doing, even amongst Evil
Men. I had rather never receive a Kindness, than never bestow one: not to
Return a Benefit is the Greater Sin, but not to Confer it, is the Earlier. We
cannot propose to our selves a more glorious Example, than that of the
Almighty; who neither needs, nor expects any thing from us; and yet he is
continually showring down, and distributing his Mercies and his Graces among
us; not only for our Necessities, but also for our Delights: as Fruits, and
Seasons; Rain, and Sunshine; Veins of Water, and of Metal; and all this to the
Wicked, as well as to the Good; and without any other End than the common
Benefit of the Receivers. With what Face then can we be Mercenary one to
another, that have received all things from Divine Providence gratis? It Is a
common saying, I gave such, or such a Man so much Money, I would I had thrown it
into the Sea. And yet the Merchant Trades again after a Piracy; and the Banker
ventures afresh after a bad Security. He that will do no good Offices after a
disappointment, must stand still, and do just nothing at all. The Plow goes on
after a Barren Year; and, while the Ashes are yet warm, we raise a new house
upon the Ruins of a former. What Obligations can be greater than those, which
Children receive from their Parents? And yet, should we give them over in their
Infancy, it were all to no purpose: Benefits, like Grain, must be followed from
the Seed to the Harvest. I will not so much as leave any place for Ingratitude.
I will pursue, and I will encompass the Receiver with Benefits; so that let him
look which way he will, his Benefactor shall be still in his Eye, even when he
would avoid his own Memory. And then I will remit to one Man, because he calls
for it; to another, because he does not; to a third, because he is Wicked; and,
to a fourth, because he is the Contrary. I Will cast away a Good Turn upon a Bad
Man, and I Will requite a Good one. The one, because it is my Duty; and the
other, that I may not be in his Debt. I do not love to hear any Man complain,
That he has met with a Thankless Man. If he has met but with one, he has either
been very Fortunate, or very Careful. And yet Care is not sufficient. For,
there is no way to escape the hazard of losing a Benefit, but the not bestowing
of it; and, to neglect a Duty to my self, for fear another should abuse it. It
is an others fault, if he be Ungrateful, but it is Mine if I do not Give. To
find one Thankful Man, I will oblige a great many that are not so. The Business
of Mankind would be at a stand, if we should do nothing for fear of
Miscarriages in matters of Uncertain Event. I will try, and believe all things,
before I give any Man over, and do all that is possible that I may not lose a
Good Office, and a Friend together. What do I know, but he may misunderstand
the Obligation? Business may have put it out of his head, or taken him off
from't: He may have slipped his Opportunity: I will say, in Excuse of Humane
Weakness, That one Man's Memory is not sufficient for all things; It is but of a
limited Capacity, so as to hold only so much, and no more; and when it is once
full, it must let out part of what it had, to take in any thing beside; and,
the last Benefit ever sits closest to us. In our Youth, we forget the
Obligations of our Infancy, and when we are Men, we forget those of our Youth.
If nothing will prevail, let him keep what he has and welcome; but, let him
have a care of Returning evil for good, and making it dangerous for a Man to do
his duty. I would no more Give a Benefit to such a Man, than I would lend Money
to a Beggarly Spendthrift; or deposite any in the hands of a known Knight of
the Post. However the Case stands, an Ungrateful Person is never the better for
a Reproach; if he be already hardened in his Wickedness, he gives no heed to it;
and, if he be not, it turns a doubtful Modesty, into an incorrigible Impudence:
Beside that, he watches for ill Words, to pick a quarrel with them.

There should be no delay in the doing of a Benefit.
As the Benefactor is not to upbraid a Benefit, so neither to delay it: The one
is tiresome, and the other odious. We must not hold Men in hand, as Physicians,
and Surgeons do their Patients, and keep them longer in fear, and pain, than
needs, only to magnify the Cure. A Generous Man gives easily; and Receives as
he Gives, but never Exacts. He rejoices in the Return, and Judges favorably of
it whatever it be, and Contents himself with a bare thank for a Requital. It Is
a harder Matter with some to get the Benefit, after it is promised, than the
first promise of it; there must be so many Friends made in the Case. One must
be desired to solicit another; and he must be entreated to move a Third, and
a Fourth must be at last besought to receive it; so that the Author, upon the
upshot, has the least share in the Obligation. It is then welcome when it comes
free, and without deduction; and no Man either to Intercept, to Hinder, or to
Detain it. And, let it be of such a Quality too, that it be not only delightful
in the Receiving, but, after it is Received: which it will certainly be, if we
do but observe this Rule, never to do any thing for another, which we could not
honestly desire for our selves.

CHAP. XVI. How the Receiver ought to behave himself.
THERE are certain Rules, in Common, betwixt the Giver, and the Receiver: We
must do both cheerfully, that the Giver may Receive the Fruit of his Benefit in
the very act of bestowing it. It is a just ground of Satisfaction, to see a
Friend pleased; but, it is much more, to make him so. The Intention of the One
is to be suited to the Intention of the other; and, there must be an Emulation
betwixt them, whether shall Oblige most. Let the one say, That he has Received
a Benefit, and let the other persuade himself, That he has not Returned it. Let
the One say, I am paid; and the other, I am yet in your Debt; let the
Benefactor acquit the Receiver, and the Receiver bind himself: The frankness of
the discharge heightens the Obligation. It is in Conversation, as in a
Tennis-Court: Benefits are to be tossed like Balls; the longer the Rest, the
better are the Gamesters. The Giver, in some respect, has the Odds, because (as
in a Race) he starts first, and the other must use great diligence to overtake
him. The Return must be Larger than the first Obligation, to come up to it; and,
it is a Kind of Ingratitude, not to render it with Interest. In a Matter of
Money, It Is a common thing to pay a Debt out of Course, and before it be due;
but we account our selves to owe nothing for a Good Office; whereas the Benefit
increases by delay. So Insensible are we of the most Important affair of Humane
Life. That Man were doubtless in a Miserable Condition, that could neither see,
nor hear, nor taste, nor feel, nor smell: but, How much more unhappy is he
then, that wanting a Sense of Benefits, loses the greatest Comfort in Nature,
in the Bliss of Giving, and Receiving them? He that takes a Benefit as it is
meant, is in the right; for, the Benefactor has then his end, and his only end,
when the Receiver is Grateful.

THE more glorious part, in appearance, is that of the Giver; but, The Receiver
has the harder Game to Play.
the Receiver has undoubtedly the harder Game to play, in many regards. There
are some from whom I would not accept of a Benefit; that is to say, from those
upon whom I would not bestow one. For, Why should not I scorn to receive a
Benefit, where I am ashamed to owe it? And, I would yet be more tender too,
where I Receive, than where I Give; for, it is a torment to be in Debt, where a
Man has no mind to pay; as it is the greatest delight imaginable to be engaged
by a Friend, whom I should yet have a Kindness for, if I were never so much
disobliged. It is a pain to an honest, and a generous Mind, to lie under a duty
of affection against Inclination. I do not speak here of Wise Men, that love to
do what they ought to do; that have their Passions at Command; that prescribe
Laws to themselves, and keep them when they have done; but, of Men, in a State
of Imperfection, that may have a good will perhaps to be honest, and yet be
overborn by the Contumacy of their Affections. We must therefore have a Care
to whom we become Obliged: and, I would be much stricter yet in the Choice of a
Creditor for Benefits, than for Money. In the one Case, it is but paying what I
had, and the Debt is discharged: In the other, I do not only owe more, but when
I have paid that, I am still in Arriere: And, this Law is the very foundation
of Friendship. I will suppose my self a Prisoner; and a notorious Villain
offers to lay down a Sum of Money for my Redemption. First, Shall I make use of
this Money, or no? Secondly, If I do, What Return shall I make him for it? To
the First Point, I will take it; but, only as a Debt, not as a Benefit, that
shall ever tie me to a Friendship with him: And Secondly, my Acknowledgment
shall be only correspondent to such an Obligation. It is a School-Question,
Whether or no Brutus, that thought Caesar not fit to live (and put himself in
the head of a Conspiracy against him) could honestly have Received his Life
from Caesar, if he had fallen into Caesar's power, without examining what reason
moved him to that Action? How great a Man soever he was in other Cases, without
dispute he was extremely out in this, and below the dignity of his Profession.
For a Stoic to fear the Name of a King, when yet Monarchy is the best State of
Government; or there to hope for Liberty, where so great rewards were
propounded, both for Tyrants, and their Slaves; For him to imagine, ever to
bring the Laws to their former State, where so many thousand lives had been
lost in the Contest, not so much whether they should serve or no, but who
should be their Master: He was strangely mistaken sure in the Nature and Reason
of things, to Phansy, that when Julius was gone, some body else would not start
up in his place, when there was yet a Tarquin found, after so many Kings that
were destroyed, either by Sword or Thunder: And yet the Resolution is, That he
might have Received it, but not as a Benefit; for, at that rate I owe my Life
to every Man that does not take it away.

A Benefit refused for the Person.
GRAECINUS JULIUS, (whom Caligula put to death, out of a pure Malice to his
Virtue) had a considerable sum of Money sent him from Fabius Persicus (a Man of
Great and Infamous Example) as a Contribution toward the Expense of Plays, and
other Public Entertainments; but Julius would not receive it; and some of his
Friends, that had an Eye more upon the Present, than the Presenter, asked him,
with some freedom, What he meant by refusing it? Why (says he) Do you think
that I Will take Money, where I would not take so much as a Glass of Wine? After
this, Rebilus (a Man of the same stamp) sent him a greater Sum upon the same
score. You must excuse me (says he to the Messenger) for I would not take any
thing of Persicus neither.

TO match this Scruple of Receiving Money, with another of Keeping it; and the
Sum not above Three pence, or a Groat at most: A Pythagorean Scruple.
There was a certain Pythagorean that Contracted with a Cobbler for a pair of
Shoes, and some three or four days after, going to pay him his Money, the shop
was shut up; and when he had knocked a great while at the door, Friend, (says
a Fellow) you may hammer your heart out there, for the Man that you look for is
dead. And when our Friends are dead, we hear no more News of them; but yours
that are to live again, will shift well enough (alluding to Pythagoras his
Transmigration.) Upon this the Philosopher went away, with his Money chinking in
his hand, and well enough content to save it: at last his Conscience took check
at it, and, upon Reflection, Though the Man be dead (says he) to Others, he is
alive to Thee; pay him what thou owe him: and so he went back presently, and
thrust it into his Shop through the Chink of the door. Whatever we owe, it is
our part to find where to pay it; and to do it without asking too; for whether
the Creditor be good, or bad, the Debt is still the same.

IF a Benefit be forced upon me, as from a Tyrant, or a d A forced Benefit.
Superior, where it may be dangerous to refuse; this is rather Obeying than
Receiving, where the necessity destroys the choice; the way to know what I
have a Mind to do, is to leave me at liberty, whether I will do it or no; but,
it is yet a Benefit, if a Man does me good in spite of my Teeth; as it is none,
if I do any Man good against my Will. A Man may both hate, and yet Receive a
Benefit at the same time; the Money is never the worse, because a Fool, that is
not read in Quoines, refuses to take it. If the thing be good for the Receiver,
and so intended, no matter how ill it is taken. Nay, the Receiver may be
obliged, and not know it: But, there can be no Benefit, which is unknown to the
Giver. Neither will I, upon any Terms, receive a Benefit from a Worthy Person
that may do him a Mischief: It is the part of an Enemy, to save himself, by
doing another Man harm.

Keep a Grateful Mind.
BUT, Whatever we do, let us be sure always to keep a Grateful Mind. It is not
enough to say, What Requital shall a Poor Man offer to a Prince; or, a Slave to
his Patron? When it is the glory of Gratitude, that it depends only upon the
good will. Suppose a Man defends my Fame; delivers me from Beggary; saves my
Life; or gives me Liberty, that is more than Life. How shnll I be grateful to
that Man? I will receive, cherish, and rejoice in the Benefit. Take it kindly,
and it is requited: not that the Debt it self is discaharg'd, but it is
nevertheless a discharge of the Conscience. I will yet distinguish betwixt a
Debtor, that becomes Insolvent by Expenses upon Whores, and Diee; and another
that is undone by Fire, or Thieves; Nor do I take this Gratitude for a payment;
but, there is no danger, I presume, of being Arrested for such a Debt.

IN the Return of Benefits, let us be ready, and cheerful, f We should be
cheerful, but not Importune in the Returning of Benefits.
but not pressing. There is as much greatness of Mind in the Owing of a good
Turn, as in the doing of it; and, we must no more force a requital out of
season, than be wanting in it. He that precipitates a Return, does as good as
say, I am weary of being in this Man's Debt; not but that the hastening of a
Requital, as a good Office, is a Commendable Disposition; but, it is another
thing, to do it as a discharge, for, it looks like casting off a heavy, and a
troublesome burden. It Is for the Benefactor to say, when he will receive it;
no matter for the Opinion of the World, so long as I gratify my own
Conscience; for I cannot be mistaken in my self, but another may. He that is
over-sollicitous to return a Benefit, thinks the other so likewise to receive
it. If he had rather we should keep it, Why should we refuse, and presume to
dispose of his Treasure, who may call it in, or let it lie out, at his choice?
It Is as much a fault, to receive what I ought not, as not to give what I ought:
for, the Giver has the Privilege of Choosing his own time for receiving.

There must be no Pride, either in the conferring, or in the Receiving of
Benefits.
SOME are too proud in the conferring of Benefits; others, in the Receiving of
them, which is, to say the Truth, intolerable. The same Rule serves both sides,
as in the Case of a Father, and a Son; a Husband, and a Wife; one Friend, or
Acquaintance, and another, where the Duties are known and common. There are
some that will not receive a Benefit, but in Private; nor thank you for it but
in your Ear, or in a Corner; there must be nothing under Hand, and Seal, no
Brokers, Notaries, or Witnesses in the Case: This is not so much a scruple of
modesty, as a kind of denying the Obligation, and only a less hardened
Ingratitude. Some receive Benefits so coldly, and indifferently, that a Man
would think the Obligation lay on the other side, as who should say, Well,
since you will needs have it so, I am content to take it. Some again, so
carelessly, as if they hardly knew of any such thing; whereas we should rather
aggravate the matter, You cannot Imagine, how many you have obliged in this
Act: there never was so great, so kind, so seasonable a Courtesy. Furnius
never gained so much upon Augustus, as by a Speech, upon the getting of his
Fathers Pardon for siding with Anthony. This Grace, says he, is the only
Injury that ever Caesar did me; for it has put me upon a necessity of Living,
and Dying Ungrateful. It Is safer to affront some people, than to oblige them;
for, the better a Man deserves, the worse they will speak of him: as if the
professing of open hatred to their Benefactors, were an Argument, that they lie
under no Obligation. Some people are so sour, and ill-natured, that they take
it for an Affront to have an Obligation, or a Return offered them, to the
discouragement both of Bounty, and of Gratitude together. The not doing, and
the not receiving of Benefits, are equally a Mistake. He that refuses a new
one, seems to be offended at an old one: and yet sometimes I would neither
return a Benefit, no nor so much as receive it, if I might.

CHAP. XVII. Of Gratitude.
HE that Preaches Gratitude, pleads the Cause both of God and Man; for, without
it, we can neither be Sociable, nor Religious. There is a strange delight in
the very purpose, and Contemplation of it, as well as in the Action; when I can
say to my self, I love my Benefactor; What is there in this World that I would
not do, to oblige, and serve him? Where I have not the Means of a Requital, the
very Meditation of it is sufficient. A Man is nevertheless an Artist, for not
having his Tools about him; or a Musician, because he wants his Fiddle; Nor is
he the less brave, because his hands are bound; or, the worse Pilot, for being
upon dry Ground. If I have only a Will to be Grateful, I am so. Let me be upon
the Wheel; or, under the hand of the Executioner; Let me be burnt Limb, by
Limb, and my whole Body dropping in the Flames, a Good Conscience supports me
in all Extremes: Nay, it is comfortable even in Death it self: For, when we
come to approach that point, What care do we take to summon, and call to mind
all our Benefactors, and the Good Offices they have done us, that we may leave
the World fair, and set our Minds in Order. Without Gratitude, we can neither
have Security, Peace, nor Reputation: And, it is not therefore the less
desirable, because it draws many Adventitious Benefits along with it. Suppose
the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars had no other Business, then only to pass over
our heads, without any effect upon our Minds, or Bodies; without any regard to
our Health, Fruits, or Seasons: a Man could hardly lift up his Eyes toward the
Heavens without wonder, and veneration, to see so many Millions of Radiant
Lights, and to observe their Courses, and Revolutions, even without any respect
to the Common good of the Universe. But when we come to consider, that
Providence, and Nature, are still at Work when we Sleep; with the admirable
Force, and Operation of their Influences, and Motions, we cannot then but
acknowledge their Ornament to be the least part of their value; and that they
are more to be esteemed for their Virtue, than for their Splendour. Their main
End, and Use, is matter of Life, and Necessity, though they may seem to us more
considerable for their Majesty, and Beauty. And so it is with Gratitude; we
love it rather for Secondary Ends, then for it Self.

NO Man can be Grateful without Contemning those a We must be grateful in
despite of all Oppositions.
things that put the Common People out of their Wits. We must go into
Banishment; Lay down our Lives; Beggar, and expose our selves to Reproaches:
Nay, it is often seen, that Loyalty suffers the Punishment due to Rebellion;
and, that Treason receives the Rewards of Fidelity. As the Benefits of it are
many, and great, so are the hazards, which is the Case, more or less, of all
other Virtues: and it were hard, if this, above the rest, should be both
painful, and fruitless: So that though we may go currently on with it in smooth
way, we must yet prepare, and resolve, (if need be) to force our passage to it,
even if the way were covered with Thorns, and Serpents; and, fall back, fall
edge, we must be Grateful still. Grateful, for the Virtue sake, and Grateful
over and above upon the point of Interest; for, it preserves old Friends, and
gains new ones. It is not our business to fish for one Benefit with another;
and by bestowing a little, to get more: or to oblige for any sort of
Expedience, but because I ought to do it, and because I love it; and that to
such a degree, that if I could not be Grateful, without appearing the contrary;
if I could not return a Benefit without being suspected of doing an Injury; in
despite of Infamy it self, I would yet be Grateful. No Man is greater in my
esteem, than he that ventures the Fame, to preserve the Conscience of an honest
Man; the one is but Imaginary, the other Solid, and Inestimable. I cannot call
him Grateful, who, in the instant of returning one Benefit, has his Eye upon
another. He that is Grateful for Profit, or Fear, is like a Woman that is
honest, only upon the Score of Reputation.

Gratitude is an Obvious, a Cheap, and an easy Virtue.
AS Gratitude is a Necessary, and a Glorious, so is it also an Obvious, a Cheap,
and an Easy Virtue: So Obvious, that wheresoever there is a Life, there is a
place for it: So Cheap, that the Covetous Man may be Grateful without Expense;
and so Easy, that the Sluggard may be so likewise, without Labor. And yet it
is not without its Niceties too; for, there may be a Time, a Place, or
Occasion, wherein I ought not to return a Benefit; Nay, wherein I may better
disown it, than deliver it.

LET it be understood, by c It Is one thing to be Grateful for a Benefit, and
another thing to return it.
the way, that it is one thing to be Grateful for a good Office, and another
thing to Return it: the Good Will is enough in one Case, being as much as the
one side demands, and the other promises; but the Effect is requisite in the
other. The Physician that has done his best, is acquitted, though the Patient
dies; and so is the Advocate, though the Clyent may lose his Cause. The General
of an Army, though the Battle be lost, is yet worthy of Commendation, if he has
discharged all the parts of a prudent Commander; In this Case, the one acquits
himself, though the other be never the better for it. He is a Grateful Man, that
is always willing and ready; and he that seeks for all means, and occasions of
requiting a Benefit, though without attaining his end, does a great deal more,
than the Man, that without any trouble makes an immediate Return. Suppose my
Friend a Prisoner, and that I have sold my Estate for his Ransom: I put to Sea
in foul weather, and upon a Coast that is pestered with Pirates: my Friend
happens to be Redeemed before I come to the place; my Gratitude is as much to
be esteemed, as if he had been yet a Prisoner; and, if I had been taken, and
robbed, my self, it would still have been the same Case. Nay, there is a
Gratitude in the very Countenance; for an honest Man bears his Conscience in
his Face, and propounds the requital of a Good turn in the very moment of
receiving it: he is Cheerful, and Confident; and, in the possession of a true
Friendship, delivered from all Anxiety. There is this difference betwixt a
Thankful Man, and an Unthankful; the one is always pleased in the good he has
done, and the other only once, in what he has received. There must be a
Benignity in the Estimation even of the smallest Offices; and such a Modesty as
appears to be obliged in whatsoever it gives: As it is indeed a very great
Benefit, the opportunity of doing a good Office to a worthy Man; He that
attends to the present, and remembers what is past, shall never be Ungrateful.
But, Who shall judge in the Case? For a Man may be Grateful without making a
Return, and Ungrateful with it. Our best way is to help every thing by a fair
Interpretation; and wheresoever there is a doubt, to allow it the most
favorable construction: for he that is exceptious at words, or looks, has a
Mind to pick a Quarrel. For my own part, when I come to cast up my account, and
know what I owe, and to whom, though I make my return sooner to some, and later
to others, as occasion, or fortune will give me leave, yet I Will be just to all.
I will be Grateful to God; to Man; to those that have Obliged me; nay, even to
those that have obliged my Friends, I am bound in honor, and in Conscience, to
be thankful for what I have received; and if I be not yet full, it is some
pleasure still that I may hope for more. For the Requital of a Favor, there
must be Virtue, Occasion, Means, and Fortune.

IT is a Common thing to Screw up Justice to the pitch f A Man may be
over-Grateful, as well as over-righteous.
of an Injury. A Man may be Over-Righteous; and, Why not Over-Grateful too?
There is a Mischievous excess, that borders so close upon Ingratitude, that it
is no easy matter to distinguish the one from the other: but, in regard that
there is good Will in the bottom of it (however distempered; for it is
Effectually but Kindness out of the Wits) we shall discourse it under the Title
of Gratitude Mistaken.

CHAP. XVIII. Gratitude Mistaken.
TO refuse a Good Office, not so much because we do not need it, as because we
would not be indebted for it, is a kind of Fantastical Ingratitude; and
somewhat Akin to that Nicety of humor, on the other side, of being
Over-Grateful; only it lies another way, and seems to be the more pardonable
Ingratitude of the two. Some People take it for a great Instance of their Good
Will, to be still wishing their Benefactors, such or such a Mischief, only,
forsooth, that they themselves might be the happy Instruments of their Release.
These Men do like Extravagant Lovers, that take it for a great proof of their
Affection, to wish one another Banished, Beggered, or diseased, that they might
have the opportunity of interposing to their relief. What difference is there
betwixt such Wishing, and Cursing? Such an Affection, and a Mortal hatred? The
Intent is good, you will say, but this is a Misapplication of it. Let such a one
fall into my Power; or into the hands of his Enemies, his Creditors, or the
Common People, and no Mortal be able to rescue him but my self. Let his Life,
his Liberty, and his Reputation lie all at Stake, and no Creature, but my self,
in Condition to succor him. And why all this, but because he has obliged me,
and I would requite him? If this be Gratitude, to propound Jayles, Shackles,
Slavery, War, Beggary to the Man, that you would requite, What would you do
where you are Ungrateful? This way of Proceeding, over and above that it is
impious in it self, is likewise overhasty, and Unseasonable: for, he that goes
too fast, is as much too blame, as he that does not move at all (to say nothing
of the Injustice) for if I had never been obliged, I should never have wished
it. There are Seasons wherein a Benefit is neither to be Received, nor
Requited. To press a Return upon me, when I do not desire it, is Unmannerly;
but it is worse, to force me to desire it. How rigorous would he be to exact a
Requital, who is thus eager to return it? To wish a Man in distress, that I may
relieve him; is, first to wish him Miserable; to wish that he may stand in need
of any body, is against Him; and to wish that he may stand in need of Me, is
for my self: So that my business is not so much a Charity to my Friend, as the
Cancelling of a Bond: Nay, it is half way, the wish of an Enemy. It is
Barbarous to wish a Man in Chains, Slavery, or Want, only to bring him out
again: Let me rather wish him powerful, and happy, and my self indebted to him.
By Nature, we are prone to Mercy, Humanity, Compassion; may we be excited to be
more so, by the Number of the Grateful; may their Number increase, and may we
have no need of trying them.

IT is not for an honest Man to make way to a Good Office by a Crime; We must
not do an ill thing, that good may come of it.
as if a Pilot should pray for a Tempest, that he might prove his skill; or a
General wish his Army routed, that he might show himself a great Commander in
recovering of the day. It Is throwing of a Man into a River, to take him out
again. It Is an Obligation, I confess, to cure a Wound, or a Disease; but, to
make that Wound, or Disease, on purpose to Cure it, is a most perverse
Ingratitude. It is barbarous even to an Enemy; much more to a Friend; For, it
is not so much to do him a Kindness, as to put him in need of it. Of the two,
let it be rather a Scar, than a Wound; and yet it would be better to have it
neither. Rome had been little beholden to Scipio, if he had prolonged the
Punique War, that he might have the finishing of it at last: or to the Decii,
for dying for their Country, if they had first brought it to the last Extremity
of needing their Devotion. It may be a good Contemplation, but it is a lewd
Wish. Aeneas had never been surnamed the Pious, if he had wished the ruin of
his Country, only that he might have the honor of taking his Father out of the
Fire. It Is the Scandal of a Physician to make work, and irritate a Disease, and
to torment his Patient for the Reputation of his Cure. If a Man should openly
imprecate Poverty, Captivity, Fear, or Danger, upon a Person that he has been
Obliged to, Would not the whole World condemn him for it? And, What Is the
difference; but that the One is only a private Wish, and the Other, a public
Declaratio? Rutilius was told in his Exile, that for his Comfort, there would
be ere long a Civil War, that would bring all the Banished Men home again. God
forbid, says he, for I had rather my Country should blush for my Banishment,
than Mourn for my Return. How much more honorable is it to Owe cheerfully, than
to Pay dishonestly? It is the wish of an Enemy to take a Town, that he may
preserve it, and to be Victorious, that he may forgive; but, the Mercy comes
after the Cruelty; beside, that it is an Injury both to God and Man, for, the
Man must be first afflicted by Heaven, to be relieved by me. So that we impose
the Cruelty upon God, and take the Compassion to our selves, and, at the best,
it is but a Curse that makes way for a Blessing; the bare wish is an Injury;
and, if it does not take effect, it is because Heaven has not heard our Prayers.
Or, if they should succeed, the fear it self is a Torment: And, it is much more
desirable, to have a firm, and unshaken Security. It Is Friendly to wish it in
your Power to oblige me, if ever I chance to need it; but, it is unkind to wish
me miserable, that I may need it. How much more Pious is it, and Humane, to
wish that I may never want the Occasion of Obliging, nor the Means of doing it;
nor ever have reason to repent of what I have done?

CHAP. XIX. Of Ingratitude.
INGRATITUDE is, of all Crimes, that which we are to account the most Venial in
others, and the most Unpardonable in our selves. It is Impious to the highest
degree; for, it makes us fight against our Children, and our Altars. There are,
there ever were, and there ever will be Criminals of all sorts; as Murderers,
Tyrants, Thieves, Adulterers, Traitors, Robbers, and Sacrilegious Persons; but,
there is hardly any Notorious Crime without a Mixture of Ingratitude. It
disunites Mankind, and breaks the very Pillars of Society. And yet so far is
this Prodigious Wickedness from being any wonder to us, that even thankfulness
it self were much the greater of the two. For Men are deterred from it by
Labor, Expense, Lazyness, Business; or else diverted from it by Lust, Envy,
Ambition, Pride, Levity, Rashness, Fear: Nay, by the very Shame of Confessing
what they have received. And the Unthankful Man has nothing to say for himself
all this while; For, there needs neither Pains, nor Fortune, for the discharge
of his Duty; Beside, the inward Anxiety, and Torment, when a Man's Conscience
makes him afraid of his own Thoughts.

TO speak against the Ungrateful, is to rail against Mankind; We are all
Ungrateful.
for, even those that complain are guilty; nor do I speak only of those that do
not live up to the strict Rule of Virtue; but Mankind it self is degenerated,
and lost. We live unthankfully in this World, and we go struggling and murmuring
out of it; dissatisfied with our Lot; whereas we should be Grateful for the
Blessings we have enjoyed, and account that sufficient which Providence has
appointed for us: A little more time may make our Lives longer, but not
happier; and whenever it is the pleasure of God to call us, we must obey; and
yet all this while we go on quarrelling at the World for what we find in our
selves, and we are yet more Unthankful to Heaven, than we are to one another.
What Benefit can be great now to that Man that despises the Bounties of his
Maker? We would be as strong as Elephants, as swift as Bucks, as light as
Birds, and we complain, that we have not the sagacity of Dogs; the sight of
Eagles, the long Life of Ravens; nay, that we are not Immortal, and endu'd with
the Knowledge of things to come. Nay, we take it ill, that we are not Gods upon
Earth: never considering the Advantages of our Condition, or the Benignity of
Providence in the Comforts that we enjoy. We subdue the strongest of Creatures,
and overtake the fleetest: We reclaim the fiercest, and outwit the Craftiest.
We are within one degree of Heaven it self, and yet we are not satisfied. Since
there is not any one Creature which we had rather be, we take it ill that we
cannot draw the United Excellences of all other Creatures into our selves. Why
are we not rather thankful to that Goodness, which has subjected the whole
Creation to our Use, and Service?

Causes of Ingratitude.
THE Principal Causes of Ingratitude, are Pride, and Self-Conceipt, Avarice,
Envy, etc. It Is a familiar Exclamation, ' It Is true, he did this or that for me,
but it came so late, and it was so little, I had even as good have been without
it: If he had not given it to me, he must have given it to some body else; it
was nothing out of his own Pocket: Nay, we are so Ungrateful, that he that
gives us all we have, if he leaves any thing to himself, we reckon that he does
us an Injury. It cost Julius Caesar his Life, the disappointment of his
Unsatiable Companions; and yet he reserved nothing of all that he got, to
himself, but the liberty of disposing it. There is no Benefit so large, but
Malignity will still lessen it: none so narrow, which a good Interpretation
will not enlarge. No Man shall ever be Grateful, that views a Benefit on the
wrong side; or takes a good Office by the wrong handle. The Avaritious Man is
Naturally Ungrateful, for he never thinks he has enough, but, without
considering what he has, only Minds what he covets. Some pretend want of power
to make a Competent Return, and you shall find in others a kind of Graceless
Modesty, that makes a Man ashamed of requiting an Obligation, because it is a
Confession that he has received one.

Not to return Good for Good is Inhumane, but Evil for Good, is Diabolical.
NOT to return one good Office for another, is Inhumane, but to return evil for
good is Diabolical. There are too many even of this sort, who, the more they
owe, the more they hate. There Is nothing more dangerous than to oblige those
People, for when they are Conscious of not paying the Debt, they wish the
Creditor out of the way. It is a Mortal hatred, that which arises from the
Shame of an abused Benefit. When we are on the Asking side, What a deal of
cringing there is, and profession? Well, I shall never forget this Favor. It
will be an eternal Obligation to me. But, within a while, the Note is changed,
and we hear no more words on it; till, by little and little, it is all quite
forgotten. So long as we stand in need of a Benefit, there is nothing dearer to
us; nor any thing cheaper, when we have received it. And yet a Man may as well
refuse to deliver up a Sum of Money that is left him in Trust, without a a Suit,
as not to return a good Office without asking; and when we have no value any
further for the Benefit, we do commonly care as little for the Author. People
follow their Interest; one Man is Grateful for his Convenience, and another Man
is Ungrateful for the same Reason.

There are Ungrateful Governments, as well as Ungrateful Men.
SOME are Ungrateful to their Country; and their own Country no less Ungrateful
to others; so that the Complaint of Ingratitude reaches all Men. Does not the
Son wish for the death of his Father? the Husband for that of his Wife, etc.
But, Who can look for Gratitude in an Age of so many Gaping, and Craving
Appetites, where all People take, and none give? In an Age of License to all
sorts of Vanity, and Wickedness; as Lust, Gluttony, Avarice, Envy, Ambition,
Sloth, Insolence, Levity, Contumacy, Fear, Rashness, Private Discords, and
Public Evils, Extravagant and Groundless wishes, Vain Confidences, Sickly
Affections, Shameless Impieties, Rapine Authorized, and the Violation of all
things Sacred, and Profane. Obligations are pursued with Sword and Poison:
Benefits are turned into Crimes; and that Blood most Seditiously Spilt, for
which every honest Man should expose his own. Those that should be the
Preservers of their Country, are the Destroyers of it; and, it is matter of
dignity to trample upon the Government; The Sword gives the Law, and
Mercenaries take up Arms against their Masters. Among these turbulent, and
unruly Motions, What hope is there of finding honesty, or good Faith, which is
the quietest of all Virtues? There is no more lively Image of humane life, than
that of a conquered City: there is neither Mercy, Modesty, nor Religion, and if
we forget our Lives, we may well forget our Benefits. The World abounds with
Examples of Ungrateful Persons, and no less with those of Ungrateful
Governments. Was not Catiline Ungrateful? Whose Malice aimed, not only at the
Mastering of his Country, but at the total destruction of it, by calling in an
Inveterate, and Vindictive Enemy from beyond the Alps, to wreak their long
thirsted-for Revenge; and to Sacrifice the Lives of as many noble Romans, as
might serve to answer, and appease the Ghosts of the Slaughtered Gauls? Was
not Marius Ungrateful? that from a Common Soldier, being raised up to a Consul,
not only gave the Word for Civil Bloodshed, and Massacres, but was himself the
Sign for the Execution; and every Man he met in the Streets, to whom he did not
stretch out his Right Hand, was Murdered? And, Was not Sylla Ungrateful too?
that when he had waded up to the Gates in Humane Blood, carried the Outrage
into the City, and there most barbarously cut two entire Legions to pieces in a
Corner; not only after the Victory, but most perfidiously after quarter given
them. Good God that ever any Man should not only escape with Impunity, but
receive a Reward for so horrid a Villainy? Was not Pompey Ungrateful too? who,
after three Consulships, three Triumphs, and so many honors Usurped before his
time, split the Commonwealth into three Parts; and brought it to such a pass,
that there was no hope of Safety, but by Slavery; Only, forsooth, to abate the
Envy of his Power, he took other Partners with him into the Government, as if
that which was not lawful for any one, might have been allowable for more;
dividing, and distributing the Provinces, and breaking all into a Triumvirate,
reserving still two parts of the three in his own Family. And, Was not Caesar
Ungrateful also? though, to give him his due, he was a Man of his Word;
Merciful in his Victories, and never killed any Man, but with his Sword in his
hand. Let us therefore forgive one another. Only one Word more now for the
shame of Ungrateful Governments. Was not Camillus banished? Scipio dismissed?
and Cicero exiled, and plundered? But, What is all this to those that are so
mad, as to dispute even the goodness of Heaven, which gives us all, and expects
nothing again, but continues giving to the most Unthankful, and Complaining.

CHAP. XX. There can be no Law against Ingratitude,
INGRATITUDE is so dangerous to it self, and so detestable to other people,
that Nature, one would think, had sufficiently provided against it, without
need of any other Law. For every Ungrateful Man is his own Enemy, and it seems
superfluous to compel a Man to be kind to himself, and to follow his own
Inclinations. This, of all wickedness imaginable, is certainly the Vice which
does the most divide, and distract Humane Nature. Without the Exercise, and the
Commerce of Mutual Offices, we can be neither happy, nor safe; for it is only
Society that secures us; Take us one by one, and we are a Prey even to Brutes,
as well as to one another; Nature has brought us into the World naked, and
unarmed; we have not the Teeth, or the Paws, of Lions or Bears,, to make our
selves terrible: but, by the two Blessings of Reason, and Union, we secure and
defend our selves against Violence and Fortune. This it is that makes Man the
Master of all other Creatures, who otherwise were scarce a Match for the
weakest of them. This is it that comforts us in Sickness, in Age, in Misery, in
Pains, and in the wo^st of Calamities. Take away this Combination, and Mankind
is dissociated, and falls to pieces. It Is true, that there is no Law
established against this abominable Vice: but, we cannot say yet, that it
scapes unpunished, for, a public hatred is certainly the greatest of all
Penalties, over and above that, we lose the most valuable Blessing of Life, in
the not bestowing, and Receiving of Benefits. If Ingratitude were to be
punished by a Law, it would discredit the Obligation; for a Benefit is to be
Given, not Lent: And if we have no Return at all, there is no just Cause of
Complaint: for Gratitude were no Virtue, if there were any danger in being
Ungrateful. There are Halters, I know, Hooks, and Gibbets, provided for
Homicide, Poison, Sacrilege, and Rebellion; but Ingratitude (here upon Earth)
is only punished in the Schools; all further pains, and Inflictions, being
wholly remitted to Divine Justice. And, if a Man may Judge of the Conscience by
the Countenance, the Ungrateful Man is never without a Canker at his heart; his
Min^ and Aspect, is sad and sollicitous; whereas the other is always Cheerful,
and Serene.

AS there There neither is, nor can be, any Law against Ingratitude.
are no Laws Extant against Ingratitude; So is it utterly Impossible to
contrive any, that in all Circumstances shall reach it. If it were Actionable,
there would not be Courts enough in the whole World, to try the Causes in.
There can be no setting of a day for the requiting of Benefits, as for the
payment of Money, nor any Estimate upon the Benefits themselves, but the whole
matter rests in the Conscience of both parties; And then there are so many
degrees of it, that the same Rule will never serve all: Beside that, to
proportion it, as the Benefit is greater or less, will be both impracticable,
and without Reason. One good Turn saves my Life; another, my Freedom, or
peradventure my very Soul. How shall any Law now suite a Punishment to an
Ingratitude, under these differing degrees? It must not be said in Benefits, as
in Bonds, Pay what you owe. How shall a Man pay Life, Health, Credit, Security,
in kind? There can be no set Rule to bound that infinite variety of Cases,
which are more properly the Subject of Humanity, and Religion, than of Law, and
Public Justice. There would be Disputes also about the Benefit it Self; which
must totally depend upon the Courtesy of the Judge, for no Law Imaginable can
set it forth. One Man Gives me an Estate; another only Lends me a Sword, and
that Sword preserves my Life. Nay, the very same thing several ways done,
changes the Quality of the Obligation. A Word, a Tone, a Look, makes a great
Alteration in the Case. How shall we judge then, and determine a Matter, which
does not depend upon the fact it self, but upon the Force, and Intention of it.
Some things are reputed Benefits, not for their value, but because we desire
them. And there are Offices of a much greater Value, that we do not reckon upon
at all. If Ingratitude were Liable to a Law, we must never give, but before
Witnesses, which would overthrow the dignity of the Benefit. And then the
Punishment must either be equal, where the Crimes are unequal, or else it must
be unrighteous: So that Blood must answer for Blood. He that is Ungrateful for
my saving his Life, must forfeit his own. And, What can be more Inhumane, than
that Benefits should conclude in Sanguinary Events? A Man saves my Life, and I
am Ungrateful for it: Shall I be punished in my purse? That Is too little: if it
be less than the Benefit, it is unjust, and it must be Capital to be made equal
to it. There are moreover certain Privileges granted to Parents, that can
never be reduced to a Common Rule: Their Injuries may be Cognizable, but not
their Benefits. The diversity of Cases is too Large, and Intricate, to be
brought within the Prospect of a Law: So that it is much more Equitable to
punish none, than to punish all alike. What if a Man follows a good Office with
an Injury; Whether or no shall this quit scores? or, Who shall compare them,
and weigh tho one against the other? There is another thing yet, which perhaps
we do not dream of: Not one Man upon the face of the Earth would escape, and yet
every Man would expect to be his own Judge. Once again; We are all of us
ungrateful; and the Number does not only take away the Shame, but gives
Authority, and Protection to the Wickedness.

IT is thought Reasonable by some, that there should be a Law against
Ingratitude, for, say they, It Is common for one City to upbraid another, and,
to claim that of Posterity, which was bestowed upon their Ancestors: But, this
is only clamor without Reason. It is objected by others, as a discouragement to
good Offices; if Men shall not be made answerable for them; but, I say, on the
other side, that no Man would accept of a Benefit upon those terms. He that
Gives, is prompted to it by a goodness of Mind; and, the generosity of the
Action is lessened by the Caution; for, it is his desire, that the Receiver
should please himself, and owe no more than he thinks fit. But, What if this
might occasion fewer Benefits, so long as they would be franker? nor is there
any hurt in putting a Check upon Rashness, and Profusion: In Answer to this;
Men will be careful enough whom they oblige, without a Law; Nor is it possible
for a Judge ever to set us right in it; or indeed any thing else, but the Faith
of the Receiver. The honor of a Benefit is this way preserved, which is
otherwise profaned, when it comes to be Mercenary, and made matter of
Contention. We are even forward enough of our selves, to wrangle without
unnecessary Provocations. It would be well, I think, if Moneys might pass upon
the same Conditions with other Benefits: and the payment remitted to the
Conscience, without formalizing upon Bills and Securities: but Humane Wisdom
has rather advised with Convenience, than Virtue, and chosen rather to force
honesty, than to expect it. For every paltry Sum of Money, there must be Bonds,
Witnesses, Counter-parts, Pawns, etc. which is no other than a shameful
Confession of Fraud, and Wickedness; when more Credit is given to our Seals,
than to our Minds; and Caution taken, least he that has received the Money,
should deny it. Were it not better now to be deceived by some, than to suspect
all? What Is the difference at this rate, betwixt the Benefactor, and an Usurer,
save only that in the Benefactors Case, there is no body stands Bound?

The End.
SENECA'S MORALS OF A Happy Life; OF ANGER and CLEMENCY: ABSTRACTED By To.
L'ESTRANGE. PART II.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, for Henry Brom, at the Gun in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1678.

THE Contents OF A HAPPY LIFE.
Chap. I. OF a Happy Life, and wherein it Consists. Page 1. Chap. II. Humane
Happiness is Founded upon Wisdom, and Virtue, and first of Wisdom. p. 9.
Chap. III. There can be no Happiness without Virtue. p. 20. (...) Chap. XVI.
Constancy of Mind gives a Man Reputation, and makes him Happy in despite of all
Misfortunes. p. 200. Chap. XVII. Our Happiness depends in a great Measure upon
the Choice of our Company. p. 220. Chap. XVIII. The Blessings of Friendship. p.
230. Chap. XIX. He that would be Happy, must take an Account of his Time. p.
240. Chap. XX. Happy is the Man that may Choose his own Business. p. 256. Chap.
XXI. The Contempt of Death makes all the Miseries of Life easy to us. p. 269
Chap. XXII. Consolations against Death from the Providence, and the Necessity
of it. p. 288 Chap. XXIII. Against Immoderate Sorrow for the Death of Friends:
p. 299 Chap: XXIV. Consolations against Banishment, and Bodily pains. p. 312
Chap. XXV. Poverty to a Wise Man is rather a Blessing than a Misfortune. p. 321
SENECA OF A Happy Life
CHAP. I. Of a Happy Life, and wherein it consists.
THere is not any thing in this World perhaps, that is more Talked of, and less
Understood, then the Business of a Happy Life. It is every Man's Wish, and
Design; and yet not one of a thousand that knows wherein that Happiness
consists. We live however in a Blind, and Eager pursuit of it; and the more
haste we make in a wrong way, the farther we are from our Journeys and. Let us
therefore First, consider, What it is we would be at; and Secondly, Which is
the readiest way to compass it. If we be Right, we shall find every day how
much we improve; but, if we either follow the Cry, or the Track of People that
are out of the way, we must expect to be misled, and to consume our days in
Wandering, and Error. Wherefore it highly concerns us to take along with us a
skilful Guide; For it is not in this, as in other Voyages, where the Highway
brings us to our Place of Repose; Or, if a Man should happen to be out, where
the Inhabitants might set him Right again: But, on the Contrary, the beaten
Road is here the most dangerous, and the People, in stead of helping us,
misguide us. Let us not therefore follow, like Beasts, but rather govern our
selves by Reason, then by Example. It fares with us in Humane Life, as in a
Routed Army; one stumbles first, and then another falls upon him, and so they
follow, one upon the Neck of another, till the whole Field comes to be but one
heap of Miscarriages. And the mischief is, That the Number of the Multitude
carries it against Truth, and Justice; so that we must leave the Crowd, if we
would be Happy: For, the Question of a Happy Life is not to be decided by Vote:
Nay, so far from it, that Plurality of Voices is still an Argument of the
Wrong; the Common People find it easier to Believe, then to Judge; and content
themselves with what is Usual; never examining whether it be Good or no. By the
Common People is intended the Man of Title, as well as the Clouted Shoe: for I
do not distinguish them by the Eye, but by the Mind, which is the proper Judge
of the Mind. Worldly Felicity I know makes the head giddy; but, if ever a Man
comes to himself again, he will confess, that whatsoever he has done he wishes
undone; and, that the things he feared, were better then those he prayed for.

THE true Felicity of Life, is to be True Happiness.
free from Perturbations; to understand our Duties toward God, and Man; to
enjoy the Present, without any anxious dependence upon the Future. Not to amuse
our selves with either Hopes, or Fears, but to rest satisfied with what we
have, which is abundantly sufficient; for he that is so, wants nothing. The
great Blessings of Mankind are within us, and within our Reach, but we shut our
Eyes, and, like People in the dark, we fall foul upon the very thing we search
for, without finding it. Tranquillity is a certain equality of Mind, which no
condition of Fortune can either exalt, or depress. Nothing can make it less;
for, it is the State of Humane Perfection: It raises us as high as we can go;
and makes every Man his own Supporter; whereas he that is born up by any thing
else, may fall. He that Judges aright, and perseveres in it, enjoyes a
perpetual Calm: he takes a true prospect of things; he observes an Order, a
Measure, a Decorum in all his Actions: He has a Benevolence in his Nature; he
squares his Life according to Reason; and draws to himself Love, and
Admiration. Without a Certain, and an Unchangeable Judgment, all the rest is
but Fluctuation: But, he that always Wills, and Nills the same thing, is
undoubtedly in the Right. Liberty, and Serenity of Mind, must necessarily ensue
upon the mastering of those things, which either allure, or affright us; when,
in stead of those flashy Pleasures, (which even at the best are both vain, and
hurtful together) we shall find our selves possessed of Joys transporting, and
everlasting. It must be a Sound Mind that makes a Happy Man; there must be a
Constancy in all Conditions, a Care for the things of this World, but without
trouble, and such an Indifferency for the Bounties of Fortune; that either with
them, or without them, we may live contentedly. There must be neither
Lamentation, nor Quarrelling, nor Sloth, nor Fear, for it makes a Discord in a
Man's Life. He that fears, Serves. The Joy of a Wise Man stands firm without
Interruption: In all Places, at all Times, and in all Conditions, his thoughts
are cheerful and quiet. As it never came in to him from without, so it will
never leave him; but, it is born within him, and inseparable from him. It is a
sollicitous Life that is egged on with the hope of any thing, though never so
open and easy. Nay, though a Man should never suffer any sort of
disappointment. I do not speak this, either as a Bar to the fair enjoyment of
Lawful Pleasures; or to the gentle Flatteries of Reasonable Expectations: but,
on the contrary, I would have Men to be always in good Humor; provided that
it arises from their own Souls, and be cherished in their own Breasts. Other
delights are trivial; they may smooth the Brow, but they do not fill, and
affect the heart. True Joy is a severe, and sober Motion; and they are
miserably out, that take Laughing for Rejoicing: The seat of it is within, and
there is no Cheerfulness like the Resolution of a Brave Mind, that has Fortune
under its Feet. He that can look Death in the Face, and bid it welcome; open
his door to Poverty, and Bridle his Appetites; this is the Man whom Providence
has established in the Possession of Inviolable Delights. The Pleasures of the
vulgar are ungrounded, thin, and superficial; but the other are Solid, and
Eternal. As the Body it self is rather a Necessary thing, than a Great* so the
Comforts of it are but Temporary, and Vain; Beside that without extraordinary
Moderation, their End is only Pain, and Repentance. Whereas a Peaceful
Conscience, Honest Thoughts, Virtuous Actions; and, an Indifference for Casual
Events, are Blessings without End, Satiety, or Measure. This Consummated State
of Felicity is only a Submission to the Dictate of Right Nature: The Foundation
of it is Wisdom, and Virtue; the Knowledge of what we ought to do, and the
Conformity of the Will to that Knowledge.

CHAP. II. Humane Happiness is founded upon Wisdom, and Virtue; and first of
Wisdom.
TAKING for granted, That Humane Happiness is founded upon Wisdom, and Virtue,
we shall Treat of these two Points in order as they lie: And First, of Wisdom;
not in the Latitude of its various Operations, but only as it has a regard to
Good Life, and the Happiness of Mankind.

WISDOM is a Right Understanding; a Wisdom, What it is.
Faculty of discerning Good from Evil; What is to to be chosen, and what
rejected: A Judgment grounded upon the value of things, and not the Common
Opinion of them; An Equality of Force, and a Strength of Resolution: It sets a
Watch over our Words and Deeds; It takes us up with the Contemplation of the
Works of Nature; and makes us Invincible, by either Good, or Evil Fortune. It
is Large, and Spacious; and requires a great deal of Room to Work in; It
ransacks Heaven, and Earth; It has for its Object, things past, and to come;
Transitory and Eternal: It examines all the Circumstances of Time; what it is;
when it began; and how long it will continue: And so for the Mind; whence it
came; what it is; when it begins; how long it lasts; whether or no it passes
from one Form to another; or serves only one; and wanders when it leaves us;
where it abides in the State of Separation, and what the Action of it; what use
it makes of its Liberty; whether or no it retains the Memory of things past,
and comes to the Knowledge of it self. It is the Habit of a Perfect Mind; and
the Perfection of Humanity, raised as high as Nature can carry it. It differs
from Philosophy, as Avarice, and Money; the One desires, and the Other is
desired; the one is the Effect, and the Reward of the other. To be Wise, is the
Use of Wisdom, as Seeing is the Use of Eyes, and Well-speaking the Use of
Eloquence. He that is perfectly Wise, is perfectly Happy; Nay, the very
beginning of Wisdom makes Life easy to us. Neither is it enough to know this,
unless we print it in our Minds by daily Meditation, and so bring a good Will
to a good Habit. And we must Practice what we Preach: For, Philosophy is not a
Subject for popular Ostentation; nor does it rest in Words, but in Things; It
is not an Entertainment taken up for delight; or to give a Taste to our
Leisures, but it fashions the Mind; governs our Actions, tells us what we are
to do, and what not: It sits at the Helm, and guides us through all Hazzards.
Nay, we cannot be safe without it, for every hour gives us occasion to make use
of it: It Informs us in all the Duties of Life; Piety to our Parents; Faith to
our Friends; Charity to the Miserable; Judgment in Counsel: It gives us Peace,
by Fearing nothing* and Riches, by Coveting nothing.

THERE IS no Condition of Life that excludes a Wise Man from discharging his
Duty. If his Fortune b A Wise Man does his duty in all Conditions.
be good, he tempers it; if bad, he masters it; if he has an Estate, he will
exercise his Virtue in Plenty; if none, in Poverty; if he cannot do it in his
Country, he will do it in Banishment; if he has no command, he will do the
office of a common Soldier. Some People have the skill of reclaiming the
fiercest of Beasts: they will make a Lion Embrace his Keeper; a Tiger Kiss him;
and an Elephant Kneel to him. This is the Case of a Wise Man in the extremest
Difficulties; Let them be never so terrible in themselves; when they come to
him once, they are perfectly tame. They that ascribe the Invention of Tillage,
Architecture, Navigation, etc. to Wise Men, may perchance be in the right, that
they were invented by Wise Men; but they were not invented by Wise Men, as Wise
Men: For Wisdom does not teach our Fingers, but our Minds: Fiddling, and
Dancing; Arms, and Fortifications, were the Works of Luxury, and Discord; but
Wisdom instructs us in the ways of Nature, and in the Arts of Unity, and
Concord; Not in the Instruments, but in the Government of Life; nor to make us
live only, but to live happily. She teaches us what things are Good, what Evil,
and what only appear so; and, to distinguish betwixt true Greatness, and
Tumor. She Clears our Minds, of Dross, and Vanity; she raises up our Thoughts
to Heaven, and carries them down to Hell: She discourses the Nature of the
Soul; the Powers, and Faculties of it; the first Principles of things; the
Order of Providence; she exalts us from things Corporal, to Incorporeal; and
retrives the Truth of all: She searches Nature, gives Laws to Life, and tells
us, That it is not enough to know God, unless we Obey him: She looks upon all
Accidents, as Acts of Providence; sets a true Value upon things; delivers us
from false Opinions, and Condemns All Pleasures that are attended with
Repentance. She allows nothing to be Good, that will not be so for ever; No Man
to be Happy, but he that needs no other Happiness then what he has within
himself; no Man to be Great, or Powerful, that is not Master of himself. This
is the Felicity of Humane Life; a Felicity that can neither be corrupted, no^
extinguished: It enquires into the Nature of the Heavens, the Influences of the
Stars; ^ow far they operate upon our Minds, and Bodies; which thoughts, though
they do not form our Manners, they do yet raise, and dispose us for Glorious
things.

IT is agreed upon at all Hands, that Right Reason is the Perfection of Humane
Nature.
Right Reason is the Perfection of Humane Nature, and Wisdom only the Dictate
of it. The Greatness that arises from it, is solid, and unmovable; the
Resolutions of Wisdom being Free, Absolute, and Constant; whereas Folly is
never long pleased with the same thing, but still shifting of Counsels, and
Sick of it self. There can be no Happiness without Constancy, and Prudence;
for, a Wise Man is to write without a Blot; and, what he likes once, he
approves for ever: He admits of nothing that is either Evil, or Slippery, but
Marches without Staggering, or Stumbling, and is never surpised: He lives
always True, and Steady to himself; and whatsoever befalls him, this great
Artificer of both Fortunes turns to Advantage. He that demurs, and hesitates,
is not yet composed; but, wheresoever Virtue interposes upon the Main, there
must be Concord, and Consent in the Parts; For all Virtues are in Agreement, as
well as all Vices are at Variance. A Wise Man, in what condition soever he is,
will be still Happy, for he subjects all things to himself, because he submits
himself to Reason, and governs his Actions by Counsel, not by Passion. He is
not moved with the Utmost Violences of Fortune, nor with the Extremities of
Fire, and Sword; whereas a Fool is afraid of his own shadow, and surpised at
ill Accidents, as if they were all levelled at him. He does nothing
unwillingly, for whatever he finds necessary, he makes it his Choice. He
propounds to himself the Certain Scope, and end of Humane Life: He follows
that which conduces to it, and avoids that which hinders it. He is content with
his Lot, whatever it be, without wishing what he has not; though, of the two,
he had rather abound, then want. The great Business of his Life, like that of
Nature, is performed without Tumult, or Noise: He neither fears danger, nor
provokes it. But, it is his Caution, not any want of Courage: for Captivity,
Wounds, and Chains he only looks upon as false, and Lymphatical Terrors. He
does not pretend to go through with whatever he Undertakes; but to do that well
which he does: Arts are but the Servants, Wisdom Commands, and where the
matter fails, it is none of the Workmans fault. He is Cautelous in doubtful
Cases; in Prosperity temperate, and resolute in Adversity: Still making the
best of every Condition, and improving all Occasions to make them serviceable
to his Fate. Some Accidents there are, which I confess may Affect him, but not
Overthrow him: as Bodily Pains, Loss of Children, and Friends; the Ruin and
Desolation of a Man's Country: One must be made of Stone, or Iron, not to be
sensible of these Calamities; and beside, it were no Virtue to bear them, if a
Body did not feel them.

THERE are Three degrees of Proficients in Wisdom.
Three degrees of Proficients in the School of Wisdom. The first, are those
that come within sight of it, but not up to it: They have learned what they
ought to do, but they have not put their Knowledge in practice: they are past
the hazard of a Relapse, but they have still the grudgings of a Disease, though
they are out of the danger of it. By a Disease, I do understand an Obstinacy in
Evil, or an ill habit, that makes us over-eager upon things, which are either
not much to be desired, or not at all. A Second sort are those, that have
subjected their Appetites for a season, but are yet in fear of falling back. A
Third sort are those that are clear of many Vices, but not of all. They are not
Covetous, but perhaps they are Choleric; not Lustful, but perchance Ambitious;
they are firm enough in some Cases, but weak in others; there are many that
despise Death, and yet shrink at Pain. There are diversities in Wise Men, but
no Inequalities; one is more Affable; Another more Ready; a Third, a better
Speaker; but, the Felicity of them all is equal. It is in this, as in Heavenly
Bodies, there is a certain State in Greatness.

IN Civil, and Domestic Affairs, a A Wise Man in some Cases may need Counsel.
Wise Man may stand in need of Counsel, as of a Physician, an Advocate, a
Solicitor; but, in greater matters, the Blessing of Wise Men rests in the Joy
they take in the Communication of their Virtues: If there were nothing else in
it, a Man would apply himself to Wisdom, because it states him in a perpetual
Tranquillity of Mind.

CHAP. III. There can be no Happiness without Virtue.
VIRTUE is that Perfect Good, which is the complement of a Happy Life; the only
Immortal thing that belongs to Mortality: It is the Knowledge both of others,
and it self: It is an Invincible Greatness of Mind, not to be elevated, or
dejected, with good, or ill fortune; It is Sociable, and Gentle, Free, Steady,
and Fearless; Content within it self, full of inexhaustible delights, and it is
valued for it self. One may be a good Physician, a good Governor, a good
Grammarian; without being a Good Man; So that all things from without, are only
Accessoryes, for the seat of it is a pure, and holy Mind. It consists in a
Congruity of Actions; which we can never expect, so long as we are distracted
by our Passions. Not but that a Man may be allowed to Change Color, and
Countenance, and suffer such Impressions as are properly a kind of Natural
Force upon the Body, and not under the dominion of the Mind: But, all this
while, I will have his Judgment firm, and he shall act steadily, and boldly,
without wavering betwixt the Motions of his Body, and those of his Mind. It is
not a thing Indifferent, I know, whether a Man lies at Ease upon a Bed, or in
Torment upon a Wheel: and yet the former may be the worse of the two, if we
suffer the latter with Honor, and enjoy the other with Infamy; It is not the
Matter, but the Virtue, that makes the Action Good, or Ill; and, He that is led
in Triumph, may be yet greater than his Conqueror. When we come once to value
our Flesh above our Honesty, we are lost: and yet I would not press upon
dangers; no not so much as upon Inconveniences; unless where the Man and the
Brute come in competition: And, in such a Case, rather then make a forfeiture
of my Credit, my Reason, or my Faith, I would run all Extremities. They are
great Blessings, to have tender Parents, Dutiful Children, and to live under a
Just, and well-ordered Government. Now, Would it not trouble even a Virtuous
Man, to see his Children Butchered before his Eyes; his Father made a Slave,
and his Country overrun by a Barbarous Enemy? There is a great difference
betwixt the simple Loss of a Blessing, and the succeeding of a great Mischief
into the place of it over and above. The loss of Health is followed with
Sickness; and the loss of Sight, with Blindness; but, this does not hold in the
Loss of Friends, and Children; where there is rather something on the Contrary
to supply that Loss, that is to say, Virtue; which fills the Mind, and takes
away the desire of what we have not. What Matters it whether the Water be
stopped, or no, so long as the Fountain is safe? Is a Man ever the wiser for a
Multitude of Friends, or the more foolish for the Loss of them? So neither is
he the Happier, Nor the more Miserable: Short Life, Grief, and Pain, are
Accessions that have no Effect at all upon Virtue. It consists in the Action,
and not in the things we do: In the Choice it self, and not in the Subject
matter of it. It is not a despicable Body, or Condition; not Poverty, Infamy,
or Scandal, that can obscure the Glories of Virtue: but, a Man may see her
through all oppositions, and he that looks diligently into the State of a
Wicked Man, will see the Canker at his Heart, through all the false, and
dazzling splendors of Greatness, and Fortune. We shall then discover our
Childishness, in setting our hearts upon things trivial and contemptible; and,
in the selling of our very Country, and Parents for a Rattle. And, What Is the
difference (in effect) betwixt Old Men, and Children; but that the One deals
in Paintings, and Statues, and the Other in Babies? so that we our selves are
only the more Expensive Fools.

IF one could but see the Mind of a Good Man, as it is Illustrated with Virtue;
the Beauty, and the The dignity of Virtue.
Majesty of it, which is a Dignity not so much as to be thought of without
Love, and Veneration; Would not a Man bless himself at the sight of such an
Object, as at the Encounter of some Supernatural Power? A Power so Miraculous,
that it is a kind of Charm upon the Souls of those that are truly affected with
it. There is so wonderful a Grace, and Authority in it, that even the worst of
Men approve it, and set up for the Reputation of being accounted Virtuous
themselves. They covet the Fruit indeed, and the Profit of Wickedness, but they
hate, and are ashamed of the Imputation of it. It is by an Impression of
Nature, that all Men have a Reverence for Virtue: they Know it, and they have a
Respect for it, though they do not Practice it: Nay, for the Countenance of
their very Wickedness they miscall it Virtue. Their Injuries they call
Benefits, and expect a Man should thank them for doing him a Mischief; they
cover their most Notorious Iniquities with a Pretext of Justice. He that Robs
upon the Highway had rather find his Booty, than force it. Ask any of them
that live upon Rapine, Fraud, Oppression, if they had not rather enjoy a
Fortune Honestly gotten, and their Consciences will not suffer them to deny it.
Men are Vicious only for the Profit of Villainy; for, at the same time that they
commit it, they condemn it. Nay, so powerful is Virtue, and so Gracious is
Providence, that every Man has a Light set up within him for a Guide; which we
do all of us both See, and Acknowledge, though we do not pursue it. This is it
that makes the Prisoner upon the Torture happier than the Executioner, and
Sickness better than Health, if we bear it without yielding, or repining: This
is it that overcomes Ill Fortune, and Moderates Good; for it marches betwixt
the One, and the Other, with an Equal contempt of Both. It turns, (like Fire)
all things into it self; our Actions, and our Friendships, are tinctured with
it; and, whatever it touches becomes Amiable. That which is frail and Mortal,
rises, and falls, grows, wastes, and varies from it self; but the State of
things Divine is always the same: And so is Virtue, let the Matter be what it
will. It is never the worse for the difficulty of the Action, nor the Better
for the Easiness of it. It Is the same in a Rich Man, as in a Poor, in a Sickly
Man, as in a Sound, in a Strong as in a Weak* The Virtue of the Besieged is as
great as that of the Besiegers. There are some Virtues, I confess, which a good
Man cannot be without, and yet he had rather have no Occasion to employ them.
If there were any difference, I should prefer the Virtues of Patience before
those of Pleasure; for, it is braver to break through Difficulties, than to
temper our delights. But, though the Subject of Virtue may possibly be against
Nature, as to be burnt, or wounded, yet the virtue it self of an Invincible
Patience is according to Nature. We may seem perhaps to promise more than
Humane Nature is able to perform; but, we speak with a respect to the Mind, and
not to the Body.

IF a Man does not Live up to his own Rules, it is something The Good Will is
accepted for the Deed.
yet to have Virtuous Meditations, and Good Purposes, even without Acting: It
is Generous, the very Adventure of being Good, and the bare proposal of an
Eminent Course of Life, though beyond the force of Humane Frailty to
accomplish. There is something of Honor yet in the Miscarriage; Nay, in the
Naked Contemplation of it. I would receive my own Death with as little trouble,
as I would hear of another Man's; I would bear the same Mind, whether I be Rich
or Poor; whether I get, or lose in the World; what I have, I will not either
sordidly spare, or prodigally squander away; and, I will reckon upon Benefits
well placed, as the fairest part of my Possession: Not valuing them by Number,
or Weight, but by the Profit and Esteem of the Receiver; accompting my self
never the Poorer for that which I give to a Worthy Person. What I do shall be
done for Conscience, not Ostentation: I will Eat, and Drink, not to gratify my
Palate, or only to fill, and empty, but to satisfy Nature: I will be Cheerful
to my Friends; Mild, and Placable to my Enemies; I will prevent an honest
request, if I can foresee it, and I will grant it without asking; I will look
upon the whole World as my Country, and upon the Gods, both as the Witnesses
and the Judges of my Words, and Deeds. I will live, and dye with this
Testimony, that I loved good Studies, and a good Conscience, that I never
invaded another Man's Liberty, and that I preserved my own. I will govern my
Life, and my Thoughts, as if the whole World were to see the One, and to read
the other; for, What does it signify, to make any thing a secret to my
Neighbor, when to God (who is the searcher of our hearts) all our Privacies
are open?

VIRTUE is divided into two Parts, Virtue is divided into Contemplation and
Action
Contemplation, and Action. The one is delivered by Institution, the other by
Admonition: One part of Virtue consists in Discipline; the other in Exercise;
for we must first Learn, and then Practice. The sooner we begin to apply our
selves to it, and the more haste we make, the longer shall we enjoy the
Comforts of a rectified mind; nay, we have the Fruition of it in the very Act
of Forming it; but, it is another sort of delight, I must confess, that arises
from the Contemplation of a Soul which is advanced into the Possession of
Wisdom, and Virtue. If it was so great a Comfort to us, to pass from the
Subjection of our Childhood, into a State of Liberty, and Business; how much
greater will it be, when we come to cast off the Boyish Levity of our Minds;
and range our selves among the Philosophers? We are past our Minority, it is
true, but not our Indiscretions; and, which is yet worse, we have the Authority
of Seniors, and the Weaknesses of Children. (I might have said of Infants, for
every little thing frights the one, and every trivial fancy the other.)
Whoever studies this point well, will find, that many things are the less to be
feared, the more terrible they appear. To think any thing Good that is not
Honest, were to reproach Providence; for, Good Men suffer many Inconveniences;
But Virtue, like the Sun, goes on still with her work, let the Air be never so
cloudy, and finishes her Course; Extinguishing likewise all other Splendors,
and Oppositions; Insomuch, that Calamity is no more to a Virtuous Mind, than a
Shower into the Sea. That which is Right, is not to be valued by quantity,
number, or time; A Life of a day may be as honest, as a Life of a hundred
years; but yet Virtue in one Man may have a larger Field to show it self in,
than in another. One Man perhaps may be in a Station to Administer unto Cities,
and Kingdoms; to Contrive good Laws, Create Friendships, and do beneficial
Offices to Mankind: it is another Man's Fortune to be straightened by Poverty, or
put out of the way by Banishment: and yet the latter may be as virtuous as the
former; and may have as great a Mind, as exact a Prudence, as inviolable a
Justice, and as large a Knowledge of things, both Divine, and Humane: without
which, a Man cannot be happy. For virtue is open to all; as well to Servants,
and Exiles, as to Princes: It is profitable to the World, and to it Self, at
all Distances, and in all Conditions; and there is no difficulty can excuse a
Man from the Exercise of it; and it is only to be found in a Wise Man, though
there may be some faint resemblances of it in the common people. The Stoics
hold all Virtues to be equal; but, yet there is great variety in the Matter
they have to work upon, according as it is larger, or narrower; Illustrious, or
less Noble; of more, or less Extent; as all good Men are equal; that is to say,
as they are Good; but yet one may be Young, another Old; one may be Rich,
another Poor; one, Eminent, and Powerful, another Unknown, and Obscure. There
are many things which have little or no Grace in themselves, and are yet made
Glorious and Remarkable by virtue. Nothing can be good which gives neither
Greatness nor Security to the Mind; but on the Contrary, infects it with
Insolence, Arrogance, and Tumor: Nor does Virtue dwell upon the Tip of the
Tongue, but in the Temple of a Purified heart. He that depends upon any other
good, becomes Covetous of Life, and what belongs to it, which exposes a Man to
Appetites that are vast, unlimited, and intolerable. Virtue is Free, and
Indefatigable, and accompanied with Concord, and Gracefulness: Whereas Pleasure
is mean, servile, transitory, tiresome, and sickly, and scarce out-lives the
tasting of it: It is the good of the Belly, and not of the Man, and only the
Felicity of Brutes. Who does not know, that Fools enjoy their Pleasures, and
that there is great variety in the Entertainments of Wickedness? Nay, the Mind
it self has its variety of Perverse Pleasures, as well as the Body; as
Insolence, Self-Conceipt, Pride, Garrulity, Laziness, and the Abusive Wit of
turning every thing into Ridicule; whereas Virtue Weighs all this, and Corrects
it; It is the Knowledge both of others, and of it self; it is to be learned
from it self; and, the very Will it self may be Taught: which Will cannot be
right, unless the whole habit of the Mind be right, from whence the Will comes.
It is by the Impulse of Virtue that we Love Virtue, so that the very way to
Virtue lies by Virtue, which takes in also, at a View, the Laws of Humane Life.

NEITHER are we to value our selves upon a day, or A Virtuous Life must be all
of a Piece.
an hour, or any one Action, but upon the whole habit of the Mind. Some Men do
one thing bravely, but not another; they will shrink at Infamy, and bear up
against Poverty: In this Case, we commend the Fact, and despise the Man. The
Soul is never in the right place, till it be delivered from the Cares of Humane
Affairs: We must Labor, and Climb the Hill, if we will arrive at Virtue, whose
seat is upon the Top of it. He that masters Avarice, and is truly good, stands
firm against Ambition; he looks upon his last hour, not as a Punishment, but as
the Equity of a Common Fate; He that Subdues his Carnal Lusts, shall easily
keep himself unteinted with any other. So that Reason does not Encounter this
or that Vice by it self, but beats down all at a Blow. What does he care for
Ignominy, that only values himself upon Conscience, and not Opinion? Socrates
looked a Scandalous Death in the Face, with the same Constancy that he had
before practiced toward the Thirty Tyrants: his Virtue consecrated the very
Dungeon; as Cato's Repulse was Cato's Honor, and the reproach of the
Government. He that is wise, will take delight even in an Ill opinion that is
well gotten; it is Ostentation, not Virtue, when a Man will have his good Deeds
published; and, it is not enough to be just, where there is honor to be gotten,
but to continue so, in defiance of Infamy and Danger.

BUT Virtue cannot lie hid, for, the time will come, that Virtue can never be
suppressed.
shall raise it again (even after it is buried) and deliver* it from the
Malignity of the Age that oppressed it: Immortal Glory is the Shadow of it, and
keeps it Company whether we will or no; but sometimes the Shadow goes before
the Substance, and otherwhiles it follows it: and, the later it comes, the
larger it is, when even Envy it self shall have given way to it. It was a long
time that Democritus was taken for a Madman, and before Socrates had any Esteem
in the World. How long was it before Cato could be Understood? Nay, he was
Affronted, Contemned, and Rejected; and People never knew the value of him till
they had lost him; the Integrity and Courage of Rutilius had been forgotten,
but for his Sufferings. I speak of those that Fortune has made Famous for their
Persecutions, and there are others also that the World never took notice of
till they were Dead; as Epicurus, and Metrodorus, that were almost wholly
unknown, even in the Place where they Lived. Now, as the Body is to be kept in,
upon the Downhill, and forced Upwards; So there are some Virtues that require
the Rein, and others the Spur. In Liberality, Temperance, Gentleness of Nature,
we are to check our selves, for fear of falling; but, in Patience, Resolution,
and Perseverance, where we are to Mount the Hill, we stand in need of
Encouragement. Upon this Division of the Matter, I had rather steer the
Smoother Course, than pass through the Experiments of Sweat and Blood. I know
it is my Duty to be content in all Conditions; but yet if it were at my Choice,
I would choose the fairest. When a Man comes once to stand in need of Fortune,
his Life is Anxious, Suspicious, Timorous, Dependent upon every moment, and in
fear of all Accidents. How can that Man Resign himself to God, or bear his Lot,
whatever it be, without Murmuring, and cheerfully submit to Providence,; that
shrinks at every Motion of Pleasure, or Pain? It is Virtue alone that raises us
above Griefs, Hopes, Fears, and Chances; and makes us not only Patient, but
willing, as knowing that whatever we suffer, is according to the Decree of
Heaven. He that is overcome with Pleasure (so contemptible, and weak an Enemy)
What will become of him when he comes to grapple with Dangers, Necessities,
Torments, Death, and the Dissolution of Nature it self? Wealth, Honor, and
Favor, may come upon a Man by Chance; nay, they may be cast upon him without
so much as looking after them, but Virtue is the work of Industry, and Labor;
and certainly it is worth the while to purchase that good which brings all
others along with it. A Good Man is Happy within himself, and Independent upon
Fortune: Kind to his Friend; Temperate to his Enemy; Religiously Just,
Indefatigably Laborious, and he discharges all Duties with a Constancy, and
Congruity of Actions.

CHAP. IV. Philosophy is the Guide of Life.
IF it be true, that the Understanding, and the Will, are the two Eminent
Faculties of the Reasonable Soul; it follows necessarily, that Wisdom, and
Virtue, (which are the best Improvement of those two Faculties) must be the
Perfection also of our Reasonable Being; and consequently the Undeniable
Foundation of a Happy Life. There is not any Duty to which Providence has not
annexed a Blessing; not any Institution of Heaven, which, even in this Life, we
may not be the better for; not any temptation, either of Fortune, or of
Appetite, that is not subjected to our Reason; nor any Passion, or Affliction,
for which Virtue has not provided a Remedy. So that it is our own fault if we
either Fear, or Hope for any thing; which two Affections are the Root of all
our Miseries. From this General Prospect of the Foundation of our Tranquillity,
we shall pass by degrees to a particular Consideration of the means by which
it may be procured; and of the Impediments that obstruct it: beginning with
that Philosophy which principally regards our Manners, and Instructs us in the
Measures of a Virtuous, and a Quiet Life.

Philosophy is Moral, Natural, and Rational.
PHILOSOPHY is divided into Moral, Natural, and Rational: The First concerns
our Manners; the Second searches the Works of Nature; and the Third furnishes
us with Propriety of Words, and Arguments, and the faculty of distinguishing,
that we may not be imposed upon with Tricks, and Fallacies. The Causes of
things fall under Natural Philosophy; Arguments, under Rational; and Actions,
under Moral. Moral Philosophy is again divided into Matter of Justice, which
arises from the Estimation of Things, and of Men; and into Affections, and
Actions; and, a failing in any one of these, disorders all the rest; For, What
does it profit us to know the true value of things, if we be transported by our
Passions? or, to Master our Appetites, without understanding the when, the
what, the how, and other Circumstances of our Proceedings? For, it is one thing
to Know the Rate, and Dignity of things; and another to know the little Nicks,
and Springs of Acting. Natural Philosophy is Conversant about things Corporeal,
and Incorporeal; the disquisition of Causes, and Effects, and the Contemplation
of the Cause of Causes: Rational Philosophy is divided into Logic and
Rhetoric; the One looks after Words, Sense, and Order; the Other Treats barely
of Words, and the Significations of them. Socrates places all Philosophy in
Moralls; and Wisdom, in the distinguishing of Good and Evil. It is the Art and
Law of Life, and it Teaches us what to do in all Cases, and, like good
Markes-men, to hit the White at any distance. The force of it is incredible;
for it gives us, in the weakness of a Man, the security of a Spirit: In
Sickness, it is as good as a Remedy to us, for whatsoever eases the Mind, is
profitable also to the Body. The Physician may prescribe Diet, and Exercise,
and accommodate his Rule and Medicine to the Disease; but, it is Philosophy that
must bring us to a Contempt of Death, which is the Remedy of all Diseases. In
Poverty, it gives us Riches, or such a State of Mind, as makes them superfluous
to us. It arms us against all Difficulties; One Man is pressed with Death,
another with Poverty; some with Envy; others are offended at Providence, and
unsatisfied with the Condition of Mankind: But Philosophy prompts us to relieve
the Prisoner, the Infirm, the Necessitous, the Condemned; to show the Ignorant
their Errors, and rectify their Affections. It makes us inspect, and govern our
Manners; it rouzes us where we are faint, and drouzy; it binds up what is
loose, and humbles in us that which is Contumacious: It delivers the Mind from
the Bondage of the Body; and raises it up to the Contemplation of its Divine
Original. Honors, Monuments, and all the works of Vanity, and Ambition are
demolished and Destroyed by Time; but, the Reputation of Wisdom is venerable
to Posterity, and those that were envied, or neglected in their Lives, are
adored in their Memories; and exempted from the very Laws of Created Nature,
which has set bounds to all other things. The very shadow of Glory carries a
Man of Honor upon all dangers, to the Contempt of Fire, and Sword, and it were
a shame, if Right Reason should not inspire as generous Resolutions into a Man
of Virtue.

NEITHER is Philosophy only b One Wise Man teaches another.
profitable to the Public, but one Wise Man helps another, even in the
Exercise of their Virtues; and, the One has need of the Other, both for
Conversation and Counsel; for, they Kindle a mutual Emulation in good Offices.
We are not so perfect yet, but that many new things remain still to be found
out, which will give us the reciprocal Advantages of Instructing one another.
For, as one Wicked Man is Contagious to another; and, the more Vices are
mingled, the worse it is; so is it on the Contrary with Good Men, and their
Virtues. As Men of Letters are the most useful, and excellent of Friends, so
are they the best of Subjects; as being better Judges of the Blessings they
enjoy under a well-ordered Government; and of what they owe to the Magistrate,
for their Freedom, and Protection. They are Men of Sobriety, and Learning, and
free from Boasting, and Insolence; they reprove the Vice, without Reproaching
the Person; for, they have learned to be Wise, without either Pomp, or Envy.
That which we see in high Mountains, we find in Philosophers; they seem taller
near hand then at a distance: They are raised above other Men, but their
greatness is substantial. Nor do they stand upon the Tiptoe, that they may seem
higher than they are, but content with their own stature, they reckon
themselves tall enough when Fortune cannot reach them. Their Laws are short,
and yet comprehensive too, for they bind all.

IT is the Bounty of Nature that we live; but of Philosophy that b Philosophy
teaches us to live well.
we live well; which is in truth a greater Benefit than Life it self. Not but
that Philosophy is also the Gift of Heaven, so far, as to the Faculty, but not
to the Science; for that must be the business of Industry. No Man is born Wise;
but Wisdom and Virtue require a Tutor; though we can easily learn to be Vicious
without a Master. It is Philosophy that gives us a Veneration for God; a
Charity for our Neighbor, that teaches us our Duty to Heaven, and exhorts us to
an Agreement one with another: It unmasks things that are terrible to us,
asswages our Lusts, refutes our Errors, restrains our Luxury, Reproves our
Avarice, and Works strangely upon Tender Natures. I could never hear Attalus,
(says Seneca) upon the Vices of the Age, and the Errors of Life, without a
compassion for Mankind; and in his discourses upon Poverty, there was something
me thought that was more than Humane. More than we use, says he, is more than
we need, and only a Burden to the Bearer. That saying of his put me out of
countenance at the superfluities of my own fortune. And so in his Invectives
against vain pleasures; he did at such a rate advance the felicities of a Sober
Table, a Pure Mind, and a Chaste Body, that a man could not hear him without a
Love for Continence, and Moderation. Upon these Lectures of his I denied my
self for a while after, certain delicacies that I had formerly used: but in a
short time I fell to them again; though so sparingly, that the Proportion came
little short of a Total Abstinence.

NOW to show Youth is apt to take good Impressions.
you (says our Author) how much earnester my entrance upon Philosophy was, than
my Progress; My Tutor Sotion gave me a wonderful kindness for Pythagoras; and
after him, for Sextius. The former forbear shedding of Blood, upon his
Metempsychosis; and put men in fear of it, least they should offer violence to
the souls of some of their departed friends, or relations. Whether (says he)
there be a Transmigration or not; if it be true, there is no hurt in it; if
false, there is frugality: and nothing's gotten by Cruelty neither, but the
cozening a Wolf perhaps, or a Vulture of a Supper? Now Sextius abstained upon
another Account; which was, that he would not have men inured to hardness of
heart, by the Laceration, and tormenting of Living Creatures; beside that
Nature had sufficiently provided for the Sustenance of Mankind, without Blood.
This wrought so far upon me; that I gave over eating of flesh, and in one year,
made it not only easy to me, but pleasant; My mind me thought was more at
Liberty; (and I am still of the same Opinion) but I gave it over nevertheless,
and the Reason was this: It was imputed as a Superstition to the Jews, the
forbearance of some sorts of flesh, and my Father brought me back again to my
old custom, that I might not be thought tainted with their Superstition. Nay,
and I had much ado to prevail upon my ^elf to suffer it too. I make use of this
Instance to show the Aptness of Youth to take good Impressions, if there be a
friend at hand to press them. Philosophers are the Tutors of Mankind; if they
have found out Remedies for the mind, it must be our part to apply them. I
cannot think of Cato, Laelius, Socrates, Plato, without Veneration, their very
names are Sacred to me. Philosophy is the health of the Mind; let us look to
that health first, and in the Second place, to that of the Body: which may be
had upon easier terms; for a strong Arm, a Robust Constitution, or the skill of
procuring this, is not a Philosophers Business. He does some things as a Wise
man, and other things as he is a Man; and he may have strength of Body, as well
as of Mind; but if he Runs, or Casts the Sledge, it were injurious to ascribe
that to his Wisdom, which is Common to the greatest Fools. He studies rather to
fill his Mind, than his Coffers; and he knows that Gold and Silver were mingled
with dirt, till Avarice, or Ambition parted them. His Life is Ordinate,
Fearless, Equal, Secure; he stands firm in all extremities, and bears the Lot
of his Humanity with a Divine Temper. There Is a great Difference betwixt the
Splendour of Philosophy, and of Fortune; the one shines with an Original Light,
the other with a borrowed one; beside, that it makes us Happy, and Immortal;
for Learning shall outlive Palaces, and Monuments. The House of a Wise Man is
safe, though narrow; there is neither Noise, nor Furniture in it; no Porter at
the Door, nor any thing that is either Vendible, or Mercenary, nor any business
for Fortune; For, she has nothing to do, where she has nothing to look after.
This is the way to Heaven, which Nature has Chalked out, and it is both secure
and pleasant; there needs no Train of Servants, no Pomp, or Equipage, to make
good our Passage; no Money, or Letters of Credit, for expenses upon the Voyage;
but, the Graces of an honest mind will serve us upon the way, and make us happy
at our Journeys end.

TO tell you my Opinion now of the The Liberal Sciences are matter rather of
Curiosity, than Virtue.
Liberal Sciences; I have no great esteem for any thing that terminates in
Profit, or Money, and yet I shall allow them to be so far Beneficial, as they
only prepare the Understanding, without deteyning it. They are but the
Rudiments of Wisdom; and only then to be learned, when the Mind is capable of
nothing better; and the Knowledge of them is better worth the keeping, than the
acquiring. They do not so much as pretend to the making of us Virtuous, but
only to give us an aptitude of disposition to be so. The Grammarian's Business
lies in a Syntax of Speech; or if he proceed to History, or the measuring of a
Verse, he is at the end of his Line; but, What signifies a Congruity of
Periods, the Computing of Syllables, or the modifying of Numbers, to the taming
of our Passions, or the repressing of our Lusts? The Philosopher proves the
Body of the Sun to be large, but for the true Dimensions of it, we must ask the
Mathematician; Geometry, and Music, if they do not teach us to master our
Hopes, and Fears, all the rest is to little purpose. What does it concern us,
which was the Elder of the two, Homer, or Hesiod; or which was the taller,
Hellen, or Hecuba? We take a great deal of pains to trace Ulysses in his
Wanderings: But, were it not time as well spent to look to our selves, that we
may not wander at all? Are not we our selves tossed with tempestuous Passions;
and both assaulted by terrible Monsters on the one hand, and tempted by Sirens
on the other? Teach me my Duty to my Country, to my Father, to my Wife, to
Mankind. What is it to me, whether Penelope was honest or no? Teach me to know
how to be so my self, and to live according to that Knowledge. What am I the
better for putting so many parts together in Music, and raising an harmony out
of so many different Tones? Teach me to tune my Affections, and to hold
Constant to my Self. Geometry teaches me the Art of Measuring Acres; teach me
to measure my Appetites, and to know when I have enough: teach me to divide
with my Brother, and to rejoice in the Prosperity of my Neighbor. You teach me
how I may hold my own, and keep my Estate; but I would rather learn how I may
lose it all, and yet be contented. It Is hard, you will say, for a Man to be
forced from the Fortune of his Family. This Estate, it is true, was my Fathers;
but, Whose was it in the time of my Great-Grandfather? I do not only say, What
Man's was it? but, What Nations? The Astrologer tells me of Saturn, and Mars in
Opposition; but I say, let them be as they will, their Courses and their
Positions are ordered them by an Unchangeable Decree of Fate. Either they
produce, and point out the Effects of all things, or else they signify them:
If the former; What are we the better for the Knowledge of that, which must of
necessity come to pass? If the latter, What does it avail us, to foresee what
we cannot avoid? so that whether we know, or not know the event will still be
the same.

HE that designs the Institution of Humane Life, should not It Is not for the
Dignity of a Philosopher to be curious about words
be overcurious of his Words; It does not stand with his dignity to be
sollicitous about Sounds and Syllables, and to debase the Mind of Man with
small and trivial things: placing Wisdom in Matters that are rather difficult,
than great. If ^e be Eloquent, it is his Good Fortune, not his Business. Subtle
Disputations are only the sport of Wits, that play upon the Catch; and are
fitter to be contemned, then resolved. Were not I a Madman to sit wrangling
about Words, and putting of Nice, and Impertinent Questions, when the Enemy has
already made a Breach, the Town fired over my head, and the Mine ready to play,
that shall blow me up into the Air? Were this a time for fooleries? Let me
rather fortify my self against Death, and Inevitable Necessities; let me
understand, that the good of Life does not consist in the Length, or Space, but
in the Use of it. When I go to sleep, who knows whether ever I shall wake
again? and, when I wake, whether ever I shall sleep again? When I go abroad,
whether ever I shall come home again: and, when I return; whether ever I shall
go abroad again. It is not at Sea only, that Life and Death are within a few
Inches one of another; but they are as near every where else too, only we do
not take so much notice of it. What have we to do with Frivolous, and Captious
Questions, and Impertinent Niceties? Let us rather study how to deliver our
selves from Sadness, Fear, and the burden of all our Secret Lusts: Let us pass
over all our most Solemn Levities, and make haste to a Good Life, which is a
thing that Presses us. Shall a Man that goes for a Midwife, stand gaping upon a
Post, to see what Play to day; or when his house is on Fire, stay the Curling
of a Perriwig before he calls for help? Our Houses are on fire, our Country
invaded, our Goods taken away, our Children in danger, and, I might add to
these, the Calamities of Earthquakes, Shipwracks, and what ever else is most
terrible. Is this a time for us now to be playing fast and loose with Idle
Questions, which are, in effect, but so many unprofitable Riddles? Our Duty is,
The Cure of the Mind, rather than the Delight on it; but we have only the Words
of Wisdom, without the Works, and turn Philosophy into a Pleasure, that was
given for a Remedy. What can be more ridiculous, then for a Man to neglect his
Manners, and Compose his Style? We are Sick, and Ulcerous, and must be Lan^'d,
and Scarify'd, and every Man has as much Business within himself as a Physician
in a Common Pestilence. Misfortunes, in fine, cannot be avoided, but they may
be sweetened, if not overcome; and our Lives may be made happy by Philosophy.

CHAP. V. The Force of Precepts.
THERE seems to be so near an Affinity betwixt Wisdom, Philosophy, and Good
Counsels, that it is rather Matter of Curiosity, then of Profit, to divide
them: Philosophy being only a Limited Wisdom; and, Good Counsels, a
Communication of that Wisdom, for the Good of Others, as well as of our Selves;
and to Posterity, as well as to the Present. The Wisdom of the Ancients, as to
the Government of Life, was no more, than certain Precepts, what to do, and
what not; and Men were much Better in that Simplicity; for as they came to be
more Learned, they grew less Careful of being Good. That plain, and Open
Virtue, is now turned into a dark, and Intricate Science; and, we are taught to
Dispute, rather than to Live. So long as Wickedness was simple, simple Remedies
also were sufficient against it: But, now it has taken Root, and spread; we
must make use of stronger.

THERE are some Dispositions that embrace Good things as The best of us are yet
the better for Admonition, and Precept.
soon as they hear them; but they will still need quickening by Admonition, and
Precept. We are Rash, and Forward in some Cases, and Dull in others; and there
is no Repressing of the One humor, or Raising of the Other, but by removing the
Causes of them; which are (in one Word) False Admiration, and False Fear. Every
Man knows his Duty to his Country, to his Friends, to his Guests; and yet when
he is called upon to Draw his Sword for the One, or to Labor for the Other, he
finds himself distracted betwixt his Apprehensions, and his Delights: He knows
well enough the Injury he does his Wife, in the keeping of a Wench; and yet his
Lust overrules him; So that it is not enough to Give Good Advice, unless we can
Take away that which hinders the Benefit of it. If a Man does what he Ought to
do, he will never do it Constantly, or Equally, without knowing Why he does it:
And if it be only Chance, or Custom, he that does well by Chance, may do Ill
so too. And further; A Precept may direct us what we Ought to do, and yet fall
short in the Manner of Doing it: An Expensive Entertainment may, in One Case,
be Extravagance, or Gluttony; and yet a Point of Honor, and Discretion in
Another. Tiberius Caesar had a huge Mullet presented him, which he sent to the
Market to be sold: And now (says he) my Masters (to some Company with him) you
shall see, that either Apicius, or Octavius, will be the Chapman for this Fish:
Octavius beat the Price, and gave about 30 l. Sterling for it. Now there was a
great difference betwixt Octavius, that bought it for his Luxury, and the
Other, that purchased it for a Compliment to Tiberius. Precepts are idle, if we
be not first taught, what Opinion we are to have of the Matter in Question;
Whether it be Poverty, Riches, Disgrace, Sickness, Banishment, etc. Let us
therefore examine them one by one; not what they are Called, but what in Truth
they Are. And so for the Virtues: It Is to no purpose to set a high esteem upon
Prudence, Fortitude, Temperance, Justice; if we do not first know what Virtue
is: whether One, or More; or if he that has One, has All; or how they differ.

PRECEPTS are of great Weight; and a few The Power of Precepts, and Sentences.
Useful ones at hand, do more toward a Happy Life, than whole Volumes of
Cautions, that we know not where to find. These Solitary Precepts should be our
daily Meditation, for they are the Rules by which we ought to square our Lives.
When they are contracted into Sentences, they strike the Affections; whereas
Admonition is only blowing of the Coal; it moves the vigor of the Mind, and
Excites Virtue: We have the Thing already, but we know not where it lies. It is
by Precepts, that the Understanding is Nourished, and Augmented; the Offices of
Prudence, and Justice, are Guided by them, and they lead us to the Execution of
our Duties. A Precept delivered in Verse, has a much greater Effect, than in
Prose; and those very People that never think they have enough; let them but
hear a sharp Sentence against Avarice; How will they clap and admire it, and
bid open Defyance to Money? So soon as we find the Affections struck, we must
follow the Blow: not wish Syllogisms, or Quirks of Wit; but, with plain and
weighty Reason: and, we must do it with Kindness too, and Respect; for* there
goes a Blessing along with Counsels, and Discourses that are bent wholly upon
the Good of the Hearer: And those are still the most Efficacious, that take
Reason along with them; and tell us as well why we are to do this or that, as
what we are to do* For, some Understandings are weak, and need an Instructor to
expound to them what is Good, and what is Evil. It is a great Virtue to Love,
to Give, and to follow Good Counsel; if it does not Lead us to Honesty, it does
at least Prompt us to it. As several Parts make up but one Harmony, and the most
agreeable Music arises from Discords; so should a Wise Man gather many Arts,
many Precepts, and the Examples of many Ages, to enform his own Life. Our
Forefathers have left us in Charge to avoid three things; Hatred, Envy, and
Contempt; now it is hard to avoid Envy, and not incurr Contempt; for, in taking
too much Care not to usurp upon others, we become many times liable to be
trampled upon our selves. Some People are afraid of others, because it is
possible that others may be afraid of them: but, let us secure our selves on
all hands; For Flattery is as dangerous as Contempt. It Is not to say, in Case
of Admonition, I knew this before: For, we know many things, but we do not
think of them; so that it is the part of a Monitor not so much to Teach, as to
Mind us of our Duties. Sometimes a Man oversees that which lies just under his
Nose; otherwhile he is Careless, or pretends not to see it: We do all know,
that Friendship is Sacred, and yet we violate it; and the greatest Libertine
expects, that his own Wife should be honest.

GOOD Good Counsel is the best Service we can do to Mankind.
Counsel is the most needful service that we can do to Mankind, and if we give
it to many, it will be sure to profit some: For, of many Trials, some or other
will undoubtedly succeed. He that places a Man in the Possession of himself,
does a great thing; for Wisdom does not show it self so much in Precept, as in
Life; in a firmness of Mind, and a Mastery of Appetite: It Teaches us to Do,
as well as to Talk; and to make our Words and Actions all of a Color. If that
Fruit be pleasantest which we gather from a Tree of our own Planting, How much
a greater delight shall we take in the Growth, and Increase of Good Manners of
our own Forming? It is an Eminent Mark of Wisdom for a Man to be always like
himself. You shall have some that keep a thrifty Table, and lash out upon
Building; Profuse upon themselves, and sordid to others; Niggardly at Home, and
Lavish abroad. This Diversity is Vicious, and the Effect of a Dissatisfied, and
uneasy Mind; whereas every Wise Man lives by Rule. This Disagreement of
Purposes arises from hence, either that we do not propound to our selves what
we would be at; or if we do, that we do not pursue it, but pass from one thing
to another: and we do not only change neither, but return to the very thing
which we had both quitted, and condemned.

IN all our Three Points to be amin'd in all our Undertakings.
Undertakings, let us first examine our own strength; the Enterprise next, and
Thirdly the Persons with whom we have to do. The first point is most Important;
for, we are apt to overvalue our selves, and reckon, that we can do no more
than indeed we can. One Man sets up for a Speaker, and is out, as soon as he
opens his Mouth; another overcharges his Estate perhaps, or his Body: A Bashful
Man is not fit for Public Business; some again are too Stiff, and Peremptory
for the Court; many people are apt to fly out in their Anger, nay, and in a
Frolic too, if any sharp thing fall in their way, they will rather venture a
Neck, than lose a Jest. These people had better be quiet in the World, than
busy. Let him that is Naturally Choleric, and Impatient, avoid all
Provocations, and those Affairs also, that Multiply, and draw on more; and
those also from which there is no Retreat. When we may come off at pleasure,
and fairly hope to bring our Matters to a Period, it is well enough. If it so
happen, that a Man be tied up to Business, which he can neither loosen, nor
break off; let him imagine those Shackles upon his Mind to be Irons upon his
Legs: They are troublesome at first, but when there is no Remedy but Patience,
Custom makes them easy to us, and Necessity gives us Courage. We are all
Slaves to Fortune; some only in loose and Golden Chains, others in straight
ones, and Courser: Nay, and they that bind us, are slaves too themselves; some
to Honor, others to Wealth, some to Offices, others to Contempt, some to their
Superiors, others to Themselves; Nay Life it self is a servitude: Let us make
the best on it then, and with our Philosophy mend our Fortune. Difficulties may
be softened, and heavy Burdens Disposed of to our ease. Let us Covet nothing
out of our Reach, but content our selves with things hopeful, and at hand; and
without Envying the Advantages of others: For Greatness stands upon a Craggy
Precipice, and it is much Safer, and Quieter living upon a Level. How many Great
Men are forced to keep their Station upon mere Necessity; because they find,
there is no coming down from it but headlong. These Men should do well to
fortify themselves against ill Consequences, by such Virtues, and Meditations
as may make them less sollicitous for the future. The surest Expedient in this
Case is to bound our Desires, and to leave nothing to Fortune which we may keep
in our own power. Neither will this Course wholly compose us, but it shows us,
at worst, the end of our troubles.

IT is a main point to take Care, that we Propose Propose nothing, but what is
Hopeful and Honest.
nothing but what is Hopeful, and Honest. For it will be equally troublesome to
us, either not to succeed, or to be ashamed of the success. Wherefore, let us
be sure not to admit any Ill Design into our heart; that we may lift up pure
hands to Heaven, and Ask nothing which another shall be a Loser by. Let us Pray
for a Good Mind, which is a Wish to no Man's Injury. I will Remember always
that I am a Man, and then consider, that if I am Happy, it will not last
Always; if Unhappy, I may be other if I please. I will carry my Life in my
Hand, and deliver it up readily when it shall be called for: I will have a Care
of being a Slave to my Self, for it is a Perpetual, a Shameful, and the
Heaviest of all Servitudes; And, this may be done by moderate Desires. I will
say to my ^elf, What is it that I Labor, Sweat, and Solicit for, when it is
but very little that I want, and it will not be long that I shall need any
thing. He that would make Trial of the Firmness of his Mind, let him set
certain days apart for the Practice of his Virtues. Let him Mortify himself
with Fasting, Course Clothes, and hard Lodging; and then say to himself; Is
this the thing now that I was afraid of? In a State of Security a Man may thus
prepare himself against Hazards, and in Plenty, fortify himself against Want.
If you will have a Man Resolute when he comes to the Push, train him up to it
beforehand. The Soldier does Duty in Peace, that he may be in breath when he
comes to a Battle. How many Great, and Wise Men, have made Experiment of their
Moderation by a practice of Abstinence, to the highest degree of Hunger, and
Thirst; and convinced themselves, that a Man may fill his Belly, without being
beholden to Fortune; which never denies any of us wherewith to satisfy our
Necessities, though she be never so Angry: It is as easy to suffer it always,
as to try it once; and it is no more than Thousands of Servants, and Poor
People do every day of their Lives. He that would live Happily, must neither
trust to Good Fortune, nor Submit to Bad: He must stand upon his Guard against
all Assaults: He must stick to himself, without any dependence upon other
People. Where the Mind is tinctured with Philosophy, there is no place for
Grief, Anxiety, or Superfluous Vexations. It is prepossessed with Virtue, to
the neglect of Fortune, which brings us to a degree of security not to be
disturbed. It Is easier to give Counsel than to take it, and a Common thing for
one Choleric Man to condemn another. We may be sometimes Earnest in Advising,
but not Violent, or Tedious. Few words with Gentleness, and Efficacy are best:
the misery is, that the Wise do not need Counsel, and Fools will not take it. A
Good Man, it is true, delights in it; and it is a mark of Folly, and Ill Nature,
to hate Reproof. To a Friend I would be always Frank and Plain; and rather
fail in the Success, than be wanting in the Matter of Faith, and Trust. There
are some Precepts that serve in Common, both to the Rich, and Poor, but they
are too general; as, Cure your Avarice, and the work is done. It is one thing
not to desire Money, and another thing not to understand how to use it. In the
Choice of the Persons we have to do withal, we should see that they be worth
our while: In the Choice of our Business we are to consult Nature, and follow
our Inclinations. He that gives sober Advice to a Witty Droll, must look to
have every thing turned into Ridicule. As if you Philosophers (says
Marcellinus) did not love your Whores, and your Guts, as well as other people;
and then he tells you of such and such that were taken in the Manner. We are
all sick, I must confess, and it is not for sick Men to play the Physicians;
but, it is yet Lawful for a Man in an Hospital to discourse of the Common
Condition, and Distempers of the Place. He that should pretend to teach a Mad
Man how to Speak, Walk, and behave himself, Were not he the Madder Man of the
two? He that directs the Pilot makes him move the Helm; order the Sayls so or
so, and make the best of a scant Wind, after this or that manner. And so should
we do in our Counsels. Do not tell me what a Man should do in Health, or
Poverty, but show me the way to be either Sound, or Rich. Teach me to Master my
Vices: For, it is to no purpose so long as I am under their Government, to tell
me, what I must do when I am clear of it. In Case of an Avarice a little eased,
a Luxury Moderated, a Temerity Restrained, a Sluggish Humor quickened; Precepts
will then help us forward, and tutor us how to behave our selves. It is the
first, and the main Tie of a Soldier, his Military Oath, which is an Engagement
upon him both of Religion and Honor In like manner, he that pretends to a Happy
Life, must first lay a Foundation of Virtue, as a Bond upon him, to Live and
Dye true to that Cause. We do not find Felicity in the Veins of the Earth,
where we dig for Gold, nor in the Bottom of the Sea, where we fish for Pearl;
but in a pure, and untainted Mind, which, if it were not Holy, were not fit to
entertain the Deity. He that would be truly Happy, must think his own Lot best,
and so live with men, as considering that God sees him, and so speak to God, as
if Men heard him.

CHAP. VI. No Felicity like Peace of Conscience.
A GOOD Conscience is the Testimony of a Good Life, and the Reward of it. This
is it that fortifies the Mind against Fortune, when a Man has gotten the
Mastery of his Passions; placed his Treasure, and his Security, within himself;
Learned to be Content with his Condition, and that Death is no Evil in it self,
but only the End of Man. He that has dedicated his Mind to Virtue, and to the
Good of Humane Society, whereof he is a Member, has consummated all that is
either Profitable, or Necessary for him to Know, or Do, toward the
Establishment of his Peace. Every Man has a Judge, and a Witness within
himself, of all the Good, and Ill that he Does; which inspires us with great
Thoughts, and Administers to us wholesome Counsels. We have a Veneration for
all the Works of Nature, the Heads of Rivers, and the Springs of Medicinal
Waters: the Horrors of Groves and of Caves, strike us with an Impression of
Religion, and Worship. To see a Man Fearless in Dangers, untainted with Lusts,
Happy in Adversity, Composed in a Tumult, and Laughing at all those things
which are generally either Coveted, or Feared; all Men must acknowledge, that
this can be nothing else but a Beam of Divinity that Influences a Mortal Body.
And this it is that carries us to the Disquisition of things Divine, and
Humane; What the State of the World was before the Distribution of the First
Matter into Parts; what Power it was that drew Order out of that Confusion, and
gave Laws both to the whole, and to every Particle thereof; What that space is
beyond the World; and whence proceed the several operations of Nature. Shall
any Man see the Glory, and Order of the Universe; so many scattered Parts, and
Qualities wrought into one Mass; such a Medly of things, which are yet
Distinguished; the World enlightened, and the Disorders of it so wonderfully
Regulated, and, Shall he not consider the Author, and Disposer of all This;
and, whither we our selves shall go, when our Souls shall be delivered from the
Slavery of our Flesh? The whole Creation, we see, conformes to the Dictate of
Providence, and follows God both as a Governor, and as a Guide. A Great, a
Good, and a Right Mind is a kind of Divinity lodged in Flesh, and may be the
Blessing of a Slave, as well as of a Prince; it came from Heaven, and (...)
Heaven it must return; and, it is a kind of Heavenly Felicity, which a pure,
and virtuous Mind enjoyes, in some Degree, even upon Earth: Whereas Temples of
Honor are but empty Names, which probably owe their Beginning either to
Ambition, or to Violence. I am strangely transported with the thoughts of
Eternity; Nay, with the Belief of it; for I have a profound Veneration for the
Opinions of Great Men, especially when they promise things so much to My
satisfaction: for they do Promise them, though they do not Prove them. In the
Question of the Immortality of the Soul, it goes very far with me, a General
Consent to the Opinion of a Future Reward, and Punishment: which Meditation
raises me to the Contempt of this Life, in Hope of a Better. But still, though
we know that we have a Soul, yet, What that Soul is, How, and from Whence; we
are utterly Ignorant: This only we understand, that all the Good, and Ill we
do, is under the Dominion of the Mind; that a Clear Conscience States us in an
Inviolable Peace: And, that the greatest Blessing in Nature, is that, which
every honest Man may bestow upon himself. The Body is but the Clog, and
Prisoner of the Mind, tossed up and down, and Persecuted with Punishments,
Violences, and Diseases; but the Mind it self is Sacred, and Eternal, and
exempt from the Danger of all Actual Impressions.

Every man's Conscience is his Judge.
PROVIDED that we look to our Consciences, no matter for Opinion: Let me
Deserve Well, though I Hear Ill. The Common People take Stomach, and Audacity,
for the Marks of Magnanimity, and Honor; and, if a Man be Soft, and Modest,
they look upon him as an easy Fop; but, when they come once to observe the
Dignity of his Mind, in the Equality, and Firmness of his Actions; and that his
External Quiet is founded upon an Internal Peace, the very same People have him
in Esteem, and Admiration. For, there is no Man but Approves of Virtue, though
but few Pursue it; we see where it is, but we dare not venture to come at it:
And the Reason is, we overvalue that which we must quit to obtain it. A good
Conscience fears no Witnesses, but a Guilty Conscience is sollicitous, even in
solitude. If we do nothing but what is Honest, let all the World know it; but
if otherwise, What does it signify to have no body else know it, so long as I
know it my self? Miserable is he that slights that Witness! Wickedness, it is
true, may escape the Law, but not the Conscience: For, a Private Conviction is
the First, and the Greatest Punishment of Offenders; so that Sin plagues it
self; and the Fear of Vengeance pursues even those that escape the stroke of it.
It were ill for Good Men that Iniquity may so easily evade the Law, the Judge,
and the Execution, if Nature had not set up Torments, and Gibbets, in the
Consciences of Transgressors. He that is Guilty, lives in perpetual Terror; and
while he expects to be punished, he punishes himself: and, whosoever Deserves
it, Expects it. What if he be not Detected? He is still in Apprehension yet,
that he may be so. His sleeps are Painful, and never Secure; and he cannot
speak of another Man's Wickedness, without thinking of his own; whereas a good
Conscience is a Continual Feast. Those are the only Certain, and Profitable
Delights, which arise from the Conscience of a well-Acted Life: No matter for
Noise Abroad, so long as we are Quiet Within: but, if our Passions be
Seditious, that is enough to keep us Waking, without any other Tumult. It is not
the Posture of the Body, or the Composure of the Bed, that will give rest to an
Uneasy Mind: There is an Impatient sloth, that may be roused by Action, and
the Vices of Lazyness must be Cured by Business. True Happiness is not to be
found in the Excesses of Wine, or of Women, nor in the Largest Prodigalities of
Fortune: What she has given me she may take away; but she shall not Tear it
from me; and, so long as it does not grow to me, I can part with it without
pain. He that would perfectly know himself, let him set aside his Money, his
Fortune, his Dignity, and examine himself Naked; without being put to learn
from others the Knowledge of himself.

IT is dangerous for a Man too suddenly, or too easily, to believe b Let every
Man Examine himself.
himself. Wherefore let us Examine, Watch, Observe, and Inspect our own hearts;
for, we our selves are our own greatest Flatterers: We should every Night call
our selves to an Account, What Infirmity have I Mastered to day? What Passion
Opposed? What Temptation resisted? What Virtue Acquired. Our Vices will abate
of themselves, if they be brought every day to the Shrift. Oh the Blessed sleep
that follows such a Diary! Oh the Tranquillity, Liberty, and Greatness of that
Mind, that is a Spy upon it Self; and a private Censor of its own Manners! It
is my Custom (says our Author) every Night, so soon as the Candle is out, to
run over all the Words, and Actions of the past day; and I let nothing escape
me; for, Why should I fear the Sight of my own Errors, when I can Admonish,
and Forgive my self? I was a little too hot in such a Dispute: my Opinion might
have been as well spared, for it gave Offense, and did no good at all. The
thing was true; but all truths are not to be spoken at all times. I would I had
held my tongue, for, there is no contending either with Fools, or our Superiors.
I have done Ill; but it shall be so no more. If every Man would but thus look
into himself, it would be the better for us all. What can be more Reasonable
than this Daily Review of a Life that we cannot warrant for a Moment? Our Fate
is set, and the first breath we draw, is only the first Motion toward our last:
One Cause depends upon another; and the Course of all things, Public and
Private, is but a long connection of Providential Appointments. There is a great
variety in our Lives, but all tends to the same Issue. Nature may use her own
Bodies as she pleases; but, a Good Man has this Consolation, that nothing
perishes which he can call his own. It Is a great Comfort, that we are only
condemned to the same Fate with the Universe; the Heavens themselves are Mortal
as well as our Bodies; Nature has made us Passive; and to Suffer is our Lot.
While we are in Flesh, every Man has his Chain, and his Clog; only it is
looser, and lighter to one Man than to another; and he is more at ease that
takes it up, and Carries it, than he that Drags it. We are Born to Lose, and to
Perish; to Hope, and to Fear; to Vex our selves, and others; and there is no
Antidote against a Common Calamity, but Virtue; For, the Foundation of true Joy
is in the Conscience.

CHAP. VII. A Good Man can never be Miserable, nor a Wicked Man Happy.
THERE is not in the Scale of Nature a more Inseparable Connection of Cause, and
Effect, than in the Case of Happiness, and Virtue: Nor any thing that more
naturally produces the One, or more Necessarily presupposes the Other. For,
What is it to be Happy, but for a Man to content himself with his Lot, in a
Cheerful, and Quiet Resignation to the Appointments of God? All the Actions of
our Lives ought to be Governed with a respect to Good, and Evil: And, it is
only Reason that distinguishes: by which Reason we are in such manner
Influenced, as if a Ray of the Divinity were dipped in a Mortal Body; and that is
the Perfection of Mankind. It Is true, we have not the Eyes of Eagles, or the
Sagacity of Hounds; Nor if we had, could we pretend to value our selves upon
any thing which we have in Common with Brutes. What are we the better for that
which is Foreign to us, and may be given, and taken away? As the Beams of the
Sun irradiate the Earth, and yet Remain where they were, so is it, in some
proportion, with a Holy Mind, that Illustrates all our Actions, and yet adheres
to its Original. Why do we not as well commend a Horse for his glorious
Trappings, as a Man for his Pompous Additions? How much a braver Creature is a
Lion (which by Nature ought to be Fierce, and Terrible) How much braver (I say)
in his Natural Horror, than in his Chains? so that every thing in its pure
Nature pleases us best. It is not Health, Nobility, Riches, that can Justify a
Wicked Man; nor is it the want of all these that can discredit a Good one.
That Is the Sovereign Blessing, which makes the Possessor of it valuable without
any thing else, and him that wants it Contemptible, though he had all the World
besides. It Is not the Painting, Gilding, or Carving that makes a good Ship;
but, if she be a Nimble Sayler, Tight, and Strong, to endure the Seas, that is
her Excellency. It Is the Edge, and Temper of the Blade that makes a good Sword;
not the Richness of the Scabbard: and so it is not Money, or Possessions that
make a Man Considerable, but his Virtue.

IT is every Man's Duty to make himself Profitable to Mankind: If he can, to
Many; if not, to a A Good Man makes himself profitable to Mankind.
Fewer: If not so neither, to his Neighbors; but however to Himself. There are
Two Republics, a Great one, which is Humane Nature; and a Less, which is the
Place where we were Born: Some serve Both at a time; some only the Greater, and
some again only the Less: The Greater may be served in Privacy, Solitude,
Contemplation, and perchance that way better than any other: but, it was the
Intent of Nature however, that we should serve Both* A Good Man may serve the
Public, his Friend, and Himself, in any Station: If he be not for the Sword,
let him take the Gown; If the Bar does not agree with him, let him try the
Pulpit; If he be Silenced Abroad, let him give Counsel at Home; and discharge
the Part of a Faithful Friend, and a Temperate Companion. When he is no longer
a Citizen, he is yet a Man; the whole World is his Country, and Humane Nature
never wants Matter to Work upon: But, if nothing will serve a Man in the Civil
Government, unless he be Prime Minister; or in the Field, but to Command in
Chief, it is his own fault. The Common Soldier, where he cannot use his Hands,
sights with his very Looks; his Example, his Encouragement, his Voice: and
stands his Ground even when he has lost his hands; and does Service too with
his very Clamor; so that in any Condition whatsoever, he still discharges the
Duty of a Good Patriot. Nay, he that spends ^his time well, even in a
Reti^ement, gives a great Example: We may enlarge indeed, or Contract,
according to the Circumstances of Time, Place, or Abilities; but above all
things, we must be sure to keep our selves in Action; For, he that is slothful
is dead even while he lives. Was there ever any State so desperate, as that of
Athens under the Thirty Tyrants; where it was Capital to be Honest; and the
Senate House was turned into a College of Hangmen? never was any Government so
wretched, and so hopeless; and yet Socrates at the same time Preached
Temperance to the Tyrants, and Courage to the Rest: and afterward died an
Eminent Example of Faith, and Resolution, and a Sacrifice for the Common Good.

IT is not for a Wise Man to stand The Injuries of Fortune do not affect the
Mind.
shifting, and ^encing with Fortune, but to oppose her barefaced; for, he is
sufficiently convinced, that she can do him no hurt. She may take away his
Servants, Possessions, Dignity; assault his Bo^, put out his Eyes, cut off his
Hands, and strip him of all the External Comforts of Life. But, What does all
this amount to, more than the recalling of a Trust, which he has received, with
Condition to deliver it up again upon Demand? He looks upon himself as
Precarious, and only Lent to himself; and yet he does not value himself ever
the less, because he is not his Own, but takes such care as an Honest Man
should do, of a thing that is committed to him in Trust. Whenever he that
lent me my Self, and what I have, shall call for all back again, it is not a
Loss, but a Restitution; and I must willingly deliver up what most undeservedly
was bestowed upon me: And, it will become me to return my Mind better than I
received it.

DEMETRIUS, upon the taking of Megara, asked Stilpo c A Generous Instance of a
Constant Mind.
the Philosopher what he had lost. Nothing, says he, for I have all that I
could call my own about me. And yet the Enemy had then made himself the Master
of his Patrimony, his Children, and his Country: But these he looked upon only
as Adventitious Goods, and under the Command of Fortune: Now he that neither
lost any thing, nor feared any thing in a Public Ruin, but was safe, and at
Peace, in *the Middle of the Flames, and in the Heat of a Military
Intemperance, and Fury; What Violence, or Provocation imaginable can put such a
Man as This out of the Possession of himself? Walls, and Castles may be Min'd,
and Battered; but there is no Art, or Engine, that can subvert a Steady Mind. I
have made my way (says Stilpo) through Fire, and Blood; what is become of my
Children, I know not; but these are Transitory Blessings, and Servants that are
condemned to Change their Masters; What was my Own Before, is my Own Still:
Some have lost their Estates; others their Dear-bought Mistresses; their
Commissions, and Offices; the Usurers have lost their Bonds, and Securities;
but, Demetrius, for my Part, I have saved All: And, do not imagine, after all
this, either that Demetrius is a Conqueror; or that Stilpo is overcome: it is
only Thy Fortune has been too hard for Mine. Alexander took Babylon; Scipio
took Carthage; the Capitol was Burnt: but, there is no Fire, or Violence that
can discompose a Generous Mind. And, let us not take this Character neither for
a Chimaera; for all Ages afford some, though not many Instances, of this
Elevated Virtue. A Good Man does his Duty, let it be never so painful, so
hazardous, or never so great a loss to him; and, it is not all the Money, the
Power, and the Pleasure in the World; no not any Force, or Necessity, that can
make him Wicked: He considers what he is to Do, not what he is to Suffer, and
will keep on his Course, though there should be nothing but Gibbets, and
Torments in the way. As in this Instance of Stilpo; who, when he had lost his
Country, his Wife, his Children; the Town on Fire over his head, and Himself
scaping hardly, and naked, out of the Flames; I have saved all my Goods; (says
he) my Justice, my Courage, my Temperance, my Prudence; accompting nothing his
Own, or Valuable; and showing how much easier it was to overcome a Nation, than
one Wise Man. It is a Certain Mark of a Brave Mind, not to be moved by any
Accidents: The upper Region of the Air admits neither Clouds, nor Tempests; The
Thunder, Storms, and Meteors, are formed Below; and this is the Difference
betwixt a Mean, and an Exalted Mind: The Former is Rude, and Tumultuary; the
Latter is Modest, Venerable, Composed, and always Quiet in its Station. In
brief; It is the Conscience that pronounces upon the Man, whether he be Happy
or Miserable. But, though Sacrilege, and Adultery, be Generally condemned, How
many are there still that do not so much as Blush at the One; and, in truth,
that take a Glory in the Other? For, nothing is more Common, than for Great
Thieves to ride in Triumph, when the little ones are punished. But, Let
Wickedness escape, as it may, at the Bar, it never fails of doing Justice upon
it self; for, every Guilty Person is his own Hangman.

CHAP VIII. The Due Contemplation of Divine Providence is the Certain Cure of
all Misfortunes.
WHOEVER observes the World, and the Order of it, will find all the Motions in
it to be only a Vicissitude of Falling, and Rising; Nothing extinguished, and
even those things which seem to us to Perish, are in truth but Changed. The
seasons Go, and Return; Day, and Night follow in their Courses; The Heavens
Roll, and Nature goes on with her Work: All things succeed in their Turns;
Storms, and Calms; the Law of Nature will have it so, which we must follow, and
obey; accompting all things that are done to be well done: So that what we
cannot Mend, we must Suffer, and wait upon Providence without Repining: It is
the part of a Cowardly Soldier to follow his Commander, Groaning; but, a
Generous Man delivers himself up to God without struggling, and it is only for
a Narrow Mind to condemn the Order of the World; and to propound rather the
mending of Nature, than of Himself. No Man has any Cause of Complaint against
Providence, if that which is Right pleases him. Those Glories that appear fair
to the Eye, their Luster is but false, and superficial; and they are only
Vanity, and Delusion: They are rather the Goods of a Dream, than a Substantial
Possession; they may Cozen us at a Distance, but bring them once to the Touch,
they are Rotten and Counterfeit. There are no greater wretches in the World,
than many of those which the People take to be Happy; Those are the only true,
and Incorruptible Comforts, that will abide all Trials; and the more we turn,
and examine them, the more valuable we find them; and, The greatest Felicity of
all, is not to stand in need of Any? What Is Poverty? No Man lives so poor as he
was born. What Is Pain? It will either have an end it self, or make an end of
us. In short; Fortune has no Weapon that reaches the Mind: But the Bounties of
Providence are Certain, and Permanent Blessings; and they are the Greater, and
the Better, the longer we consider them: That is to say, The Power of
contemning things Terrible, and despising what the Common People Covet. In the
very Methods of Nature, we cannot but observe the Regard that Providence had to
the Good of Mankind, even in the Disposition of the World, in providing so
amply for our Maintenance, and Satisfaction. It is not possible for us to
Comprehend what that Power is, which has made all things: Some few sparks of
that Divinity are discovered, but infinitely the greater part of it lies hid.
We are all of us however so far agreed; First, in the Acknowledgment and Belief
of that Almighty Being; and Secondly; that we are to ascribe to it, all
Majesty, and Goodness.

IF there be a Providence, say some, How comes it that Good Men are Afflicted
in this World, and Wicked Men Prosper.
How comes it to pass, that good Men labor under Affliction, and Adversity;
and Wicked Men enjoy themselves in Ease and Plenty? My Answer is, That God
deals by Us as a good Father does by his Children; he Tryes us, he Hardens us,
and Fits us for Himself. He keeps a strict hand over those that he loves, and
by the rest he does as we do by our slaves; he lets them go on in License and
Boldness. As the Master gives his most hopeful Scholars the hardest Lessons, so
does God deal with the most Generous Spirits; and the Cross Encounters of
Fortune, we are not to look upon as a Cruelty, but as a Contest: The
Familiarity of Dangers brings us to the Contempt of them, and that part is
strongest which is most exercised: the Seamans Hand is Callous, the Soldiers
Arm is Strong, and the Tree that is most exposed to the Wind, takes the best
Root: Those People that live in a perpetual VVinter, in extremity of Frost, and
Penury, where a Cave, a Look of Straw, or a few Leaves is all their Covering,
and wild Beasts their Nourishment; All this by Custom is not only made
tolerable, but when it is once taken up upon necessity, by little and little it
becomes pleasant to them. Why should we then account that Condition of Life a
Calamity, which is the Lot of many Nations? There is no State of Life so
miserable, but there are in it Remissions, Diversions; nay, and Delights too;
such is the Benignity of Nature toward us, even in the severest Accidents of
Humane Life. There were no Living, if Adversity should hold on as it begins,
and keep up the Force of the First Impression. We are apt to Murmr at many
things as great Evils, that have nothing at all of Evil in them beside the
Complaint; which we should more reasonably take up against our selves. If I be
Sick, it is part of my Fate; and for other Calamities they are usual Things;
they Ought to be; nay, which is more, they Must be, for they come by Divine
Appointment. So that we should not only Submit to God, but Assent to him, and
Obey him, out of Duty, even if there were no Necessity; All those terrible
Appearances that make us Groan, and Tremble, are but the Tribute of Life; we
are neither to Wish, nor to Ask, nor to Hope to escape them; For it is a kind of
Dishonesty to pay a Tribute Unwillingly. Am I troubled with the Stone; or
Afflicted with continual Losses? Nay, Is my Body in danger? All this is no more
than what I Prayed for, when I Prayed for Old Age. All these things are as
familiar in a Long Life, as Dust, and Dirt in a Long Way. Life is a Warfare;
and, What Brave Man would not rather Choose to be in a Tent, than in a Shambles?
Fortune does like a Sword-Man; She Scorns to Encounter a fearful Man: there is
no Honor in the Victory, where there is no Danger in the Way to it: She tryes
Mucius by Fire; Rutilius by Exile; Socrates by Poison, Cato by Death. It Is only
in Adverse Fortune, and in Bad Times, that we find great Examples. Mucius
thought himself happier with his Hand in the Flame, than if it had been in the
Bosom of his Mistress. Fabricius took more pleasure in eating the Roots of his
own Planting, than in all the Delicacies of Luxury, and Expense. Shall we call
Rutilius miserable, whom his very Enemies have adored? who, upon a Glorious,
and a Public Principle, chose rather to lose his Country, than to return from
Banishment? the only Man that denied any thing to Sylla the Dictator, who
recalled him. Nor did he only refuse to come, but drew himself farther off: Let
them, says he, that think Banishment a Misfortune, live slaves at Rome, under
the Imperious Cruelties of Sylla: He that sets a Price upon the Heads of
Senators, and after a Law of his own Institution against Cut-throates, becomes
the greatest himself. Is it not better for a Man to live in Exile Abroad, than
to be Massacred at Home. In suffering for Virtue, it is not the Torment, but the
Cause that we are to Consider; and the more Pain, the more Renown. When any
Hardship befalls us, we must look upon it as an Act of Providence, which many
times suffers Particulars to be wounded for the Conservation of the whole:
Beside that God Chastises some People under an Appearance of Blessing them,
turning their Prosperity to their Ruin, as a Punishment for abusing his
Goodness. And we are further to Consider, that many a Good Man is Afflicted,
only to teach others to suffer; for we are born for Example: And likewise, that
where Men are Contumacious, and Refractory, it pleases God many times to Cure
greater Evils by Less, and to turn our Miseries to our Advantage.

HOW many Providence draws Good out of Evil.
Casualties, and Difficulties are there, that we dread, as insupportable
Mischiefs, which, upon farther thoughts, we find to be Mercies, and Benefits?
As Banishment, Poverty, Loss of Relations, Sickness, Disgrace? Some are Cured
by the Lance; by Fire, Hunger, Thirst; taking out of Bones, Lopping of Limbs,
and the like: Nor do we only Fear things that are many times Beneficial to us,
but on the other side, we hanker after, and pursue things that are Deadly, and
Pernicious: We are Poisoned in the very Pleasures of our Luxury; and betrayed
to a Thousand Diseases, by the Indulging of our Palate. To lose a Child, or a
Limb, is only to part with what we have received, and Nature may do what she
pleases with her own. We are Frail our selves, and we have received things
Transitory: That which was given us, may be taken away; Calamity tryes Virtue,
as the Fire does Gold: Nay, he that lives most at ease, is only delayed, not
dismissed, and his Portion is to come. When we are visited with Sickness, or
other Afflictions, we are not to murmr as if we were ill used: It is a Mark
of the General's Esteem, when he puts us upon a Post of Danger: We do not say,
My Captain uses me Ill, but He does me Honor: And so should we say, that are
commanded to encounter Difficulties, for this is our Case with God Almighty.

WHAT was Regulus the worse, because Fortune made Choice of him for an Eminent
Instance, c Calamity is the Trial of Virtue.
both of Faith, and Patience? He was thrown into a Case of Wood stuck with
pointed Nails; so that which way soever he turned his Body, it rested upon his
Wounds; his Eyelids were cut off, to keep him waking; and yet Mecaenas was not
happier upon his Bed, than Regulus upon his Torments. Nay, the World is not yet
grown so wicked, as not to prefer Regulus before Mecaenas: And, can any Man
take That to be an Evil, of which, Providence accounted this brave Man worthy.
It has pleased God (says he) to single me out for an Experiment of the Force
of Humane Nature. No Man knows his own Strength, or Value, but by being put to
the Proof. The Pilot is tried in a Storm; the Soldier in a Battle; the Rich Man
knows not how to behave himself in Poverty: He that has lived in Popularity,
and Applause, knows not how he would bear Infamy, and Reproach: Nor he that
never had Children, how he would bear the Loss of them. Calamity is the
Occasion of Virtue, and a Spur to a Great Mind. The very Apprehension of a
Wound startles a Man when he first bears Arms, but an Old Soldier bleeds
boldly; because he knows, that a Man may lose Blood, and yet win the Day. Nay,
many times a Calamity turns to our Advantage; and Great Ruins have but made
way to Greater Glories. The Crying out of Fire has many times quieted a Fray,
and the Interposing of a wild Beast has parted the Thief, and the Traveller;
for, we are not at leisure for Less Mischiefs, while we are under the
Apprehension of Greater. One Man's Life is saved by a Disease; Another is
Arrested, and taken out of the way, just when his House was falling upon his
head.

TO show now, that the Favors, or the Accidents are neither Good nor Evil.
Crosses of Fortune; and the Accidents of Sickness, and of Health, are neither
Good, nor Evil; God permits them indifferently both to Good, and Evil Men. It Is
hard, you will say, for a Virtuous Man to suffer all sorts of Misery, and for a
Wicked Man, not only to go free, but to enjoy himself at pleasure. And, Is it
not the same thing for Men of Prostituted Impudence, and Wickedness, to sleep
in a whole skin, when Men of Honor, and Honesty, bear Arms, lie in the
Trenches, and receive Wounds? Or for the Vestal Virgins to rise in the Night to
their Prayers, when Common Strumpets lie stretching themselves in their Beds?
We should rather say with Demetrius, If I had known the will of Heaven before I
was called to it, I would have offered my self. If it be the Pleasure of God to
take my Children, I have brought them up to that End: If my Fortune, any Part
of my Body, or my Life, I would rather present it, than yield it up: I am ready
to part with all, and to suffer all; for I know that nothing comes to pass, but
what God appoints: Our Fate is Decreed, and things do not so much Happen, as in
their due time Proceed, and every Man's Portion of Joy, and Sorrow is
Predetermin'd.

THERE is nothing falls amiss to a Nothing that is properly Evil, can befall a
Good Man.
Good Man, that can be charged upon Providence; for, Wicked Actions, Lewd
Thoughts, Ambitious Projects, Blind Lusts, and Insatiable Avarice, against all
These he is Armed by the Benefit of Reason: And, Do we expect now, that God
should look to our Luggage too? (I mean our Bodies?) Democritus discharged
himself of his Treasure, as the Clog, and Burden of his Mind. Shall we wonder
then if God suffers that to befall a Good Man, which a Good Man sometimes does
to himself? I lose a Son; and why not? when it may some time so fall out, that
I my self may kill him. Suppose he be Banished by an Order of State: Is it not
the same thing with a Man's Voluntary leaving of his Country, and never to
return? Many Afflictions may befall a Good Man, but no Evil; for Contraries
will never Incorporate: All the Rivers in the World are never able to Change
the Taste, or Quality of the Sea. Prudence, and Religion are above Accidents;
and draw Good out of every thing; Affliction keeps a Man in Ure, and makes him
Strong, Patient, and Hardy. Providence treats us like a Generous Father, and
brings us up to Labors, Toils, and Dangers; whereas the Indulgence of a Fond
Mother makes us weak, and spiritless: God loves us with a Masculine Love, and
turns us loose to Injuries, and Indignities: he takes delight to see a Brave
and a Good Man Wrestling with Evil Fortune, and yet keeping himself upon his
Legs, when the whole World is in disorder about him. And, Are not we our selves
delighted, to see a bold Fellow press with his Lance upon a Bore, or Lion? And
the Constancy, and Resolution of the Action, is the Grace, and Dignity of the
Spectacle. No Man can be Happy that does not stand firm against all
Contingences; and say to himself in all Extremities, I should have been
content, if it might have been so, or so; but, since it is otherwise determined,
God will provide better. The more we struggle with our Necessities, we draw the
Knot the harder, and the worse it is with us: And, the more the Bird Flaps, and
Flutters in the Snare, the surer she is Caught: So that the best way is to
submit, and lie still, under this double Consideration, That the Proceedings of
God are Unquestionable; and his Decrees not to be resisted.

CHAP. IX. Of Levity of Mind, and other Impediments of a Happy Life.
NOW to Sum up what is already delivered, we have showed what Happiness is,
and wherein it consists: That it is founded upon Wisdom and Virtue; for, we
must first know what we Ought to do, and then Live according to that Knowledge:
We have also discoursed the Helps of Philosophy, and Precepts toward a Happy
Life: The Blessing of a Good Conscience; That a Good Man can never be
Miserable, nor a Wicked Man Happy; nor any Man Unfortunate, that cheerfully
submits to Providence. We shall now Examine, How it comes to pass, that when
the certain Way to Happiness lies so fair before us, Men will yet steer their
Course on the other side, which as Manifestly leads to Ruin.

THERE are some that live without any Impediments of Happiness.
Design at all; and only pass in the World like Straws upon a River; they do
not Go, but they are Carried. Others only deliberate upon the Parts of Life,
and not upon the Whole, which is a great Error, for there is no disposing of the
Circumstances of it, unless we first propound the main Scope. How shall any Man
take his Aim without a Mark? or, What wind will serve Him that is not yet
resolved upon his Port? We Live as it were by Chance, and by Chance we are
Governed. Some there are that Torment themselves afresh with the Memory of what
is Past; Lord! What did I endure? Never was any Man in my Condition; every body
gave me over; my very Heart was ready to break, etc. Others again Afflict
themselves with the Apprehension of Evils to Come; and very ridiculously Both:
For the One does not Now concern us, and the Other, not Yet; Beside that, there
may be Remedies for Mischiefs likely to happen; for they give us warning by
Signs, and Symptoms of their Approach. Let him that would be Quiet, take heed
not to provoke Men that are in Power; but live without giving Offense; and if
we cannot make all Great Men our Friends, it will suffice to keep them from
being our Enemies. This is a thing we must avoid, as a Mariner would do a
Storm. A Rash Seaman never considers what Wind blows, or what Course he steers;
but runs at a Venture, as if he would brave the Rocks, and the Eddies: whereas
he that is Careful, and Considerate, informs himself beforehand where the
Danger lies, and what weather it is like to be: He consults his Compass, and
keeps aloof from those places that are Infamous for Wrecks and Miscarriages. So
does a Wise Man in the common business of Life; he keeps out of the Way from
those that may do him hurt; but it is a point of Prudence not to let them take
notice that he does it on purpose; for that which a Man shuns, he tacitly
condemns. Let him have a care also of List'ners, Newsmongers, and Medlers in
other Peoples Matters; for their discourse is commonly of such things as are
never Profitable, and most commonly Dangerous either to be spoken, or heard.

LEVITY Levity of Mind is a great Hindrance of our Repose.
of Mind is a great Hindrance of Repose, and the very Change of Wickedness is
an Addition to the Wickedness it self; for it is Inconstancy added to Iniquity;
We relinquish the thing we sought, and then we take it up again; and so divide
our Lives between our Lusts, and our Repentances. From one Appetite we pass to
another, not so much upon Choice, as for Change; and there is a Check of
Conscience that casts a Damp upon all our Unlawful Pleasures; which makes us
lose the Day in expectation of the Night, and the Night it self for fear of the
Approaching Light* Some people are never at quiet; others are always so; and
they are Both to blame; For that which looks like Vivacity, and Industry in the
one, is only a Restlessness, and Agitation; and that which passes in the other
for Moderation, and Reserve, is but a Drouzy, and an Unactive sloth. Let
Motion, and Rest, both take their turns, according to the Order of Nature,
which made both the Day, and the Night: Some are perpetually shifting from one
thing to another: Others again make their whole Life but a kind of Uneasy
sleep: Some lie tossing, and turning, till very weariness bring them to Rest;
Others again I cannot so properly call Inconstant, as Lazy: there are many
Proprieties, and Diversities of Vice; but, it is one never failing effect of
it, to live Displeased. We do all of us labor under Inordinate Desires; we are
either timorous, and dare not venture, or venturing, we do not succeed; or else
we cast our selves upon uncertain Hopes, where we are perpetually Sollicitous,
and in Suspense. In this distraction, we are apt to propose to our selves
things dishonest, and hard; and when we have taken great pains to no purpose,
we come then to repent of our Undertakings: We are afraid to go on, and we can
neither Master our Appetites, nor obey them; We live, and die Restless, and
Irresolute, and which is worst of all, when we grow weary of the Public, and
betake our selves to Solitude for Relief, our Minds are Sick, and Wallowing,
and the very House and Walls are troublesome to us; we grow Impatient, and
ashamed of our selves; and suppress our Inward vexation till it breaks our
heart for want of vent. This is it that makes us Sour, and Morose; Envious of
others, and dissatisfied with our selves: till at last, betwixt our Troubles
for other Peoples Successes, and the Despair of our Own, we fall foul upon
Fortune, and the Times; and get into a Corner, perhaps, where we sit brooding
over our own Disquiets. In these Dispositions there is a kind of pruriginous
Fancy that makes some people take delight in Labor, and Uneasiness, like the
Clawing of an Itch till the blood starts.

THIS is it that puts us upon rambling Voyages; one while by Sea, another while
by Land; b Change of Place does no good without Change of Mind.
but still disgusted with the Present: The Town pleases us to day; the Country
to Morrow; the Splendors of the Court at one time; the Horrors of a Wilderness
at another; but all this while we carry our Plague about us; for it is not the
place that we are weary of, but our selves. Nay, our weakness extends to every
thing, for we are Impatient equally of Toil, and of Pleasure. This Trotting of
the Ring, and only treading the same steps over and over again, has made many a
Man lay violent hands upon himself. It must be the Change of the Mind, not of
the Climate, that will remove the Heaviness of the Heart; our Vices go along
with us, and we carry in our selves the Causes of our Disquiets. There Is a
great weight lies upon us, and the bare shocking of it makes it the more
Uneasy; changing of Countries in this Case is not Traveling, but Wandering. We
must keep on our Course if we would gain our Journeys end; He that cannot live
Happily any where, will live happily no where. What is a Man the better for
Traveling? as if his Cares could not find him out wherever he goes? Is there
any retiring from the Fear of Death, or of Torments? or from those Difficulties
which beset a Man wherever he is. It is only Philosophy that makes the Mind
Invincible, and places us out of the Reach of Fortune; so that all her Arrows
fall short of us. This is it that reclaimes the Rage of our Lusts, and sweetens
the Anxiety of our Fears. Frequent Changing of Places, or Councels, shows an
Instability of Mind; and we must fix the Body, before we can fix the Soul: We
can hardly stir abroad, or look about us without encountering some thing or
other that revives our Appetites. As he that would cast off an unhappy Love,
avoids whatsoever may put him in Mind of the Person; so he that would wholly
deliver himself from his Beloved Lusts, must shun all Objects that may put them
in his head again, and remind him of them. We travel, as Children run up and
down after strange sights, for Novelty, not Profit; we return neither the
better nor the sounder; nay, and the very Agitation hurts us. We learn to call
Towns, and Places by their Names, and to tell Stories of Mountains, and of
Rivers: but, Had not our time been better spent in the Study of Wisdom, and of
Virtue? In the Learning of what is already discovered, and in the Quest of
things not yet found out? If a Man break his Leg, or strain his Ancle, he sends
presently for a Surgeon to set all right again; and does not take Horse upon it,
or put himself on Shipboard: No more does the Change of place work upon our
Disordered Minds, than upon our Bodies. It is not the Place (I hope) that makes
either an Orator, or a Physician. Will any Man ask upon the Road, Pray which is
the way to Prudence, to Justice, to Temperance, to Fortitude? No matter whither
any Man goes that carries his Affections along with him. He that would make his
Travels delightful, must make himself a Temperate Companion. A great Traveller
was complaining, That he was never the better for his Travels. That Is very
true, said Socrates, because you traveled with your self. Now had not he
better have made himself another Man, than to transport himself to another
Place? It Is no matter what Manners we find any where, so long as we carry our
own. But we have all of us a Natural Curiosity of seeing fine sights, and of
making new discoveries; turning over Antiquities, Learning the Customs of
Nations, etc. We are never quiet: To day we seek an Office; to morrow we are
sick on it: We divide our Lives betwixt a dislike of the Present, and a desire
of the Future; but, he that lives as he should, orders himself so as neither to
fear, nor to wish for to morrow: If it comes, it is welcome, but if not, there is
nothing lost; for, that which is to come is but the same over again that is
past. As Levity is a pernicious Enemy to Quiet; so Pertinacity is a great one
too. The One Changes Nothing; the Other Sticks to Nothing; and which of the two
is the worse may be a question. It is many times seen, that we beg earnestly
for those things, which if they were offered us we would refuse: And it is but
just to punish this Easiness of Asking with an equal Facility of Granting.
There are some things which we would be thought to desire, which we are so far
from desiring, that we dread them. I shall tire you (says one) in the Middle
of a Tedious Story. No, pray be pleased to go on, we cry, though we wished his
Tongue out at half way. Nay, we do not deal Heartily even with God himself. We
should say to our selves in these Cases, This have I drawn upon my self. I
could never be quiet till I had gotten this Woman, this Place, this Estate,
this Honor; and now see what is come on it.

ONE Sovereign Remedy against all Misfortunes is Constancy of Mind secures us
in all Difficulties.
Constancy of Mind: the Changing of Parties, and Countenances looks as if a Man
were driven with the Wind. Nothing can be above him that is above Fortune. It
is not Violence, Reproach, Contempt, or whatever else from without, that can
make a Wise Man quit his Ground: but he is Proof against all Calamities, both
great and small: Only our Error is, that what we cannot do our selves, we think
no body else can, so that we judge of the Wise by the Measures of the Weak.
Place me among Princes, or among Beggars; The One shall not make me Proud, nor
the Other Ashamed: I can take as sound a sleep in a Barn, as in a Palace; and a
Bottle of Hay makes me as good a Lodging, as a Bed of Down. Should every day
succeed to my wish, it should not Transport me: Nor would I think my self
Miserable, if I should not have one quiet hour in my whole Life. I will not
transport my Self with either Pain, or Pleasure; but yet for all that, I could
wish that I had an easier Game to play; and that I were put rather to Moderate
my Joys, than my Sorrows. If I were an Imperial Prince, I had rather Take,
than be Taken: and yet I would bear the same Mind under the Chariot of my
Conqueror that I had in my Own. It is no great matter to trample upon those
things that are most coveted, or feared by the Common People. There are those
that will laugh upon the Wheel; and cast themselves upon a Certain Death, only
upon a Transport of Love, perhaps, Anger, Avarice, or Revenge: How much more
then upon an Instinct of Virtue; which is Invincible, and Steady? If a short
Obstinacy of Mind can do this; How much more shall a Composed, and a Deliberate
Virtue; whose Force is equal, and perpetual?

TO secure our selves in this World; first we must aim at The less we have to
do with the World, the Better.
nothing that Men count worth the wrangling for: Secondly, We must not Value
the Possession of any thing, which even a Common Thief would think worth the
stealing. A Man's Body is no Booty. Let the way be never so dangerous for
Robberies, the Poor, and the Naked pass quietly. A plain-dealing sincerity of
Manners makes a Man's Life Happy, even in despite of Scorn, and Contempt; which
is every Clear Man's Fate. But we had better yet be Contemned for Simplicity,
than lie perpetually upon the Torture of a Counterfeit. But then a Care must be
taken not to confound Simplicity with Negligence; And it is moreover, an
Uneasy Life, that of a disguise. For a Man to seem to be what he is not; to
keep a perpetual Guard upon himself, and to live in fear of discovery: He takes
every Man that looks upon him for a Spy; over and above the trouble of being
put to play another Man's part. It is a good Remedy in some Cases for a Man to
apply himself to Civil Affairs, and Public Business: and yet in this State of
Life too, what betwixt Ambition, and Calumny; it is hardly safe to be Honest.
There are indeed some Cases wherein a Wise Man will give way: but let him not
yield over-easily neither: If he Marches off, let him have a care of his Honor;
and make his Retreat with his Sword in his hand, and his Face to the Enemy. Of
all others a Studious Life is the least tiresome; it makes us easy to our
selves, and to others, and gains us both Friends, and Reputation.

CHAP X. He that sets up his Rest upon Contingencies, shall never be at Quiet.
NEVER pronounce any Man Happy that depends upon Fortune for his Happiness; for
nothing can be more preposterous, than to place the Good of a Reasonable
Creature in Unreasonable Things. If I have lost any thing, it was Adventitious;
and, the less Money, the less Trouble; the less Favor, the less Envy: Nay,
even in those Cases that put us out of our Wits, it is not the Loss it self,
but the Opinion of the Loss that troubles us. It is a Common Mistake to account
those things Necessay that are superfluous, and to depend upon Fortune for the
Felicity of Life, which arises only from Virtue. There is no trusting to her
Smiles: the Sea Swells, and Rages in a moment; and the Ships are swallowed up
at Night, in the very place where they sported themselves in the Morning. And
Fortune has the Same Power over Princes, that it has over Empires; over
Nations, that it has over Cities; and the same Power over Cities that it has
over Private Men. Where Is that Estate that may not be followed upon the heel
with Famine, and Beggary? That Dignity, which the next Moment may not be laid
in the Dust? That Kingdom that is secure from Desolation and Ruin? The Period
of all things is at hand, as well that which casts out the Fortunate, as the
other that delivers the Unhappy; and that which may fall out at any time, may
fall out this very day. What shall come to pass I know not, but what may come
to pass I know: So that I Will despair of Nothing, but expect every thing; and
whatsoever Providence remits is clear Gain. Every moment, if it spares me,
deceives me: and yet in some sort it does not deceive me; for though I know
that any thing may happen; yet I know likewise that every thing will not. I Will
hope the best, and provide for the worst. Methinks we should not find so much
fault with Fortune for her Inconstancy, when we our selves suffer a Change
every moment that we live; only other Changes make more Noise, and this steals
upon us like the shadow upon a Dial; every jote as certainly, but more
Insensibly.

THE Burning of Lions may serve to show An Instance of the uncertainty of
Humane Affairs in the Burning of Lions.
us, that we are never safe; and to arm us against all surprises. The Terror
of it must needs be great, for the Calamity is almost without Example. If it
had been fired by an Enemy, the Flame would have left some farther Mischief to
have been done by the Soldiers: But to be wholly consumed, we have not heard of
many Earthquakes so Pernicious: So many Rarities to be destroyed in one Night;
and in the depth of Peace to suffer an Outrage beyond the Extremity of War, Who
would believe it? But twelve hours betwixt so fair a City, and none at all: It
was laid in Ashes in less time than it would require to tell the Story. To
stand unshaken in such a Calamity is hardly to be expected; and our Wonder
cannot but be equal to our Grief. Let this Accident teach us to provide against
all Possibilities, that fall within the Power of Fortune; all External things
are under her Dominion: One while she calls our Hands to her Assistance:
another while she contents her self with her own Force, and destroys us with
Mischiefs of which we cannot find the Author. No Time, Place, or Condition is
excepted; she makes our very Pleasures Nauseous to us: she makes War upon us in
the depth of Peace, and turns the means of our security into an occasion of
Fear: She turns a Friend into an Enemy, and makes a Foe of a Companion: We
suffer the Effects of War without an Adversary; and rather than fail, our
Felicity shall be the Cause of our Destruction. Least we should either Forget,
or Neglect her Power, every day produces something Extraordinary. She
persecutes the most Temperate with Sickness; the strongest Constitutions with
the Pthisick; she brings the Innocent to Punishment, and the most retired she
assaults with Tumults. Those Glories that have grown up with many Ages, with
Infinite Labor, and Expense, and under the Favor of many Auspicious
Providence, One Day Scatters, and brings to nothing. He that pronounced a Day,
nay an hour sufficient for the destruction of the greatest Empire, might have
fallen to a Moment. It were some Comfort yet to the Frailty of Mankind, and of
Humane Affairs, if things might but decay as slowly as they rise; but they Grow
by degrees, and they fall to ruin in an Instant. There Is no Felicity in any
thing either Private or Public: Men, Nations, and Cities have all their Fates,
and Periods: Our very Entertainments are not without Terror, and our Calamity
arises there where we least expect it. Those Kingdoms that stood the shock
both of Foreign Wars, and Civil, come to destruction without the sight of an
Enemy. Nay, we are to dread our Peace, and Felicity, more than Violence,
because we are there taken Unprovided; unless in a State of Peace we do the
Duty of Men in War, and say to our selves, Whatsoever May be, Will be. I am to
day, Safe, and Happy* in the Love of my Country; I am to morrow, Banished: To
day, in pleasure, peace, health; to Morrow, broken upon the Wheel, led in
Triumph, and in the Agony of Sickness. Let us therefore prepare for a Shipwreck
in the Port, and for a Tempest in a Calm. One Violence drives Me from my
Country; another ravishes That from me; and that very Place where a Man can
hardly pass this day for a Crowd, may be to Morrow a Desert. Wherefore, let us
set before our Eyes the whole Condition of Humane Nature; and consider as well
what May happen, as what commonly Does. The way to make future delights Easy
to us in the Sufferance, is to make them Familiar to us in the Contemplation.
How many Cities in Asia, Achaia, Assyria, Macedonia, have been swallowed up by
Earthquakes! Nay, whole Countries are lost, and large Provinces laid under
Water; but, time brings all things to an end, for all the Works of Mortals are
Mortal: All Possessions, and their Possessors are Uncertain, and Perishable;
and, What wonder is it to lose any thing at any time, when we must one day lose
all?

THAT which we That which we call our Own, is but lent us.
call our Own is but lent us; and what we have received Gratis we must return
without Complaint. That which Fortune gives us this hour, she may take away the
next; and he that trusts to her Favors, shall either find himself deceived, or
if he be not, he will at least be troubled because he may be so. There Is no
Defense in Walls, Fortifications, and Engines, against the Power of Fortune: we
must provide our selves within, and when we are safe There, we are Invincible;
we may be Battered, but not Taken. She throws her Gifts among us, and we Sweat,
and Scuffle for them; Never considering how few are the better for that which
is expected by all. Some are transported with what they Get; Others tormented
for what they Miss, and many times there is a Leg or an Arm broken in a Contest
for a Counter. She gives us Honors, Riches, Favors, only to take them away
again; either by Violence, or Treachery, So that they frequently turn to the
damage of the Receiver. She throws out Baits for us, and sets Traps, as we do
for Birds and Beasts; Her Bounties are Snares, and Lime-twigs to us; we think
that we Take, but we are Taken. If they had any thing in them that were
substantial, they would some time or other fill, and quiet us; but they serve
only to provoke our Appetite, without any thing more than Pomp, and Show, to
allay it. But the best of it is, if a Man cannot mend his Fortune, he may yet
mend his Manners, and put himself so far out of her Reach, that whether she
Gives, or Takes, it shall be all one to us; for we are never the Greater for
the One, nor the Less for the Other. We call this a Dark Room, or That a Light
One, when it is in it self neither the one, nor the other, but only as the Day,
and the Night renders it. And so it is in Riches, Strength of Body, Beauty,
Honor, Command; and likewise in Pain, Sickness, Banishment, Death; which are in
themselves Middle, and Indifferent things, and only Good, or Bad, as they are
Influenced by Virtue. To Weep, Lament, and Groan, is to renounce our Duty; and
it is the same weakness on the other side to Exult, and Rejoice: I would rather
Make my Fortune, than Expect it; being neither depressed with her Injuries, nor
dazzled with her Favors. When Zeno was told that all his Goods were drowned;
Why then, says he, Fortune has a Mind to make me a Philosopher. It Is a great
Matter for a Man to advance his Mind above her Threats, or Flatteries; for he
that has once gotten the Better of her, is safe for ever.

IT is some Comfort yet to the Unfortunate, that Great Men lie under Fortune
spares neither Great, nor Small.
the Lash for Company; and that Death spares the Palace, no more than the
Cottage; and that whoever is above Me, has a Power also above him. Do we not
daily see Funerals without Trouble, Princes deposed, Countries depopulated,
Towns sacked; without so much as thinking how soon it may be our own Case?
Whereas, if we would but prepare, and arm our selves against the Iniquities of
Fortune, we should never be surpised. When we see any Man Banished, Beggared,
Tortured, we are to account, that though the Mischief fell upon another, it was
levelled at us. What wonder is it, if of so many Thousands of dangers, that are
constantly hovering about us, one comes to hit us at last? That which befalls
any Man, may befall every Man: and then it breaks the force of a Present
Calamity, to provide against the Future. Whatsoever our Lot is, we must bear
it; as, suppose it be Contumely, Cruelty, Fire, Sword, Pains, Diseases, or a
Prey to wild Beasts; there is no struggling, nor any Remedy but Moderation.
It Is to no purpose to bewail any Part of our Life, when Life it self is
miserable throughout; and the whole Flux of it only a Course of transition from
one Misfortune to another. A Man may as well wonder, that he should be cold in
Winter; Sick at Sea, or have his Bones clatter'd together in a Wagon, as at
the Encounter of Ill Accidents, and Crosses in the Passage of Humane Life: And
it is in vain to run away from Fortune, as if there were any Hiding place
wherein she could not find us; or to expect any Quiet from her, for she makes
Life a perpetual State of War, without so much as any Respite, or Truce. This
we may conclude upon; that her Empire is but Imaginary, and that whosoever
serves her makes himself a voluntary Slave; for the things that are often
contemned by the Inconsiderate, and Always by the Wise, are in themselves
neither Good, nor Evil: as Pleasure, and Pain; Prosperity, and Adversity; which
can only operate upon our Outward Condition, without any Proper, and Necessary
Effect upon the Mind.

CHAP. XI. A Sensual Life is a miserable Life.
THE Sensuality that we here treat of, falls naturally under the Head of
Luxury; which extends to all the Excesses of Gluttony, Lust, Effeminacy of
Manners; and, in short, to whatsoever concerns the overgreat Care of the
Carcass.

TO begin now with the Pleasures of the The Excesses of Luxury are Painful, and
Dangerous.
Palate; (which deal with us like Egyptian Thieves, that strangle those they
embrace) What shall we say of the Luxury of Nomentanus, and Apicius, that
entertained their very Souls in the Kitchen? they have the Choicest Music for
their Ears; the most diverting Spectacles for their Eyes; the Choicest variety
of Meats, and Drinks for their Palates. What is all this (I say) but a Merry
Madness? It Is true, they have their Delights, but not without Heavy, and
Anxious Thoughts, even in their very Enjoyments; beside that, they are followed
with Repentance, and their Frolicks are little more than the Laughter of so
many people out of their Wits. Their Felicities are full of Disquiet, and
neither Sincere, nor well-Grounded; but they have need of one Pleasure to
support another, and of new Prayers to forgive the Errors of their Former.
Their Life must needs be wretched, that Get with great Pains, what they Keep
with greater. One Diversion overtakes another: Hope excites Hope; Ambition
begets Ambition; so that they only change the Matter of their Miseries, without
seeking any End of them, and shall never be without either prosperous, or
unhappy Causes of Disquiet. What if a body might have all the Pleasures in the
World for the Asking? Who would so much Unmann Himself, as by accepting of
them, to desert his Soul, and become a Perpetual Slave to his Senses? Those
False, and Miserable Palates, that Judge of Meats by the Price, and Difficulty,
not by the Healthfulness, or Taste; They Vomit, that they may Eat, and they
Eat that they may fetch it up again. They cross the Seas for Rarities, and
when they have swallowed them, they will not so much as give them time to
digest. Wheresoever Nature has placed Men, she has provided them Aliment: but
we rather choose to Irritate Hunger by expense, than to Allay it at an Easier
rate. What is it that we plow the Seas for; or Arm our selves against Men, and
Beasts? To what end do we Toil, and Labor, and pile bags upon bags? We may
enlarge our Fortunes, but we cannot our Bodies; so that it does but spill, and
run over, whatsoever we can take more than we can hold. Our Forefathers (by
the Force of whose Virtues we are now supported in our Vices) lived every jote
as well as we, when they provided, and dressed their own Meat with their own
Hands; lodged upon the Ground, and were not as yet come to the vanity of Gold,
and Gemms: when they swore by their Earthen Gods, and kept their Oath though
they died for it. Did not our Consuls live more Happily when they Cooked their
own Meat with those Victorious Hands that had conquered so many Enemies, and
won so many Laurels? Did they not live more Happily (I say) than our Apicius?
(that Corrupter of Youth, and Plague of the Age he lived in) who, after he had
spent a prodigious Fortune upon his Belly, Poisoned himself for fear of
Starving, when he had yet 250 000. Crowns in his Coffers: Which may serve to
show us, that it is the Mind, and not the Sum that makes any Man Rich: When
Apicius with all this Treasure counted himself in a State of Beggary; and took
Poison to avoid that Condition, which another would have Prayed for. But, Why
do we call it Poison, which was the wholsomest Draught of his Life? His daily
Gluttony was Poison rather, both to himself and others. His Ostentation of it
was Intolerable; and so was the Infinite Pains he took to mislead others by his
Example, who went even fast enough of themselves without driving.

IT is a shame for a Man to place his If Sensuality were Happiness, Beasts were
Happier than Men.
Felicity in those Entertainments, and Appetites that are stronger in Brutes.
Do not Beasts eat with a better Stomach? Have they not more Satisfaction in
their Lusts? And they have not only a quicker Relish of their Pleasures, but
they enjoy them without either Scandal, or Remorse. If Sensuality were
Happiness, Beasts were happier than Men; but Humane Felicity is lodged in the
Soul, not in the Flesh. They that deliver themselves up to Luxury are still
either tormented with too Little, or oppressed with too Much; and equally
miserable, by being either deserted, or overwhelmed: They are like Men in a
dangerous Sea; one while cast adry upon a Rock, and another while swallowed up
in a Whirlpool; and all this, from the Mistake of not distinguishing Good from
Evil. The Huntsman that with much Labor, and Hazard Takes a wild Beast, runs
as great a Risque afterward in the Keeping of him; for many times he tears out
the Throat of his Master; and it is the same thing with Inordinate Pleasures;
The more in Number, and the greater they are, the more General and Absolute a
Slave is the Servant of them. Let the Common People pronounce him as Happy as
they please, he pays his Liberty for his Delights, and sells himself for what
he buys.

LET any Man take a View of our We have as many Diseases as Dishes.
Kitchins; the Number of our Cooks, and the Variety of our Meats; Will he not
wonder to see so much Provision made for one Belly? We have as many Diseases as
we have Cooks, or Meats; and the Service of the Appetite is the study now in
Vogue. To say nothing of our Trains of Laquayes; and our Troops of Caterers,
and Sewers. Good God! that ever one Belly should employ so many People. How
Nauseous, and Fulsome are the Surfeits that follow these Excesses? Simple Meats
are out of Fashion; and All are collected into One; so that the Cook does the
Office of the Stomach; nay, and of the Teeth too, for the Meat looks as if it
were chewed beforehand; Here Is the Luxury of all Tastes in one Dish, and liker
a Vomit, than a Soup. From these Compounded Dishes, arise Compounded Diseases,
which require Compounded Medicines. It is the same thing with our Minds, that
it is with our Tables; Simple Vices are Curable by Simple Counsels, but a
General Dissolution of Manners is hardly overcome: We are overrun with a
Public, as well as with a Private Madness. The Physicians of old understood
little more than the Virtue of some Herbs to stop Blood, or heal a Wound: And
their Firm and Healthful Bodies needed little more, before they were corrupted
by Luxury and Pleasure: And, when it ^ame to That once, their Business was not
to Lay Hunger, but to Provoke it, by a thousand Inventions, and Sauces. That
which was Aliment to a Craving Stomach, is become a Burden to a Full one. From
hence come Paleness, trembling; and worse Effects from Crudities, than Famine:
A Weakness in the Joints, the Belly Stretched, a Suffusion of Choler; the
Torpor of the Nerves; and a Palpitation of the Heart. To say nothing of
Meagrims, Torments of the Eyes, and Ears; Headache, Gouts, Scurvy; several Sorts
of Fevers, and putrid Ulcers; with other Diseases that are but the Punishment
of Luxury. So long as our Bodies were hardened with Labor, or tired with
Exercise, or Hunting, our Food was Plain, and Simple; many Dishes have made
many Diseases.

IT is an Ill thing for a Man not to know the Measure of his Stomach; nor to
consider, that Men do many things in their Drink, that they are ashamed of
Sober; Drunkenness is a Voluntary Madness.
Drunkenness being nothing else but a Voluntary Madness. It emboldens Men to do
all sorts of Mischief; It both Irritates Wickedness, and Discovers it; It does
not make Men Vicious, but it shows them to be so. It was in a Drunken Fit that
Alexander killed Clytus. It makes him that is Insolent, Prouder; Him that is
Cruel, Fiercer; It takes away all Shame. He that is Peevish breaks out
Presently into Ill Words, and Blows. The Leacher, without any regard to
Decency, or Scandal, turns up his Whore in the Marketplace. A Man's Tongue
trips, his Head runs round; he Staggers in his Pace. To say nothing of the
Crudities and Diseases that follow upon this Distemper. Consider the Public
Mischiefs it has done: How many Warlike Nations, and Strong Cities, that have
stood Invincible to Attaques, and Sieges, has Drunkenness overcome? Is it not a
great Honor to drink the Company Dead? A Magnificent Virtue to Swallow more
Wine than the rest, and yet at last to be outdone by a Hogs-head? What shall
we say of those Men that Invert the Offices of Day, and Night? As if our Eyes
were only given us to make use of in the Dark: Is it Day? ' It Is time to go to
Bed. Is it Night? ' It Is time to Rise; Is it toward Morning? Let us go to
Supper. When other People lie down, they Rise; and lie till next Night to
digest the Debauche of the day before. It Is an Argument of Clownery, to do as
other People do. Luxury steals upon us by Degrees; First, it shows it self in a
more than Ordinary Care of our Bodies; it slips next into the Furniture of our
Houses; and it gets then into the Fabrique, Curiosity, and Expense of the House
it self. It appears lastly in the Fantastical Excesses of our Tables. We
change, and shuffle our Meats; Confound our Sauces; Serve that in First, that
use to be Last; and value our Dishes, not for the Taste, but for the Rarity.
Nay, we are so delicate, that we must be told when we are to Eat, or Drink;
when we are Hungry, or Weary; and we cherish some Vices, as Proofs, and
Arguments of our Happiness. The most miserable of Mortals are they, that
deliver themselves up to their Palates, or to their Lusts: The Pleasure is
short, and turns presently Nauseous, and the End of it is either Shame, or
Repentance. It is a Brutal Entertainment, and Unworthy of a Man, to place his
Felicity in the Service of the Senses. As to the Wrathful, the Contentious, the
Ambitious, though the Distemper be great, the offense has yet something in it
that is Manly: but, the Basest of Prostitutes are those, that Dedicate
themselves wholly to Lust; what with their Hopes and Fears; Anxiety of Thought,
and perpetual Disquiets, they are never well, full nor fasting.

WHAT a deal of Business is now The Folly, and Vanity of Luxury.
made about our Houses, and Diet, which was at first both Obvious, and of
little Expense? Luxury led the way, and we have employed our Wits in the Aid of
our Vices. First we desired Superfluities; our next step was to Wickedness,
and, in Conclusion, we delivered up our Minds to our Bodies, and so became
slaves to our Appetites, which before, were our Servants, and are now become
our Masters. What was it that brought us to the Extravagance of Embroderyes,
Perfumes, Tirewomen, etc. We past the bounds of Nature, and lashed out into
Superfluities: Insomuch, that it is now adays only for Beggars, and Clowns, to
content themselves with what is Sufficient: Our Luxury makes us Insolent, and
Mad. We take upon us Like Princes, and fly out for every Trifle, as if there
were Life, and Death in the Case. What a Madness is it for a Man to lay out an
Estate upon a Table, or a Cabinet; a Patrimony upon a pair of Pendents, and to
inflame the Price of Curiosities, according to the Hazard either of Breaking,
or of Losing them? To wear Garments that will neither defend a Woman's Body, nor
her Modesty; so thin, that one would make a Conscience of Swearing, she were
not Naked: For, she hardly shows more in the Privacies of her Amor, than in
Public? How long shall we Covet, and Oppress; enlarge our Possessions; and
account That too little for one Man, which was formerly enough for a Nation?
And our Luxury is as Insatiable as our Avarice: Where Is that Lake, that Sea,
that Forest, that Spot of Land, that is not ransacked to gratify our Palate?
The very Earth is burdened with our Buildings, not a River, nor a Mountain
scapes us. Oh that there should be such boundless desires in our little Bodies!
Would not fewer Lodgings serve us? We lie but in One, and where we are not,
That is not properly Ours. What with our Hooks, Snares, Nets, Dogs, etc. we are
at War with all Living Creatures; and nothing comes amiss, but that which is
either too Cheap, or too Common; and all this is to gratify a Fantastical
Palate. Our Avarice, our Ambition, our Lusts are Insatiable; we enlarge our
Possessions; swell our Families; we rifle Sea, and Land, for matter of Ornament
and Luxury. A Bull Contents himself with One Meadow; and One Forest is enough
for a Thousand Elephants; but the Little Body of a Man devours more than all
other Living Creatures. We do not Eat to Satisfy Hunger, but Ambition; we are
Dead while we are Alive; and our Houses are so much our Tombs, that a Man might
write our Epitaphs upon our very Doors.

A A Voluptuous Person cannot be a Good Man.
Voluptuous Person, in Fine, can neither be a Good Man, a Good Patriot, nor a
Good Friend; for he is transported with his Appetites, without considering,
that the Lot of Man is the Law of Nature. A Good Man (like a good Soldier) will
stand his Ground, receive Wounds, Glory in his Scars, and, in Death it self,
Love his Master for whom he Falls; with that Divine Precept always in his
Mind, Follow God. Whereas he that complains, laments, and groans, must yield
nevertheless, and do his Duty, though in spite of his Heart. Now, what a
Madness is it, for a Man to choose rather to be lugg'd, than to follow; and
vainly to contend with the Calamities of Humane Life? Whatsoever is laid upon
us by Necessity, we should receive Generously; For it is Foolish to strive with
what we cannot avoid. We are born Subjects, and to obey God is Perfect Liberty.
He that does This, shall be Free, Safe, and Quiet; all his Actions shall
succeed to his Wish: and, What can any Man desire more, than to want nothing
from without, and to have all things desirable within himself? Pleasures do but
weaken our Minds, and send us for our support to Fortune, who gives us Money
only as the Wages of Slavery. We must stop our Eyes, and our Ears. Ulysses had
but one Rock to Fear, but Humane Life has many. Every City, nay, every Man is
one, and there is no trusting even to our nearest Friends. Deliver me from the
Superstition of taking those things which are Light, and Vain, for Felicities.

CHAP XII. Avarice, and Ambition are Insatiable, and Restless.
THE Man that would be truly Rich, must not increase his Fortune, but retrench
his Appetites: For Riches are not only Superfluous, but Mean, and little more
to the Possessor, than to the Looker on. What is the end of Ambition, and
Avarice; when, at best, we are but Stuards of what we falsely call our Own? All
those things that we pursue with so much hazard, and expense of Blood, as well
to Keep, as to Get; for which we break Faith, and Friendship; What are they,
but the mere Deposita of Fortune? And not Ours, but already enclining toward a
new Master. There is nothing our Own, but that which we give to our selves; and
of which we have a Certain, and an Inexpugnable Possession. Avarice is so
Insatiable, that it is not in the Power of Liberality to Content it: And our
Desires are so Boundless, that whatever we get, is but in the way to getting
more without end: And so long as we are Sollicitous for the Increase of Wealth,
we lose the true Use of it; and spend our Time in Putting out, Calling in, and
passing our Accounts, without any Substantial Benefit, either to the World, or
to our selves. What is the Difference betwixt Old Men, and Children? The one
cries for Nuts, and Apples, and the other for Gold, and Silver. The one sets up
Courts of Justice; Hears, and Determines; Acquits, and Condemns in Jest, the
other in Earnest; The one makes Houses of Clay, the other of Marble: So that
the Works of Old Men are nothing in the World but the Progress, and Emprovement
of Childrens Errors: And they are to be Admonished, and Punished too like
Children; not in Revenge for Injuries Received, but as a Correction for
Injuries Done, and to make them give over. There is some substance yet in Gold,
and Silver; but, as to Judgments, and Statutes, Procuration, and
Continuance-Money, these are only the Visions, and the Dreams of Avarice. Throw
a Crust of Bread to a Dog, he takes it open-mouthed, swallows it whole, and
presently gapes for more: Just so do we with the Gifts of Fortune; down they go
without Chewing, and we are immediately ready for another Chop. But, What has
Avarice now to do with Gold, and Silver, that is so much outdone by Curiosities
of a far greater value? Let us no longer complain, that there was not a heavier
Load laid upon those precious Metals; or that they were not buried deep
enough, when we have found out ways by Wax, and Parchments; and by Bloody
Usurious Contracts, to undo one another. It is remarkable, that Providence has
given us all things for our Advantage near at hand; but Iron, Gold, and Silver
(being both the Instruments of Blood, and Slaughter, and the Price of it,)
Nature has hidden in the Bowels of the Earth.

THERE is no Avarice without some Avarice punishes it self.
punishment, over and above that which it is to it self. How miserable is it in
the desire: How miserable even in the Attaining of our Ends? For Money is a
greater Torment in the Possession, than it is in the pursuit. The Fear of
Losing it is a Great Trouble, the Loss of it a greater, and it is made a
greater yet by Opinion. Nay, even in the Case of no direct Loss at all, the
Covetous Man loses what he does not get. It Is true, the People call the Rich
Man a Happy Man, and wish themselves in his Condition; But, Can any Condition
be worse than That, which carries Vexation, and Envy along with it? Neither is
any Man to boast of his Fortune, his Herds of Cattle; His Number of Slaves;
his Lands and Palaces; for comparing that which he has, to that which he
farther Covets, he is a Beggar. No Man can possess all things, but any Man may
Contemn them, and the Contempt of Riches is the nearest way to the gaining of
them.

SOME Magistrates are made for Money does ^ll.
Money, and Those commonly are bribed with Money. We are all turned Merchants,
and look not into the Quality of things, but into the Price of them; for Reward
we are Pious, and for Reward again we are Impious. We are Honest, so long as we
may Thrive upon it; but, if the Devil himself give better wages, we change our
Party. Our Parents have trained us up into an Admiration of Gold, and Silver,
and the Love of it is grown up with us to that Degree, that when we would show
our Gratitude to Heaven, we make Presents of those Metalls. This is it that
makes Poverty look like a Curse, and a Reproach; and the Poets help it forward;
The Chariot of the Sun must be all of Gold; the Best of Times must be the
Golden Age, and thus they turn the greatest Misery of Mankind into the greatest
Blessing.

NEITHER does Avarice Avarice makes us Ill-natured, as well as Miserable.
only make us Unhappy in our selves, but Malevolent also to Mankind. The
Soldier wishes for War; the Husbandman would have his Corn dear; the Lawyer
prays for Dissension; the Physician fora Sickly year; He that deals in
Curiosities, for Luxury, and Excess; makes up his Fortunes out of the
Corruptions of the Age; High Winds, and Public Conflagrations make work for
the Carpenter, and Bricklayer; and one Man lives by the Loss of another; some
few perhaps have the Fortune to be detected, but they are all Wicked alike* A
great Plague makes work for the Sexton, and, in one word, whosoever gains by
the Dead, has not much Kindness for the Living. Demudes of Athens Condemned a
Fellow that sold Necessaries for Funerals, upon Proof, that he wished to make
himself a Fortune by his Trade, which could not be but by a great Mortality.
But perhaps he did not so much desire to have many Customers, as to sell dear,
and Buy Cheap; besides, that all of That Trade might have been Condemned as
well as he. Whatsoever whets our Appetites, Flatters and depresses the Mind,
and by dilating it weakens it; first blowing it up, and then filling, and
deluding it with Vanity.

TO proceed now from the most Prostitute of all Vices, The Cares, and Crimes
that attend Ambition.
Sensuality, and Avarice, to that which passes in the World for the most
Generous, the Thirst of Glory, and Dominion; If they that run Mad after Wealth,
and Honor, could but look into the hearts of them that have already gained
these Points; How would it startle them to see those hideous Cares, and Crimes,
that wait upon Ambitious Greatness? All those Acquisitions that dazzle the Eyes
of the Vulgar, are but False Pleasures, Slippery, and Uncertain. They are
Achieved with Labor, and the very Guard of them is Painful. Ambition puffs us
up with Vanity, and Wind; and we are equally troubled, either to see any Body
before us, or no Body behind us; so that we lie under a double Envy; for,
whosoever Envies another, is also envied himself. What matters it how far
Alexander extended his Conquests, if he was not yet satisfied with what he had?
Every Man wants as much as he Covets; and, it is lost labor to pour into a
Vessel that will never be full. He that had subdued so many Princes, and
Nations, upon the killing of Clytus (one Friend) and the Loss of Ephestion,
(another) delivered himself up to Anger, and Sadness; and when he was Master of
the World, he was yet a Slave to his Passions. Look into Cyrus, Cambyses, and
the whole Persian Line, and you shall not find so much as one Man of them that
died satisfied with What he had gotten. Ambition aspires from Great things to
Greater; and propounds Matters, even Impossible, when it has once arrived at
things beyond Expectation. It is a kind of Dropsy; the more a Man drinks, the
more he Covets. Let any Man but observe the Tumults, and the Crowds that attend
Palaces; What Affronts must we endure to be admitted; and, How much greater
when we are in? The Passage to Virtue is Fair, but the way to Greatness is
Craggy, and it stands not only upon a Precipice, but upon Ice too: and yet it
is a hard matter to convince a Great Man that his Station is slippery, or to
Prevail with him not to depend upon his Greatness. But all Superfluities are
Hurtful; a Rank Crop lays the Corn; too great a Burden of Fruit breaks the
Bow; and our Minds may be as well overcharged with an Immoderate Happiness.
Nay, though we our selves would be at Rest, our Fortune will not suffer it: The
way that leads to Honor, and Riches, leads to Troubles; and we find the Causes
of our Sorrows in the very Objects of our Delights. What Joy is there is
Feasting, and Luxury; in Ambition, and a Crowd of Clients; In the Arms of a
Mistress, or in the Vanity of an Unprofitable Knowledge? These short and False
Pleasures deceive us; and, like Drunkenness, Revenge the Jolly Madness of one
hour, with the Nauseous, and sad Repentance of Many. Ambition is like a Gulf,
every thing is swallowed up in it, and buried; beside the dangerous
consequences of it; For, that which One has taken from All, may be easily taken
away again from All, by One. It was not either Virtue, or Reason, but the Mad
Love of a deceiptful Greatness that animated Pompey in his Wars, either Abroad,
or at Home. What was it but his Ambition that hurried him to Spain, Africa,
and elsewhere, when he was too Great already, in every bodies Opinion, but his
Own? And the same Motive had Julius Caesar, who could not, even then, brook a
Superior Himself, when the Commonwealth had submitted unto Two already. Nor
was it any instinct of Virtue, that pushed on Marius, who, in the Head of an
Army, was himself yet led on under the Command of Ambition: but, he came at
last to the deserved Fate of other Wicked Men, and to Drink himself of the same
Cup that he had filled to others. We Impose upon our Reason, when we suffer our
selves to be transported with Titles; for, we know, that they are nothing but a
more Glorious Sound: and so for Ornaments, and Gildings, though there may be a
Luster to Dazzle our Eyes, our Understanding tells us yet, that it is only
Outside, and that the Matter under it is Course, and Common.

I will never Envy Miserable are those People, that the World Accounts Great
and Happy.
those that the People call Great, and Happy. A Sound Mind is not to be shaken
with a Popular, and Vain Applause; nor is it in the Power of their Pride to
disturb the State of our Happiness. An Honest Man is known now adays by the
Dust he raises upon the Way: and, it is become a Point of Honor to overrun
People, and keep all at a distance; though he that is put out of the way, may
perchance be Happier than he that takes it. He that would exercise a Power
Profitable to himself, and Grievous to no body else, let him practice it upon
his Passions. They that have Burnt Cities, otherwise Invincible, driven Armies
before them, and bathed themselves in Humane Blood; after that they have
overcome all open Enemies, they have been vanquished by their Lust, by their
Cruelty, and without any Resistance. Alexander was possessed with the Madness
of laying Kingdoms waste. He began with Greece, where he was brought up; and
there he quarry'd himself upon that in it which was Best; He Enslaved
Lacedaemon, and Silenced Athens: Nor was he content with the Destruction of
those Towns, which his Father Philip had either Conquered, or Bought; but he
made himself the Enemy of Humane Nature, and, like the worst of Beasts, he
worried what he could not eat. Felicity is an Unquiet thing; it torments it
self, and puzzles the Brain. It makes some People Ambitious, others Luxurious;
It puffs up some, and softens others; only (as it is with Wine) some Heads bear
it better than others; But it dissolves all. Greatness stands upon a Precipice;
and if Prosperity carries a Man never so little beyond his Poyze, it
over-beares, and dashes him to pieces. It Is a rare thing for a Man in a great
Fortune, to lay down his Happiness gently; it being a Common Fate, for a Man to
sink under the Weight of those Felicities that raise him. How many of the
Nobility did Marius bring down to Herdsmen, and other mean Offices? Nay, in the
very Moment of our despising Servants, we may be made so our selves.

CHAP. XIII. Hope, and Fear, are the Bane of Humane Life.
NO Man can be said to be perfectly Happy, that runs the Risque of
Disappointment; which is the Case of every Man that Fears, or Hopes for any
thing. For, Hope, and Fear, how distant soever they may seem to be the one from
the other, they are both of them yet coupled in the same Chain, as the Guard,
and the Prisoner; and the one treads upon the Heel of the other. The Reason of
this is Obvious, for they are Passions that look forward, and are ever
sollicitous for the Future; only Hope is the more Plausible Weakness of the
Two; which in truth, upon the Main, are Inseparable, for the one cannot be
without the other; but where the Hope is stronger than the Fear, or the Fear
than the Hope, we call it the one, or the other: For, without Fear, it were no
longer Hope, but Certainty; as without Hope, it were no longer Fear, but
Despair. We may come to Understand, whether our Disquiets are vain, or no, if
we do but Consider, that we are either troubled about the Present, the Future,
or Both. If the Present, it is easy to Judge, and the Future is Uncertain. It Is
a Foolish thing to be Miserable beforehand, for fear of Misery to come, for a
Man loses the Present which he might enjoy, in expectation of the Future; Nay,
the Fear of losing any thing is as bad as the loss it self. I will be as
Prudent as I can, but not Timorous, or Careless: And I will bethink my self,
and forecast what Inconveniences may happen, before they come. It Is true, a Man
may Fear, and yet not be Fearful; which is no more, than to have the Affection
of Fear, without the Vice of it; but yet a frequent Admittance of it runs into
a Habit. It is a Shameful, and an Unmanly thing to be Doubtful, Timorous, and
Uncertain; to set one step forward, and another backward; and to be Irresolute.
Can there be any Man so Fearful, that had not rather fall once, than hang
always in suspense?

OUR Our Miseries are Endless, if we fear all Possibilities.
Miseries are Endless, if we stand in Fear of all Possibilities; the best way
in such a Case is, to drive out one Nail with another, and a little to qualify
Fear with Hope: which may serve to Palliate a Misfortune, though not to Cure
it. There is not any thing that we Fear, which is so Certain to come, as it is
certain that many things which we do Fear will not come but, we are loath to
oppose our Credulity when it begins to move us, and so to bring our Fear to the
Test. W^ but What if the Thing we fear should come to pass? perhaps it will be
the better for us. Suppose it to be Death it self; Why may it not prove the
Glory of my Life? Did not Poison make Socrates Famous? And, was not Cato (...)
a great part of his Honor? Do we fear any Misfortune to be fall us? We are not
presently sure that it will Happen. How many deliverances have Come Unlooked
for? And, How many Mischiefs that we looked for, have never come to pass? It Is
time enough to lament, when it comes, and in the Interim, to promise our selves
the Best. What do I know but some thing or other may delay, or divert it? Some
have escaped out of the Fire; Others, when a House has fallen over their Heads,
have received no Hurt; One Man has been saved when a Sword was at his Throat;
another has been Condemned, and outlived his Heads-man: So that Ill Fortune,
we see, as well as Good, has her Levities: Peradventure it will be,
Peradventure not; and till it comes to Pass, we are not sure of it: We do many
times take Words in a worse sense than they were intended, and imagine things
to be worse taken than they are. It Is time enough to bear a Misfortune when it
Comes, without Anticipating it.

HE that would deliver himself from all Apprehensions of the Prepare for the
worst.
Future, let him first take for granted, that all his Fears will fall upon him;
and then Examine, and Measure the Evil that he fears, which he will find to be
neither Great, nor Long. Beside, that the Ills which he fears he May Suffer, he
suffers in the very Fear of them. As in the symptoms of an Approaching
Disease; a Man shall find himself Lazy, and Listless; a Weariness in his Limbs,
with a Yawning, and Shuddering all over him: So is it in the Case of a Weak
Mind, It Phancies Misfortunes, and makes a Man wretched before his time. Why
should I torment my self at present, with what perhaps may fall out Fifty year
hence? This Humor is a kind of Voluntary Disease, and an Industrious
Contrivance of our own Unhappiness, to complain of an Affliction that we do not
Feel. Some are not only moved with Grief it self, but with the mere Opinion of
it; as Children will start at a Shadow, or at the Sight of a Deformed Person.
If we stand in fear of Violence from a Powerful Enemy, it is some Comfort to
us, that whosoever makes himself terrible to Others, is not without Fear
Himself: The least Noise makes a Lion start; and the Fiercest of Beasts,
whatsoever enrages them, makes them tremble too: A Shadow, a Voice, an Unusual
Odor rouzes them.

THE things most to be feared, I take to be of three Kinds. The things most to
be Feared, are Want, Sickness, and the Violences of Men in Power.
Want, Sickness, and those Violences that may be imposed upon us by a Strong
Hand. The Last of these has the greatest Force, because it comes attended with
Noise, and Tumult: Whereas the Incommodities of Poverty, and Diseases, are more
Natural, and steal upon us in Silence, without any External Circumstances of
Horror: But, the Other marches in Pomp, with Fire, and Sword, Gibbets, Racks,
Hooks: Wild Beasts to devour us; Stakes to Empale us; Engines to Tear us to
pieces; Pitched Bags to burn us in, and a thousand other Exquisite Inventions
of Cruelty. No wonder then if that be most Dreadful to us, that presents it
self in so many Uncouth shapes; and by the very Solemnity is rendered the most
Formidable. The more Instruments of Bodily pain the Executioner shows us, the
more Frightful he makes himself: For, many a Man that would have encountered
Death in any Generous Form, with Resolution enough, is yet overcome with the
Manner of it. As for the Calamities of Hunger, and Thirst, Inward Ulcers,
Scorching Fevers, Tormenting Fits of the Stone, I look upon these Miseries to
be at least as Grievous as any of the rest: Only they do not so much affect the
Fancy, because they Lie out of Sight. Some People talk High of Dangers at a
Distance; but (like Cowards) when the Executioner comes to do his Duty, and
shows us the Fire, the Axe, the Scaffold, and Death at Hand, their Courage
fails them upon the very Pinch, when they have most need of it. Sickness (I
hope) Captivity, Fire, are no new things to us; the Falls of Houses, Funerals,
and Conflagrations, are every day before our Eyes. The Man that I Supped with
last Night is Dead before Morning; Why should I wonder then, seeing so many
fall about me, to be hit at last my Self? What can be a Greater Madness, than
to cry out, Who would have dreamed of This? And why not I beseech you? Where is
that Estate that may not be reduced to Beggary? That Dignity which may not be
followed with Banishment, Disgrace, and Extreme Contempt? That Kingdom that
may not suddenly fall to ruin; change its Master, and be Depopulated? That
Prince that may not pass the Hand of a Common Hangman? That which is one Man's
Fortune, may be another; but, the Foresight of Calamities to come, breaks the
Violence of them.

CHAP. XIV. It is according to the True, or False Estimate of Things, that we
are Happy, or Miserable.
HOW many things are there that the Fancy makes Terrible by Night, which the
Day turns into Ridiculous? What is there in Labor, or in Death, that a Man
should be afraid of? They are much Slighter in Act, than in Contemplation; and,
we May contemn them, but we Will not: So that it is not because they are Hard,
that we dread them; but they are Hard, because we are first afraid of them.
Pains, and other Violences of Fortune, are the same thing to Us, that Goblins
are to Children: We are more Scared with them, than Hurt. We take up our
Opinions upon Trust, and Err for Company; still Judging That to be Best, that
has most Competitors. We make a False Calculation of Matters, because we advise
with Opinion, and not with Nature; And this misleads Us to a higher esteem for
Riches, Honor, and Power, than they are worth: We have been used to Admire, and
Recommend them, and a Private Error is Quickly turned into a Public. The
Greatest, and the Smallest things are equally Hard to be comprehended; we
account many things Great, for want of Understanding what effectually is so;
And we reckon other things to be Small, which we find frequently to be of the
Highest Value. Vain things only move Vain Minds; The Accidents that we so much
Boggle at, are not Terrible in themselves, but they are made so by our
Infirmities, and we consult rather what we Hear, than what we Feel, without
Examining, Opposing, or Discussing the things we fear; so that we either stand
still, and Tremble, or else directly Run for it; as those Troops did, that upon
the raising of the Dust, took a Flock of Sheep for the Enemy. When the Body,
and Mind are Corrupted, it is no Wonder if all things prove Intolerable; and not
because they are so in Truth, but because we are Dissolute, and Foolish: For,
we are Infatuated to such a Degree, that betwixt the Common Madness of Men, and
that which falls under the Care of the Physician, there is but this difference;
The one labors of a Disease, and the other of a False Opinion.

THE Stoics hold, That all those Torments that commonly draw from us Groans,
and Ejulations, are in themselves Trivial, and Contemptible. But these
High-flown Expressions apart, (how true soever) Let us Discourse the Point at
the Let every Man make the best of his Lot.
rate of Ordinary Men, and not make our selves Miserable before our time; for,
The things we apprehend to be at Hand, may possibly never come to pas^. Some
things trouble us More than they should, Other things Sooner; and some things
again disorder us, that ought not to trouble us at all: So that we either
Enlarge, or Create, or Anticipate our Disquiets. For the First part, let it
rest as a matter in Controversy; for that which I account Light, Another
perhaps will Judge Insupportable; One Man Laughs under the Lash, and another
Whines for a Phillip. How sad a Calamity is Poverty to One Man, which to
Another appears rather Desirable than Inconvenient? For the Poor Man that has
nothing to Lose, has nothing to Fear: And he that would enjoy himself to the
Satisfaction of his Soul, must be either poor Indeed, or at least look as if he
were so. Some people are extremely dejected with Sickness, and Pain; whereas
Epicurus blessed his Fate with his last Breath in the Acutest Torments of the
Stone Imaginable. And so for Banishment, which to One Man is so Grievous, and
yet to Another is no more than a bare Change of Place: A thing that we do every
day for our Health, Pleasure; nay, and upon the Account even of Common
Business. How Terrible is Death to One Man, which to Another appears the
greatest Providence in Nature; even toward all Ages, and Conditions? It is the
Wish of Some, the Relief of Many, and the End of All. It sets the Slave at
Liberty, carries the Banished Man Home, and places all Mortals upon the same
Level: Insomuch, that Life it self were a Punishment without it. When I see
Tyrants, Tortures, Violences, the Prospect of Death is a Consolation to me, and
the only Remedy against the Injuries of Life.

NAY, so great are our Mistakes in the True Estimate of things, that we have
hardly done any thing which we have not had reason to wish Undone; and we have
found the things we feared, to be more desirable than those we coveted: Our
very Prayers many times are Curses.
Our very Prayers have been more Pernicious than the Curses of our Enemies; and
we must Pray again to have our former Prayers forgiven. Where Is the Wise Man
that wishes himself the wishes of his Mother, his Nurse, or his Tutour; the
worst of Enemies, with the Intention of the best of Friends. We are Undone if
their Prayers be heard; and it is our Duty to Pray, that they may not; For they
are no other than well-meaning Execrations. They take Evil for Good; and one
Wish fights with another: Give me rather the Contempt of all those things
whereof they wish me the greatest Plenty. We are equally hurt by some that Pray
for us, and by others that Curse us: The One imprints in us a False Fear, and
the Other does us Mischief by a Mistake. So that it is no wonder if Mankind be
Miserable, that is brought up from the very Cradle under the Imprecations of
our Parents. We pray for Trifles, without so much as thinking of the greatest
Blessings; and we are not ashamed many times to ask God for That, which we
should blush to own to our Neighbor.

IT is with us, as with an Innocent We are vain and wicked, and will not
Believe it.
that Our Author had in his Family; She fell blind on a sudden, and no body
could persuade her, that she was Blind. She could not endure the House, (she
Cried) it was so dark; and was still calling to go abroad. That which we laughed
at in her, we find to be true in our selves, we are Covetous, and Ambitious;
but the World shall never bring us to acknowledge it, and we Impute it to the
Place: Nay, we are the worse of the Two; for that blind Fool called for a
Guide, and we wander about without one. It is a hard matter to Cure those that
will not believe they are Sick. We are ashamed to admit a Master, and we are
too old to Learn. Vice still goes before Virtue: So that we have two Works to
do; we must cast off the One, and Learn the Other. By One Evil we make way to
another, and only seek things to be avoided, or those of which we are soon
weary. That which seemed too Much when we wished for it, proves too Little when
we have it; and it is not as some Imagine, that Felicity is Greedy; but it is
Little, and Narrow, and cannot Satisfy us. That which we take to be very High,
at a distance we find to be but Low, when we come at it. And the Business is,
we do not understand the true State of Things: we are deceived by Rumors; when
we have Gained the thing we aimed at, we find it to be either Ill, or Empty; or
perchance Less than we expected, or otherwise perhaps Great, but not Good.

CHAP XV. The Blessings of Temperance and Moderation.
THERE is not any thing that is Necessary to us, but we have it either Cheap,
or Gratis; and this is the Provision that our Heavenly Father has made for us,
whose Bounty was never wanting to our Needs. It Is true, the Belly Craves, and
Calls upon us, but then a small matter contents it: A little Bread, and Water
is sufficient, and all the rest is but superfluous. He that lives according to
Reason, shall never be Poor; and he that Governs his Life by Opinion, shall
never be Rich; for Nature is Limited, but Fancy is Boundless. As for Meat,
Cloths, and Lodging, a little Feeds the Body, and as little Covers it; So that
if Mankind would only attend Humane Nature, without gaping at Superfluities, a
Cook would be found as needless as a Soldier: For we may have Necessaries upon
very Easy Terms; whereas we put our selves to great Pains for excesses. When
we are Cold, we may cover our selves with Skins of Beasts; and, against violent
Heats, we have Natural Grotto's; or with a few Osyers, and a little Clay we may
defend our selves against all Seasons. Providence has been kinder to us than to
leave us to live by our Wits, and to Stand in need of Invention, and Arts: It
is only Pride, and Curiosity, that Involves us in Difficulties; If nothing will
serve a Man but Rich Cloths, and Furniture; Statues and Plate; a Numerous Train
of Servants, and the Rarities of all Nations; it is not Fortunes Fault, but his
Own, that he is not Satisfied: For his Desires are Insatiable, and this is not
a Thirst, but a Disease; and if he were Master of the whole World, he would be
still a Beggar. It Is the Mind that makes us Rich, and Happy, in what Condition
soever we are; and Money signifies no more to it than it does to the Gods; If
the Religion be Sincere, no matter for the Ornaments: It Is only Luxury, and
Avarice, that makes Poverty Grievous to us; For it is a very small matter that
does our Business; and when we have provided against Cold, Hunger, and Thirst,
all the Rest is but Vanity, and Excess: And there is no need of Expense upon
Foreign Delicacies, or the Artifices of the Kitchen. What is he the worse for
Poverty, that despises these things? Nay, Is he not rather the better for it,
because he is not able to go to the Price of them? For he is kept sound whether
he will, or no; And that which a Man Cannot do, looks many times as if he would
not.

WHEN I look back into the The moderation of past Ages.
Moderation of past Ages, it makes me ashamed to Discourse, as if Poverty had
need of any Consolation: For we are now come to that degree of Intemperance,
that a fair Patrimony is too little for a Meal. Homer had but One Servant;
Plato Three; and Zeno (the Master of the Masculine Sect of Stoics) had none at
all. The Daughters of Scipio had their Portions out of the Common Treasury, for
their Father left them not worth a Penny: How Happy were their Husbands that
had the People of Rome for their Father-in-Law? Shall any Man now Contemn
Poverty after these Eminent Examples; which are sufficient not only to
Justify, but to Recommend it? Upon Diogenes's only Servant's running away from
him, he was told where he was, and persuaded to fetch him back again. What,
says he, can Manes live without Diogenes, and not Diogenes without* Manes? And
so let him go. The Piety, and Moderation of Scipio has made his Memory more
Venerable, than his Arms; and more yet after he left his Country, than while
he defended it: For matters were come to that pass, that either Scipio must be
Injurious to Rome, or Rome to Scipio. Course Bread, and Water, to a Temperate
Man is as good as a Feast; and the very Herbs of the Field yield a Nourishment
to Man, as well as to Beasts. It was not by Choice Meats, and Perfumes, that
our Forefathers recommended themselves, but by* Virtuous Actions, and the Sweat
of Honest, Military, and of Manly Labors.

WHILE Nature lay in Common, and all The State of Innocence.
her Benefits were promiscuously enjoyed, What could be happier than that state
of Mankind? when People lived without either Avarice, or Envy? What could be
Richer, then when there was not a Poor Man to be found in the World? So soon as
this Impartial Bounty of Providence came to be restrained, by Covetousness; and
that Particulars appropriated That to themselves which was intended for All;
then did Poverty creep into the World; when some Men by desiring more than came
to their share, lost their Title to the Rest. A loss never to be repaired; for
though we may come Yet to get Much, we once had All. The Fruits of the Earth
were in those days divided among the Inhabitants of it, without either Want,
or Excess. So long as Men contented themselves with their Lot, there was no
Violence; no Engrossing, or Hiding of those Benefits for Particular Advantages,
which were appointed for the Community; but every Man had as much Care for his
Neighbor, as for Himself. No Arms, or Bloodshed; no War, but with wild Beasts:
But under the Protection of a Wood, or a Cave, they spent their days without
Cares, and their nights without Groans; Their Innocence was their Security, and
their Protection. There were as yet no Beds of State, no Ornaments of Pearl, or
Embrodery, nor any of those Remorses that attend them; but the Heavens were
their Canopy, and the Glories of them their Spectacle. The Motions of the Orbs;
the Courses of the Stars, and the wonderful order of Providence was their
Contemplation: There was no fear of the House falling; or the Russling of a Rat
behind the Arras; they had no Palaces then like Cities; but they had open Air,
and Breathing-Room; Crystal Fountains, Refreshing Shades; the Meadows dressed up
in their Native Beauty, and such Cottages as were according to Nature, and
wherein they lived contentedly, without fear either of Losing, or of Falling.
These people lived without either Solicitude, or Fraud; and yet I must call
them rather Happy, than Wise. That Men were generally better before they were
corrupted, then after, I make no doubt; and I am apt to believe, that they were
both Stronger, and Hardier too; but their Wits were not yet come to Maturity;
for Nature does not give Virtue; and it is a kind of Art to become Good: They
had not as yet torn up the Bowels of the Earth for Gold, Silver, or Precious
Stones; and, so far were they from killing any Man, as we do, for a Spectacle,
that they were not as yet come to it, either in Fear, or Anger; nay, they
spared the very Fishes. But after all This, they were Innocent, because they
were Ignorant; and there is a great difference betwixt not Knowing how to
offend, and not being Willing to do it. They had, in that rude Life, certain
Images, and Resemblances of Virtue, but yet they fell short of Virtue it self,
which comes only by Institution, Learning, and Study, as it is perfected by
Practice. It is indeed the End for which we were born, but yet it did not come
into the World with us; and in the best of Men, before they are instructed, we
find rather the Matter, and the Seeds of Virtue, than the Virtue it self. It is
the wonderful Benignity of Nature, that has laid open to us all things that may
do us Good, and only hidden those things from us that may hurt us: as if she
durst not Trust us with Gold, and Silver; or with Iron; which is the Instrument
of War, and Contention for the other. It is we our selves that have drawn out
of the Earth, both the Causes, and the Instruments of our Dangers: And we are
so vain as to set the highest esteem upon those things to which Nature has
assigned the lowest place. What can be more Course, and Rude in the Mine, than
these precious Metalls; or more Slavish, and Dirty, than the People that Dig,
and Work them? And yet they defile our Minds more than our Bodies; and make the
Possessor fouler than the Artificer of them. Rich Men, in fine, are only the
Greater Slaves. Both the One, and the Other wants a great deal.

HAPPY is that Man that Eats only for b A Temperate Life is a Happy Life.
Hunger, and Drinks only for Thirst; that stands upon his own Legs, and lives
by Reason, not by Example; and provides for Use, and Necessity, not for
Ostentation and Pomp. Let us Curb our Appetites, encourage Virtue, and rather
be beholden to our Selves for Riches, than to Fortune; who, when a Man draws
himself into a narrow compass, has the least Mark at him. Let my Bed be plain,
and Clean, and my Cloths so too; my Meat without much Expense, or many Wayters;
and neither a burden to my Purse, nor to my Body; nor to go out the same way
it came in. That which is too little for Luxury, is abundantly enough for
Nature, The end of Eating, and Drinking, is Satiety; Now, What matters it,
though One Eats, and Drinks more, and Another Less, so long as the One is not a
hungry, nor the Other a thirst? Epicurus, that limits Pleasure to Nature, as
the Stoics do Virtue, is undoubtedly in the Right; and those that Cite him to
authorize their Voluptuousness, do exceedingly mistake him, and only seek a
Good Authority for an Evil Cause: For their Pleasures of Sloth, Gluttony, and
Lust, have no Affinity at all with his Precepts, or Meaning. It Is true, that at
first sight, his Philosophy seems Effeminate; but he that looks nearer him,
will find him to be a very Brave Man only in a Womanish Dress.

IT IS a Common Objection, I know, That these Philosophers c Let Philosophers
Live as they Teach.
do not Live at the rate that they Talk; for they can flatter their Superiors,
Gather Estates, and be as much concerned at the Loss of Fortune, or of Friends,
as other people: As sensible of Reproaches, as Luxurious in their Eating, and
Drinking, their Furniture, their Houses; as Magnificent in their Plate,
Servants, and Officers; as Profuse, and Curious in their Gardens, etc. Well!
And what of all This; or if it were twenty times More? It Is some degree of
Virtue for a Man to Condemn himself; and if he cannot come up to the Best, to
be yet better than the Worst; and if he cannot wholly Subdue his Appetites,
however to Check, and Diminish them. If I do not Live, as I Preach; take notice
that I do not speak of my Self, but of Virtue; nor am I so much offended with
Other Men's Vices, as with my Own. All this was objected to Plato, Epicurus,
Zeno: Nor is any Virtue so Sacred, as to escape Malevolence. The Cinique
Demetrius was a great Instance of Severity, and Mortification; and one that
Imposed upon himself, neither to Possess any thing, nor so much as to Ask it:
and yet he had this Scom put upon him, that his Profession was Poverty, not
Virtue. Plato is blamed for Asking Money; Aristotle for Receiving it;
Democritus, for Neglecting it; Epicurus, for Consuming it. How happy were we if
we could but come to Imitate these Men's Vices; for if we knew our Own
Condition, we should find work enough at Home. But, we are like People that are
making Merry at a Play, or a Tavern; when our own houses are on fire, and yet
we know nothing on it. Nay, Cato himself was said to be a Drunkard; but
Drunkenness it self shall sooner be proved to be no Crime, than Cato Dishonest.
They that demolish Temples, and overturn Altars, show their Good Will, though
they can do the Gods no hurt; and so it fares with those that invade the
Reputation of Great Men. If the Professors of Virtue be as the World calls
them, Avaritious, Libidinous, Ambitious; What are they then that have a
detestation for the very Name of it? But Malicious Natures do not want Wit to
abuse Honester Men than themselves. It is the Practice of the Multitude, to
bark at Eminent Men, as little Dogs do at Strangers; for they look upon Other
Men's Virtues, as the Upbraiding of their Own Wickedness. We should do well to
commend those that are Good; if not, let us pass them Over; but however let us
spare our selves: for beside the Blaspheming of Virtue, our Rage is to no
purpose. But to return now to my Text.

WE are ready enough to limit Others, but It Is good to Practice Frugality in
Plenty.
loath to put Bounds and Restraint upon our selves; though we know that many
times a Greater Evil is Cured by a Less; and the Mind that will not be brought
to Virtue by Precept, comes to it frequently by Necessity. Let us try a little
to Eat upon a Joynt-Stool; to serve our selves; to Live within Compass, and
accommodate our Cloths to the End they were made for. Occasional Experiments of
our Moderation give us the best Proof of our Firmness, and Virtue. A
well-governed Appetite is a great part of Liberty; and it is a Blessed Lot,
that since no Man can have all things that he would have, we may all of us
forbear desiring what we have not. It is the Office of Temperance to Overrule
us in our Pleasures; Some she Rejects, Others she Qualifies, and Keeps within
Bounds. Oh! the Delights of Rest, when a Man comes to be Weary, and of Meat,
when he is heartily Hungry! I have learned (says our Author) by one Journey,
how many things we have that are superfluous, and how easily they may be
spared; for, when we are without them, upon Necessity, we do not so much as
feel the want of them. This is the Second Blessed Day (says he) that my
Friend, and I have Traveled together; One Wagon carries our selves, and our
Servants; My Mattress lies upon the Ground, and I upon That: Our Diet
answerable to our Lodging; and never without our Figs, and our Table-Books. The
Muletier without Shoes, and the Mules only prove themselves to be Alive by
their walking. In this Equipage, I am not willing, I perceive, to own my self;
but as often as we happen into better Company, I presently fall a blushing;
which shows, that I am not yet confirmed in those things which I Approve, and
Commend: I am not yet come to Own my Frugality; for he that is Ashamed to be
seen in a Mean Condition, would be proud of a splendid one. I value my self
upon what Passengers think of me, and Tacitly renounce my Principles; whereas
I should rather lift up my Voice to be heard by Mankind, and tell them, You are
all Mad; your Minds are set upon supersluities, and you value no Man for his
Virtues. I came one Night weary home, and threw my self upon the Bed, with this
Consideration about me: There is nothing Ill, that is Well Taken. My Baker
tells me he has no Bread; but, says he, I may get some of your Tenants, though
I fear it is not Good. No matter, said I, for I Will stay till it be Better; that
is to say, till my stomach will be glad of worse. It is Discretion sometimes to
practice Temperance, and wont our selves to a Little; for there are many
Difficulties both of Time, and Place, that may Force us upon it. When we come
to the Matter of Patrimony; How strictly do we examine what every Man is Worth,
before we will trust him with a Penny: Such a Man, we cry, has a great Estate,
but it is shrewdly encumbered; a very Fair House, but 'twas built with borrowed
Money; a Numerous Family, but he does not keep Touch with his Creditors; if his
Debts were paid, he would not be worth a Groat. Why do we not take the same
Course in other things; and examine what every Man is worth? It Is not enough to
have a Long Train of Attendants; Vast Possessions; or an Incredible Treasure in
Money, and Jewels; a Man may be Poor for all this. There Is only this difference
at Best; One Man borrows of the Usurer, and the Other of Fortune. What
signifies the Carving, or the Guilding of the Chariot? Is the Master ever the
better for it?

WE cannot Close up This Chapter with a more Generous The Moderation and
Bravery of Fabricius.
Instance of Moderation, than That of Fabricius. Pyrrhus tempted him with a Sum
of Money to betray his Country; and Pyrrhus his Physician offered Fabricius,
for a Sum of Money, to Poison his Master; But he was too Brave, either to be
Overcome by Gold, or to Overcome by Poison; so that he refused the Money, and
advised Pyrrhus to have a Care of Treachery, and This in the Heat too of a
Licentious War: Fabricius valued himself upon his Poverty, and was as much
above the Thought of Riches, as of Poison. Live Pyrrhus, says he, by my
Friendship; and Turn That to thy Satisfaction, which was before thy Trouble;
that is to say, That Fabricius could not be Corrupted.

CHAP. XVI. Constancy of Mind gives a Man Reputation, and makes him Happy in
despite of all Misfortunes.
THE Whole Duty of Man may be reduced to the Two Points of Abstinence, and
Patience. Temperance in Prosperity, and Courage in Adversity. We have already
treated of the Former; and the Other follows now in Course.

EPICURUS will have it, that a A Wise Man is above Injuries.
Wise Man will Bear all Injuries; but the Stoics will not allow Those things
to be Injuries, which Epicurus calls so. Now, betwixt these Two, there is the
same difference that we find betwixt two Gladiators; the One receives Wounds,
but yet maintains his Ground; the Other tells the People, when he is in Blood,
that It Is but a scratch, and will not suffer any body to part them. An Injury
cannot be Received, but it must be Done; but it may be Done, and yet not
Received; as a Man may be in the Water, and not Swim, but if he Swims, it is
presumed that he is in the Water. Or if a Blow, or a Shot be levelled at us, it
may so happen that a Man may miss his Aim, or some Accident interpose, that may
divert the Mischief. That which is Hurt is Passive, and Inferior to that which
Hurts it; but you will say, that Socrates was Condemned, and put to Death, and
so received an Injury; but I answer, that the Tyrants Did him an Injury, and
yet he Received none. He that steals any thing from me, and Hides it in my Own
house; though I have not Lost it, yet he has stolen it. He that lies with his
own Wife, and takes her for another Woman; though the Woman be Honest, the Man
is an Adulterer. Suppose a Man gives me a draught of Poison; and it proves not
strong enough to kill me; his Guilt is never the Less for the Disappointment:
He that makes a Pass at me, is as much a Murderer, though I put it by, as if
he had struck me to the Heart. It is the Intention, not the Effect, that makes
the Wickedness. He is a Thief, that has the Will of Killing, and Slaying,
before his hand is dipped in Blood: As it is Sacrilege, the very Intention of
laying violent Hands upon Holy Things. If a Philosopher be exposed to Torments,
the Axe over his Head, his Body wounded, his Guts in his Hands; I will allow
him to Groan; for Virtue it self cannot divest him of the Nature of a Man; but
if his Mind stands Firm, he has discharged his part. A Great Mind enables a Man
to maintain his Station with Honor; So that he only makes Use of what he meets
in his way, as a Pilgrim that would fain be at his Journeys End.

IT is the Excellency of a Great A Great Mind neither Asks any thing, nor wants
any thing.
Mind to Ask nothing, and to Want nothing; and to say, I Will have nothing to do
with Fortune that Repulses Cato, and Prefers Vatinius. He that quits his Hold,
and accounts any thing Good that is not Honest; runs gaping after Casualties,
spends his days in Anxiety, and Vain Expectation; That Man is Miserable. And
yet it is hard, you will say, to be Banished, or cast into Prison: Nay, what if it
were to be burnt, or any other way destroyed? We have Examples in all Ages, and
in all Cases, of Great Men that have triumphed over all Misfortunes. Metellus
suffered Exile Resolutely; Rutilius, Cheerfully; Socrates disputed in the
Dungeon; and though he might have made his Escape, refused it: To show the
World how easy a thing it was to subdue the Two Great Terrors of Mankind,
Death, and a Iayle. Or what shall we say of Mucius Scaevola; a Man only of a
Military Courage, and without the Help either of Philosophy, or Letters? who,
when he found that he had killed the Secretary, in stead of Porcenna (the
Prince) burnt his Right Hand to Ashes for the Mistake; and held his Arm in the
Flame, till it was taken away by his very Enemies. Porcenna did more easily
pardon Mucius for his Intent to kill him, than Mucius forgave Himself for
missing of his Aim. He might have done a Luckyer thing, but never a Braver.

DID not Cato in the last night of his Cato's Constancy.
Life, take Plato to Bed with him; with his Sword at his Beds-head; the One,
that he might have Death at his Will; the Other, that he might have it in his
Power; being resolved that no Man should be able to say, either that he killed,
or that he saved Cato? So soon as he had composed his Thoughts, he took his
Sword; Fortune, says he, I have hitherto Fought for my Countries Liberty, and
for my Own, and only that I might live Free among Freemen; but the Cause is now
Lost, and Cato Safe. With that word, he cast himself upon his Sword, and after
the Physicians, that pressed in upon him, had bound up his Wound, he tore it
open again, and so expired with the same Greatness of Soul, that he Lived. But
these are the Examples, you will say, of Men Famous in their Generations. Let us
but Consult History, and we shall find, even in the most Effeminate of Nations,
and the most Dissolute of Times, Men of all Degrees, Ages, and Fortunes; nay,
even Women themselves, that have overcome the Fear of Death: which, in truth,
is so little to be feared, that, duly considered, it is one of the Greatest
Benefits in Nature. It was as great an Honor for Cato, when his Party was
Broken, that He himself stood his Ground, as it would have been if he had
carried the Day, and settled an Universal Peace: For it is an Equal Prudence, to
make the Best of a Bad Game, and to manage a Good one. The Day that he was
Repulsed, he Played; and the Night that he Killed himself, he Read; as valuing
the Loss of his Life, and the Missing of an Office at the same Rate. People, I
know, are apt to pronounce upon Other Men's Infirmities, by the Measure of their
Own, and to think it Impossible that a Man should be content to be burnt,
Wounded, Killed, or Shackl'd, though in some Cases he may. It is only for a
Great Mind to judge of Great things; for otherwise, that which is our
Infirmity, will seem to be another Bodies; as a straight Stick in the Water
appears to be Crooked. He that Yields, draws upon his own Head his own Ruin;
for we are sure to get the better of Fortune, if we do but struggle with her.
Fencers, and Wrastlers we see, what Blows, and Bruises they endure, not only
for Honor, but for Exercise: If we turn our Backs once, we are Routed, and
Pursued; That Man only is Happy, that Draws Good out of Evil; that stands fast
in his Judgment, and Unmoved with any External Violence; or however, so little
moved, that the Keenest Arrow in the Quiver of Fortune is but as the Prick of a
Needle to him, rather than a Wound: And all her other Weapons fall upon him
only as Hail upon the Roof of a House, that Crackles, and skips off again,
without any Damage to the Inhabitant.

A Generous, and a Clear-sighted Young Man, will take it for The greatest Evil
in Adversity is the Submitting to it.
a Happiness to encounter Ill Fortune. It Is nothing for a Man to hold up his
Head in a Calm, but to maintain his Post, when all others have quitted their
Ground, and there to stand upright, where other Men are beaten Down, this is
Divine, and Praiseworthy. What Ill is there in Torments, or in those things
which we commonly account Grievous Crosses? The great Evil is the want of
Courage; the Bowing, and Submitting to them; which can never happen to a Wise
Man; for he stands Upright under any Weight: Nothing that is to be Born
displeases him; he knows his Strength; and, whatsoever may be Any Man's Lot, he
never complains of, if it be his Own. Nature, he says, deceives no Body; she
does not tell us whether our Children shall be Fair, or Foul; Wise, or Foolish;
Good Subjects, or Traitors; nor whether our Fortune shall be Good, or Bad. We
must not Judge of a Man by his Ornaments* but strip him of all the Advantages,
and the Impostures of Fortune; nay, of his very Body too, and look into his
Mind: If he can see a naked Sword at his Eyes, without so much as winking; if
he make it a thing Indifferent to him, whether his Life go out at his Throat,
or at his Mouth; if he can hear himself Sentenced to Torments, or Exile; and
under the very hand of the Executioner, say Thus to himself, All This I am
provided for, and it is no more, than a Man, that is to Suffer the Fate of
Humanity. This is the Temper of Mind that Speaks a Man Happy; and without This,
all the Confluences of External Comforts signify no more than the Personating
of a King upon the Stage; when the Curtain is drawn we are Players again. Not
that I pretend to except a Wise Man out of the Number of Men, as if he had no
sense of Pain, but I reckon him as Compounded of Body, and Soul: The Body is
Irrational, and may be Galled, Burnt, Tortured; but the Rational Part is
Fearless, Invincible, and not to be shaken. This is it that I reckon upon as
the Supreme Good of Man; which till it be perfected, is but an Unsteady
Agitation of Thought, and in the Perfection, an Immovable Stability. It is not
in our Contentions with Fortune, as in those of the Theater, where we may throw
down our Arms, and pray for Quarter: but here we must Die Firm, and Resolute.
There needs no Encouragement to those things which we are Inclined to by a
Natural Instinct; as the Preservation of our selves with Ease, and Pleasure;
but, if it comes to the Trial of our Faith by Torments, or of our Courage by
Wounds, these are Difficulties that we must be armed against by Philosophy, and
Precept: And yet all This is no more than what we were born to; and no matter
of Wonder at all; so that a Wise Man prepares himself for it; as expecting that
whatsoever May be, Will be. My Body is Frail, and Liable, not only to the
Impressions of Violence, but to Afflictions also, that Naturally Succeed our
Pleasures. Full Meals bring Crudities; Whoring, and Drinking make the Hands to
Shake, and the Knees to Tremble. It is only the Surprise, and Newness of the
thing, which makes that Misfortune Terrible, which by Premeditation might be
made Easy to us: For, that which some People make Light by Sufferance, others
do by Foresight. Whatsoever is Necessary, we must bear Patiently. It Is no new
thing to Die; no new thing to Mourn, and no new thing to be Merry again. Must I
be Poor? I shall have Company; In Banishment? I Will think my self Born there. If
I Die, I shall be no more Sick, and it is a thing I can do but Once.

LET us never wonder at any thing Let no Man be Surpised with what he is Born
to
we are Borne to; for no Man has reason to Complain, where we are All in the
same Condition. He that scapes, might have suffered; and it is but Equal to
submit to the Law of Mortality. We must undergo the Colds of Winter, the Heats
of Summer; the Distempers of the Air, and Diseases of the Body. A Wild Beast
meets us in One place, and a Man that is more Brutal, in another; We are Here
assaulted by Fire, There by Water. Demetrius was reserved by Providence for the
Age he lived in; to show, that neither the Times could Corrupt Him, nor He
Reform the People. He was a Man of an Exact Judgment, Steady to his Purpose,
and of a Strong Eloquence; Not Finical in his Words, but his Sense was
Masculine, and Vehement. He was so Qualified in his Life, and Discourse, that
ho served both for an Example, and a Reproach. If Fortune should have offered
that Man the Government, and the Possession of the whole World, upon Condition
not to lay it down again; I dare say he would have refused it; And Thus have
Expostulated the matter with you. Why should you tempt a Freeman to put his
shoulder^ under a Burden; or an Honest Man to pollute himself with the Dregs
of Mankind? Why do you offer me the Spoyle's of Princes, and of Nations, and
the Prince not only of your Blood, but of your Souls? It is the part of a
Great Mind to be Temperate in Prosperity; Resolute in Adversity; To Despise
what the Vulgar Admire; and to Prefer a Mediocrity to an Excess. Was not
Socrates oppressed with Poverty, Labor, nay, and the worst of Wars in his Own
Family, a Fierce, and Turbulent Woman to his Wife? Were not his Children
Indocile, and like their Mother? After Seven and twenty years spent in Arms,
he fell under a slavery to the Thirty Tyrants, and most of them his bitter
Enemies: He came at last, to be Sentenced as a Violator of Religion, a
Corrupter of Youth, and a Common Enemy to God, and Man. After This, he was
Emprison'd, and put to Death by Poison; which was all so far from working upon
his Mind, that it never so much as altered his Countenance. We are to bear Ill
Accidents, as Unkind Seasons, Distempers, or Diseases; and, Why may we not
reckon the Actions of Wicked Men even among those Accidents? Their
Deliberations are not Counsels, but Frauds, Snares, and Inordinate Motions of
the Mind; and they are never without a thousand Pretenses, and Occasions of
doing a Man Mischief. They have their Informers, their Knights of the Post;
they can make an Interest with Powerful Men, and one may be Robbed as well upon
the Bench, as upon the Highway. They lie in wait for Advantages, and live in
Perpetual Agitation, betwixt Hope, and Fear: Whereas he that is truly
Composed, will stand all Shocks, either of Violences, Flatteries, or Menaces,
without Perturbation. It is an Inward fear that makes us Curious after what we
hear Abroad.

IT is an Error to attribute either Good, or Ill, to The Works of Fortune are
neither Good, nor Evil.
Fortune; but the Matter of it we may; and we our selves are the Occasion of
it, being, in Effect, the Artificers of our own Happiness, or Misery: For the
Mind is above Fortune; if That be Evil, it makes every thing else so too: But
if it be Right, and Sincere, it Corrects what is Wrong, and Mollifies what is
Hard, with Modesty, and Courage. There Is a great Difference among those that
the World calls Wise Men. Some take up Private Resolutions of Opposing Fortune,
but they cannot go Thorough with them, for they are either Dazzled with Splendour
on the One hand, or Affrighted with Terrors on the Other: but there are Others
that will Close, and Grapple with Fortune, and still come off Victorious.
Mucius overcame the Fire, Regulus the Gibbet; Socrates, Poison; Rutilius,
Banishment; Cato, Death; Fabricius, Riches; Tubero, Poverty; and Sextius,
Honors. But there are some again so Delicate, that they cannot bear so much as
a Scandalous Report; which is the same thing as if a Man should quarrel for
being Justled in a Crowd, or dashed as he walks in the Streets; He that has a
great way to Go, must expect to Slip, to Stumble, and to be Tired: To the
Luxurious Man, Frugality is a Punishment; Labor, and Industry to the Sluggard;
nay, Study it self is a Torment to him. Not that these things are Hard to us by
Nature, but we our selves are Vain, and Irresolute. Nay, we wonder many of us,
how any Man can live without Wine, or endure to Rise so early in a Morning.

A Brave man must expect to be tossed; for he is to steer his Course in the
Teeth of Fortune, g Virtue is most Glorious in Extremities.
and to work against VVind, and VVeather. In the Suffering of Torments, though
there appears but one Virtue, a Man Exercises many. That which is most Eminent,
is Patience (which is but a Branch of Fortitude) But there is Prudence also, in
the Choice of the Action, and in the Bearing what we cannot avoid; and there is
Constancy in bearing it Resolutely; And there is the same Concurrence also of
several Virtues in other Generous Undertakings. When Leonidas was to carry his
300 Men into the Straits of the Thermopylae to put a stop to Xerxes his huge
Army: Come, fellow Soldiers, says he, Eat your Dinners here, as if you were
to Sup in another World. And they answered his Resolution. How Plain, and
Imperious was That short Speech of Caeditius to his Men upon a Desperate
Action? and, How glorious a Mixture was there in it both of Bravery, and
Prudence! Soldiers, says he, it is necessary for us to Go, but it is not
necessary for us to Return. This Brief, and Pertinent Harangue, was worth Ten
thousand of the Frivolous Cavils, and Distinctions of the Schools; which rather
break the Mind, than Fortify it, and when it is once perplexed, and pricked
with Difficulties, and Scruples, there they leave it. Our Passions are
Numerous, and Strong, and not to be Mastered with Quirks, and Tricks, as if a
Man should undertake to defend the Cause of God, and Men, with a Bu^rush. It
was a Remarkable piece of Honor, and Policy together, That Action of Caesar's,
upon the taking of Pompey's Cabinet at the Battle of Pharsalia: It Is Probable
that the Letters in it might have discovered who were his Friends, and who his
Enemies, and yet he Burnt it without so much as Opening it: Esteeming it the
Noblest way of Pardoning, to keep himself Ignorant both of the Offender, and of
the Offense. It was a Brave Presence of Mind also in Alexander, who, upon
Advice, that his Physician Philip intended to Poison him, took the Letter of
Advice in One hand, and the Cup in the Other, delivering Philip the Letter to
Read, while he himself drank the Potion.

SOME are of Opinion, that Death gives a Virtue is Invincible.
Man Courage to support Pain, and that Pain fortifies a Man against Death: But
I say rather, that a Wise Man depends upon himself against Both, and that he
does not either suffer with Patience, in hopes of Death, or Dye willingly
because he is weary of Life; but he bears the One, and Waits for the Other, and
carries a Divine Mind through all the Accidents of Humane Life. He looks upon
Faith, and Honesty, as the most Sacred Good of Mankind, and neither to be
forced by Necessity, nor Corrupted by Reward: Kill, Burn, Tear him in Pieces,
he will be True to his Trust; and the more any Man labors to make him discover
a Secret, the deeper will he hide it. Resolution is the Inexpugnable Defense of
Humane Weakness, and it is a wonderful Providence that attends it. Horatius
Cocles opposed his Single Body to the whole Army, till the Bridge was cut down
behind him, and then leaped into the River, with his Sword in his Hand, and
came off safe to his Party. There was a Fellow Questioned about a Plot upon the
Life of a Tyrant, and put to the Torture to declare his Confederates: He named,
by One, and One, all the Tyrants Friends that were about him; and still as they
were named, they were put to Death: The Tyrant asked him at last, if there were
any more. Yes, says he, you your self were in the Plot, and now you have never
another Friend left you in the World: Whereupon the Tyrant Cut the Throats of
his own Guards. He is the Happy Man that is the Master of himself, and triumphs
over the Fear of Death, which has overcome the Conquerors of the World.

CHAP XVII. Our Happiness depends in a great Measure upon the Choice of our
Company.
THE Comfort of Life depends upon Conversation, Good Offices, and Concord; and
Humane Society is like the Working of an Arch of Stone; All would fall to the
Ground if One Piece did not support another. Above all things, let us have a
tenderness for Blood; and it is yet too Little not to Hurt, unless we Profit
one another. We are to Relieve the Distressed; to put the Wanderer into his
Way, and to Divide our Bread with the Humble; which is but the doing of Good to
our Selves: for we are only several Members of one Great Body. Nay, we are all
of a Consanguinity; formed of the same Materials, and Designed to the same End:
This obliges us to a mutual Tenderness, and Converse; and the Other, to live
with a Regard to Equity, and Justice. The Love of Society is Natural; but the
Choice of our Company is Matter of Virtue, and Prudence. Noble Examples stir us
up to Noble Actions; and the very History of Large, and Public Souls, inspires
a Man with Generous Thoughts. It makes a Man Long to be in Action; and doing of
something that the World may be the better for; as Protecting the Weak,
Delivering the Oppressed, Punishing the Insolent. It is a great Blessing, the
very Conscience of giving a Good Example; beside, that it is the greatest
Obligation any Man can lay upon the Age he lives in. He that Converses with the
Proud shall be puffed up; a Lustful Acquaintance makes a Man Lascivious; and
the way to secure a Man from Wickedness, is to withdraw from the Examples of
it. It Is too Much to have them Near us, but more to have them Within us. Ill
Example, Pleasure, and Ease are, no doubt of it, great Corrupters of Manners. A
Rocky Ground hardens the Horses Hoof; The Mountanier makes the best Soldier;
The Miner makes the best Pionier, and Severity of Discipline fortifies the
Mind. In all Excesses, and Extremities of Good, and of Ill Fortune, let us have
recourse to Great Examples that have contemned Both. Those are the best
Instructers that Teach in their Lives, and prove their Words by their Actions.

AS an Ill Air may endanger a Good Constitution, so may a Avoid even Dissolute
places, as well as loose Companions.
Place of Ill Example endanger a Good Man. Nay, there are some Places that have
a kind of Privilege to be Licentious, and where Luxury, and Dissolution of
Manners seem to be Lawful; for Great Examples give both Authority, and Excuse
to Wickedness. Those Places are to be avoided as Dangerous to our Manners.
Hannibal himself was Unmann'd by the Looseness of Campania, and though a
Conqueror by his Arms, he was Overcome by his Pleasures. I would as soon live
among Butchers, as among Cooks; not but that a Man may be Temperate in any
place; but, to see Drunken Men Staggering up and down every where; and only the
Spectacles of Lust, Luxury, and Excess before our Eyes, it is not safe to
expose our selves to the Temptation. If the Victorious Hannibal himself could
not resist it, What shall become of Us then that are Subdued, and give Ground
to our Lusts already. He that has to do with an Enemy in his Breast, has a
harder Task upon him than he that is to encounter one in the Field: his hazard
is Greater if he loses Ground, and his Duty is perpetual; for he has no Place,
or Time for Rest. If I give way to Pleasure, I must also yield to Grief, to
Poverty, to Labor, Ambition, Anger, till I am torn to Pieces by my Misfortunes,
and my Lusts. But, against all This, Philosophy propounds a Liberty, that is to
say, a Liberty from the Service of Accidents, and Fortune. There is not any
thing that does more Mischief to Mankind, then Mercenary Masters of Philosophy,
that do not Live as they Teach; They give a Scandal to Virtue. How can any Man
expect that a Ship should Steer a Fortunate Course, when the Pilot lies
Wallowing in his own Vomit. It Is an Usual thing, first to Learn to do Ill our
Selves, and then to Instruct Others to do so: But, that Man must need^ be very
Wicked, that has gathered into himself the Wickedness of all other People.

THE best Conversation is with the Practical Philosophers are the best Company.
Philosophers: That is to say, with such of them as teach us Matter, not Words;
that Preach to us Things Necessary, and keep us to the Practice of them. There
can be no Peace in Humane Life without the Contempt of all Events* There is
nothing that either puts better Thoughts into a Man, or sooner sets him Right
that is out of the way, than a good Companion* For, the Example has the Force
of a Precept, and touches the Heart with an Affection to Goodness. And not only
the Frequent Hearing, and Seeing of a Wise Man delights us, but the very
Encounter of him suggests profitable Contemplations; such as a Man finds
himself moved with, when he goes into a Holy Place. I will take more Care with
Whom I Eat, and Drink, than What; for without a Friend the Table is a Manger.
Writing does well; but personal Discourse, and Conversation does Better; For
Men give great Credit to their Ears, and take stronger Impressions from
Example, than Precept. Cleanthes had never hit Zeno so to the Life, if he had
not been In with him at all his Privacies; if he had not watched, and observed
him, whether or no he Practiced as he Taught. Plato got more from Socrates his
Manners, than from his Words; and it was not the School, but the Company, and
Familiarity of Epicurus, that made Metrodorus, Hermachus, and Polyaenus so
famous.

NOW though it be by Instinct that we Covet Society, and avoid Solitude, we
should yet c The more Company, the more Danger.
take This along with us, that the more Acquaintance, the more Danger. Nay,
there is not One Man of an hundred that is to be trusted with Himself. If
Company cannot Alter us, it may Interrupt us; and he that so much as stops upon
the Way, loses a great deal of a short Life; which we yet make shorter by our
Inconstancy. If an Enemy were at our Heels, What haste should we make? But
Death is so, and yet we never mind it. There is no venturing of Tender, and
Easy Natures among the People; for it is odds that they will go over to the Major
Party. It would perhaps shake the Constancy of Socrates, Cato, Laelius, or any
of us all; even when our Resolutions are at the Height, to stand the shock of
Vice that presses upon us with a Kind of Public Authority. It is a World of
Mischief that may be done by one Single Example of Avarice, or Luxury. One
Voluptuous Palate makes a great many. A wealthy Neighbor Stirs up Envy, and a
Fleering Companion moves Ill Nature wherever he comes. What will become of
Those People then, that expose themselves to a Popular Violence? Which is ill
both ways; either if they comply with the Wicked, because they are Many, or
quarrel with the Multitude, because they are not Principl'd alike. The best way
is to Retire, and Associate only with those, that may be the better for Us, and
We for Them. These Respects are Mutual, for while we Teach, we Learn. To deal
Freely; I dare not trust my self in the Hands of much Company: I never go
Abroad, that I come Home again the same Man I went Out. Some thing or other
that I had put in Order, is discomposed: Some Passion that I had subdued, gets
head again, and it is just with our Minds, as it is after a long Indisposition
with our Bodies; we are grown so Tender, that the least breath of Air exposes
us to a Relapse. And, it is no wonder, if a Numerous Conversation be Dangerous,
when there is scarce any single Man, but by his Discourse, Example, or
Behavior, does either Recommend to us, or Imprint in us, or by a Kind of
Contagion, Insensibly infect us with one Vice or other; and the more People,
the greater is the Peril. Especially let us have a Care of Public Spectacles,
where Wickedness insinuates it self with Pleasure; and above all Others, let
us avoid Spectacles of Cruelty, and Blood; and have nothing to do with those
that are perpetually VVhining, and Complaining; there may be Faith, and
Kindness there, perhaps, but no Peace. People that are either Sad, or Fearful,
we do commonly, for their Own Sakes, set a guard upon them, for fear they
should make an Ill Use of being Alone: especially the Imprudent, who are still
contriving of Mischief, either for Others, or for Themselves; in Cherishing
their Lusts, or Forming their Designs. So much for the Choice of a Companion,
we shall now Proceed to that of a Friend.

CHAP. XVIII. The Blessings of Friendship.
OF all Felicities, the most Charming is that of a Firm, and Gentle Friendship.
It sweetens all our Cares; Dispells our Sorrows; and Counsels us in all
Extremities. Nay, if there were no other Comfort in it, than the bare Exercise
of so Generous a Virtue, even for that Single Reason, a Man would not be
without it. Beside, that it is a Sovereign Antidote against all Calamities;
even against the Fear of Death it self.

BUT, we are not yet to number our Every Man is not a Friend that makes us a
Visit.
Friends, by the Visits that are made us; and to confound the Decencies of
Ceremony, and Commerce, with the Offices of United Affections. Caius Gracchus,
and after him, Livius Drusus, were the Men that introduced among the Romans,
the Fashion of separating their Visitants: Some were taken into the Closet;
Others were only admitted into the Antichamber; and some again were fain to
wait in the Hall perhaps, or in the Court. So that they had their First, their
Second, and their Third-rate Friends; but none of them True: Only they are
called so in Course, as we Salute Strangers with some Title or other of Respect
at a Venture. There Is no depending upon those Men that only take their
Complement in their Turn, and rather slip through the Door, than enter at it:
He will find himself in a great Mistake, that either seeks for a Friend in a
Palace, or tries him at a Feast.

THE great Difficulty rests in the The Choice of a Friend.
Choice of him; that is to say, in the First place, let him be Virtuous; for
Vice is Contagious, and there is no trusting of the Sound, and the Sick
together: And he ought to be a Wise Man too, if a body knew where to find him:
But, in this Case, he that is least Ill, is Best; and the highest Degree of
Humane Prudence is, only the most Venial Folly. That Friendship, where Men's
Affections are Cimented by an equal, and by a Common Love of Goodness, it is
not either Hope, or Fear, or any Private Interest that can ever Dissolve it;
but we carry it with us to our Graves, and lay down our Lives for it with
satisfaction. Paulina's Good, and Mine, (says our Author) were so wrapped up
together, that in Consulting Her Comfort, I provided for my Own: and when I
could not prevail upon Her to take less Care for Me, she prevailed upon me to
take more Care of my Self. Some People make it a Question, Whether is the
greater Delight, the Enjoying of an Old Friendship: or, the Acquiring of a New
one; but, it is in the Preparing of a Friendship, and in the Possession of it,
as it is with a Husbandman, in Sowing, and Reaping. His Delight is the Hope of
his Labor in the One Case, and the Fruit of it in the Other. My Conversation
lies among my Books, but yet in the Letters of a Friend methinks I have his
Company; and when I Answer them, I do not only Write, but Speak: And in Effect,
a Friend is an Eye, a Heart, a Tongue, a Hand, at all Distances. When Friends
see one another personally, they do not see one another as they do when they
are Divided, where the Meditation dignifies the Prospect: But they are
effectually in a great measure Absent, even when they are Present. Consider
their Nights apart; their Private Studies; their separate Employments, and
Necessary Visits, and they are almost as much together Divided, as Present.
True Friends are the whole World to one another; and he that is is a Friend to
himself, is also a Friend to Mankind. Even in my very Studies, the greatest
Delight I take in what I Learn, is the Teaching of it to Others: For, there is
no Relish, methinks, in the Possessing of any thing without a Partner: Nay, if
Wisdom it self were offered me, upon Condition only of keeping it to my self,
I should undoubtedly refuse it.

LUCILIUS tells me, that he has Written to me by a There must be no Reserves in
Friendship.
Friend, but cautions me withal, not to say any thing to him of the Affair in
Question; for he himself stands upon the same Guard. What is this, but to
Affirm, and to Deny the same thing, in the same Breath; in calling any Man a
Friend, whom we dare not trust as our own Soul? For, there must be no Reserves
in Friendship: As much Deliberation as you please, before the League is Struck:
but, no Doubtings, or Jealousies, after. It Is a Preposterous weakness to Love a
Man before we Know him, and not to Care for him after. It requires Time, to
consider of a Friendship; but, the Resolution once taken, Entitles him to my
very heart, I look upon my thoughts to be as safe in his Breast, as in my Own;
I shall, without any Scruple, make him the Confident of my most Secret Cares,
and Counsels. It goes a great way toward the Making of a Man Faithful, to let
him understand, that you Think him so; and he that does but so much as Suspect
that I will Deceive him, gives me a kind of Right to Cozen him. When I am with
my Friend, methinks I am alone, and as much at Liberty to Speak any thing, as
to Think it; And as our Hearts are One, so must be our Interests, and
Convenience: For Friendship lays all things in Common, and nothing can be Good
to the One, that is Ill to the Other. I do not speak of such a Community as to
destroy one another Propriety; but as the Father, and the Mother have two
Children, not one a Piece, but each of them Two.

BUT, let us have a Care above all things, that our Kindness A Generous
Friendship.
be rightly founded; for, where there is any other Invitation to Friendship,
than the Friendship it self, that Friendship will be Bought, and Sold. He
derogates from the Majesty of it, that makes it only dependent upon Good
Fortune. It is a Narrow Consideration for a Man to please himself in the
thought of a Friend, because, says he, I shall have One to help me, when I am
Sick; in Prison, or in Want. A Brave Man should rather take delight in the
Contemplation of Doing the same Offices for another. He that loves a Man for
his own Sake, is in an Error. A Friendship of Interest cannot last any longer
than the Interest it self; and this is the Reason that Men in Prosperity are so
much followed; and when a Man goes down the Wind, no body comes near him.
Temporary Friends will never stand the Test. One Man is Forsaken for Fear, or
Profit; Another is Betrayed: It Is a Negotiation, not a Friendship, that has an
Eye to Advantages: only through the Corruption of Times, that which was
formerly a Friendship, is now become a Design upon a Booty; Alter your
Testament, and you lose your Friend. But, my End of Friendship, is to have One
dearer to me than my Self; and for the saving of whose Life, I would cheerfully
lay down my Own: taking this along with me, that only Wise Men can be Friends;
Others are but Companions; and that there is a great Difference also betwixt
Love, and Friendship; The One may sometime do us Hurt; the Other always does
us Good; for One Friend is Helpful to Another in all Cases, as well in
Prosperity, as Affliction. We receive Comfort even at a Distance, from those we
Love, but then it is Light, and Faint: whereas Presence, and Conversation
touches us to the Quick; especially if we find the Man we Love to be such a
person as we wish.

IT is Usual with Princes to Reproach the Living, by Commending the Dead; and
to e The Loss of a Friend is hardly to be Repaired.
Praise those People for speaking Truth, from whom there is no longer any
Danger of Hearing it. This was Augustus his Case. He was forced to banish his
daughter Iulia, for her Common, and Prostituted Impudence; and still, upon
Fresh Informations, he was often heard to say; If Agrippa, or Mecaenas had been
now alive, this would never have been. But yet where the Fault lay, may be a
Question; for perchance it was his Own, that had rather complain for the Want
of them, than seek for Others as Good. The Roman Losses by War, and by Fire,
Augustus could quickly Supply, and Repair; but for the Loss of Two Friends, he
lamented his whole Life after. Xerxes (a Vain, and a Foolish Prince) when he
made War upon Greece, One told him, 'Twould never come to a Battle: Another,
That he would find only empty Cities, and Countries, for they would not so much
as stand the very Fame of his Coming; Others soothed him in the Opinion of his
Prodigious Numbers, and they all concurred to puff him up to his destruction.
Only Demaratus advised him, not to depend too much upon his Numbers, for he
would rather find them a Burden to him than an advantage: And that 300 Men in
the Streights of the Mountains, would be sufficient to give a Check to his
whole Army; and that such an Accident would Undoubtedly turn his vast Numbers
to his Confusion. It fell out afterward as he foretold, and he had Thanks for
his Fidelity. A Miserable Prince, that among so many Thousand Subjects, had but
One Servant to tell him the Truth!

CHAP. XIX. He that would be happy, must take an Account of his Time.
IN the distribution of Humane Life, we find, that a great part of it passes
away in Evil-doing; A Greater yet, in doing just Nothing at all; and
effectually, the whole, in doing things beside our business. Some hours we
bestow upon Ceremony, and Servile Attendances; Some upon our Pleasures, and the
Remainder runs at Waste. What a deal of Time is it that we spend in Hopes, and
Fears; Love, and Revenge; in Balls, Treats, making of Interests; Suing for
Offices, Soliciting of Causes, and Slavish Flatteries? The shortness of Life,
I know, is the Common Complaint both of Fools, and Philosophers; as if the Time
we have, were not sufficient for our duties. But it is with our Lives, as with
our Estates, a good Husband makes a Little go a great way; whereas let the
Revenue of a Prince fall into the Hands of a Prodigal, it is gone in a moment.
So that the Time allotted us, if it were well employed, were abundantly enough
to answer all the Ends, and Purposes of Mankind. But, we squander it away in
Avarice, Drink, Sleep, Luxury, Ambition; fawning Addresses, Envy, Rambling
Voyages; Impertinent Studies, Change of Counsels, and the like; and when our
Portion is spent, we find the want of it, though we gave no heed to it in the
Passage: In so much, that we have rather Made our Life Short, than found it so.
You shall have some People perpetually playing with their Fingers, Whistling,
Humming, and Talking to themselves; and Others consume their days in the
Composing, Hearing, or Reciting of Songs, and Lampoons. How many precious
Mornings do we spend in Consultation with Barbers, Tailors, and Tire-Women,
Patching, and Painting, betwixt the Comb, and the Glass? A Counsel must be
called upon every Hair we cut, and one Curle amiss, is as much as a Bodies Life
is worth. The truth is, we are more sollicitous about our Dress, than our
Manners, and about the Order of our Perriwigs, than that of the Government. At
this rate, let us but discount, out of a Life of a Hundred years, that Time
which has been spent upon Popular Negotiations, frivolous Amors, Domestic
Brawls, Sauntrings up and down, to no purpose; Diseases that we have brought
upon our selves; and this large extent of Life will not amount perhaps to the
Minority of another Man. It is a Long Being, but perchance a Short Life. And
what is the Reason of all this? we Live as if we should never Dye, and without
any thought of Humane Frailty; when yet the very Moment we bestow upon this
Man, or Thing, may peradventure be our last. But the greatest Loss of Time, is
Delay, and Expectation, which depends upon the Future. We let go the Present,
which we have in our own Power, we look Forward to that which depends upon
Fortune, and so quit a Certainty for an Uncertainty. We should do by Time, as
we do by a Torrent, make Use of it while we may have it, for it will not last
always.

THE Calamities of Humane Nature, may be Divided into No Man can be Happy to
whom Life is Irksome, or Death Terrible.
the Fear of Death, and the Miseries, and Errors of Life. And it is the great
Work of Mankind, to Master the One, and to Rectify the Other: And so to Live,
as neither to make Life Irksome to us, nor Death Terrible. It should be our
Care, before we are Old, to Live Well, and when we are so, to Die well; that we
may expect our End without Sadness: For it is the Duty of Life to prepare our
selves for Death; and there is not an hour we Live, that does not Mind us of
our Mortality: Time Runs on, and all things have their Fate, though it lies in
the Dark: The Period is Certain to Nature, but, What am I the better for it, if
it be not so to me? We propound Travels, Arms, Adventures, without ever
considering that Death lies in the way; Our Term is set, and none of us Know
how Near it is; but we are all of us Agreed, that the Decree is Unchangable.
Why should we wonder, to have That befall us to Day, which might have happened
to us any Minute since we were Born? Let us therefore Live as if every Moment
were to be our Last; and set our Accounts Right, every day that passes over our
Heads. We are not Ready for Death, and therefore we Fear it, because we do not
know what will become of us when we are gone; and that Consideration strikes us
with an Inexplicable Terror. The way to avoid this Distraction, is to contract
our Business, and our Thoughts; when the Mind is once settled; a Day, or an Age
is all One to us, and the Series of Time, which is now our Trouble, will be
then our delight: For he that is Steadily resolved against all Uncertainties,
shall never be disturbed with the Variety of them. Let us make haste therefore
to Live, since every day to a Wise Man is a New Life: For, he has done his
business the Day before, and so prepared himself for the next, that if it be
not his Last, he knows yet that it might have been so. No Man enjoyes the true
Taste of Life, but he that is willing, and Ready to Quit it.

THE Wit of Man is not able to Express the We take more care of our Fortunes
than of our Lives.
Blindness of Humane Folly, in taking so much more Care of our Fortunes, our
Houses, and our Money, than we do of our Lives; Every Body breaks in upon the
One, Gratis, but we betake our selves to Fire, and Sword, if any Man invades
the Other. There Is no Dividing in the Case of Patrimony, but People share our
Time with us at pleasure: So Profuse are we of that only thing, whereof we may
be Honestly Covetous. It Is a Common Practice to ask an Hour or two of a Friend,
for such, or such a business, and it is as easily granted; both Parties only
considering the Occasion, and not the Thing it self. They never put Time to
Account, which is the most Valuable of all precious things; but because they do
not see it, they reckon upon it as Nothing; and yet these Easy Men, when they
come to Dye, would give the whole World for those hours again, which they so
Inconsiderately cast away before; but there is no recovering of them. If they
could number their Days that are yet to Come, as they can those that are
already past, How would those very People tremble at the Apprehension of Death,
though a Hundred year hence, that never so much as think of it at present,
though they know not but it may take them away the next Immediate Minute. It Is
an usual saying, I would give my Life for such or such a Friend, when at the
same time we Do give it, without so much as thinking of it: Nay, when That
Friend is never the better for it, and we our selves the worse. Our Time is
set, and Day and Night we Travel On; there is no Baiting by the way, and it is
not in the Power of either Prince, or People to prolong it. Such is the Love of
Life, that even those Decrepit Dotards that have lost the Use of it, will yet
beg the Continuance of it, and make themselves Younger than they are, as if
they could cozen even Fate it self. When they fall Sick, what promises of
Amendment, if they escape that Bout? What Exclamations against the Folly of
their Mis-pent Time! And yet, if they Recover, they Relapse. No Man takes Care
to Live Well, but Long, when yet it is in every Bodies Power to do the Former,
and in no Man's to do the Latter. We consume our Lives, in providing the very
Instruments of Life, and govern our selves still with a Regard to the Future;
So that we do not Properly Live, but we are about to Live. How great a shame is
it, to be laying new Foundations of Life, at our last Gasp, and for an Old Man,
(that can only prove his Age by his Beard) with one Foot in the Grave, to go to
School again. While we are Young, we may Learn: Our Minds are Tractable, and
our Bodies fit for Labor, and Study; but when Age comes On, we are seized with
Languor, and Sloth, afflicted with Diseases, and at last we leave the World as
Ignorant as we came into it; Only we Die worse than we were Born; which is none
of Natures Fault, but Ours; for our Fears, Suspicions, Perfidy, etc. are from
our Selves. I wish with all my Soul, that I had thought of my End sooner, but I
must make the more Haste now, and Spurr on, like those that set out Late upon a
Journey; It will be better to Learn Late, than not at all, though it be but
only to instruct me, how I may leave the Stage with Honor.

IN the Division of Life, there is time Present, Past, and to Come. What we Do,
is Short; what h Time Present, Past, and to come.
we Shall do, is Doubtful; but, what we Have done, is Certain, and out of the
Power of Fortune. The Passage of Time is wonderfully quick, and a Man must look
Backward to see it: and in that Retro-spect, he has all past Ages at a View,
but the Present gives us the slip Unperceived. It Is but a Moment that we Live,
and yet we are Dividing it into Childhood, Youth, Man's Estate, and Old Age, all
which Degrees we bring into that narrow Compass. If we do not watch, we lose
our Opportunities; if we do not make Haste, we are left behind; Our Best hours
escape us, the Worst are to come. The Purest part of our Life runs First, and
leaves only the Dregs at the Bottom: And That Time, which is good for nothing
else, we dedicate to Virtue; and only propound to Begin to Live, at an Age that
very few People arrive at. What greater Folly can there be in the World, than
this Loss of Time, the Future being so Uncertain, and the Damages so
Irreparable? If Death be Necessary, why should any Man Fear it? And if the Time
of it be Uncertain, Why should we not always Expect it? We should therefore
First Prepare our selves by a Virtuous Life, against the Dread of an Inevitable
Death: And it is not for us to put off being Good, till such, or such a
Business is Over; for One business draws on Another, and we do as good as Sow
it; one Grain produces more. We are not to Philosophize when we have nothing
else to do, but to attend Wisdom, even to the neglect of all things else, for
we are so far from having Time to spare, that the Age of the World would be yet
too narrow for the work we have to do; nor is it enough not to Omit it, but we
must not so much as Intermit it.

THERE is nothing that we can We can call nothing our Own, but our Time.
properly call our Own, but our Time, and yet every Body fools us out of it,
that has a mind to it. If a Man borrows a Paltry Sum of Money, there must be
Bonds, and Securities, and every Common Civility is presently charged upon
Account: But, he that has my Time, thinks he owes me nothing for it, though it
be a Debt, that Gratitude it self can never repay. I cannot call any Man Poor,
that has Enough yet left, be it never so Little: It Is good Advice yet to those
that have the World before them, to play the Good Husbands betimes, for it is
too late to spare at the Bottom, when all is drawn out to the Lees. He that
takes away a Day from me, takes away what he can never restore me. But our Time
is either Forced away from us, or Stolen from us, or Lost: of which, the last is
the Foulest Miscarriage. It is in Life, as in a Journey; a Book, or a
Companion, brings us to our Lodging before we thought we were halfway. Upon the
whole Matter, we consume our selves one upon another, without any regard at all
to our own Particular. I do not speak of such as Live in Notorious Scandal, but
even they themselves, whom the World pronounces happy, are smothered in their
Felicities; Servants to their Professions, and Clients, and drowned in their
Lusts. We are apt to Complain of the Haughtiness of Great Men, when yet there
is hardly any of them all so proud, but that at some time or other a Man may
yet have Access to him, and perhaps a good Word, or Look into the Bargain. Why
do we not rather Complain of Our selves, for being of all others, even to our
Selves, the most Deaf, and Inaccessible.

COMPANY, and Business, are great Company, and Business are great Devourers of
Time.
Devourers of Time, and Our Vices destroy our Lives, as well as our Fortunes.
The Present is but a Moment, and perpetually in Flux; the Time past we call to
mind when we please, and it will abide the Examination and Inspection. But, the
Busy Man has not Leisure to look Back; or if he has, it is an Unpleasant thing
to reflect upon a Life to be repented of: Whereas the Conscience of a Good Life
puts a Man into a secure, and perpetual Possession of a Felicity never to be
disturbed, or taken away: But he that has led a wicked Life, is afraid of his
own Memory, and in the Review of himself he finds only appetite, Avarice, or
Ambition, in stead of Virtue. But still he that is not at Leisure many times to
Live, must, when his Fate comes, whether he will or no, be at Leisure to Dye.
Alas! What is Time to Eternity? the Age of a Man, to the Age of the World? And
how much of this Little do we spend in Fears, Anxieties, Tears, Childhood; nay,
we sleep away the one half. How great a Part of it runs away in Luxury, and
Excess; the Ranging of our Guests, our Servants, and our Dishes? As if we were
to Eat, and Drink, not for Satiety, but Ambition. The Nights may well seem
short that are so dear bought, and bestowed upon Wine, and Women: The day is
lost in Expectation of the Night, and the Night in the Apprehension of the
Morning. There is a Terror in our very Pleasures; and This vexatious Thought in
the very height of them, that They will not last always: which is a Canker in
the delights, even of the Greatest, and the most Fortunate of Men.

CHAP. XX. Happy is the Man that may choose his own Business.
OH! the Blessings of Privacy, and Leisure! the Wish of the Powerful, and
Eminent, but the Privilege only of Inferiors: For it is They alone that live to
themselves: Nay, the very Thought, and Hope of it, is a Consolation, even in
the middle of all the Tumults, and Hazards, that attend Greatness. It was
Augustus his Prayer that he might live to Retire, and deliver himself from
Public Business: His Discourses were still pointing that way, and the highest
Felicity which this Mighty Prince had in Prospect, was the devesting himself of
that Illustrious State, which, how Glorious soever in show, had, at the Bottom
of it only Anxiety, and Care. But, it is One thing to Retire for Pleasure, and
another thing for Virtue: which must be Active, even in that Retreat, and give
Proof of what it has learned: for a Good, and a Wise Man does in Privacy
consult the well-being of Posterity. Zeno, and Chrysippus did greater things in
their Studies, than if they had led Armies, born Offices, or given Laws: which
in truth they did, not to one City alone, but to all Mankind: their Quiet
contributed more to the Common Benefit, than the Sweat, and Labor of other
People. That Retreat is not worth the while, which does not afford a Man,
Greater, and Nobler Work than Business. There Is no slavish Attendance upon
great Officers; no Canvassing for Places, no making of Parties: no
Disappointments in my Pretension to This Charge, to that Regiment; or to such,
or such a Title: no Envy of any Man's Favor, or Fortune: but a Calm Enjoyment
of the General Bounties of Providence, in Company with a Good Conscience. A
Wise Man is never so Busy, as in the Solitary Contemplation of God, and the
Works of Nature. He withdraws himself to attend the Service of Future Ages, and
those Counsels which he finds salutary to himself, he commits to Writing, for
the Good of Aftertimes, as we do the Receipts of Sovereign Antidotes, or
Balsams. He that is well employed in his Study, though he may seem to do
nothing at all, does the greatest things yet of all others, in Affairs both
Humane and Divine. To supply a Friend with a Sum of Money, or give my Voice for
an Office, these are only Private, and Particular Obligations; but he that
lays down Precepts for the governing of our Lives, and the moderating of our
Passions, obliges Humane Nature, not only in the Present, but in all succeeding
Generations.

HE that would be at quiet, let him repair to his Philosophy is a quiet Study.
Philosophy, a Study, that has Credit with all sorts of Men. The Eloquence of
the Bar, or whatsoever else addresses to the People, is never without Enemies:
but Philosophy minds its own Business, and even the worst have an Esteem for it.
There can never be such a Conspiracy against Virtue; the World can never be so
wicked, but the very Name of a Philosopher shall still continue Venerable, and
Sacred. And yet Philosophy it self must be handled Modestly, and with Caution.
But what shall we say of Cato then, for his meddling in the Broyl of a Civil
War, and interposing himself in the Quarrel betwixt two enraged Princes? He,
that when Rome was split into Two Factions, betwixt Pompey and Caesar, declared
himself against Both. I speak this of Cato's last Part, for in his Former time
the Common Wealth was made unfit for a Wise Man's Administration. All he could
do then, was but Bawling, and Beating of the Air; One while he was Lugg'd, and
Tumbled by the Rabble, Spit upon, and Dragged out of the Forum, and then again
hurried out of the Senatehouse to Prison. There are some things which we
propound Originally, and others that fall in as Accessory to another
Proposition. If a Wise Man Retire, it is no matter whether he does it, because
the Commonwealth was wanting to Him, or because He was wanting to It. But, to
what Republic shall* a Man betake himself? Not to Athens* where Socrates was
condemned, and whence Aristotle fled for fear he should have beeen condemned
too; and where Virtue was oppressed by Envy. Not to Carthage, where there was
nothing but Tyranny, Injustice, Cruelty, and Ingratitude. There is scarce any
Government to be found, that will either endure a Wise Man, or which a Wise Man
will endure: So that Privacy is made Necessary, because the only thing which is
Better, is no where to be had. A Man may commend Navigation, and yet Caution us
against those Seas that are Troublesome, and Dangerous: So that he does as good
as command me not to weigh Anchor, that commends Sailing only upon these
Terms. He that is a slave to Business, is the most wretched of Slaves.

BUT how shall I get my self at Liberty? Liberty is to be Purchas^d at any Rate.
We can run any hazards for Money; take any Pains for Honor; And why do we not
venture something also for Leisure, and Freedom? without which we must expect
to live and dye in a Tumult: For, so long as we live in Public, Business
breaks in upon us, as one Billow drives on another; and there is no avoiding it
with either Modesty, or Quiet. It is a kind of Whirlpool, that sucks a Man In,
and he can never disengage himself. A Man of Business cannot in truth be said
to Live, and not one of a Thousand understands how to do it: for how to Live,
and how to Dye, is the Lesson of every moment of our Lives: All other Arts have
their Masters. As a Busy Life is always a Miserable Life, so is it the
greatest of all Miseries, to be perpetually employed upon Other peoples
Business: For to Sleep, to Eat to Drink at their hours, to walk their Pace,
and to Love, and Hate, as they do, is the Vilest of Servitudes. Now though
Business must be quitted, let it not be done Unseasonably; the longer we defer
it, the more we endanger our Liberty; and yet we must no more Fly before the
Time, than Linger when the Time comes: Or however, we must not love Business
for Business sake; nor indeed do we, but for the Profit that goes along with
it: For we Love the Reward of Misery, though we Hate the Misery it self. Many
People, I know, seek Business without Choosing it, and they are even weary of
their Lives without it, for want of Entertainment in their own Thoughts: The
Hours are Long, and Hateful to them when they are Alone, and they seem as short
on the other side in their Debauches. When they are no longer Candidates they
are Suffragants: When they give over Other peoples Business, they do their Own;
and pretend Business, but they make it, and value themselves upon being thought
Men of Employment. Liberty is the thing which they are perpetually a wishing,
and never come to Obtain: A thing neither to be Bought, nor Sold; but a Man
must Ask it of Himself, and Give it to himself. He that has given proof of his
Virtue in Public, should do well to make trial of it in Private also. It is
not that Solitude, or a Country Life teaches Innocence, or Frugality; but Vice
falls of it self, without Witnesses, and Spectators; for the thing it designs
is to be taken notice of. Did ever any Man put on Rich Cloths, not to be seen?
Or spread the Pomp of his Luxury where no body was to take notice of it? If it
were not for Admirers, and Spectators, there would be no Temptations to Excess;
the very Keeping of us from Exposing them, Cures us of Desiring them, for
Vanity, and Intemperance are fed with Ostentation.

HE that has lived at Sea in a Storm, let him Retire, and Dye in the Haven: But
let his Retreat c Several People withdraw for several Ends.
be without Ostentation, and wherein he may enjoy himself with a good
Conscience, without the Want, the Fear, the Hatred, or the Desire of any thing:
Not out of a Malevolent Detestation of Mankind, but for Satisfaction, and
Repose. He that shuns both Business, and Men, either out of Envy, or any other
Discontent, his Retreat is but to the Life of a Mole: Nor does he Live to
Himself, as a Wise Man does, but to his Bed, his Belly, and his Lusts. Many
People seem to Retire out of a weariness of Public Affairs, and the Trouble of
Disappointments; and yet Ambition finds them out even in that Recess, into
which, Fear, and Wearyness had cast them; and so does Luxury, Pride, and most
of the Distempers of a Public Life. There are many that Lie Close, not that
they may Live Securely, but that they may Transgress more Privately; It is
their Conscience, not their State, that makes them keep a Porter, for they live
at such a Rate, that to be seen before they be aware, is to be detected. Crates
saw a young Man walking by himself; Have a Care, says he, Of Lewd Company.
Some Men are Busy in Idleness, and make Peace more Laborious, and Troublesome
than War: Nay, and more Wicked too, when they bestow it upon such Lusts, and
other Vices, which even the License of a Military Life would not endure. We
cannot call these People Men of Leisure, that are wholly taken up with their
Pleasures. A Troublesome Life is much to be preferred before a slothful one,
and it is a Strange thing methinks, that any Man should fear Death, that has
buried himself alive; as Privacy, without Letters, is but the Burying of a Man
Quick.

THERE are some that make a Boast of their Some Men retire to be talked of.
Retreat, which is but a kind of Lazy Ambition: they Retire, to make People
talk of Them, whereas I would rather withdraw to speak with my Self. And what
shall that be, but that which we are apt to speak one of another? I will speak
Ill of my Self; I will Examine, Accuse, and Punish my Infirmities. I have no
design to be cried up for a Great Man, that has renounced the World, in a
Contempt of the Vanity, and Madness of Humane Life; I blame no body but my
Self, and I address only to my self. He that comes to me for help, is Mistaken,
for I am not a Physician, but a Patient: And I shall be well enough content to
have it said, when any Man leaves me, I took him for a Happy, and a Learned
Man, and truly I find no such matter. I had rather have my Retreat Pardoned,
than Envied. There are some Creatures that Confound their Footing about their
Dens, that they may not be found out, and so should a Wise Man in the Case of
his Retirement. When the Door is open, the Thief passes it by, as not worth his
while; but, when it is Bolted, and Sealed, it is a Temptation for People to be
prying. To have it said, That such a one is never out of his Study; and sees no
Body, etc. this Furnishes Matter for Discourse. He that makes his Retirement
too Srict, and Severe, does as good as Call Company to take Notice of it.

EVERY Man knows his Own Constitution. One Eases his Stomach by Vomit, Another
supports e Philosophy requires Privacy, and Freedom.
it with good Nourishment: he that has the Gout forbears Wine, and Bathing; and
every Man applies to the Part that is most Infirm. He that shows a Gouty Foot,
a Lame Hand, or Contracted Nerves, shall be permitted to lie still, and attend
his Cure. And why not so in the Vices of his Mind? We must discharge all
Impediments, and make way for Philosophy, as a Study Inconsistent with Common
Business. To all other things we must deny our selves openly, and frankly; When
we are Sick, we refuse Visits, keep our selves Close, and lay aside all Public
Cares: and shall we not do as much when we Philosophize? Business is the
Drudgery of the World, and only fit for Slaves, but Contemplation is the Work
of Wise Men. Not but that Solitude, and Company may be allowed to take their
Turns: the One Creates in us the Love of Mankind, the Other, That of our
selves: Solitude Relieves us when we are Sick of Company; and Conversation,
when we are weary of being Alone; So that the One Cures the Other. There is no
Man, in fine, so miserable, as he that is at a Loss how to spend his Time. He
is Restless in his Thoughts; unsteady in his Counsels; Dissatisfied with the
Present, Sollicitous for the Future; whereas he that prudently computes his
Hours and his Business, does not only fortify himself against the Common
Accidents of Life, but Improves the most Rigorous Dispensations of Providence
to his Comfort; and stands Firm under all the Trials of Humane Weakness.

CHAP. XXI. The Contempt of Death makes all the Miseries of Life Easy to us.
IT is a hard Task to Master the Natural Desire of Life, by a Philosophical
Contempt of Death; and to convince the World, that there is no hurt in it, and
crush an Opinion that was brought up with us from our Cradles. What help? What
Encouragement? What shall we say to Humane Frailty, to carry it Fearless
through the Fury of Flames, and upon the Points of Swords? What Rhetoric shall
we use to bear down the Universal Consent of People to so dangerous an Error?
The Captious, and Superfine Subtilties of the Schools will never do the Work:
They speak many sharp things, but utterly unnecessary, and void of Effect. The
Truth of it is, there is but one Chain that holds all the World in Bondage, and
that is the Love of Life. It is not that I propound the making of Death so
Indifferent to us, as it is whether a Man's Hairs be Even, or Odd: For what with
Self-Love, and an Implanted Desire in every thing of Preserving it self, and a
long Acquaintance betwixt the Soul, and Body; Friends may be loath to part, and
Death may carry an Appearance of Evil, though in truth it is it self no Evil at
all. Beside that, we are to go to a strange Place, in the Dark, and under great
Uncertainties of our Future State: So that People Dye in Terror, because they
do not know whither they are to go, and they are apt to Fancy the worst of
what they do not understand: and these Thoughts indeed are enough to startle a
Man of great Resolution^, without a wonderful Support from Above. And moreover
our Natural Scruples, and Infirmities are assisted by the Wits, and Phancies of
all Ages, in their Infamous, and Horrid Descriptions of another World: Nay,
taking it for granted, that there will be a Reward, and Punishment, they are
yet more afraid of an Annihilation, than of Hell it self.

BUT, What is it we fear? Oh! It Is a terrible thing to Dye. But, is it not
better Once to Suffer it, It Is a Folly to Fear Death.
than always to Fear it? the Earth it self suffers both With me, and Before me.
How many Islands are swallowed up in the Sea? How many Towns do we Sail over?
Nay, How many Nations are wholly Lost, either by Inundations, or Earthquakes?
And, Shall I be afraid of my little Body? Why should I, that am sure to Dye,
and that all other things are Mortal, be fearful of coming to my last Gasp my
Self? It is the Fear of Death that makes us Base, and troubles, and destroys
the Life that we would preserve: That Aggravates all Circumstances, and makes
them Formidable. We depend but upon a Flying Moment. Dye we must; but When?
What Is that to us; It is the Law of Nature; the Tribute of Mortals, and the
Remedy of all Evils. It Is only the Disguise that affrights us; as Children that
are Terrified with a Visor. Take away the Instruments of Death, the Fire, the
Axe, the Guards, the Executioners, the Whips, and the VVracks: take away the
Pomp, I say, and the Circumstances that accompany it, and Death is no more than
what my Slave yesterday Contemned: The Pain is nothing to a Fit of the Stone;
if it be Tolerable, it is not Great; and if Intolerable, it cannot last long.
There is nothing that Nature has made Necessary, which is more Easy than
Death: We are longer a coming into the World, than going out of it; and there
is not any Minute of our Lives, wherein we may not Reasonably Expect it. Nay,
it is but a Moments Work, the parting of the Soul, and Body. What a shame is
it then to stand in Fear of any thing so Long, that is done so Soon?

NOR is it any great matter to The Fear of Death is Easily overcome.
overcome this Fear: For we have Examples as well of the meanest of Men, as of
the greatest that have done it. There was a Fellow to be exposed upon the
Theater, who, in disdain, thrust a Stick down his Own Throat, and Chok'd
himself: And another on the same Occasion, pretending to nod upon the Chariot,
as if he were asleep, cast his head betwixt the Spokes of the Wheel, and kept
his Seat till his Neck was broken. Caligula, upon a dispute with Canius Iulus;
do not flatter your self, says he, for I have given Order to put you to Death.
And I thank your most Gracious Majesty for it, says Canius, giving to
understand perhaps, that under his Government, Death was a Mercy: For he knew,
that Caligula seldom failed of being as good as his Word in that Case. He was
at Play when the Officer carried him away to his Execution, and beckoning to
the Centurion, Pray, says he, will you bear me Witness, when I am dead, and
gone, that I had the better of the Game. He was a Man exceedingly beloved, and
lamented: And for a Farewell, after he had Preached Moderation to his Friends:
You, says he, are here disputing about the Immortality of the Soul, and I am
now a going to learn the Truth of it; If I discover any thing upon that Point,
you shall hear on it. Nay, the most Timorous of Creatures, when they see there is
no escaping, they oppose themselves to all Dangers; the Despair gives them
Courage, and the Necessity overcomes the Fear. Socrates was Thirty days in
Prison after his Sentence, and had time enough to have Starved himself, and so
to have prevented the Poison; but he gave the World the Blessing of his Life as
long as he could, and took that Fatal Draught, in the Meditation, and Contempt
of Death. Marcellinus, in a Deliberation upon Death, called several of his
Friends about him: One was Fearful, and Advised what he himself would have done
in the Case: Another gave the Counsel which he thought Marcellinus would like
best; but a Friend of his that was a Stoic, and a stout Man, reasoned the
Matter to him after this manner. Marcellinus, do not trouble your self, as if
it were such a mighty business that you have now in hand; it is Nothing to Live;
all your Servants do it, nay, your very Beasts too; but, to Die Honestly, and
Resolutely, that is a great point. Consider with your self, there is nothing
pleasant in Life, but what you have tasted already, and that which is to Come
is but the same over again; And how many Men are there in the World, that
rather choose to Dye, than to suffer the Nauseous Tediousness of the Repetition:
Upon which discourse he fasted himself to Death. It was the Custom of Pacuvius
to Solemnize, in a kind of Pagentry, every day, his own Funerals. When he had
Swill'd, and Gourmandiz'd, to a Luxurious, and Beastly Excess, he was carried
away from Supper to Bed, with this Song and Acclamation, He has Lived, he has
Lived. That which he did in Lewdness, would become us to do in Sobriety, and
Prudence. If it shall please God to add another Day to our Lives, let us
thankfully receive it, but however, it is our Happiest, and Securest Course, so
to compose our selves to Night, that we may have no Anxious Dependence upon to
Morrow. He that can say, I have Lived this Day, makes the next clear again.

DEATH is the worst that either the He that Despises Death, Fears nothing.
Severity of Laws, or the Cruelty of Tyrants can impose upon us; and it is the
Utmost extent of the Dominion of Fortune. He that is fortified against That,
must consequently be Superior to all other Difficulties that are but in the Way
to it. Nay, and in some Occasions, it requires more Courage to Live, than to
Dye. He that is not prepared for Death, shall be perpetually troubled, as well
with vain Apprehensions, as with real Dangers. It is not Death it self that is
Dreadful, but the Fear of it that goes before it. When the Mind is under a
Consternation, there is no State of Life that can please us, for we do not so
much endeavor to Avoid Mischiefs, as to Run away from them: and the greatest
slaughter is upon a flying Enemy. Had not a Man better breathe out his Last
once for all, than lie Agonizing in pains, Consuming by Inches, losing of his
Blood by Drops, and yet how many are there that are ready to betray their
Country, and their Friends? and to prostitute their very Wives, and Daughters,
to preserve a Miserable Carcass? Madmen, and Children have no apprehension of
Death, and it were a shame that our Reason should not do as much toward our
security, as their Folly. But, the great matter is to Dye Considerately, and
Cheerfully, upon the Foundation of Virtue; For Life, in it self, is Irksome;
and only Eating, and Drinking, and Feeling in a Circle.

HOW many are there that betwixt the All Men must Dye.
Apprehensions of Death, and the Miseries of Life, are at their Wits End what
to do with themselves? wherefore, let us fortify our selves against those
Calamities, from which the Prince is no more exempt than the Beggar. Pompey the
Great had his head taken off by a Boy, and an Eunuch (young Ptolomy, and
Photinus.) Caligula commanded the Tribune Daecimus to kill Lepidus; and another
Tribune ( Chaereas) did as much for Caligula. Never was any Man so Great, but
he was as Liable to suffer Mischief, as he was Able to do it. Has not a Thief,
or an Enemy your Th^ote at his Mercy? Nay, and the meanest of Servants has the
Power of Life, and Death over his Master, for whosoever contemns his own Life,
may be the Master of Another bodies. You will find in Story, that the
Displeasure of Servants has been as Fatal, as that of Tyrants: And what matters
it, the Power of him we Fear, when the thing we Fear is in every Bodies Power?
Suppose I fall into the hands of an Enemy, and the Conqueror Condemns me to be
led in Triumph: It is but carrying me thither whither I should have gone
without him; that is to say, toward Death, whither I have been marching ever
since I was born. It is the Fear of our Last hour that disquiets all the Rest.
By the Justice of all Constitutions, Mankind is condemned to a Capital
Punishment: Now how despicable would that Man appear, who being Sentenced to
Death in Common with the whole World, should only Petition, that he might be
the last Man brought to the Block? Some Men are particularly afraid of Thunder,
and yet extremely careless of Other, and of greater Dangers: as if That were
all they have to Fear. Will not a Sword, a Stone, a Fever, do the work as
well? Suppose the Bolt should hit us, it were yet braver to Dye with a Stroke,
than with the Bare Apprehension of it: Beside the Vanity of Imagining, that
Heaven and Earth should be put into such a Disorder only for the Death of one
Man. A Good, and a Brave Man is not moved with Lightening, Tempests, or
Earthquakes: but perhaps he would voluntarily plunge himself into that Gulf,
where otherwise he should only fall: the cutting of a Corn, or the swallowing
of a Fly, is enough to dispatch a Man; and it is no matter how great That is,
that brings me to my Death, so long as Death it self is but Little. Life is a
small matter; but it is a matter of Importance to Contemn it. Nature that Begot
us, expells us, and a better, and a safer Place is provided for us. And what is
Death, but a Ceasing to be what we were before; we are kindled, and put out; to
Cease to Be, and not to Begin to Be, is the same thing? We Dye daily; and while
we are growing, our Life decreases: every moment that passes, takes away part
of it: All that is past is Lost: Nay, we divide with Death the very Instant that
we Live. As the last Sand in the Glass does not Measure the Hour, but finishes
it; so the Last moment that we Live does not make up Death, but concludes.
There are some that Pray more earnestly for Death, than we do for Life; but it
is better to receive it cheerfully when it Comes, than to hasten it before the
time.

BUT, What is it that we would live any longer for? To what end should we Covet
Life?
Not for our Pleasures; for those we have tasted over and over, even to
Satiety: so that there is no point of Luxury that is New to us; But a Man would
be loath to leave his Country, and his Friends behind him. That is to say, he
would have them go First; for that is the least part of his Care. Well! But I
would fain live to do more Good, and discharge my self in the Offices of Life:
As if to Dye were not the Duty of every Man that Lives. We are loath to Leave
our possessions; and no Man Swims well with his Luggage. We are all of us
equally Fearful of Death, and Ignorant of Life: But, What can be more shameful,
than to be Sollicitous upon the Brink of Security? If Death be at Any time to
be Feared, it is Always to be Feared; but, the way never to Fear it, is to be
often thinking of it. To what end is it to put off, for a little while, that
which we cannot avoid? He that Dies, does but follow him that is Dead. Why are
we then so long afraid of that which is so little a while a doing? How
miserable are those People that spend their Lives in the Dismal Apprehensions
of Death? For, they are beset on all hands, and every Minute in Dread of a
surprise. We must therefore look about us, as if we were in an Enemies Country;
and Consider our Last hour, not as the Punishment, but as the Law of Nature;
The Fear of it is a Continual Palpitation of the Heart, and he that overcomes
That Terror, shall never be troubled with any Other. Life is a Navigation; we
are perpetually wallowing, and dashing one against another; Sometimes we suffer
Shipwreck, but we are Always in Danger, and in Expectation of it. And, what is
it when it comes, but either the End of a Journey, or a Passage? It is as great
a Folly to Fear Death, as to Fear Old Age. Nay, as to Fear Life it self; for he
that would not Dye, ought not to Live, since Death is the Condition of Life:
Beside, that it is a Madness to Fear a thing that is Certain; for where there
is no Doubt, there is no place for Fear.

WE are still chiding of Fate, and even those that exact the most Rigorous
Justice betwixt Man, f To Dye is to Obey Nature.
and Man, are yet themselves Unjust to Providence. Why was such a One taken
away in the Prime of his Years? As if it were the Number of years that makes
Death easy to us, and not the Temper of the Mind. He that would Live a little
Longer to Day, would be as loath to Dye a Hundred year Hence. But, which is more
Reasonable, for Us to obey Nature, or for Nature to obey us? Go we must at
Last, and no Matter how soon: It Is the Work of Fate to make us Live Long, but
it is the Business of Virtue to make a short Life sufficient. Life is to be
measured by Action, not by Time; a Man may Dye Old at Thirty, and Young at
Fourscore. Nay, the One Lives after Death, and the Other Perished before he
Died. I look upon Age among the Effects of Chance. How Long I shall Live is in
the Power of Others, but it is in my Own how Well. The largest space of Time,
is to live till a Man is Wise. He that Dies of Old Age, does no more than go to
Bed when he is weary. Death is the Test of Life, and it is that only which
discovers what we are, and distinguishes betwixt Ostentation, and Virtue. A Man
may Dispute, Cite Great Authorities, Talk Learnedly, Huff it out, and yet be
Rotten at Heart. But let us Soberly attend our Business, and since it is
Uncertain When, or Where we shall Dye, let us look for Death in all Places, and
at all Times: We can never Study that Point too much, which we can never come
to Experiment, whether we know it or no. It is a Blessed thing to dispatch the
Business of Life before we Dye; and then to Expect Death in the Possession of a
Happy Life. He Is the Great Man, that is willing to Dye, when his Life is
pleasant to him. An Honest Life is not a Greater Good than an Honest Death. How
many Brave young Men, by an Instinct of Nature, are carried on to Great
Actions, and even to the Contempt of all Hazards?

IT IS Childish to go out of the It Is Childish to Dye Lamenting.
World Groaning, and Wailing, as we came into it. Our Bodies must be thrown away,
as the Secondine that wraps up the Infant, the other being only the Covering of
the Soul: We shall then discover the Secrets of Nature; the Darkness shall be
Discussed, and our Souls Irradiated with Light, and Glory: A Glory without a
Shadow; a Glory that shall surround us, and from whence we shall look down, and
see Day, and Night beneath us. If we cannot lift up our Eyes toward the Lamp of
Heaven without dazzling, What shall we do when we come to behold the Divine
Light in its Illustrious Original? That Death which we so much dread, and
decline, is not a Determination, but the Intermission of a Life, which will
return again. All those things that are the very Cause of Life, are the way to
Death: We Fear it, as we do Fame, but it is a great Folly to Fear Words. Some
People are so impatient of Life, that they are still wishing for Death, but he
that wishes to dye, does not desire it; Let us rather wait Gods Pleasure, and
Pray for Health, and Life. If we have a Mind to Live, Why do we wish to dye? If
we have a Mind to dye, we may do it without talking of it. Men are a great deal
more Resolute in the Article of Death it self, than they are about the
Circumstances of it, For it gives a Man Courage, to Consider, that his Fate is
Inevitable; the slow Approches of death are the most Troublesome to us; as we
see many a Gladiator, who, upon his wounds, will direct his Adversaries weapon
to his very Heart; though but Timorous perhaps in the Combat. There are some
that have not the Heart either to Live, or Die, and that is a Sad Case. But this
we are sure of, The Fear of Death is a Continual Slavery, as the Contempt of it
is Certain Liberty.

CHAP. XXII. Consolations against Death, from the Providence, and the Necessity
of it.
THIS Life is only a Prelude to Eternity, where we are to expect Another
Original, and Another State of Things: We have no Prospect of Heaven Here, but
at a Distance; Let us therefore expect our Last, and Decretory Hour, with
Courage. The Last (I say) to our Bodies, but not to our Minds: Our Luggage we
must leave behind us, and return as Naked Out of the World, as we came Into It.
The day which we fear as our Last, is but the Birthday of our Eternity; and it
is the only way to it: So that what we Fear as a Rock, proves to be but a Port;
In many Cases to be Desired, Never to be Refused; and he that Dies Young, has
only made a Quick Voyage on it. Some are Becalmed; Others cut it away before the
Wind; and we Live just as we Sail: First we run our Childhood out of sight;
our Youth next; and then our Middle Age: After That, follows Old Age, and
brings us to the Common End of Mankind. It is a great Providence that we have
more ways Out of the World, than we have Into It. Our Security stands upon a
Point, the very Article of Death. It draws a great many Blessings into a very
Narrow Compass; And although the Fruit of it does not seem to extend to the
Defunct, yet the Difficulty of it is more than balanced by the Contemplation
of the Future. Nay; suppose that all the Business of This World should be
Forgotten; or my Memory traduced, What Is all this to me? I have done my Duty.
Undoubtedly That which puts an End to all Other Evils, cannot be a very great
Evil it Self; and yet it is no Easy thing for Flesh and Blood to despise Life.
What if Death comes? If it does not stay with us, why should we Fear it? One
Hangs himself for a Mistress; Another Leaps the Garret Window to avoid a
Choleric Master; a Third runs away, and Stabs himself, rather than he will be
brought back again. We see the Force, even of our Infirmities, and shall we not
then do greater things for the Love of Virtue? To suffer Death, is but the Law
of Nature; and it is a great Comfort that it can be done but Once: In the very
Convulsions of it, we have This Consolation, that our Pain is near an end, and
that it frees us from all the Miseries of Life. What it is, we Know not; and it
were Rash to Condemn, what we do not Understand: But this we Presume, either
that we shall pass out of This into a Better Life, where we shall Live with
Tranquillity and Splendour in Diviner Mansions, or else return to our First
Principles, free from the Sense of any Inconvenience. There Is Nothing Immortal,
nor Many things Lasting; but by Diverse ways every thing comes to an End. What
an Arrogance is it then, when the World it self stands Condemned to a
Dissolution, that Man alone should expect to live for Ever? It is Unjust not to
allow unto the Giver, the Power of disposing of his Own Bounty; and a Folly,
only to value the Present. Death is as much a Debt, as Money; and Life is but a
Journey toward it. Some dispatch it Sooner, others Later; but we must All have
the same Period. The Thunderbolt is undoubtedly Just, that draws, even from
those that are stuck with it, a Veneration. A Great Soul takes no Delight in
Staying with the Body, it considers whence it Came, and Knows whither it is to
Go. The day will come, that shall separate this Mixture of Soul, and Body; of
Divine, and Humane: My Body I will leave where I found it; My Soul I will
restore to Heaven, which would have been There already, but for the Clog that
keeps it down: And beside; How many Men have been the worse for longer Living,
that might have died with Reputation, if they had been sooner taken away? How
many Disappointments of Hopeful Youths, that have proved Dissolute Men? Over
and above the Ruins, Shipwracks, Torments, Prisons, that attend Long Life: A
Blessing so deceiptful, that if a Child were in Condition to Judge of it, and
at Liberty to Refuse it, he would not take it.

WHAT Providence has made Necessary, Humane Prudence should comply with
Cheerfully: a What God has made Necessary, Man should comply with Cheerfully.
As there is a Necessity of Death, so that Necessity is Equal, and Invincible.
No Man has cause of Complaint for that which Every Man must suffer as well as
himself. When we should dye, we Will not, and when we would not, we must: But,
our Fate is Fixed, and Unavoidable is the Decree. Why do we then stand Trembling
when the Time comes? Why do we not as well lament that we did not Live a
Thousand years ago, as that we shall not be alive a Thou sand years hence?
It Is but traveling the Great Road, and to the Place whither we must All go at
Last: It Is but submitting to the Law of Nature, and to That Lot which the whole
World has suffered, that is gone Before us; and so must They too, that are to
Come After us. Nay, how many Thousands, when our Time comes, will Expire in the
same Moment with us? He that will not Follow, shall be drawn by Force: And, Is
it not much better now to do That willingly, which we shall otherwise be made
to do in spite of our Hearts. The Sons of Mortal Parents, must expect a Mortal
Posterity; Death is the End of Great and Small. We are Born Helpless, and
exposed to the Injuries of all Creatures, and of all Weathers. The very
Necessaries of Life are Deadly to us. We meet with our Fate in our Dishes, in
our Cups, and in the very Air we Breathe; Nay, our very Birth is Inauspicious,
for we come into the World Weeping; and in the Middle of our Designs, while we
are meditating great Matters, and stretching of our Thoughts to After Ages,
Death cuts us off, and our longest Date is only the Revolution of a few years.
One Man Dies at the Table; Another goes away in his Sleep; a Third in his
Mistress's Arms; a Fourth is Stabbed; Another is Stung with an Adder, or
Crushed with the Fall of a Horse. We have several ways to our End, but the End
it self, which is Death, is still the same. Whether we dye by a Sword, by a
Halter, by a Potion, or by a Disease, it is all but Death. A Child dies in the
Swaddling Clouts, and an Old Man at a Hundred, they are Both Mortal alike,
though the One goes sooner than the Other. All that lies betwixt the Cradle,
and the Grave, is Uncertain. If we compute the Troubles, the Life even of a
Child is Long; if the Swiftness of the Passage, That of an Old Man is short:
The whole is slippery, and Deceiptful, and only Death Certain; and yet all
People Complain of That which never Deceived any Man. Senecio raised himself
from a small Beginning, to a Vast Fortune, being very well skilled in the
Faculties both of Getting, and of Keeping; and either of them was sufficient
for the doing of his Business. He was a Man Infinitely Careful, both of his
Patrimony, and of his Body. He gave me a Mornings Visit (says our Author) and
after that Visit, he went away, and spent the rest of the day with a Friend of
his that was desperately Sick. At Night he was Merry at Supper, and seized
immediately after with a Squincy, which dispatched him in a few hours. This Man
that had Money at Use in all Places, and in the very Course, and Height of his
Prosperity, was thus Cut off. How Foolish a thing is it then for a Man to
flatter himself with Long Hopes, and to Pretend to Dispose of the Future? Nay,
the very Present slips through our Fingers, and there is not that moment which
we can call our Own. How vain a thing is it for us to enter upon Projects? and
to say to our selves, Well! I Will go Build, Purchase, Discharge such Offices,
Settle my Affairs, and then Retire. We are all of us Born to the same
Casualties; All equally Frail, and Uncertain of To morrow. At the very Altar,
where we Pray for Life, we Learn to Die; by seeing the Sacrifices Killed before
us. But, there is no Need of a Wound, or Searching the Heart for it, when the
Noose of a Cord, or Smothering of a Pillow will do the Work. All things have
their Seasons; they Begin, they Increase, and they Dye. The Heavens and the
Earth grow Old, and are appointed their Periods. That which we call Death, is
but a Pause, or Suspension; and, in truth, a Progress to Life; only our
Thoughts look downward upon the Body, and not Forward upon things to Come. All
things under the Sun are Mortal; Cities, Empires: and the time will come, when
it shall be a Question Where they Were, and perchance whether ever they had a
Being or no. Some will be destroyed by War; Others by Luxury, Fire,
Inundations, Earthquakes. Why should it trouble me then to Dye, as a
Forerunner of an Universal Dissolution? A Great Mind Submits it self to God,
and suffers willingly what the Law of the Universe will otherwise bring to pass
upon Necessity. That good Old Man Bassus (though with one Foot in the Grave)
How Cheerful a Mind does he bear! He lives in the View of Death, and
Contemplates his Own End with less Concern of Thought, or Countenance, than he
would do Another Man's. It is a hard Lesson, and we are a long time a Learning
of it, to receive our Death without Trouble, especially in the Case of Bassus.
In Other Deaths there is a Mixture of Hope; A Disease may be Cured, a Fire
Quenched, a falling House either Prop'd, or Avoided; the Sea may Swallow a Man,
and throw him Up again. A Pardon may Interpose betwixt the Axe and the Body;
but in the Case of Old Age there is no Place for either Hope, or Intercession.
Let us Live in our Bodies therefore, as if we were only to Lodge in them This
Night, and to leave them To morrow. It is the frequent Thought of Death that
must fortify us against the Necessity of it. He that has Armed himself against
Poverty, may Perhaps come to Live in Plenty. A Man may strengthen himself
against Pain, and yet live in a State of Health; Against the Loss of Friends,
and never Lose any: But he that fortifies himself against the Fear of Death,
shall most certainly have Occasion to employ that Virtue. It is the Care of a
Wise, and a Good Man to look to his Manners, and Actions; and rather how well
he Lives, than how Long: For to Dye Sooner, or Later, is not the Business, but
to Dye Well, or Ill: For Death brings us to Immortality.

CHAP. XXIII. Against Immoderate Sorrow for the Death of Friends.
NEXT to the Encounter of Death in our Own Bodies, the most sensible Calamity
to an Honest Man is the Death of a Friend; and we are not in truth without some
Generous Instances of those that have preferred a Friends Life before their
Own; and yet this Affliction, which by Nature is so Grievous to us, is, by
Virtue, and Providence, made Familiar, and Easy.

TO Lament the Death of a Friend, is both Sorrow within Bounds is allowable.
Natural, and Just: A Sigh, or a Tear I would allow to his Memory; but no
Profuse, or Obstinate Sorrow: Clamorous, and Public Lamentations are not so
much the Effects of Grief, as of Vainglory. He that is sadder in Company than
Alone, shows rather the Ambition of his Sorrow, than the Piety of it. Nay, and
in the Violence of his Passion, there fall out Twenty things that set him a
Laughing. At the long Run, Time Cures All, but it were better done by
Moderation, and Wisdom. Some People do as good as set a watch upon themselves,
as if they were afraid that their Grief would make an Escape. The Ostentation
of Grief is many times more than the Grief it self. When any Body is within
Hearing, what Groans, and Outcryes! when they are Alone, and Private, all is
Hush, and Quiet: So soon as any body comes in, they are at it again; and down
they throw themselves upon the Bed; fall to wringing of their hands, and
wishing of themselves dead; which they might better have done by themselves;
but their sorrow goes off with the Company. We forsake Nature, and run over to
the Practices of the People, that never were the Authors of any thing that is
Good. If Destiny were to be wrought upon by Tears, I would allow you to spend
your days, and nights, in Sadness, and Mourning; Tearing of your Hair, and
Beating of your Breasts; but if Fate be Inexorable, and Death will Keep what he
has Taken, Grief is to no Purpose. And yet I would not Advise Insensibility,
and Hardness; It were Inhumanity, and not Virtue, not to be moved at the
separation of Familiar Friends, and Relations: Now, in such Cases, we cannot
Command our selves; we cannot forbear weeping, and we Ought not to Forbear:
But, let us not pass the Bounds of Affection, and run into Imitation; within
These Limits it is some ease to the Mind.

A Wise Man gives Way to Tears in Sorrow is in some Cases Allowable, and
Inevitable in others.
Some Cases, and Cannot Avoid them in Others. When one is struck with the
Surprise of Ill News, as the Death of a Friend, or the like; or upon the Last
Embrace of an Acquaintance under the Hand of an Executioner, he lies under a
Natural Necessity of Weeping. and Trembling. In Another Case we may Indulge our
Sorrows, as upon the Memory of a Dead Friends Conversation, or Kindness, one
may let fall Tears of Generosity, and Joy. We Favor the One, and we are
Overcome with the Other; and This is Well: but we are not upon any Terms to
Force them; They may flow of their Own accord, without derogating from the
Dignity of a Wise Man; who at the same time both preserves his Gravity, and
Obeys Nature. Nay, there is a Certain Decorum even in Weeping: for Excess of
Sorrow is as Foolish as Profuse Laughter. Why do we not as well Cry, when our
Trees that we took Pleasure in, shed their Leaves, as at the Loss of Other
Satisfactions? When the next Season repairs them, either with the same again,
or Others in their Places. We may accuse Fate, but we cannot alter it, for it
is Hard, and Inexorable, and not to be Removed, either with Reproaches, or
Tears. They may carry us to the Dead, but never bring Them back again to Us. If
Reason does not put an End to our Sorrows, Fortune never will: One is pinched
with Poverty; Another Solicited with Ambition, and Fears the very Wealth that
he Coveted: One is troubled for the Loss of Children; Another for the Want of
them; So that we shall sooner want Tears, than Matter for them; let us
therefore spare That for which we have so much Occasion. I do confess, that in
the very Parting of Friends there is something of an Uneasyness, and Trouble;
but it is rather Voluntary, than Natural; and it is Custom, more than Sense,
that affects us: We do rather Impose a Sorrow upon our selves, than Submit to
it: as People Cry when they have Company, and when no body looks on, all is well
again. To Mourn without Measure, is Folly, and not to Mourn at all, is
Insensibility. The best Temper is betwixt Piety, and Reason; to be sensible,
but neither Transported, nor Cast down. He that can put a stop to his Tears,
and Pleasures, when he will, is safe. It is an Equal Infelicity to be either
too Soft, or too Hard. We are Overcome by the One, and we are put to struggle
with the Other. There is a Certain Intemperance in That Sorrow that passes the
Rules of Modesty; and yet great Piety is in many Cases a Dispensation to good
Manners. The Loss of a Son, or of a Friend, cuts a Man to the Heart, and
there is no opposing the first Violence of this Passion; but when a Man comes
once to deliver himself wholly up to Lamentations, he is to understand, that
though some Tears Deserve Compassion, Others are yet Ridiculous. A Grief that is
Fresh, finds Pity, and Comfort; but when it is Inveterate it is Laughed at, for
it is either Counterfeit, or Foolish. Beside that, to Weep excessively for the
Dead, is an Affront to the Living. The most Justifyable Cause of Mourning is to
see Good Men come to Ill Ends, and Virtue Oppressed by the Iniquity of Fortune.
But in This Case too they either suffer Resolutely, and yield us Delight in
their Courage, and Example; Or Meanly, and so give us the less trouble for the
Loss. He that dies Cheerfully, Dryes up my Tears, and he that dies Whiningly,
does not Deserve them. I would bear the Death of Friends, and Children, with
the same Constancy that I would expect my Own; and no more Lament the One, than
Fear the Other. He that bethinks himself, how often Friends have been Parted,
will find more time lost among the Living, than upon the Dead; and the most
Desperate Mourners are they, that cared least for their Friends when they were
Living; for they think to Redeem their Credits for want of Kindness to the
Living, by Extravagant Ravings after the Dead. Some, (I know) will have Grief
to be only the Perverse Delight of a Restless Mind; and Sorrows, and Pleasures
to be near Akin: and there are, I Am Confident, that find Joy even in their
Tears. But which is more Barbarous, to be Insensible of Grief for the Death of
a Friend, or to Fish for Pleasure in Grief, when a Son perhaps is burning, or a
Friend expiring? To forget ones Friend, to bury the Memory with the Body; to
Lament out of Measure is all Inhumane. He that is Gone, either would not have
his Friend Tormented, or does not know that he is so: If he does not Feel it,
it is Superfluous; If he does, it is Unacceptable to him. If Reason cannot
prevail, Reputation may, for Immoderate Mourning lessens a Man's Character: It Is
a shameful thing for a Wise Man to make the Wearyness of Grieving the Remedy of
it. In Time, the most Stubborn Grief will leave us, if in Prudence we do not
leave That First.

BUT, Do I Grieve for my Friends sake, or for my We Grieve more for Our Own
Sakes, than for Our Friends.
Own? Why should I afflict my self for the Loss of him that is either Happy, or
not at all in Being? In the One Case, it is Envy, and in the Other it is Madness.
We are apt to say, What would I give to see him again, and to enjoy his
Conversation! I was never sad in his Company; My Heart leaped when ever I met
him; I want him where ever I go: All that is to be said is, The Greater the
Loss, the Greater is the Virtue to Overcome it. If Grieving will do no Good,
it is an Idle thing to Grieve; And if That which has befallen One Man remains to
All, it is as Unjust to Complain. The whole World is upon the March toward the
same Point; Why do we not Cry for our selves that are to follow, as well as for
him that is gone First. Why do we not as well lament before hand, for That which
we know will be, and cannot possibly but be? He is not Gone, but Sent before.
As there are many things that he has Lost, so there are many things that he
does not Fear: as Anger, Jealousy, Envy, etc. Is he not more Happy in Desiring
Nothing, than Miserable in what he has lost? We do not mourn for the Absent,
why then for the Dead; who are effectually no Other? We have Lost one Blessing,
But we have many Left; And shall not all these Satisfactions Support us against
One Sorrow?

THE Comfort of Having a Friend, A Friend may be taken away, but not the
Comfort of the Friendship.
may be taken away, but not That of having had one. As there is a sharpness in
some Fruits, and a Bitterness in some Wines that pleases us, so there is a
mixture in the Remembrance of Friends, where the Loss of their Company is
sweetened again by the Contemplation of their Virtues. In some Respects I have
Lost what I had; and in Others, I retein still what I have Lost. It Is an Ill
Construction of Providence to reflect only upon my Friends being taken away,
without any Regard to the Benefit of his being once given me. Let us therefore
make the Best of our Friends, while we have them; for how long we shall keep
them, is Uncertain. I have lost a Hopeful Son, but, How many Fathers have been
deceived in their Expectations? And how many Noble Families have been destroyed
by Luxury, and Riot? He that Grieves for the loss of a Son, What if he had lost
a Friend? And yet he that has lost a Friend, has more Cause of Joy that he once
had him, than of Grief that he is taken away. Shall a Man bury his Friendship
with his Friend? We are Ungrateful for that which is Past, in hope of what is to
Come; as if that which is to come would not quickly be Past too. That which is
past we are sure of. We may receive Satisfaction, it is true, both from the
Future, and what is already Past; the One, by Expectation; and the Other, by
Memory: only the one may possibly not come to pass, and it is Impossible to
make the Other not to have Been.

BUT there is no applying of Consolation to Fresh, and Bleeding Sorrows; the
very Discourse e There Is no Dealing with the First Transports of Sorrow.
Irritates the Grief, and Inflames it. It Is like an Unseasonable Medicine in a
Disease, when the First Violence is Over, it will be more Tractable, and endure
the Handling. Those People, whose Minds are weakened by long Felicity, may be
allowed to Groan, and Complain, but it is otherwise with those that have led
their days in Misfortunes. A Long Course of Adversity has this Good in it, that
though it vexes a Body a great while, it comes to harden us at last; As a Raw
Solider shrinks at every Wound, and dreads the Surgeon more than an Enemy;
whereas a Veteran sees his own Body cut, and lamed with as little Concern as if
it were Another. With the same Resolution should we stand the Shock, and Cure
of all Misfortunes; we are never the better for our Experience, if we have not
yet learned to be Miserable. And there is no thought of Curing us by the
Diversion of Sports, and Entertainments; we are apt to fall into Relapses;
wherefore we had better Overcome our Sorrow, than Delude it.

CHAP. XXIV. Consolations against Banishment, and Bodily Pains.
IT is a Masterpiece to draw Good out of Evil; and by the Help of Virtue to
improve Misfortunes into Blessings. It Is a sad Condition, you will say, for a Man
to be barred the Freedom of his own Country And is not This the Case of
Thousands that we meet every day in the Streets; Some, for Ambition; Others, to
Negotiate, or for Curiosity, Delight, Friendship, Study, Experience, Luxury,
Vanity, Discontent: Some, to exercise their Virtues, Others, their Vices; and
not a few to Prostitute either their Bodies, or their Eloquence. To pass now
from pleasant Countries into the worst of Islands; Let them be never so barren,
or Rocky, the People never so Barbarous, or the Clime never so Intemperate; he
that is Banished thither, shall find many Strangers to live there for their
Pleasures. The Mind of Man is Naturally Curious, and Restless; which is no
wonder, considering their Divine Original; for Heavenly things are always in
Motion: Witness the Stars, and the Orbs, which are perpetually Moving, Rolling,
and Changing of Place, according to the Law, and Appointment of Nature. But
here are no Woods, you will say, no Rivers; no Gold, nor Pearl; no Commodity for
Traffic, or Commerce; nay, hardly Provision enough to keep the Inhabitants
from starving. It Is very Right; here are no Palaces, no Artificial Grotto's, or
Materials for Luxury, and Excess; but we lie under the Protection of Heaven,
and a Poor Cottage for a Retreat is more worth, than the most Magnificent
Temple, when That Cottage is Consecrated by an Honest Man under the Guard of
his Virtues. Shall any Man think Banishment Grievous, when he may take such
Company along with him? Nor is there any Banishment, but yields enough for our
Necessities, and no Kingdom is sufficient for Superfluities. It is the Mind
that makes us Rich in a Desert; and if the Body be but kept Alive, the Soul
Enjoyes all Spiritual Felicities in Abundance. What signifies the being
Banished from one Spot of Ground to Another, to a Man that has his Thoughts
Above, and can look Forward, and Backward, and wherever he pleases; and
wherever he is, he has the same Matter to work upon? The Body is but the
Prison, or the Clog of the Mind; subjected to Punishments, Robberies, Diseases;
but the Mind is Sacred, and Spiritual, and Liable to no Violence. Is it that a
Man shall want Garments, or Covering in Banishment? The Body is as easily
Clothed, as Fed; and Nature has made nothing Hard, that is Necessary. But if
nothing will serve us, but Rich Embroderies, and Scarlet, it is none of Fortunes
Fault that we are Poor, but our Own. Nay, suppose a Man should have All
restored him back again that he has Lost; it will come to nothing, for he will
want more after That, to satisfy his Desires, than he did before, to supply
his Necessities. Insatiable Desires are not so much a Thirst, as a Disease.

TO come Lower now; Where Is Banishment is but Change of Place, in which sense,
All People, and Nations have been Banished.
That People, or Nation, that have not changed their Place of Abode? Some by
the Fate of War; Others have been cast by Tempests, Shipwracks, or want of
Provisions, upon unknown Coasts. Some have been forced Abroad by Pestilence,
Sedition, Earthquakes, Surcharge of People at Home. Some Travel to see the
World; Others for Commerce: But, in fine, it is clear that, upon some Reason or
other, the whole Race of Mankind have shifted their Quarters; Changed their
very Names, as well as their Habitations: Insomuch, that we have lost the very
Memorials of what they were. All these Transportations of People, what are
they, but Public Banishments? The very Founder of the Roman Empire was an
Exile: Briefly; The whole World has been Transplanted, and one Mutation treads
upon the Heel of another. That which one Man Desires, turns another Man's
Stomach; and he that Proscribes me To Day, shall himself be cast out To morrow.
We have however this Comfort in our Misfortune; we have the same Nature, the
same Providence, and we carry our Virtues along with us. And This Blessing we
owe to that Allmighty Power, call it what you will; either a God, or an
Incorporeal Reason, a Divine Spirit, or Fate, and the Unchangeable Course of
Causes, and Effects: It is however so ordered, that nothing can be taken from
us, but what we can well spare; and that which is most Magnificent, and
Valuable, continues with us. Wherever we go, we have the Heavens over our
Heads, and no further from us, than they were before; and, so long as we can
entertain our Eyes, and Thoughts, with those Glories, what matter is it what
Ground we tread upon?

IN the Case of Pain, or Sickness, it is Pain only affects the Body, but not the
Mind.
only the Body that is affected: It may take off the Speed of a Footman, or
Bind the Hands of a Cobbler, but the Mind is still at Liberty to Hear, Learn,
Teach, Advise, and to do other Good Offices. It Is an Example of Public
Benefit, a Man that is in Pain, and Patient. Virtue may show it self as well in
the Bed, as in the Field, and he that cheerfully encounters the Terrors of
Death, and Corporal Anguish, is as great a Man as he that most Generously
hazards himself in a Battle. A Disease, it is true, bars us of some Pleasures,
but Procures us others. Drink is never so Grateful to us, as in a Burning
Fever, nor Meat, as when we have fasted our selves Sharp, and Hungry. The
Patient may be forbidden some Sensual Satisfaction, but no Physician will
forbid us the Delight of the Mind. Shall we call any Sick Man Miserable,
because he must give Over his Intemperance of Wine, and Gluttony, and betake
himself to a Diet of more Sobriety, and less Expense; and abandon his Luxury,
which is the Distemper of the Mind, as well as of the Body. It Is Troublesome, I
know, at First, to abstein from the Pleasures we have been used to, and to
endure Hunger, and Thirst; but in a Little time we lose the very Appetite, and
it is no Trouble then, to be without That which we do no not Desire. In
Diseases, there are great Pains; but if they be Long, they Remit, and give us
some Intervals of Ease; if short, and violent, either they dispatch Us, or
Consume Themselves; so that either their Respites make them Tolerable, or the
Extremity makes them short. So Merciful is Allmighty God to us, that our
Torments cannot be very Sharp, and Lasting. The Acutest Pains are those that
Affect the Nerves, but there is this comfort in them too, that they will quickly
make us Stupid, and Insensible. In Cases of Extremity, let us call to mind the
most Eminent Instances of Patience, and Courage, and turn our Thoughts from our
Afflictions to the Contemplation of Virtue. Suppose it be the Stone, the Gout,
nay the Rack it self; how many have endured it without so much as a Groan, or a
Word speaking, without so much as Asking for Relief, or giving an Answer to a
Question. Nay, they have laughed at the Tormenters upon the very Torture, and
provoked them to New Experiments of their Cruelty, which they have had still in
Derision. The Asthma I look upon, as of all Diseases, the most Importune; the
Physicians call it the Meditation of Death, as being rather an Agony, than a
Sickness: The Fit holds one not above an Hour, as no Body is long in Expiring.
There are Three things Grievous in Sickness, the Fear of Death, Bodily Pain,
and the Intermission of our Pleasures: The First is to be imputed to Nature,
not to the Disease, for we do not Dye because we are Sick, but because we Live.
Nay, Sickness it self has preserved many a Man from Dying.

CHAP. XXV. Poverty, to a Wise Man, is rather a Blessing, than a Misfortune.
NO Man shall ever be Poor, that goes to himself for what he wants; and that is
the readyest way to Riches: Nature indeed will have her Due, but yet whatsoever
is beyond Necessity, is Precarious, and not Necessary. It is not Her Business
to gratify the Palate, but to satisfy a Craving Stomach: Bread, when a Man is
Hungry, does his Work, let it be never so Course; and Water when he is a Dry;
Let his Thirst be Quenched, and Nature is satisfied; no matter Whence it Comes,
or whether he Drinks in Gold, Silver, or in the Hollow of his Hand. To Promise
a Man Riches, and to Teach him Poverty, is to Deceive him: But shall I call him
Poor, that wants nothing; though he may be beholden for it to his Patience,
rather than to his Fortune? Or shall any Man Deny him to be Rich, whose Riches
can never be taken away? Whether is it better to have Much, or Enough? He that
has Much, desires More, which shows, that he has not yet Enough; but he that
has Enough, is at Rest. Shall a Man be reputed the less Rich, for not having
That, for Which he shall be Banished; for which his very Wife, or Son, shall
Poison him? That which gives him Security in War, and Quiet in Peace; which he
Possesses without Danger, and Disposes of without Trouble? No Man can be Poor,
that has Enough, nor Rich, that Covets more than he has. Alexander, after all
his Conquests, complained that he wanted More World's; he Desired Something
More, even when he had Gotten All: And That which was Sufficient for Humane
Nature, was not Enough for One Man. Money never made any Man Rich; for the More
he Had, the More he still Coveted. The Richest Man that ever Lived, is Poor, in
My Opinion, and in Any Man's May be so: but he that keeps himself to the stint
of Nature, does neither Feel Poverty, nor Fear it. Nay, even in Poverty it
self, there are some things Superfluous. Those which the World calls Happy,
their Felicity is a False Splendour, that dazles the Eyes of the Vulgar, but Our
Rich Man is Glorious, and Happy within. There Is no Ambition in Hunger, or
Thirst: Let there be Food; and no Matter for the Table, the Dish, and the
Servants; nor with what Meats Nature is satisfied. Those are the Torments of
Luxury, that rather Stuff the Stomach, than Fill it: It studies rather to Cause
an Appetite, than to Allay it. It Is not for Us to say, This is not Handsome;
That Is Common; The Other Offends my Eye. Nature Provides for Health, not
Delicacy. When the Trumpet Sounds a Charge, the Poor Man knows that he is not
aimed at; When they Cry out Fire, His Body is all he has to look after; If he
be to take a Journey, there is no Blocking up of Streets, and Thronging of
Passages for a Parting Compliment: A small matter Fills his Belly, and Contents
his Mind; he Lives from Hand to Mouth, without Carking, or Fearing for To
morrow. The Temperate Rich Man is but his Counterfeit; his Wit is Quicker, and
his Appetite's Calmer.

NO Man finds Poverty a Trouble to Poverty is only Troublesome in Opinion.
him, but he that Thinks it so; and he that Thinks it so, Makes it so. Does not
a Rich Man Travel more at Ease with Less Luggage, and Fewer Servants? Does he
not Eat, many times, as Little, and as Course, in the Field, as a Poor Man?
Does he not, for his Own Pleasure, sometimes, and for Variety, Feed upon the
Ground, and use only Earthen Vessels? Is he not a Madman then, that Always
Fears what he Often Desires, and Dreads the Thing that he takes Delight to
Imitate? He that would know the worst of Poverty, let him but compare the Looks
of the Rich, and of the Poor, and he shall find the Poor Man to have a Smoother
Brow, and to be more Merry at Heart; or if any Trouble befalls him, it passes
over like a Cloud: Whereas the Other, either his Good Humor is Counterfeit, or
his Melancholy Deep, and Ulcerated, and the Worse, because he dares not
Publicly own his Misfortune; but he is Forced to Play the Part of a Happy Man,
even with a Canker in his Heart. His Felicity is but Personated, and if he were
but stripped of his Ornaments, he would be Contemptible. In buying of a Horse,
we take off his Cloths, and his Trappings, and examine his Shape, and Body, for
fear of being Cozened: And shall we put an Estimate upon a Man for being set
off by his Fortune, and Quality? Nay, if we see any thing of Ornament about
him, we are to suspect him the more for some Infirmity under it. He that is not
Content in Poverty, would not be so neither in Plenty; for the Fault is not in
the Thing, but the Mind. If That be Sickly, remove him from a Kennel to a
Palace, he is at the same Pass; for he carries his Disease along with him. What
can be Happier than That Condition both of Mind, and of Fortune, from which we
cannot Fall? What can be a greater Felicity, than in a Covetous Designing Age,
for a Man to live safe among Informers, and Thieves? It puts a Poor Man into
the very Condition of Providence, that Gives All, without Reserving Any thing
to it Self. How Happy is he that Ows nothing, but to himself, and only That,
which he can Easily Refuse, or Easily Pay. I do not reckon Him Poor, that has
but a Little, but he is so, that Covets more; It is a Fair Degree of Plenty, to
have what is Necessary. Whether had a Man better find Saturity in Want, or
Hunger in Plenty? It is not the Augmenting of our Fortunes, but the Abating of
our Appetites, that makes us Rich. Why may not a Man as well Contemn Riches in
his Own Coffers, as in Another Man's? And rather Hear that they are His, than
Feel them to be so? Though it is a great matter not to be Corrupted, even by
having them under the same Roof. He is the Greater Man that is Honestly Poor in
the middle of Plenty, but he is the more secure, that is Free from the
Temptation of that Plenty; and has the least Matter for another to Design Upon.
It is no great business for a Poor Man to Preach the Contempt of Riches, or for
a Rich Man to extol the Benefits of Poverty, because we do not know how either
the One, or the Other would behave himself in the Contrary Condition. The best
Proof is, the doing it by Choice, and not by Necessity, for the Practice of
Poverty in Jest, is a Preparation toward the Bearing of it in Earnest. But it
is yet a Generous Disposition so to provide for the worst of Fortunes, as what
may be easily born: the Premeditation makes them not only Tolerable, but
delightful to us; for there is That in them, without which nothing can be
Comfortable, that is to say, Security. If there were nothing else in Poverty,
but the Certain Knowledge of our Friends, it were yet a most Desirable
Blessing, when every Man leaves us, but those that Love us. It is a shame to
place the Happyness of Life in Gold, and Silver, for which Bread and Water is
sufficient; Or at the Worst, Hunger puts an end to Hunger. For the Honor of
Poverty, it was both the Foundation, and the Cause of the Roman Empire; and no
Man was ever yet so Poor, but he had enough to carry him to his Journeys End.

ALL I desire is, that my Poverty Mediocrity is the Best State of Fortune.
may not be a Burden to my self, or make me so to others, and That is the best
State of Fortune, that is neither directly necessitous, nor far from it. A
Mediocrity of Fortune, with a Gentleness of Mind, will preserve us from Fear,
or Envy; which is a Desirable Condition, for no Man wants power to do Mischief.
We never consider th Blessing of Coveting nothing, and the Glory of being full
in our selves, without Depending upon Fortune. With Parcimony, a Little is
sufficient, and without it, Nothing; whereas Frugality makes a Poor Man Rich.
If we lose an Estate, we had better never have had it: He that has Least to
Lose, has Least to Fear; and those are better satisfied, whom Fortune never
favored, then those whom she has forsaken. That State is most Commodious, that
lies betwixt Poverty, and Plenty. Diogenes understood this very well, when he
put himself into an Incapacity of losing any thing. That Course of Life is most
Commodious, which is both safe, and wholesome; the Body is to be indulged no
farther than for Health, and rather Mortified, than not kept in Subjection to
the Mind. It is Necessary to provide against Hunger, Thirst, and Cold; and
somewhat for a Covering to shelter us against other Inconveniences; but not a
Pin matter whether it be of Turf, or of Marble. A Man may lie as warm, and as
Dry, under a Thatched, as under a Gilded Roof. Let the Mind be Great, and
Glorious, and all other things are Despicable in Comparison. The Future is
Uncertain; and I had rather beg of my Self not to Desire any thing, than of
Fortune to Bestow it.

The End.
SENECA OF Anger, AND Clemency.

THE Contents.
Chap. I. ANger described: It is against Nature; and only to be found in Men.
p. 1. Chap. II. The Rise of Anger. p. 7. Chap. III. Anger may be Suppressed. p.
12. Chap. IV. It is a short Madness, and a deformed Vice. p. 20. Chap. V. Anger
is neither Warrantable, nor Useful. p. 25. Chap. VI. Anger in General, with the
Danger, and Effects of it. p. 45. Chap. VII. The Ordinary Grounds, and
Occasions of Anger. p. 65. Chap. VIII. Advice in the Case of Contumely and
Revenge. p. 76. Chap. IX. Cautions against Anger in the Matter of Education,
Converse, and other General Means of preventing it, both in our selves, and
others. p. 86. Chap. X. Against Rash Judgment. p. 100. Chap. XI. Take nothing
ill from another Man; till you have made it your own Case. p. 109. Chap. XII.
Of Cruelty. p. 115.
OF Clemency. p. 125.
SENECA OF Anger.
CHAP. I. Anger described; It is against Nature, and only to be found in Men.
WE are here to Encounter the most Outrageous, Brutal, Dangerous, and
Intractable of all Passions, the most Loathsome, and Unmannerly. Nay, the most
ridiculous too; and, the subduing of this Monster will do a great deal toward
the Establishment of Humane Peace. It is the Method of Physicians, to begin
with a Description of the Disease, before they meddle with the Cure, and I know
not why this may not do as well in the Distempers of the Mind, as in those of
the Body.

THE Stoics will have Anger to be, Anger Desrib'd. What it is.
A desire of Punishing another for some Injury done. Against which it is
Objected, That we are many times Angry with those, that never did hurt us, but
possibly may, though the harm be not as yet done. But, I say, that they hurt us
already in Conceit; and the very Purpose of it is an Injury in Thought, before
it breaks out into Act. It is opposed again, That if Anger were a Desire of
Punishing, Mean People would not be Angry with Great Ones, that are out of
their Reach: For, no Man can be said to Desire any thing, which he Judges
Impossible to Compass. But, I answer to this; That Anger is the Desire, not the
Power, and Faculty of Revenge: Neither is any Man so low, but that the greatest
Man alive, may, peradventure, lie at his Mercy.

ARISTOTLE takes Anger to be, A desire of paying sorrow for sorrow; and of
Plaguing those that have Plagued us. It is argued against both, that Beasts are
Angry; though neither provoked by any Injury, nor moved with a desire of any
bodies Grief, or Punishment. Nay, though they cause it, they do not design, or
seek it. Neither is Anger (how unreasonable soever in it self) found any where
but in Reasonable Creatures. It is true, that Beasts have an Impulse of Rage,
and Fierceness; as they are more affected also than Men, with some Pleasures:
But we may as well call them Luxurious, and Ambitious, as Angry. And yet they
are not without certain Images of Humane Affections. They have their Likings,
and their Lothings; but neither the Passions of Reasonable Nature, nor their
Virtues, nor their Vices. They are moved to Fury by some Objects; they are
quieted by others; they have their Terrors, and their Disappointments; but,
without Reflection: And, let them be never so much Irritated, or Affrighted, so
soon as ever the Occasion is removed, they fall to their Meat again, and lie
down, and take their Rest. Wisdom, and Thought are the Goods of the Mind;
whereof Brutes are wholly Incapable; and, we are as unlike them within, as we
are without: They have an odd Kind of Fancy, and they have a Voice too; but
Inarticulate, and Confused, and Incapable of those Variations which are
Familiar to us.

ANGER is not only a Vice, but a Vice, point blank against It is against Nature.
Nature, for it Divides, in stead of Joining; and, in some measure frustrates
the End of Providence in Humane Society. One Man was born to help another:
Anger makes us destroy one another; the one Unites; the other Separates; the
one is Beneficial to us; the other Mischievous: the one Succors even Strangers;
the other Destroys even the most Intimate Friends: The one Ventures all to
Save another, the other Ruins himself to Undo another. Nature is Bountiful;
but Anger is Pernicious: For it is not Fear, but Mutual Love, that binds up
Mankind.

THERE are some Motions that look like Anger, which cannot properly be called
so; as the Passion of the People against the Gladiators, when they hang off,
and will not dispatch themselves, so soon as the Spectators would have them:
There is something in it of the humor of Children, that if they get a fall,
will never leave Bawling, till the Naughty Ground is beaten, and then all is
well again. They are Angry without any Cause, or Injury; they are deluded by an
Imitation of strokes, and pacified with Counterfeit Tears: A False, and a
Childish Sorrow, is appeased with as false, and as Childish a Revenge. They
take it for a Contempt, if the Gladiators do not immediately cast themselves
upon the Swords point. They look presently about them from one to another, as
who should say, Do but see, my Masters, how these Rogues abuse us.

TO descend to the particular Branches, and Varieties, would be unnecessary,
and endless. There is a Several sorts of Anger.
Stubborn, a Vindictive, a Quarrelsome, a Violent, a Froward, a Sullen, a
Morose kind of Anger; And then we have this Variety in Complication too. One
goes no further then words, Another proceeds immediately to blows, without a
word speaking; a Third sort breaks out into Cursing, and Reprochful Language:
And there are, that content themselves with Chiding, and Complaining. There Is a
Conciliable Anger, and there is an Implacable; but in what form, or degree
soever it appears, all Anger, without Exception, is Vicious.

CHAP. II. The Rise of Anger.
THE Question will be here, Whether Anger takes its Rise from Impulse, or
Judgment: That is, whether it be moved of its own accord, or as many other
things are from within us, that arise we know not how. The Clearing of this
Point will lead us to greater Matters.

The first Motion of Anger.
THE first Motion of Anger, is, in truth, Involuntary; and only a kind of
Menacing preparation toward it. The second deliberates; as who should say,
This Injury should not Pass without a Revenge; and there it stops. The Third is
Impotent; and, Right or Wrong, resolves upon Vengeance. The First Motion is not
to be avoided; nor indeed the Second, any more than Yawning for Company:
Custom, and Care may lessen it, but, Reason it self cannot overcome it. The
Third, as it Rises upon Consideration, it must fall so too; for, that Motion
which proceeds with Judgment, may be taken away with Judgment. A Man thinks
himself Injured, and has a Mind to be revenged, but, for some Reason, lets it
rest. This is not properly Anger, but an Affection overrul'd by Reason: A kind
of Proposal disapproved. And, What are Reason, and Affection; but only Changes,
of the Mind for the better, or for the worse? Reason Deliberates before it
Judges; But, Anger passes Sentence without Deliberation: Reason only attends
the Matter in hand; but, Anger is startled at every Accident: It passes the
Bounds of Reason, and carries it away with it. In short; Anger is an Agitation
of the Mind that proceeds to the Resolution of a Revenge, the Mind assenting to
it. There is no doubt but Anger is moved by the Species of an Injury, but
whether that Motion be Voluntary, or Involuntary, is the Point in debate;
though it seems manifest to me, that Anger does nothing, but where the Mind
goes along with it. For, first to take an Offense, and then to meditate a
Revenge; and, after that, to lay both Propositions together, and say to my
self; This Injury ought not to have been done; but, as the Case stands, I must
do my self right. This Discourse can never proceed without the Concurrence of
the Will. The first motion indeed is single; but, all the rest is deliberation,
and Superstructure: There is something understood, and condemned; an
Indignation conceived, and a Revenge propounded. This can never be without the
Agreement of the Mind to the Matter in deliberation. The end of this Question
is, to know the Nature, and Quality of Anger. If it be bred in us, it will
never yield to Reason, for all Involuntary Motions are Inevitable, and
Invincible: as a kind of Horror, and Shrugging upon the sprinkling of cold
Water; the Hair standing on end at ill News: Giddiness at the sight of a
Precipice; Blushing at lewd Discourse. In these Cases, Reason can do no good;
but Anger may undoubtedly be overcome by Caution, and good Counsel; for, it is
a voluntary Vice, and not of the Condition of those Accidents that befall us as
Frailties of our Humanity: Amongst which, must be reckoned the first Motions of
the Mind, after the Opinion of an Injury received; which it is not in the power
of Humane Nature to avoid: And this is it that affects us upon the Stage, or in
a Story. Can any Man Read the Death of Pompey, and not be touched with an
Indignation? The sound of a Trumpet rouzes the Spirits, and provokes Courage.
It makes a Man sad to see the Shipwreck even of an Enemy; and we are as much
surpised by fear in other Cases: All these Motions are not so much Affections,
as Preludes to them. The Clashing of Arms; or, the Beating of a Drum, excites
a Warhorse. Nay, a Song from Xenophantes would make Alexander take his Sword in
his hand. In all these Cases, the Mind rather suffers, then acts; and therefore
it is not an Affection, to be Moved, but to give way to that Motion, and to
follow willingly what was started by Chance. These are not Affections, but
Impulses of the Body. The bravest Man in the World may look pale when he puts
on his Armor; his knees knock, and his heart work before the Battle is joined;
but, these are only Motions: whereas Anger is an Excursion, and proposes
Revenge, or Punishment, which cannot be without the Mind. As Fear flies, so
Anger Assaults; and, it is not possible to resolve either upon Violence, or
Caution, without the Concurrence of the Will.

CHAP. III. Anger may be suppressed.
IT is an Idle thing to pretend, that we cannot Govern our Anger; for, some
things that we do, are much harder than others that we ought to do; the wildest
Affections may be tamed by Discipline, and there is hardly any thing which the
Mind will do, but it may do. There needs no more Argument in this Case, then
the Instances of several Persons, both Powerful and Impatient, that have gotten
the Absolute Mastery of themselves in this point.

THRASIPPUS in his Drink fell foul upon the Cruelties of Pisistratus Mastered
his Anger.
Pisistratus; who, when he was urged by several about him to make an Example of
him, returned this Answer, Why should I be Angry with a Man that stumbles upon
me blindfold? In effect, most of our Quarrels are of our own making, either by
mistake, or by Aggravation. Anger comes sometimes upon Us, but we go oftener to
It; and, in stead of Rejecting it, we Call it.

AUGUSTUS was a great Master of his The Gentleness of Augustus.
Passion: for Timagines an Historian, wrote several bitter things against his
Person, and his Family; which passed among the People plausibly enough, as
Pieces of rash Wit commonly do. Caesar advised him several times to forbear,
and when that would not do, forbad him his Roof. After this, Asimius Pollio
gave him entertainment; and, he was so well beloved in the City, that every
Man's House was open to him. Those things that he had written in the honor of
Augustus, he recited, and burnt; and publicly professed himself Caesar's
Enemy: Augustus, for all this, never fell out with any Man that received him;
only once he told Pollio, that he had taken a Snake into his Bosom: And, as
Pollio was about to excuse himself. No, (says Caesar, interrupting him) make
your best of him; and, offering to cast him off at that very moment, if Caesar
pleased: Do you think, (says Caesar) that I will ever contribute to the
parting of you, that made you Friends? for, Pollio was angry with him before,
and only entertained him now, because Caesar had discarded him.

The Moderation of Antigonus was The Moderation of Antigonus.
remarkable; some of his Soldiers were railing at him one night, where there
was but a Hanging betwixt them: Antigonus overheard them, and putting it
gently aside; Soldiers, says he, stand a little farther off, for fear the King
should hear you. And we are to consider, not only violent examples, but
moderate, where there wanted neither Cause of displeasure, nor power of
Revenge: As in the case of Antigonus, who, the same night hearing his Soldiers
Cursing him for bringing them into so foul a way; he went to them, and, without
telling them who he was, helped them out of it. Now, says he, you may be
allowed to Curse him that brought you into the Mire, provided you Bless him
that took you out of it.

IT was a notable Story, that of Vedius Pallio, A Predominant Fear Masters
Anger.
upon his Inviting of Augustus to Supper. One of his Boys happened to break a
Glass; and his Master, in a Rage, commanded him to be thrown into a Pond to
feed his Lampreys. This Action of his might be taken for Luxury, though, in
truth, it was Cruelty. The Boy was seized, but brake loose, and threw himself
at Augustus his feet, only desiring that he might not dye that Death! Caesar,
in abhorrence of the Barbarity, presently ordered all the rest of the Glasses
to be broken; the Boy to be released, and the Pond to be filled up, that there
might be no farther Occasion for an Inhumanity of that Nature. This was an
Authority well employed. Shall the breaking of a Glass cost a Man his Life?
Nothing but a predominant fear could ever have mastered this Choleric, and
Sanguinary disposition. This Man deserved to dye a Thousand Deaths, either for
eating Humane Flesh at Second hand, in his Lampreys, or for keeping of his Fish
to be so fed.

IT is written of Praexaspes (a Favorite of Cambyses's) who was much given to
Wine, that he took the Freedom to tell his Prince of his hard Drinking, and to
lay before him the Scandal, and the Inconvenience of his Excesses; and how that
in those Distempers, he had not the Command of himself. Now (says Cambyses) to
show you your mistake; you shall see me drink deeper then ever I did, and yet
keep the use of my Eyes, and of my Hands, as well as if I were sober. Upon
this, he drank to a higher pitch than ordinary, and ordered Praexaspes his Son
to go out, and stand on the other side of the Threshold, with his left Arm over
his head; And now (says he) if I have a good aim, have at the heart of him. He
shot, and upon cutting up the Young Man, they found indeed that the Arrow had
struck him through the middle of the heart. What do you think now (says
Cambyses) Is my hand steady, or no? Apollo himself, says Praexaspes, could not
have outdone it. It may be a Question now, which was the greater Impiety, the
Murder it self, or the Commendation of it: for him to take the heart of his
Son, while it was yet Reaking, and Panting under the Wound, for an Occasion of
Flattery; Why was there not another Experiment made upon the Father, to try if
Cambyses could not yet have mended his shot? This was a most unmanly Violation
of Hospitality, but the Approbation of the Fact was still worse than the Crime
it self. This Example of Praexaspes proves sufficiently that a Man may repress
his Anger; for he returned not one ill word; no not so much as a Complaint; but
he paid dear for his good Counsel. He had been wiser perhaps, if he had let the
King alone in his Cups, for he had better have drunk Wine than Blood; It Is a
dangerous Office to give Good Advice to Intemperate Princes.

ANOTHER Instance of Anger suppressed An Instance of Anger suppressed in Harpagus.
we have in Harpagus, who was commanded to expose Cyrus upon a Mountain, but
the Child was preserved; which when Astyages came afterward to understand, he
invited Harpagus to a Dish of Meat; and when he had eaten his fill, he told him
it was a piece of his Son, and Asked him how he liked the seasoning. Whatever
pleases your Majesty, says Harpagus, must please me; and he made no more words
on it. It is most Certain that we might govern our Anger if we would; for the
same thing that Galls us at home, gives us no offense at all abroad, and what is
the Reason of it, but that we are Patient in the one place, and Froward in the
other.

IT was a strong provocation, that which was given to The Moderation of Philip
of Macedon.
Philip of Macedon, the Father of Alexander: The Athenians sent their
Ambassadors to him, and they were received with this Complement. Tell me
Gentlemen, says Philip, What is there that I can do to oblige the Athenians?
Demochares, one of the Ambassadors, told him, That they would take it for a
great Obligation if he would be pleased to hang himsef. This Insolence gave an
Indignation to the Bystanders, but Philip bad them not to meddle with him, but
even to let that foul-mouthed Fellow go as he came. And, for you, the rest of
the Ambassadors, says he, Pray'e tell the Athenians, that it is worse to speak
such things, than to hear, and forgive them. This wonderful Patience under
Contumelies was a great means of Philips Security.

CHAP. IV. It is a short madness, and a deformed Vice.
HE was much in the right whoever it was, that first called Anger, a short
Madness; for they have both of them the same Symptoms; And there is so
wonderful a resemblance betwixt the Transports of Choler, and those of Phrensy,
that it is a hard matter to know the One from the Other. A Bold, Fierce, and
Threatening Countenance, as pale as Ashes, and in the same Moment as red as
Blood; a Glaring Eye; a Wrinkled Brow, Violent Motions, the Hands Restless, and
perpetually in Action, Wringing, and Menacing, Snapping of the Joints, Stamping
with the Feet, the Hair Staring, Trembling* Lips, a Forced, and Squeaking
Voice; the Speech False, and Broken, Deep, and Frequent Sighs, and Ghostly
Looks; the Veins swell, the Heart pants, the Knees knock, with a hundred
dismal Accidents that are Common to both Distempers. Neither is Anger a bare
Resemblance only of Madness, but many times an irrevocable transition into the
thing it self. How many persons have we known, read, and heard of, that have
lost their Wits in a Passion, and never came to themselves again? It is
therefore to be avoided, not only for Moderation sake, but also for Health. Now
if the outward appearance of Anger be so foul, and hideous, How deformed must
that miserable Mind be that is harrass'd with it? for it leaves no place either
for Counsel, or Friendship, Honesty, or Good Manners; No place either for the
Exercise of Reason, or for the Offices of Life. If I were to describe it, I
would draw a Tiger bathed in Blood; sharp set, and ready to take a leap at his
Prey: or dress it up as the Poets represent the Furies, with Whips, Snakes, and
Flames. It should be Sour, Livid, full of Scars, and wallowing in Gore, Raging
Up, and Down, Destroying, Grinning, Bellowing, and Pursuing; Sick of all other
things, and most of all of it self. It turns Beauty into Deformity, and the
Calmest Counsels into Fierceness; It disorders our very Garments, and fills the
Mind with Horror. How abominable is it in the Soul then, when it appears so
hideous even through the Bones, the Skin, and so many Impediments? Is not he a
Madman that has lost the Government of himself, and is tossed hither and
thither by his Fury, as by a Tempest? The Executioner of his own Revenge, both
with his heart, and hand; and the Murderer of his nearest Friends? The
smallest matter moves it, and makes us Insociable and Inaccessible. It does all
things by Violence, as well upon it self, as others, and it is in short the
Master of all Passions.

THERE is not any Creature so All Creatures are made more Terrible by Anger.
Terrible, and Dangerous by Nature, but it becomes fiercer by Anger. Not that
Beasts have humane Affections, but certain Impulses they have which come very
near them. The Boar ^omes, champs, and whets his Tusks; the Bull tosses his
horns in the Air, Bounds, and tears up the Ground with his Feet. The Lion
Rores, and Swinges himself with his Tail; the Serpent Swells, and there is a
Ghastly kind of fellness in the Aspect of a Mad-Dog. How great a Wickedness is
it now to indulge a Violence, that does not only turn a Man into a Beast, but
makes even the most outrageous of Beasts themselves to be more Dreadful, and
Mischievous? A Vice that carries along with it neither Pleasure, nor Profit,
neither Honor, nor Security, but on the Contrary, destroys us to all the
Comfortable, and Glorious Purposes of our Reasonable Being. Some there are,
that will have the Root of it to be Greatness of Mind. And why may we not as
well entitle Impudence to Courage, whereas the One is Proud, the Other Brave;
the One is Gracious, and Gentle, the Other Rude, and Furious. At the same rate,
we may ascribe Magnanimity to Avarice, Luxury, and Ambition, which are all but
Splendid Impotences without Measure, and without Foundation. There is nothing
Great, but what is Virtuous, nor indeed truly Great, but what is also
Composed, and Quiet. Anger, alas* is but a Wild, Impetuous Blast, an Empty
Tumor, the very Infirmity of Women, and Children; a Brawling, Clamorous Evil,
and the more noise, the less Courage, as we find it commonly, that the Boldest
Tongues have the Feintest Hearts.

CHAP. V. Anger is neither Warrantable, nor Useful.
IN the first place, Anger is Unwarrantable, as it is Unjust: For it falls many
times upon the wrong person, and discharges it self upon the Innocent, in stead
of the Guilty: beside the disproportion of making the most trivial Offenses to
be Capital, and punishing an Inconsiderate Word perhaps, with Torments,
Fetters, Infamy, or Death. It allows a Man neither Time, nor Means for Defense,
but Judges a Cause without Hearing it, and admits of no Mediation. It flies in
the face of Truth it self, if it be of the Adverse Party; and turns Obstinacy
in an Error, into an Argument of Justice. It does every thing with Agitation,
and Tumult: Whereas Reason, and Equity, can destroy whole Families, if there be
Occasion for it, even to the extinguishing of their Names, and Memories, without
any Indecency, either of Countenance, or Action.

SECONDLY, It is Insociable to the Anger is Insociable.
highest point, for it spares neither Friend, nor Foe; but tears all to pieces,
and casts Humane Nature into a perpetual State of War. It dissolves the Bond of
Mutual Society, in so much that our very Companions, and Relations, dare not
come near us; it renders us unfit for the Ordinary Offices of Life, for we can
neither govern our Tongues, our Hands, nor any part of our Body. It tramples
upon the Laws of Hospitality, and of Nations, leaves every Man to be his own
Carver, and all things public, and private, Sacred and Profane, suffer
Violence.

THIRDLY, It is to no purpose. It is Unprofitable.
It Is a sad thing, we cry, to put up these Injuries, and we are not able to
bear them; as if any Man that can bear Anger, would not bear an Injury, which
is much more Supportable. You Will say, that Anger does some good yet, for it
keeps People in Awe, and secures a Man from Contempt; never considering, that
it is more dangerous to be feared, than despised. Suppose that an Angry Man
could do as much as he threatens; the more Terrible, he is still the more
odious: and on the other side, if he wants Power, he is the more despicable for
his Anger; for there is nothing more wretched than a Choleric Huff, that makes
a Noise, and nobody cares for it. If Anger should be Valuable because Men are
afraid of it; Why not an Adder, a Toad, or a Scorpion as well? It makes us lead
the Life of Gladiators; we Live, and we Fight together. We hate the Happy,
despise the Miserable, envy our Superiors, Insult upon our Inferiors, and there
is nothing in the World which we will not do, either for pleasure, or profit.
To be Angry at Offenders, is to make our selves the Common Enemies of Mankind,
which is both weak, and wicked; and we may as well be Angry that our Thistles
do not bring forth Apples; or that every Pebble in our Grounds is not an
Oriental Pearl. If we are Angry both with Young Men, and with Old, because they
do offend; Why not with Infants too, because they will offend? It is Laudable
to rejoice for any thing that is well done; but, to be transported for another
Man's doing Ill, is narrow, and sordid. Nor is it for the dignity of Virtue to
be either Angry, or Sad. It is with a Teinted Mind as with an Ulcer, not only
the Touch, but the very offer at it makes us shrink, and Complain; When we come
once to be carried off from our Poyze, we are lost. In the Choice of a Sword,
we take care that it be weildy, and well mounted; and it concerns us as much to
be wary of engaging in the Excesses of Ungovernable Passions. It is not the
Speed of a Horse altogether that pleases us, unless we find that he can Stop,
and Turn at Pleasure. It Is a sign of Weakness, and a kind of Stumbling, for a
Man to Run, when he Intends only to Walk; and it behooves us to have the same
Command of our Minds that we have of our Bodies. Beside that, the greatest
punishment of an Injury is the Conscience of having done it; and no Man suffers
more, than he that is turned over to the Pain of a Repentance. How much better
is it to Compose Injuries, than to Revenge them? For it does not only spend
time, but the Revenge of one Injury exposes us to more. In fine, as it is
unreasonable to be Angry at a Crime, it is as foolish to be Angry without one.

BUT, May not an honest Man then be allowed to be Angry at the b And in no Case
Allowable.
Murder of his Father, or the Ravishing of his Sister, or Daughter, before his
Face? No, not at all; I will defend my Parents, and I will repay the Injuries
that are done them; but it is my Piety, and not my Anger that moves me to it. I
will do my Duty without fear, or confusion; I will not Rage, I will not Weep;
but discharge the Office of a good Man, without forfeiting the dignity of a
Man. If my Father be assaulted, I Will endeavor to rescue him; If he be killed
I Will do right to his Memory; and all This, not in any transport of Passion; but
in Honor, and Conscience. Neither is there any need of Anger where Reason does
the same thing. A Man may be Temperate, and yet Vigorous, and raise his Mind
according to the Occasion, more or less, as a Stone is thrown according to the
Discretion, and Intent of the Caster. How outrageous have I seen some People
for the Loss of a Monky, or a Spaniel; and were it not a shame to have the same
sense for a Friend that we have for a Puppy; and to cry like Children, as much
for a Bauble as for the Ruin of our Country? This is not an Effect of Reason,
but of Infirmity. For a Man indeed to expose his Person for his Prince, his
Parents, or his Friends, out of a Sense of honesty, and a Judgment of Duty, it
is without dispute a worthy, and a Glorious Action; but it must be done then
with Sobriety, Calmness, and Resolution. It is high time to convince the World
of the Indignity, and Uselessness of this Passion, when it has the Authority,
and Recommendation of no less than Aristotle himself, as an Affection very much
conducing to all heroic Actions that require Heat, and Vigor: Now, to show on
the other side, that it is not in any Case Profitable, we shall lay open the
Obstinate, and Unbridled Madness of it: A Wickedness, neither sensible of
Infamy, nor of Glory; without either Modesty, or Fear; and if it passes once
from Anger into a hardened Hatred, it is Incurable. It is either stronger than
Reason, or it is weaker. If stronger, there is no contending with it; if
weaker, Reason will do the business without it. Some will have it, that an
Angry Man is Good Natured, and Sincere, whereas in truth, he only lays himself
open out of heedlessness, and want of Caution. If it were in it self Good, the
more of it the better; but in this Case, the more, the worse, and a Wise Man
does his duty without the Aid of any thing that is ill. It Is objected by some,
that those are the most Generous Creatures, which are the most prone to Anger.
But first, Reason in Man, is Impetus in Beasts. Secondly, without Discipline,
it runs into Audaciousness, and Temerity; over and above that the same thing
does not help all. If Anger helps the Lion, It Is Fear that saves the Stag;
Swiftness the Hawk, and Flight the Pigeon; but Man has God for his Example (who
is never Angry) and not the Creatures. And yet it is not amiss sometimes to
counterfeit Anger; as upon the Stage: Nay upon the Bench, and in the Pulpit,
where the Imitation of it is more effectual, than the thing it self. But it is
a great error, to take this Passion either for a Companion, or for an Assistant
to Virtue; that makes a Man incapable of all those Necessary Counsels, by which
Virtue is to govern her self. Those are false, and Inauspicious Powers, and
Destructive of themselves, which arise only from the Accession, and fervor of
a Disease. Reason Judges according to right; Anger will have every thing seem
right whatever it does; and when it has once pitched upon a Mistake, it is never
to be convinced; but prefers a Pertinacy even in the greatest Evil, before the
most necessary Repentance.

SOME People are of Opinion, that Anger It is more mischievous in War, than in
Peace.
Enflames, and Animates the Soldier, that it is a Spur to bold, and arduous
Undertakings* and that it were better to Moderate, than wholly to suppress it;
for fear of dissolving the Spirit, and force of the Mind. To this I answer,
That Virtue does not need the help of Vice, but where there is any Ardour of
Mind Necessary, we may rouse our selves, and be more or less brisk, and
vigorous, as there is occasion: But all without Anger still. It Is a mistake to
say, that we may make use of Anger as a Common Soldier, but not as a Commander;
for if it hears Reason, and follows* Orde^s, it is not properly Anger; and if
it does Not, it is Contumacious, and Mutinous. By this Argument, a Man must be
Angry to be Valiant; Covetous, to be Industrious; Timorous to be Safe, which
makes our Reason confederate with our Affections. And it is all one whether
Passion be Inconsiderate without Reason, or Reason Ineffectual without Passion;
Since the one cannot be without the other. It Is true, the less the Passion, the
less is the Mischief; for a little Passion is the smaller Evil. Nay, so far is
it from being of Use, or Advantage in the Field, that it is the Place of all
others where it is the most dangerous: for the Actions of War are to be managed
with Order, and Caution, not Precipitation, and Fancy: Whereas Anger is
heedless, and heady, and the Virtue only of Barbarous Nations, which, though
their Bodies were much stronger, and more hardened, were still worsted by the
Moderation, and Discipline of the Romans. There is not upon the Face of the
Earth, a Bolder, or a more Indefatigable Nation than the Germans; not a Braver
upon a Charge, nor a Hardyer against Colds, and Heats; their only Delight, and
Exercise, is in Arms, to the Utter neglect of all things else: and yet upon
the Encounter, they are broken, and destroyed through their own Undisciplined
Temerity, even by the most effeminate of Men. The Huntsman is not Angry with
the wild Bore, when he either pursues, or receives him; a good Swordman watches
his Opportunity, and keeps himself upon his Guard, whereas passion lays a Man
open: nay, it is one of the prime Lessons in a Fencing-School, to learn not to
be Angry. If Fabius had been Choleric, Rome had been lost, and before he
Conquered Hannibal, he overcame Himself. If Scipio had been Angry, he would
never have left Hannibal, and his Army, (who were the proper Objects of his
Displeasure) to carry the War into Afric, and so to compass his End by a more
temperate way. Nay, he was so slow, that it was charged upon him for want of
Mettle, and Resolution. And what did the Other Scipio? ( Affricanus I mean) how
much time did he spend before Numantia, to the Common Grief both of his
Country, and Himself, though he reduced it, at last, by so miserable a Famine,
that the Inhabitants laid violent hands upon themselves, and left neither Man,
Woman, nor Child, to survive the ruins of it. If Anger makes a Man fight
better; so does Wine, Phrenzy, nay and Fear it self; For the greatest Coward in
despair does the greatest wonders. No Man is Courageous in his Anger, that was
not so without it. But put the Case that Anger, by Accident, may have done some
good, and so have Fevers removed some distempers; but it is an Odious kind of
Remedy, that makes us endebted to a Disease for a Cure. How many Men have been
preserved by Poison; by a Fall from a Precipice; by a Shipwreck; by a Tempest?
Does it therefore follow, that we are to recommend the Practice of these
Experiments?

BUT, in Case of an Exemplary, and He that is Angry at Public Wickedness, shall
never be at Peace.
Prostitute Dissolution of Manners, when Clodius shall be preferred, and Cicero
rejected; when Loyalty shall be broken upon the Wheel, and Treason sit
Triumphant upon the Bench; It not this a Subject to move the Choler of any
Virtuous Man? No, by no means, Virtue will never allow of the Correcting of one
Vice by another; or that Anger, which is the Greater Crime of the two, should
presume to punish the less. It is the Natural Property of Virtue to make a Man
Serene, and Cheerful; and it is not for the Dignity of a Philosopher, to be
Transported either with Grief, or Anger: And then the End of Anger is Sorrow,
the constant effect of disappointment, and Repentance. But, to my purpose. If a
Man should be Angry at Wickedness, the Greater the Wickedness is, the Greater
must be his Anger: And, so long as there is Wickedness in the World, he must
never be pleased* Which makes his Quiet dependent upon the Humor, or Manners
of Others. There passes not a day over our heads, but he that is Choleric,
shall have some Cause, or other of displeasure, either from Men, Accidents, or
Bus^ess. He shall never stir out of his house, but he shall meet with Criminals
of all sorts; Prodigal, Impudent* Covetous, Perfidious, Contentious; Children
persecuting their Parents; Parents cursing their Children; the Innocent
accused, the Delinquent acqui^ed, and the Judge practicing that in his Chamber,
which he condemns upon the Bench* In fine, wherever there are Men, there are
Faults, and upon these Terms, Socrates himself should never bring the same
Countenance home again, that he carried out with him.

IF Anger were Sufferable in any Case, it might be allowed against an
Incorrigible Criminal, Justice is Calm, and Temperate.
under the hand of Justice: But Punishment is not matter of Anger, but of
Caution. The Law is without Passion, and strikes Malefactors as we do Serpents,
and Venomous Creatures, for fear of greater Mischief. It is not for the dignity
of a Judge, when he comes to pronounce the fatal Sentence, to express any
Motions of Anger in his Looks, Words, or Gestures: For he condemns the Vice,
not the Man; and looks upon the Wickedness without Anger, as he does upon the
Prosperity of Wicked Men without Envy. But though he be not Angry, I would have
him a little moved, in point of Humanity; but yet without any offense either to
his Place, or Wisdom. Our Passions vary, but Reason is equal; and it were a
great Folly for that which is Stable, Faithful, and Sound, to repair for Succor
to that which is Uncertain, False, and Distempered. If the Offender be
Incurable, take him out of the World, that if he will not be Good, he may cease
to be Evil; but this must be without Anger too. Does any Man hate an Arm, or a
Leg, when he cuts it off; or reckon That a Passion, which is only a Miserable
Cure? We knock Mad Dogs on the head, and remove Scabbed Sheep out of the Fold:
and this is not Anger still, but Reason; to separate the Sick from the Sound;
Justice cannot be Angry; nor is there any need of an Angry Magistrate, for the
Punishment of Foolish, and Wicked Men. The Power of Life, and Death, must not
be managed with Passion. We give a Horse the Spur, that is restiff, or jadish,
and tryes to cast his Rider. But, this is without Anger too, and only to take
down his Stomach, and bring him, by Correction, to Obedience.

IT IS true, that Correction is Necessary, Correction is necessary, but within
Bounds.
yet within Reason, and Bounds, for it does not Hurt, but Profit us under an
Appearance of Harm. Ill Dispositions in the Mind are to be dealt with as those
in the Body; The Physician first tries Purging, and Abstinence; if This will
not do, he proceeds to Bleeding, nay to Dismembring, rather than fail; for
there is no Operation too severe that ends in Health. The Public Magistrate
begins with Persuasion, and his business is, to beget a Detestation for Vice,
and a Veneration for Virtue: From Thence if need be, he advances to Admonition,
and Reproach, and then to Punishments; but Moderate, and Revocable, unless the
Wickedness be In^urable* and then the Punishment must be so too. There Is only
This Difference, the Physician, when he cannot save his Patients Life,
endeavors to make his Death Easy; but the Magistrate Aggravates the Death of
the Criminal, with Infamy, and Disgrace: not as Delighting in the severity of
it (for no Good Man can be so Barbarous) but for Example, and to the end that
they that will do no good Living, may do some Dead. The end of all Correction,
is either the Amendment of Wicked Men, or to Prevent the Influence of Ill
Example: For Men are Punished with a Respect to the Future, not to expiate
Offenses Committed, but for fear of worse to come. Public Offenders must be
Publicly Executed* that their Punishment may be a Terror to Others; but still
all this while, the Power of Life and Death must not be Managed with Passion.
The Medicine, in the mean time must be suited to the Disease: Infamy cures One;
Pain Another; Exile cures a Third; Beggary, a Fourth; But there are some that
are only to be Cured by the Gibbet. I would be no more Angry with a Thief, or a
Traitor, than I am Angry with my Self when I open a Vein. All Punishment is but
a Moral, or a Civil Remedy. I do not do any thing that is very Ill; but yet I
Transgress Often. Try me First with a Private Reprehension; and then with a
Public; If That will not serve, see what Banishment will do; If not That
neither, load me with Chains, lay me in Prison: But if I should prove Wicked
even for Wickedness sake, and leave no Hope of Reclaiming me, it would be a
kind of Mercy to Destroy me. Vice is Incorporated with me; and there is no
Remedy, but the taking of Both away together; but still, without Anger.

CHAP. VI. Anger in General, with the Danger, and Effects of it.
THERE is no Surer Argument of a Great Mind, than not to be transported to
Anger by any Accident: The Clouds, and the Tempests are formed below, but all
Above is Quiet, and Serene: which is the Emblem of a brave Man, that
suppresses all Provocations, and lives within himself, Modest, Venerable, and
Composed: Whereas Anger is a Turbulent humor, which at first dash casts off
all shame, without any regard to Order, Measure, or good Manners; transporting
a Man into Misbecoming Violences, with his Tongue, his Hands, and every part of
his Body. And whoever considers the Foulness, and the Brutality of this Vice,
must acknowledge, that there i^ no such Monster in Nature, as on^ Man raging
against another, and laboring to sink that, which can never be drowned, but
with himself for Company. It renders us incapable, either of Discourse, or of
other common Duties. It is of all Passions the most Powerful: For it makes a
Man that is in Love, to kill his Mistress; The Ambitious Man to trample upon
his Honors, and the Covetous to throw away his Fortune. There is not any Mortal
that lives free from the danger of it, for it makes even the heavy, and the
good Natured to be fierce, and outrageous; It invades us like a Pestilence, the
Lusty as well as the Weak, and it is not either strength of Body, or a good
Diet, that can secure us against it; Nay, the Learnedest, and Men otherwise of
exemplary Sobriety, are infested with it. It is so potent a Passion, that
Socrates durst not trust himself with it. Sirrah (says he, to his Man) now
would I beat you, if I were not angry with you. There is no Age, o^ Sect of Men
that Scapes it. Ot^r Vices take us one by one; but This, like an Epidemical
Co^agion, sweeps all: Men, Women, and Children; Princes, and Beggars are
carried away with it in Sholes, and Troops, as one Man. It was never seen that
a whole Nation was in Love with one Woman, or Unanimously bent upon one Vice:
But here and there, some particular Men are teinted with some Particular
Crimes; whereas in Anger, a single word many times inflames the whole
Multitude, and Men betake themselves Presently to Fire, and Sword upon it; the
Rabble takes upon them to give Laws to their Governors; the Common Soldiers, to
their Officers; to the Ruin, not only of Private Families, but of Kingdoms,
turning their Arms against their own Leaders, and choosing their own Generals.
There Is no public Council; no putting of things to the Vote; but in a Rage the
Mutiniers divide from the Senate, name their Head, force the Nobility in their
own Houses, and put them to death with their own hands. The Laws of Nations are
violated, the Persons of Public Ministers affronted, whole Cities infected
with a General Madness, and no Respite allowed for the Abatement, or Discussing
of this Public Tumor. The Ships are crowded with tumultuary Soldiers. And in
this rude, and Ill-boding Manner they March, and act under the Conduct only of
their own Passions. Whatever comes next serves them for Arms, till at last
they pay for their Licentious rashness, with the slaughter of the whole party:
This is the Event of a heady, and inconsiderate War. When Men's Minds are struck
with the Opinion of an Injury, they fall on immediately wheresoever their
Passion leads them, without either Order, Fear, or Caution; provoking their own
Mischief; never at Rest, till they come to Blows; and pursuing their Revenge,
even with their Bodies upon the Points of their Enemies Weapons. So that the
Anger it self is much more hurtful to us, than the Injury that provokes it; for
the one is bounded, but where the other will stop, no Man living knows. There
are no greater Slaves certainly, than those that serve Anger, for they improve
their Misfortunes by an Impatience more insupportable than the Calamity that
causes it.

NOR does it rise by degrees, as other Passions, but flushes like Gunpowder,
blowing up all a Anger blows up all in a Moment.
in a Moment. Neither does it only press to the Mark, but overbears every thing
in the way to it. Other vices Drive us, but This Hurry's us headlong; other
Passions stand firm Themselves, though perhaps we cannot resist them, but this
consumes, and destroys it self: It falls like Thunder, or a Tempest; with an
Irrevocable Violence, that gathers strength in the Passage, and then evaporates
in the Conclusion. Other Vices are Unreasonable, but this is Unhealthful too;
Other distempers have their Intervals, and Degrees, but in this we are thrown
down, as from a Precipice; There is not any thing so amazing to others, or so
destructive to it self: So Proud, and Insolent, if it succeeds, or so
Extravagant, if it be disappointed. No repulse discourages it, and for want of
other Matter to Work upon, it falls foul upon it self; and let the Ground be
never so Trivial, it is sufficient for the Wildest outrage imaginable. It
spares neither Age, Sex, nor Quality. Some People would be Luxurious perchance,
but that they are Poor; and Others Lazy, if they were not perpetually kept at
work. The Simplicity of a Country Life keeps many Men in Ignorance of the
Frauds, and Impieties of Courts, and Camps: But, no Nation, or Condition of Men
is exempt from the Impressions of Anger, and it is equally dangerous, as well
in War, as in Peace. We find, that Elephants will be made Familiar; Bulls will
suffer Children to ride upon their backs, and play with their horns; Bears,
and Lions, by good Usage, will be brought to ^awn upon their Masters: How
desperate a Madness is it then for Men, after the reclaiming of the fiercest of
Beasts, and the bringing of them to be tractable, and domestic, to become yet
worse than Beasts one to another. Alexander had two Friends, Clytus, and
Lysimachus; the One he exposed to a Lion, the Other to Himself, and he that was
turned loose to the Beast escaped. Why do we not rather make the best of a
short Life, and render our selves Amiable to all while we Live, and Desirable
when we Dye?

LET us bethink our selves of our Mortality, and not squander away the little
Anger is Loss of Time, as well as of Peace.
time that we have, upon Animosities, and Fewds, as if it were never to be at
an end? Had we not better enjoy the Pleasure of our own Life, than be still
contriving how to Gall, and torment another; In all our Brawlings, and
Contentions, never so much as dreaming of our own weakness. Do we not know that
these implacable Enmities of ours lie at the Mercy of a Fever, or any petty
Accident to disappoint. Our Fate is at hand, and the very hour that we have set
for another Man's Death, may peradventure be prevented by our own. What is it
that we make all this bustle for; and so needlessly disquiet our Minds? we are
offended with our Servants, our Masters, our Princes, our Clyents: It Is but a
little Patience, and we shall be all of us Equal; so that there is no need
either of Ambushes, or of Combats. Our Wrath cannot go beyond Death; and Death
will most undoubtedly come, whether we be peevish, or quiet. It Is time lost, to
take pains to do that, which will infallibly be done without us. But, suppose
that we would only have our Enemy Banished, Disgraced, or Damaged, let his
punishment be more or less, it is yet too long, either for him to be inhumanely
tormented, or for us our selves to be most barbarously pleased with it. It
holds in Anger, as in Mourning, it must, and will at last fall of it self: let
us look to it then betimes, for when it is once come to an ill habit, we shall
never want matter to feed it; and it is much better to overcome our Passions,
than to be overcome by them. Some way or other, either our Parents, Children,
Servants, Acquaintance, or Strangers, will be continually vexing us. We are
tossed hither and thither by our Affections, like a Feather in a Storm, and by
fresh provocations the Madness becomes perpetual. Miserable Creatures! That
ever our Precious hours should be so ill employed. How prone and eager are we
in our Hatred, and how backward in our Love? were it not much better now to be
making of Friendships, pacifying of Enemies; doing of good Offices both Public
and Private; than to be still meditating of mischief, and designing how to
wound one Man in his Fame, another in his Fortune, a third in his Person: the
One being so Easy, Innocent, and Safe; and the Other so Difficult, Impious,
and Hazardous. Nay, take a Man in Chains, and at the Foot of his Oppressor; How
many are there, who, even in this Case, have maimed themselves in the heat of
their Violence upon others?

THIS Untractable Passion is much more easily kept out, than Governed when it
is once Admitted; c Anger may be better kept out than Governed.
for the stronger will give Laws to the weaker, and make Reason a slave to the
Appetite. It carries us headlong, and in the Course of our Fury, we have no
more command of our Minds, than we have of our Bodies down a Precipice; when
they are once in Motion, there is no stop till they come to the bottom. Not but
that it is Possible for a Man to be warm in Winter; and not to sweat in Summer,
either by the Benefit of the Place, or the hardyness of the Body. And, in like
manner, we may provide against Anger. But certain it is, that Virtue and Vice
can never agree in the same Subject; and one may be as well a Sick Man and a
Sound at the same time, as a Good Man, and an Angry. Beside, if we will needs
be quarrelsome, it must be either with our Superior, our Equal, or Inferior. To
contend with our Superior is Folly, and Madness; with our Equals it is
Doubtful, and Dangerous; and with our Inferiors it is Base. Nor does any Man
know, but that he that is now our Enemy, may come hereafter to be our Friend,
over and above the Reputation of Clemency, and Good Nature. And what can be
more Honorable, or Comfortable, than to exchange a Feud for a Friendship. The
People of Rome never had more Faithful Allies, than those that were at first
their most obstinate Enemies: Neither had the Roman Empire ever arrived at that
height of Power, if Providence had not mingled the Vanquished with the
Conquerors. There Is an end of the Contest, when one side deserts it: So that
the paying of Anger with Benefits puts a period to the Controversy. But
however, if it be our Fortune to Transgress, let not our Anger descend to the
Children, Friends, or Relations, even of our bitterest Enemies; the very
Cruelty of Sylla was heightened by that Instance of Incapacitating the Issue of
the Proscribed. It is Inhumane to entail the hatred we have for the Father,
upon his Posterity. A Good, and a Wise Man is not to be an Enemy of Wicked Men,
but a Reprover of them, and he is to look upon all the Drunkards, the Lustful,
the Thankless, Covetous, and Ambitious that he meets with, no otherwise than as
a Physician looks upon his Patients; for he that will be Angry with Any Man,
must be displeased with All; which were as ridiculous, as to quarrel with a
Body for stumbling in the Dark: with one that is deaf, for not doing as you bid
him: Or with a Schoolboy for loving his Play better than his Book. Democritus
laughed, and Heraclitus wept at the Folly, and Wickedness of the World, but we
never Read of an Angry Philosopher.

THIS is undoubtedly the detestable of Vices, even compared with the worst of
them. d Anger the most Detestable of all Vices.
Avarice Scrapes, and gathers together that which some Body may be the better
for: but Anger lashes out, and no Man comes off gratis. An Angry Master makes
one Servant run away; and another hang himself; and his Choler causes him a
much greater loss than he suffered in the Occasion of it. It Is the cause of
Mourning to the Father, and of Divorce to the Husband: It makes the Magistrate
Odious, and gives the Candidate a Repulse. And it is worse than Luxury too,
which only aims at its proper pleasure; whereas the other, is bent upon
another bodies pain. The Malevolent, and the Envious content themselves only to
wish another Man Miserable; but it is the business of Anger to make him so: and
to wreak the Mischief it self, not so much desiring the hurt of another, as to
inflict it. Among the Powerful, it breaks out into open War, and into a Private
one with the Common People, but without Force, or Arms. It engages us in
Treacheries, perpetual Troubles, and Contentions: It alters the very Nature of
a Man, and punishes it self in the Persecution of others. Humanity excites us
to Love, This to Hatred: That to be beneficial to Others; This to hurt them:
Beside, that though it proceeds from too high a Conceit of our selves, it is
yet in effect, but a Narrow, and Contemptible Affection: especially when it
meets with a Mind that is hard, and impenetrable; and returns the dart upon the
head of him that casts it.

TO take a further view now of the miserable Consequences, and Sanguinary
Effects of this hideous e The Miserable Effects of Anger.
distemper; from hence come Slaughters, and Poisons, Wars, and Desolation, the
Rasing, and Burning of Cities; the Unpeopling of Nations, and the turning of
Populous Countries into Deserts; Public Massacres, and Regicides; Princes led
in Triumph; some Murdered in their Bed-Chambers; others Stabbed in the Senate,
or Cut off, in the Security of their Spectacles, and Pleasures. Some there are
that take Anger for a Princely Quality; as Darius, who, in his Expedition
against the Scythians, being besought by a Nobleman that had Three Sons, that
he would vouchsafe to accept of two of them into his Service, and leave the
third at home for a Comfort to his Father. I will do more for you than that,
says Darius, for you shall have them all three again: So he ordered them to be
slain before his Face, and left him their Bodies. But Xerxes dealt a little
better with Pythius, who had five Sons, and desired only one of them for
himself. Xerxes bad him take his Choice, and he named the Eldest, whom he
immediately Commanded to be Cut in halves; and one half of the Body to be laid
on each side of the way where his Army was to pass betwixt them: Undoubtedly a
most Auspicious Sacrifice; but he came afterward to the End that he deserved;
for he lived to see that Prodigious Power Scattered, and Broken, and, in stead
of Military, and Victorious Troops, to be encompassed with Carcasses. But
these, you will say, were only Barbarous Princes, that knew neither Civility, nor
Letters: And these Salvage Cruelties will be imputed perchance to their
rudeness of Manners, and want of Discipline. But, what will you say then of
Alexander the Great, that was trained up under the Institution of Aristotle
himself; and killed Clytus his Favorite and School-fellow with his own hand,
under his own Roof, and over the freedom of a Cup of Wine? And what was his
Crime? He was loath to degenerate from a Macedonian Liberty into a Persian
Slavery: that is to say, he could not Flatter. Lysimachus, another of his
Friends, he exposed to a Lion; and this very Lysimachus, after he had escaped
this danger, was never the more Merciful, when he came to Reign himself; for he
cut off the Ears and Nose of his Friend Telesphorus, and when he had so
disfigured him, that he had no longer the Face of a Man, he threw him into a
Dungeon, and there kept him to be showed for a Monster, as a strange sight. The
place was so low, that he was fain to creep upon all four, and his sides were
galled too with the straitness of it. In this Misery he lay, half Famished in
his own Filth; so Odious, so Terrible, and so Loathsome a Spectacle, that the
horror of his Condition had even extinguished all pity for him. Nothing was
ever so unlike a Man, as the poor wretch that suffered this, saving the Tyrant
that Acted it.

NOR did this Mercyless Hardness only exercise it The Cruelty of Marius.
self among Foreigners, but the fierceness of their Outrages, and Punishments,
as well as their Vices, brake in upon the Romans. M. Marius, that had his
Statue set up every where, and was Adored as a God; L. Sylla commanded his
Bones to be broken, his Eyes to be pulled out, his Hands to be cut off; and, as
if every Wound had been a several Death, his Body to be torn to Pieces, and
Cataline was the Executioner. A Cruelty, that was only fit for Marius to
Suffer; Sylla to Command, and Cataline to Act; but most dishonorable, and fatal
to the Commonwealth, to fall indifferently upon the Swords Points both of
Citizens, and of Enemies.

IT was a Severe Instance that of Piso A Barbarous Severity of Piso.
too. A Soldier that had leave to go abroad with his Camarade, came back to the
Camp at his time, but without his Companion, Piso Condemns him to Dye, as if he
had killed him, and appoints a Centurion to see the Execution. Just as the
Heads-man was ready to do his Office, the other Soldier appeared, to the great
Joy of the whole Field, and the Centurion bad the Executioner hold his hand;
Hereupon, Piso in a rage mounts the Tribunal, and Sentences all Three to Death:
the One, because he was Condemned; the Other, because it was for his sake that
his fellow Soldier was Condemned; The Centurion, for not obeying the Order of
his Superior. An Ingenious piece of Inhumanity, to contrive how to make Three
Criminals, where effectually there were none. There was a Persian King that
caused the Noses of a whole Nation to be cut off, and they were to thank him
that he spared their Heads. And this Perhaps would have been the Fate of the
Macrobii (if Providence had not hindered it) for the Freedom they used to
Cambyses Ambassadors, in not accepting the slavish terms that were offered
them. This put Cambyses into such a rage, that he presently Listed into his
Service every Man that was able to bear Arms: and without either Provisions or
Guides, Marched immediately through dry, and barren Deserts, and where never
any Man had passed before him, to take his Revenge. Before he was a third part
of the way, his Provisions failed him; His Men, at first made shift with the
Buds of Trees, Boiled Leather, and the like; but soon after, there was not so
much as a Root, or a Plant to be gotten, nor a Living Creature to be seen; and
then, by Lot, every Tenth Man was to Dye, for a nourishment to the rest; which
was still worse than the Famine: but yet This Passionate King went on so far,
till one part of his Army was lost, and the other devoured, and till he feared
that he himself might come to be served with the same sauce. So that at last he
ordered a Retreat, wanting no Delicacies all this while for himself, while his
Soldiers were taking their Chance who should Dye miserably, or Live worse. Here
was an Anger taken up against a whole Nation, that neither deserved any ill
from him, nor was so much as known to him.

CHAP. VII. The Ordinary Grounds, and Occasions of Anger.
IN this wandering State of Life, we meet with many Occasions of trouble, and
displeasure, both Great, and Trivial; and not a day passes, but from Men, or
Things, we have some Cause or other for Offense; as a Man must expect to be
justl'd, dashed, and crowded in a Populous City. One Man deceives our
Expectation; Another delays it; and a Third Crosses it; and if every thing
does not succeed to our wish, we presently fall out either with the Person, the
Business, the Place, our Fortune, or our Selves. Some Men value themselves upon
their Wit, and will never forgive any one that pretends to lessen it: Others
are Enflamed by Wine; and some are distempered by Sickness, Wearyness,
Watchings, Love, Care, etc. Some are prone to it by Heat of Constitution, but
Moist, Dry, and Cold Complexions are more liable to other Affections; as
Suspicion, Despair, Fear, Jealousy, etc. but most of our Quarrels are of our
own Contriving, One while we Suspect upon Mistake; and another while we make a
great matter of Trifles. To say the Truth, most of those things that exasperate
us, are rather Subject of Disgust, than of Mischief; there is a large difference
betwixt Opposing a Man's Satisfaction, and not Assisting it; betwixt Taking
away, and not Giving; But we reckon upon Dexying, and Deferring, as the same
thing, and interpret another being for himself, as if he were against us. Nay,
we do many times entertain an ill Opinion of Well-doing, and a Good one of the
Contrary: And we hate a Man for doing that very thing, which we should hate him
for on the other side, if he did not do it. We take it ill to be opposed, when
there is a Father Perhaps, a Brother, or a Friend in the Case against us; when
we should rather love a Man for it; and only wish that he could be honestly of
our Party. We approve of the Fact, and detest the doer of it. It is a base
thing to hate the Person whom we cannot but Commend; but it is a great deal
worse yet, if we hate him for the very Thing that deserves Commendation. The
things that we desire, if they be such as cannot be Given to One, without being
Taken away from another, must needs set those people together by the Ears, that
desire the same thing. One Man has a design upon my Mistress; another upon mine
Inheritance: And that which should make Friends, makes Enemies; our being all
of a Mind. The General Cause of Anger, is the Sense, or Opinion of an Injury;
that is, the Opinion either of an Injury Simply done, or of an Injury done
which we have not deserved. Some are Naturally given to Anger. Others are
provoked to it by Occasion; The Anger of Women, and Children is commonly sharp,
but not lasting: Old Men are rather querulous, and peevish. Hard Labor,
Diseases, Anxiety of Thought, and whatsoever hurts the Body, or the Mind,
disposes a Man to be Froward, but we must not add fire to fire.

HE that duly considers the Subject The Subject of our A^ger is not worth the
while.
matter of all our Controversies, and Quarrels, will find them low, and Mean,
and not worth the Thought of a Generous Mind; but the greatest Noise of all is
about Money. This is it, that sets Fathers and Children together by the Ears;
Husbands and Wives, and makes way for Sword and Poison: This is it that tires
out Courts of Justice; enrages Princes, and lays Cities in the Dust, to seek
for Gold, and Silver in the Ruins of them. This is it, that finds work for the
Judge, to determine, which side is least in the wrong; and whose is the more
plausible Avarice, the Plaintiffs, or the Defendents: And what is it that we
contend for all this while, but those Baubles that make us Cry, when we should
Laugh? To see a Rich old Chuff, that has no body to leave his Estate to, break
his heart for a handful of Dirt; And a Gouty Usurer, that has no other Use of
his Fingers left him, but to Count withal; to see him, I say, in the Extremity
of his Fit, wrangling for the odd Money in his Interest: -- If all that is
precious in Nature were gathered into one Mass, it were not worth the trouble
of a Sober Mind. It were endless to run over all those ridiculous Passions that
ate moved about Meats, and Drinks, and the matter of our Luxury; Nay, about
Words, Looks, Actions, Jealousies, Mistakes, which are all of them as
contemptible Fooleries as those very Bawbles that Children Scratch, and Cry
for. There is nothing Great, or Serious in all that which we keep such a
Clutter about; the Madness of it is, that we set too Great a Value upon
Trifles. One Man flies out upon a Salute, a Letter, a Speech, a Question; a
Gesture, a Wink, a Look. An Action moves one Man; A Word Affects another: One
Man is tender of his Family; another of his Person; One sets up for an Orator;
Another for a Philosopher; This Man will not bear Pride, nor That Man
Opposition. He that plays the Tyrant at Home, is as gentle as a Lamb abroad.
Some take Offense if a Man asks a Favor of them, and others, if he does not.
Every Man has his weak side; let us learn which that is, and take a Care of it,
for the same thing does not work upon all Men alike. We are moved like Beasts,
at the Idle appearances of things; and the fiercer the Creature, the more is it
startled. The sight of a red Cloth enrages a Bull. A Shadow provokes the Asp;
Nay, so unreasonable are some Men, that they take Moderate Benefits for
Injuries; and Squabble about it, with their nearest Relations. They have done
this and that for others, they cry; And they might have dealt better with us if
they had pleased. Very Good! And if it be less than we looked for, it may be
yet more than we deserve. Of all Unquiet humors, this is the worst, that will
never suffer any Man to be happy, so long as he sees a happier Man than
himself. I have known some Men so weak, as to think themselves contemned, if a
Horse did but play the Jade with Them, that is yet obedient to Another Rider. A
Brutal Folly, to be Offended at a Mute Animal; for no Injury can be done us
without the Concurrence of Reason. A Beast may hurt us, as a Sword, or a Stone,
and no otherwise. Nay, there are, that will complain of foul weather, a raging
Sea, a biting winter, as if it were expressly directed to them; and this they
charge upon Providence, whose Operations are all of them so far from being
Injurious, that they are Beneficial to us.

HOW Vain, and Idle are many of those We are Angry for Trifles.
things that make us stark Mad! A resty Horse, the overturning of a Glass; the
falling of a Key, the Dragging of a Chair, a Jealousy, a Misconstruction. How
shall that Man endure the Extremities of Hunger, and Thirst; that flies out
into a rage only for the putting of a little too much Water in his Wine? What
haste is there to lay a Servant by the heels, or break a Leg, or an Arm
immediately for it, as if he were not to have the same power over him an hour
after, that he has at that Instant? The Answer of a Servant, a Wife, a Tenant,
puts some People out of all Patience; and yet they can quarrel with the
Government for not allowing them the same Liberty in Public, which they
themselves deny to their own Families. If they say nothing, it is Contumacy; if
they Speak, or Laugh, it is Insolence. As if a Man had his Ears given him only
for Music; Whereas we must suffer all sorts of Noises, good and bad, both of
Men, and Beasts. How Idle is it to start at the tinkling of a Bell, or the
Creaking of a Door, when for all this delicacy, we must endure Thunder? Neither
are our Eyes less Curious, and Fantastical than our Ears. When we are abroad,
we can bear well enough with foul ways, nasty Streets, Noisome Ditches; but a
spot upon a Dish at home, or an unswept Hearth, absolutely distracts us. And
what is the Reason, but that we are patient in the One place, and Phantastically
peevish in the other. Nothing makes us more Intemperate than Luxury, that
shrinks at every stroke, and starts at every shadow. It Is Death to some to have
another sit above them, as if a Body were ever the more, or the less honest for
the Cushion. But they are only weak Creatures that think themselves wounded, if
they be but touched. One of the Sibarites, that saw a Fellow hard at work a
digging, desired him to give over, for it made him weary to see him: and, it
was an ordinary complaint with him, That he could take no Rest, because the
Roseleaves lay double under him. When we are once weakened with our Pleasures,
every thing grows Intolerable. And we are Angry as well with those things that
cannot hurt us, as with those that do. We tear a Book because it is blotted; and
our Clothes, because they are not well made: Things that neither deserve our
Anger, nor feel it: The Tailor perchance did his best, or however, had no
Intent to displease us: If so, first, Why should we be Angry at all; secondly,
Why should we be angry with the thing for the Man's sake? Nay, our Anger extends
even to Dogs, Horses, and other Beasts.

IT was a Blasphemous, and a Sottish Extravagance that of Caius c The
Blasphemous Extravagance of Caius Caesar.
Caesar, who challenged Jupiter for making such a Noise with his Thunder that
he could not hear his Mimiques, and invented a Machine in Imitation of it, to
oppose Thunder to Thunder; a brutal conceit, to imagine, either that he could
reach the Allmighty, or that the Allmighty could not reach him.

AND every jote as ridiculous, though not so Impious, was d A Ridiculous
Extravagance of Cyrus.
that of Cyrus; who, in his design upon Babylon, found a River in his way that
put a stop to his March: The Current was strong, and carried away one of the
Horses that belonged to his own Chariot: upon this, he swore, that since it had
obstructed his Passage, it should never hinder any Bodies else: And presently
set his whole Army to work upon it, which diverted it into a hundred and
fourscore Channels, and laid it dry. In this Ignoble, and unprofitable
employment, he lost his Time, and the Soldiers their Courage, and gave his
Adversaries an opportunity of providing themselves, while he was waging War
with a River, in stead of an Enemy.

CHAP. VIII. Advice in the Cases of Contumely and Revenge.
OF Provocations to Anger there are two sorts; there is an Injury, and there is
a Contumely. The former in its own Nature is the heavier; the other, slight in
it self, and only Troublesome to a wounded Imagination. And yet some there are
that will bear Blows, and Death it self, rather than Contumelious Words. A
Contumely is an Indignity below the Consideration of the very Law; and not
worthy either of a Revenge, or so much as a Complaint. It is only the Vexation,
and Infirmity of a weak Mind, as well as the Practice of a Haughty and Insolent
Nature, and signifies no more to a Wise, and Sober Man, than an Idle Dream,
that is no sooner past than forgotten. It Is true, it implies Contempt; But what
needs any Man Care for being Contemptible to others, if he be not so to
himself? For a Child in the Arms to strike the Mother, tear her Hair, claw the
Face of her, and call her Names, That goes for nothing with us, because the
Child knows not what it does. Neither are we moved at the Impudence, and
Bitterness of a Buffon; though he fall upon his own Master, as well as the
Guests: But, on the Contrary, we encourage, and entertain the Freedom. Are we
not Mad then, to be Delighted, and Displeased with the same thing, and to take
that as an Injury from one Man, which passes only for a Raillery from another?
He that is Wise, will behave himself toward All Men, as we do to our Children:
For They are but Children too; though they have Gray hairs; They are indeed of
a larger Size, and their Errors are grown up with them; They live without Rule,
they Covet without Choice, they are Timorous, and Unsteady, and if at any time
they happen to be Quiet, it is more out of Fear, than Reason. It Is a wretched
Condition to stand in awe of every Bodies Tongue; and, whosoever is vexed at a
Reproach, would be proud if he were Commended. We should look upon Contumelies,
Slanders, and Ill Words, only as the Clamor of Enemies, or Arrows shot at a
distance, that make a Clattering upon our Arms, but do no Execution. A Man
makes himself less than his Adversary, by Phansying that he is Contemned.
Things are only Ill, that are Ill Taken; and it is not for a Man of worth to
think himself better, or worse, for the Opinion of Others. He that thinks
himself Injured, let him say, Either I have deserved this, or I have not. If I
have, it is a Judgment; if I have not, it is an Injustice; and the doer of it has
more reason to be ashamed, than the sufferer. Nature has assigned every Man his
Post, which he is bound in honor to maintain, let him be never so much pressed.
Diogenes was Disputing of Anger, and an Insolent young Fellow, to try if he
could put him beside his Philosophy, spit in his Face; Young Man, says
Diogenes, this does not make me Angry yet; but I am in some doubt whether I
should be so or no. Some are so Impatient, that they cannot bear a Contumely,
even from a Woman; whose very Beauty, Greatness, and Ornaments, are all of them
little enough to vindicate her from many Indecencyes, without much Modesty, and
Discretion. Nay, they will lay it to heart even from the meanest of Servants.
How wretched is that Man whose Peace lies at the Mercy of the People. A
Physician is not Angry at the Intemperances of a Mad Patient, nor does he take
it ill to be Railed at by a Man in a Fever: Just so should a Wise Man treat
all Mankind, as a Physician does his Patient, and looking upon them only as
Sick, and Extravagant; let their Words, and Actions, whether Good, or Bad, to
go equally for nothing; attending still his duty even in the Coursest Offices
that may conduce to their Recovery. Men that are Proud, Froward, and Powerful,
he values their Scorn as little as their Quality; and looks upon them no
otherwise, than as people in the Access of a Fever. If a Beggar worships him,
or if he takes no Notice of him, it is all one to him; and with a Rich Man he
makes it the same Case. Their Honors, and their Injuries he accounts much
alike; without Rejoicing at the one, or Grieving at the other.

IN these Cases, the rule is, to pardon all Pardon all, where there is either
sign of Repentance, or Hope of Amendment.
Offenses, where there is any sign of Repentance, or hope of Amendment. It does
not hold in Injuries, as in Benefits, the Requiting of the one with the other.
For it is a shame to overcome in the one, and in the other to be overcome. It
is the Part of a great Mind to despise Injuries; and it is one kind of Revenge,
to neglect a Man, as not worth it: For it makes the first Aggressor too
Considerable. Our Philosophy methinks might carry us up to the Bravery of a
Generous Mastiff, that can hear the Barking of a thousand Curs, without taking
any Notice of them. He that receives an Injury from his Superior, it is not
enough for him to bear it with Patience, and with out any thought of Revenge,
but he must receive it with a Cheerful Countenance, and look as if he did not
understand it too: for if he appear too sensible, he shall be sure to have more
on it. It Is a Damned humor in Great Men, that whom they wrong, they will hate. It
was well answered of an old Courtier; that was asked, How he kept so long in
favor? Why, says he, by receiving Injuries, and crying your humble Servant for
them. Some Men take it for an Argument of Greatness, to have Revenge in their
power; but so far is he that is under the dominion of Anger, from being Great,
that he is not so much as Free. Not but that Anger is a kind of pleasure to
some in the Act of Revenge: but the very Word is Inhumane, though it may pass
for Honest. Virtue, in short, is impenetrable, and Revenge is only the
Confession of an Infirmity.

IT is a Fantastical Humor, that the same The same conceit makes us Merry in
Private, and angry in Public.
Jest in Private, should make us Merry, and yet Enrage us in Public; nay, we
will not Allow the Liberty that we take. Some Railleries we account Pleasant,
others Bitter: A conceit upon a Squint Eye, a Bunch-back, or any Personal
Defect, passes for a Reproach, And why may we not as well hear it, as see it?
Nay, if a Man Imitates our Gate, Speech, or any Natural Imperfection, it puts
us out of all Patience, as if the Counterfeit were more Grievous, than the
doing of the thing it self. Some cannot endure to hear of their Age, nor others
of their Poverty; and they make the thing the more taken Notice of, the more
they desire to hide it. Some Bitter Jest (for the purpose) was broken upon you
at the Table; keep better Company then. In the Freedom of Cups a sober Man will
hardly contain himself within Bounds. It sticks with us extremely sometimes,
that the Porter will not let us in to his great Master. Will any but a Madman
quarrel with a Curr for barking, when he may pacify him with a Crust? What have
we to do* but to keep farther off, and Laugh at Him? Fidus Cornelius (a tall,
slam Fellow) fell downright a Crying in the Senate House, at Corbulo's saying,
that he looked like an Estrich. He was a Man that made nothing of a lash upon
his Life, and Manners, but it was worse than Death to him, a reflection upon
his Person. No Man was ever ridiculous to others, that laughed at himself first:
It prevents mischief, and it is a Spiteful disappointment of those that take
pleasure in such abuses. Vatinius (a Man that was made up for Scorn, and
Hatred, Scurrilous, and Impudent to the highest degree, but most abusively
witty, and with all this he was Diseased, and Deformed to extremity) his way
was always to beg in to make sport with himself, and so he prevented the
Mockeries of other People. There are none more abusive to others, than they
that lie most open to it themselves; but the humor goes round, and he that
laughs at me to day, will have some Body to laugh at him to morrow, and revenge
my Quarrel. But however there are some Liberties that will never go down with
some Men.

ASIATICUS VALERIUS (one of Caligula's particular Friends, and a Man of
Stomach, that c Some Ieasts will never be forgiven.
would not easily digest an Affront) Caligula told him in public, what kind of
Bedfellow his Wife was. Good God! that ever any Man should hear this, or a
Prince speak it, Especially to a Man of Consular Authority, a Friend, and a
Husband; and in such a Manner too, as at once to own his Disgust, and his
Adultery. The Tribune Chaereas had a weak broken Voice, like an Hermophradite;
when he came to Caligul^ for the Word, he would give him sometimes Venus,
otherwhiles Priapus; as a Slur upon him both ways. Valerius was afterward the
Principal Instrument in the Conspiracy against him; and Chaereas, to convince
him of his Manhood, at one blow cleft him down the Chine with his Sword. No Man
was so forward as Caligula to Break a Jest, and no Man so Unwilling to Bear it.

CHAP. IX. Cautions against Anger in the matter of Education, Converse, and
other General Means of preventing it, both in our selves and others.
ALL that we have to say in particular upon this Subject lies under these two
Heads; First, that we do not fall into Anger, and Secondly, that we do not
Transgress in it. As in the Case of our Bodies, we have some Medicines to
preserve us when we are well, and others to recover us when we are Sick; so it
is one thing not to Admit it, and another thing to Overcome it. We are in the
first place, to avoid all provocations, and the beginnings of Anger: for, if we
be once down, it is a hard Task to get up again: When our Passion has got the
better of our Reason, and the Enemy is received into the Gate, we cannot expect
that the Conqueror should take Conditions from the Prisoner. And, in truth, our
Reason, when it is thus mastered, turns effectually into passion. A Careful
Education is a great Matter; for our minds are easily formed in our Youth, but
it is a harder business to cure Ill Habits Beside that, we are enflamed by
Climate, Constitution, Company, and a Thousand other Accidents, that we are not
aware of.

THE Choice of a good Nurse, and a well-Natur'd Tutor, goes a great way; for
the sweetness both of the Blood, and of the Manners will pass into the Child.
There is nothing breeds Anger more than a soft, and Effeminate Education; and
it is very seldom seen, that either the Mothers, or the Schoolmasters Darling
ever comes to good. But, my young Master, when he comes into the World, behaves
himself like a Choleric Coxcomb; For Flattery, and a great Fortune nourish
Teachiness. But it is a Nice point, so to check the Seeds of Anger in a Child,
as not to take off his Edge, and quench his Spirits, whereof a Principal Care
must be taken, betwixt License, and Severity, that he be neither too much
Emboldened, or Depressed. Commendation gives him Courage, and Confidence; but
then the danger is, of blowing him up into Insolence, and Wrath: So that when
to use the Bitt, and when the Spur, is the main difficulty. Never put him to a
necessity of Begging any thing basely, or if he does, let him go without it.
Enure him to a Familiarity, where he has any Emulation; And in all his
Exercises, let him understand, that it is generous to overcome his Competitor,
but not to hurt him. Allow him to be Pleased when he does well, but not
Transported, for that will puff him up into too high a Conceit of himself.
Give him nothing that he cries for, till the Dogged Fit is over, but then let
him have it when he is quiet; to show him that there is nothing to be gotten by
being peevish. Chide him for whatever he does Amiss, and make him betimes
acquainted with the Fortune that he was born to. Let his Diet be Cleanly, but
Sparing; and Cloth him like the rest of his Fellows; For, by placing him upon
that Equality at first, he will be the less proud afterward: and consequently
the less waspish, and quarrelsome.

IN the next place, let us have a Care of Temptations, that we cannot Resist,
and Provocations that we cannot Bear; and especially of Sour, and Exceptious
Company, For a Cross humor is Contagious. Nor is it all, that a man shall be
the better for the example of a quiet Conversation; but an Angry disposition is
troublesome, because it has nothing else to work upon. We should therefore
Choose a Sincere, Easy, and Temperate Companion, that will neither Provoke
Anger, nor Return it; nor give a Man any Occasion of exercising his Distempers.
Nor is it enough to be Gentle, Submiss, and Humane, without Integrity, and
Plain-dealing: For Flattery is as Offensive on the other side. Some Men would
take a Curse from you better than a Complement. Caelius, a passionate Orator,
had a Friend of singular Patience that Supped with him; who had no way to avoid
a quarrel, but by saying Amen to all that Caelius said. Caelius taking this
ill; Say something against me, says he, that you and I may be Two: and he was
angry with him because he would not; but the Dispute fell, as it needs must,
for want of an Opponent.

HE that is naturally addicted to Anger, let him use a Moderate Diet, and
abstain from Wine; for it is but adding Fire to Fire. Gentle Exercises,
Recreations, and Sports, Temper and Sweeten the Mind. Let him have a Care also
of Long, and Obstinate Disputes, for it is easier not to begin them, than to put
an end to them. Severe Studies are not good for him neither; as Law,
Mathematics: too much Intention preys upon the Spirits, and makes him Eager.
But Poetry, History, and those lighter Entertainments may serve him for
Diversion, and Relief. He that would be quiet, must not venture at things out
of his reach, or beyond his strength; for he shall either stagger under the
burden, or Discharge it upon the next Man he meets; which is the same Case in
Civil, and Domestic Affairs. Business that is ready, and practicable, goes off
with ease; but when it is too heavy for the bearer, they fall Both together.
Whatsoever we design, we should first take a measure of our selves, and compare
our Force with the Undertaking, for it vexes a Man not to go through with his
Work: a Repulse inflames a Generous Nature, as it makes one that is
Phlegmatic, Sad. I have known some that have advised looking in a Glass when a
Man is in the Fit, and the very Spectacle of his own deformity has cured him.
Many that are troublesome in their Drink, and know their own Infirmity, give
their Servants order beforehand, to take them away by force, for fear of
Mischief, and not to obey their Masters themselves when they are hotheaded. If
the thing were duly considered, we should need no other Cure than the bare
Consideration of it. We are not Angry at Madmen, Children, and Fools, because
they do not know what they do: And why should not Imprudence have an equal
Privilege in other Cases? If a Horse Kick, or a Dog Bite, shall a Man Kick, or
Bite again? The one it is true is wholly void of Reason, but it is also an
equivalent Darkness of Mind, that possesses the other. So long as we are among
Men, let us Cherish Humanity; and so live, that no Man may be either in Fear,
or in danger of us. Losses, Injuries, Reproaches, Calumnies, they are but short
Inconveniences, and we should bear them with Resolution. Beside that, some
People are above our Anger; others below it. To contend with our Superiors were
a Folly; and with our Inferiors an Indignity.

THERE is hardly a more Effectual Remedy against Anger, than Patience, and
Consideration. Patience softens Wrath.
Let but the first fervor abate, and that Mist which darkens the Mind, will be
either Lessened, or Dispelled. A Day, nay an hour does much in the most Violent
Cases, and perchance totally suppress it: Time discovers the Truth of things,
and turns that into Judgment, which at first was Anger. Plato was about to
Strike his Servant, and while his hand was in the Air, he checked himself, but
still held it in that Menacing Posture. A Friend of his took notice of it, and
asked him what he meant. I am now, says Plato, punishing of an Angry Man: So
that he had left his Servant to chastise himself. Another time, his Servant
having committed a great Fault; Speusippus, says he, do you beat that Fellow,
for I am Angry: So that he forbear Striking him for the very Reason that would
have made another Man have done it. I am Angry, says he, and shall go farther
than becomes me. Nor is it fit that a Servant should be in his Power, that is
not his own Master. Why should any one Venture now to trust an Angry Man with a
Revenge, when Plato durst not trust himself? Either He must Govern That, or
That will undo him. Let us do our best to Overcome it; but let us however Keep
it Close, without giving it any Vent. An Angry Man, if he gives himself Liberty
at all times, will go too far. If it comes once to show it self in the Eye, or
Countenance, it has got the better of us. Nay, we should so oppose it, as to
put on the very contrary dispositions: Calm Looks, Soft and Slow Speech; an
easy, and deliberate March, and by little and little we may possibly bring our
Thoughts into a sober Conformity with our Actions. When Socrates was Angry, he
would take himself in it, and Speak Low, in opposition to the Motions of his
displeasure. His Friends would take notice of it, and it was not to his
disadvantage neither, but rather to his Credit, that so many should know that
he was Angry, and no Body feel it: which could never have been, if he had not
given his Friends the same Liberty of Admonition which he himself took. And
this Course should we take; we should desire our Friends not to flatter us in
our Follies, but to treat us with all Liberties of Reprehension, even when we
are least willing to bear it, against so powerful, and so insinuating an Evil,
we should call for help while we have our Eyes in our head, and are yet Masters
of our selves. Moderation is profitable for Subjects, but more for Princes; who
have the means of executing all that their Anger prompts them to. When that
power comes once to be exercised to a Common Mischief, it can never long
continue, a Common fear joining in one Cause all their divided Complaints. In a
Word now how we may Prevent, Moderate, or Master this Impotent Passion in
Others.

IT is not enough to be sound our selves, unless we Several ways of diverting
Anger.
endeavor to make others so, wherein we must accommodate the Remedy to the
Temper of the Patient. Some are to be dealt with by Artifice, and Address: As
for Example, Why will you gratify your Enemies, to show your self so much
concerned? It Is not worth your Anger, it is below you; I am as much troubled at
it my self* as you can be; but you had better say nothing, and take your time
to be even with them. Anger, in some People, is to be openly opposed; in
others, there must be a little yielding, according to the disposition of the
Person. Some are won by Entreaties; others are gained by mere Shame, and
Conviction; and some by delay; A dull way of Cure for a Violent Distemper: but
this must be the last Experiment. Other Affections may be better dealt with at
leisure: For they proceed gradually; but This Commences, and Perfects it self
in the same Moment. It does not, like other Passions, Solicit, and Mislead
us, but it runs away with us by force; and hurries us on with an Irresistible
Temerity, as well to our own, as to another ruin: Not only flying in the Face
of him that provokes us, but like a Torrent, bearing down all before it.
There Is no encountering the first Heat and Fury of it; For it is Deaf, and Mad.
The best way is (in the beginning) to give it Time, and Rest, and let it spend
it self: while the Passion is too hot to handle, we may deceive it: but
however, let all Instruments of Revenge be put out of the way. It is not amiss
sometimes to pretend to be angry too; and join with him, not only in the
Opinion of the Injury, but in the seeming Contrivance of a Revenge. But this
must be a Person then that has some Authority over him. This is a way to get
time, and by advising upon some greater punishment, to delay the Present. If
the Passion be Outrageous, try what shame or fear can do. If weak, it is no hard
matter to amuse it by strange Stories, grateful News, or Pleasant Discourses.
Deceit, in this Case, is Friendship, for Men must be Cozened to be Cured.

THE Injuries that press hardest upon us, are those which Those Injuries go
nearest us, that we have neither Deserved, nor Expected.
either we have not deserved, or not expected, or at least not in so high a
degree. This Arises from the Love of our selves: For every Man takes upon him
Like a Prince in this Case, to practice all Liberties, and to allow none. Which
proceeds either from Ignorance, or Insolence. What News is it for People to do
ill things? for an Enemy to hurt us; nay, for a Friend, or a Servant to
Transgress; And to prove Treacherous, Ungrateful, Covetous, Impious? What we
find in one Man, we may in another, and there is no more Security in Fortune,
than in Men. Our Joys are mingled with Fears, and a Tempest may rise out of a
Calm: but a skilful Pilot is always provided for it.

CHAP. X. Against Rash Judgment.
IT is good for every Man to fortify himself on his weak side: and if he Loves
his Peace, he must not be Inquisitive, and hearken to Tale-bearers; for the Man
that is Overcurious to hear, and see every thing, multiplyes Troubles to
himself: For a Man does not feel, what he does not know. He that is listening
after private Discourse, and what People say of him, shall never be at Peace.
How many things that are Innocent in themselves, are made Injurious yet, by
misconstruction? Wherefore some things we are to pause upon, others to laugh
at, and others again to pardon. Or if we cannot avoid the Sense of Indignities,
let us however shun the open profession of it; which may be easily done, as
appears by many Examples of those, that have suppressed their Anger, under the
Awe of a greater Fear. It is a good Caution not to believe any thing till we
are very certain of it, for many probable things prove false, and a short time
will make Evidence of the Undoubted Truth. We are prone to Believe many things
which we are unwilling to Hear, and so we conclude, and take up a prejudice,
before we can Judge. Never condemn a Friend unheard; or without letting him
know his Accuser, or his Crime. It Is a Common thing to say, Do not you tell
that you had it from me: for if you do, I Will deny it, and never tell you any
thing again. By which means, Friends are set together by the Ears, and the
Informer slips his Neck out of the Collar. Admit no Stories upon these Terms;
For it is an unjust thing to Believe in private, and to be Angry openly. He
that delivers himself up to Guess, and Conjecture, runs a great hazard; for
there can be no Suspicion without some probable Grounds; so that without much
Candor, and Simplicity, and making the best of every thing, there is no living
in Society with Mankind. Some things that offend us we have by Report; others
we see, or hear. In the first Case, let us not be too Credulous; some People
Frame Stories that they may deceive us: Others, only Tell what they Hear, and
are deceived Themselves. Some make it their Sport to do ill Offices; others do
them only to pick a thank: There are some, that would part the dearest Friends
in the World; Others love to do Mischief, and stand aloof off, to see what
comes on it. If it be a small matter, I would have Witnesses, but if it be a
greater, I would have it upon Oath, and allow Time to the Accused, and Counsel
too, and hear it over and over again.

IN those Cases where we our selves are Witnesses, we should Make the best of
every thing.
take into Consideration all the Circumstances. If a Child, 'twas Ignorance: If
a Woman, a Mistake: If done by Command, a Necessity; If a Man be Injured, it is
but Quid pro quo. If a Judge, he Knows what he does: If a Prince, I must
Submit; either, if Guilty, to Justice, or if Innocent, to Fortune: If a Brute,
I make my self one by Imitating it: If a Calamity, or Disease, my best Relief
is Patience: If Providence, it is both Impious, and Vain to be Angry at it: If a
Good Man, I Will make the Best on it; If a Bad, I Will never Wonder at it. Nor is it
only by Tales, and Stories, that we are Inflamed, but Suspicions, Countenances;
nay, a Look, or a Smile is enough to blow us up. In these Cases, let us suspend
our Displeasure, and plead the Cause of the Absent. Perhaps he is Innocent; or
if not, I have time to consider on it, and may take my Revenge at Leisure: but
when it is once Executed, it is not to be Recalled. A Jealous Head is apt to
take that to himself which was never meant him. Let us therefore trust to
nothing, but what we see: And chide our selves where we are over-Credulous. By
this Course, we shall not be so easily imposed upon; nor put to trouble our
selves about things not worth the while; as the Loytring of a Servant upon an
Errant, the Tumbling of a Bed; or the Spilling of a Glass of Drink. It Is a
Madness to be disordered at these Fooleries. We consider the thing done, and
not the Doer of it. It may be he did it Unwillingly; or by Chance. It was a
Trick put upon him, or he was forced to it. He did it for Reward perhaps, not
Hatred; Nor of his own Accord; but he was egged on to it. Nay, some regard must
be had to the Age of the Person, Or to Fortune; and we must consult Humanity,
and Candor in the Case. One does me a Great Mischief, at Unawares. Another does
me a very small one by Design: Or peradventure none at all, but intended me
one. The Latter was more in Fault, but I Will be Angry with neither. We must
distinguish betwixt what a Man cannot do, and what he will not. It Is true; he
has once offended me, but, How often has he pleased me? He has offended me
often, and in other kinds, And why should not I bear it as well now as I have
done? Is he my Friend? why then 'twas against his will. Is he my Enemy? It Is no
more than I looked for. Let us give way to Wise Men, and not squabble with
Fools; and say thus to our selves, We have all of us our Errors; No Man is so
Circumspect, so Considerate, or so fearful of offending, but he has much to
answer for. A Generous Prisoner cannot immediately comply with all the Sordid,
and Laborious Offices of a Slave. A Footman that is not breathed, cannot keep
pace with his Masters Horse: He that is over-watch'd, may be allowed to be
Drowzy. All these things are to be weighed, before we give any Ear to the first
Impulse. If it be my duty to Love my Country, I must be kind also to my
Countrymen: If a Veneration be due to the Whole, so is a Piety also to the
Parts: And it is the Common Interest to preserve them. We are all Members of
one Body, and it is as Natural to help one another, as for the hands to help
the feet, or the eyes the hands. Without the Love, and Care of the Parts the
Whole can never be preserved, and we must spare one another, because we are
born for Society, which cannot be maintained, without a Regard to Particulars.
Let This be a Rule to us, never to deny a Pardon that does no hurt either to
the Giver, or Receiver. That may be well enough in one, which is Ill in
another; and therefore we are not to condemn any thing that is Common to a
Nation: for Custom defends it. But much more pardonable are those things which
are Common to Mankind.

IT is a kind of Spiteful Comfort, that Whoever does an Injury, is liable to
suffer one.
whoever does me an Injury, may receive one, and that there is a Power over him
that is above me. A Man should stand as firm against all Indignities, as a Rock
does against the Waves. As it is some satisfaction to a Man in a Mean
Condition, that there is no Security in a more prosperous; And as the Loss of a
Son in a Corner is born with more Patience, upon the sight of a Funeral carried
out of a Palace; So are Injuries, and Contempts, the more tolerable from a
meaner Person, when we consider, that the Greatest Men, and Fortunes are not
exempt. The wisest also of Mortals have their failings, and no Man Living is
without the same Excuse. The difference is, that we do not all of us transgress
the same way: but we are obliged in Humanity to bear one with another. We
should, every one of us, bethink our selves how remiss we have been in our
Duties; How immodest in our Discourses; how Intemperate in our Cups; and why
not as well how Extravagant we have been in our Passions? Let us Clear our
selves of this Evil, purge our minds, and utterly root out all those Vices,
which, upon leaving the least string, will grow again, and recover. We must
Think of every thing, Expect every thing, that we may not be Surpised. It is a
Shame, says Fabius, for a Commander to excuse himself, by saying, I was not
aware of it.

CHAP. XI. Take nothing ill from Another Man, till you have made it your Own
Case.
IT is not prudent to deny a Pardon to any Man, without first examining, if we
do not stand in need of it our selves; for it may be our Lot to ask it, even at
his Feet, to whom we refuse it. But we are willing enough to Do, what we are
very unwilling to Suffer. It is unreasonable to Charge Public Vices upon
Particular Persons: For we are All of us wicked, and that which we blame in
others, we find in our selves. It Is not a Paleness in one, or a Leanness in
another; but a Pestilence that has laid hold upon All. It Is a wicked World, and
we make part of it; and the way to be quiet, is to bear one with another. Such
a Man, we cry, has done me a shrewd turn, and I never did him any hurt. Well,
but it may be I have mischiev'd other People, or at least I may live to do as
much to him as that comes to. Such a one has spoken ill things of me; but if I
first spoke ill of him, as I do of many others, this is not an Injury, but a
Repayment. What if he did over-shoot himself? he was loath to lose his Conceit,
perhaps, but there was no Malice in it; and if he had not done me a Mischief, he
must have done himself one. How many Good Offices are there that look like
Injuries? Nay, How many have been Reconciled, and good Friends, after a
professed hatred?

BEFORE we lay any thing to heart, let us ask our selves if we have not done
Let no Man condemn another without making it his own Case.
the same things to others. But, where shall we find an equal Judge? He that
loves another Man's Wife (only perhaps because she is another) will not suffer
his own to be so much as looked upon. No Man so fierce against Calumny, as the
Evil Speaker; None so strict Exacters of Modesty in a Servant, as those that
are most Prodigal of their own. We carry our Neighbors Crimes in sight, and we
throw our own over our Shoulders. The Intemperance of a bad Son is chastis'd by
a worse Father; and the Luxury that we punish in others, we allow to our
selves. The Tyrant exclaimes against Homicide; and Sacrilege against Theft. We
are Angry with the Persons, but not with the Faults.

SOME things there are that cannot hurt us, and Some things cannot hurt us, and
others will not.
others will not; as good Magistrates, Parents, Tutors, Judges; whose Reproof,
or Correction we are to take, as we do Abstinence, Bleeding, and other uneasy
things, which we are the better for. In which Cases, we are not so much to
reckon upon what we suffer, as upon what we have done. I take it ill, says
one, and I have done nothing, says another: when at the same time we make it
worse, by adding Arrogance, and Contumacy to our first Error. We cry out
presently, What Law have we Transgressed? As if the Letter of the Law were the
Sum of our Duty; and that Piety, Humanity, Liberality, Justice, and Faith, were
things beside our Business. No, no, the Rule of Humane Duty is of a greater
Latitude; and we have many Obligations upon us, that are not to be found in the
Statute-Books. And yet we fall short of the Exactness, even of That Legal
Innocence. We have intended one thing, and done another; wherein only the want
of Success has Kept us from being Criminals. This very thing, methinks, should
make us more favorable to Delinquents, and to forgive not only our selves, but
the Gods too; of whom we seem to have harder thoughts, in taking that to be a
Particular Evil directed to us, that befalls us only by the Common Law of
Mortality. In fine, no Man living can Absolve himself to his Conscience, though
to the World perhaps he may. It Is true, that we are also Condemned to Pains,
and Diseases, and to Death too, which is no more than the quitting of a Soul
house. But, Why should any Man complain of Bondage, that wheresoever he looks,
has his way open to Liberty? That Precipice, that Sea, that River, that Well,
there is Freedom in the bottom of it. A Stoical Error.
It hangs upon every Crooked Bow; and not only a Man's Throat, or his Heart, but
every vein in his Body opens a Passage to it.

TO Conclude, where my Proper Virtue fails me, I will have recourse to
Examples, and say to my self, Am I greater than Philip, or Augustus, who both
of them put up greater Reproaches. Many have pardoned their Enemies, and shall
not I forgive a neglect, a little freedom of the Tongue? Nay the Patience but
of a Second Thought does the business; for, though the first shock be violent,
take it in parts and it is subdued. And, to wind up all in one word; The great
Lesson of Mandkin, as well in this, as in all other Cases, is to do as he would
be done by.

CHAP. XII. Of Cruelty.
THERE is so near an Affinity betwixt Anger, and Cruelty, that many People
confound them; as if Cruelty were only the Execution of Anger in the Payment of
a Revenge: which holds in some Cases, but not in others. There are a sort of
Men that take delight in the spilling of Humane blood; and in the Death of
those that never did them any Injury, nor were ever so much as suspected for
it; As Apollodorus, Phalaris, Sinis, Procrustes, and others, that burnt Men
alive, whom we cannot so properly call Angry, as Brutal. For, Anger does
necessarily presuppose an Injury, either Done, or Conceived, or Feared; but the
other takes Pleasure in Tormenting, without so much as pretending any
Provocation to it, and kills merely for killing sake. The Original of this
Cruelty perhaps was Anger, which by frequent Exercise, and Custom, has lost
all sense of Humanity, and Mercy; and they that are thus affected, are so far
from the Countenance, and Appearance of Men in Anger, that they will Laugh,
Rejoice, and Entertain themselves with the most horrid Spectacles; as Racks,
Iails, Gibbets, several sorts of Chains, and Punishments; Dilaceration of
Members, Stigmatizings, and Wild Beasts; with other exquisite Inventions of
Torture: And yet at last the Cruelty it self is more Horrid, and Odious, than
the Means by which it works. It is a Bestial madness, to Love Mischief; beside,
that it is Womanish to Rage and Tear; a Generous Beast will scorn to do it, when
he has any thing at his Mercy. It is a Vice for Wolves, and Tigers; and no less
Abominable to the World, than Dangerous to it self.

THE Romans had their Morning, and their Meridian The Cruelty of the Roman
Spectacles.
Spectacles. In the Former, they had their Combats of Men with Wild Beasts; and
in the Latter, the Men fought One with Another. I went (says our Author) the
other day to the Meridian Spectacles, in hope of Meeting somewhat of Mirth, and
Diversion, to sweeten the humors of those that had been entertained with Blood
in the Morning: But, it proved otherwise; for compared with this Inhumanity,
the former was a Mercy. The whole business was only Murder upon Murder; the
Combatants fought Naked, and every Blow, was a Wound. They do not contend for
Victory, but for Death; and he that kills one Man, is to be killed by another.
By Wounds they are forced upon Wounds, which they Take, and Give upon their
bare Breasts. Burn that Rogue, they cry; What? Is he afraid of his Flesh? Do
but see how sneakingly that Rascal dies? Look to your selves, my Masters, and
consider on it: Who knows but this may come to be your own Case? Wicked Examples
seldom fail of Coming home at last to the Authors. To destroy a Single Man,
may be Dangerous, but to Murder whole Nations, is only a more Glorious
Wickedness. Private Avarice, and Rigor are Condemned: But Oppression, when it
comes to be Authorized, by an Act of State; and to be publicly Commanded,
though particularly Forbidden, becomes a Point of Dignity, and Honor. What a
shame is it for Men to Enterworry one another, when yet the fiercest even of
Beasts are at peace with those of their own kind? This Brutal Fury puts
Philosophy it self to a stand. The Drunkard, the Glutton, the Covetous, may be
reduced. Nay, and the mischief of it is, that no Vice keeps it self within its
proper Bounds. Luxury runs into Avarice, and when the Reverence of Virtue is
extinguished, Men will stick at nothing that carries profit along with it. Man's
Blood is shed in Wantonness; his Death is a Spectacle for Entertainment, and
his Groans are Music. When Alexander delivered up Lysimachus to a Lion, how
glad would he have been to have had Nails, and Teeth to have devoured him
himself? It would have too much derogated, he thought, from the dignity of his
Wrath, to have appointed a Man for the Execution of his Friend. Private
Cruelties, it is true, cannot do much Mischief, but in Princes, they are a War
against Mankind.

C. CAESAR would commonly, for Exercise, Barbarous Cruelties.
and Pleasure, put Senators, and Roman Knights to the Torture: and Whip several
of them, like Slaves, or put them to Death with the most accurate Torments,
merely for the satisfaction of his Cruelty. That Caesar that wished the People
of Rome had but one Neck, that he might cut it off at one Blow. It was the
Employment, the Study, and the Joy of his Life. He would not so much as give
the Expiring leave to Groan, but caused their Mouths to be stopped with Spunges,
or for want of them, with Rags of their own Cloths, that they might not breathe
out so much as their last Agonies at Liberty; Or perhaps, least the tormented
should speak something which the Tormentor had no mind to hear. Nay, he was so
Impatient of Delay, that he would frequently rise from Supper to have Men
killed by Torch-light, as if his Life and Death had depended upon their
dispatch before the next morning. To say Nothing how many Fathers were put to
death by him in the same night with their Sons. (which was a kind of Mercy, in
the prevention of their Mourning.) And was not Sylla's Cruelty prodigious too,
which was only stopped for want of Enemies? He caused 7000 Citizens of Rome to be
slaughtered at once; and some of the Senators being startled at their Cries
that were heard into the Senate House: Let us mind our business, says Sylla,
This is nothing but a few Mutineers that I have Ordered to be sent out of the
Way. A Glorious Spectacle! says Hannibal! when he saw the Trenches flowing
with Humane Blood; and if the Rivers had run Blood too, he would have liked it
so much the better.

AMONG the famous, and detestable Speeches, that are committed to Memory, I
know d He that Threatens All, Fears all.
none worse than that Impudent, and Tyrannical Maxim; Let them Hate me, so
they Fear me: not considering that those that are kept in Obedience by Fear,
are both Malicious, and Mercenary, and only wait for an opportunity to change
their Master. Beside that, whosoever is Terrible to Others, is likewise afraid
of Himself. What is more ordinary, than for a Tyrant to be destroyed by his own
Guards, which is no more than the putting of those Crimes into Practice, which
they learned of their Masters? How many Slaves have revenged themselves of
their Cruel oppressors, though they were sure to dye for it? but when it comes
once to a Popular Tyranny, whole Nations conspire against it. For, whosoever
threatens All, is in danger of All; over and above, that the Cruelty of a
Prince increases the number of his Enemies, by destroying some of them; for it
entailes an hereditary hatred upon the Friends and Relations of those that are
taken away. And then it has this Misfortune, that a Man must be wicked upon
Necessity; for there is no going back; So that he must betake himself to Arms,
and yet he lives in fear. He can neither trust to the Faith of his Friends, nor
to the Piety of his Children; he both dreads Death, and wishes it; and becomes
a greater Terror to Himself, than he is to his People. Nay, if there were
nothing else to make Cruelty detestable, it were enough, that it passes all
Bounds both of Custom, and Humanity, and is followed upon the Heel, with
Sword, or Poison. A Private Malice indeed does not move whole Cities; but that
which extends to All, is every Bodies Mark. One Sick Person gives no great
disturbance in a Family; but, when it comes to a Depopulating Plague, all
People fly from't. And why should a Prince expect any Man to be good, whom he
has taught to be wicked?

BUT, What if it were Safe to be cruel? Were it not still a sad thing, the very
State of such a c A Tyrannical Government is a Perpetual State of War.
Government? A Government, that bears the Image of a Taken City, where there is
nothing but Sorrow, Trouble, and Confusion. Men dare not so much as trust
themselves with their Friends, or with their Pleasures. There is not any
Entertainment so Innocent, but it affords pretense of Crime, and Danger. People
are betrayed at their Tables, and in their Cups, and drawn from the very
Theater to the Prison. How horrid a Madness is it to be still Raging, and
Killing; to have the rattling of Chains always in our Ears; Bloody Spectacles
before our Eyes; and to carry Terror, and Dismay, wherever we go? If we had
Lions, and Serpents to rule over us, this would be the manner of Their
Government; saving that they agree better among themselves; It passes for a
Mark of Greatness, to burn Cities, and lay whole Kingdoms waste; nor is it for
the honor of a Prince, to appoint This or That single Man to be killed, unless
they have whole Troops, or (sometimes) Legions, to work upon. But, it is not
the Spoils of War, and Bloody Trophyes, that make a Prince Glorious; but, the
Divine Power of preserving Unity, and Peace. Ruin, without Distinction is more
properly the business of a General Deluge, or a Conflagration. Neither does a
Fierce, and Inexorable Anger become the Supreme Magistrate: Greatness of Mind
is always Meek, and Humble; but Cruelty is a Note, and an Effect of Weakness;
and brings down a Governor to the Level of a Competitor.

OF Clemency.
THE Humanity, and Excellence of this Virtue, is confessed at all hands, as
well by the Men of Pleasure, and those that think every Man was made for
himself, as by the Stoics, that make Man a Sociable Creature, and born for the
Common Good of Mankind: For it is, of all Dispositions, the most Peaceable, and
Quiet. But before we enter any further upon the Discourse, it would be first
known what Clemency is, that we may distinguish it from Pity: which is a
Weakness; though many times mistaken for a Virtue: And the next thing will be,
to bring the Mind to the Habit, and Exercise of it.

CLEMENCY is a favorable Disposition of the Mind, in the Matter of inflicting
Punishment; Or, a Clemency Defined.
A Moderation, that remits somewhat of the Penalty Incurred. As Pardon is the
Total Remission of a deserved Punishment. We must be Careful not to confound
Clemency with Pity; for as Religion worships God, and Superstition Profanes
that worship: so should we distinguish betwixt Clemency, and Pity; Practicing
the One, and Avoiding the Other. For Pity proceeds from a Narrowness of Mind,
that respects rather the Fortune, than the Cause. It is a kind of Moral
Sickness, contracted from other Peoples Misfortunes: Such another weakness as
Laughing, or Yawning for Company, or as That of Sick Eyes, that cannot look
upon others that are Blear'd, without dropping Themselves. I Will give a
Shipwrack'd-Man a Plank, a Lodging to a Stranger, or a Piece of Money to him
that wants it: I will dry up the Tears of my Friend, yet I will not weep with
him, but treat him with Constancy, and Humanity, as one Man ought to treat
Another.

IT is objected by some, that Clemency is an Insignificant Virtue; and that
only the Bad are a Clemency is Profitable for all.
the Better for it; for the Good have no need on it. But, in the first place; as
Physic is in Use only among the Sick, and yet in Honor with the Sound; so the
Innocent have a Reverence for Clemency, though Criminals are properly the
Object of it. And then again, a Man may be Innocent, and yet have Occasion for
it too: for, by the Accidents of Fortune, or the Condition of Times, Virtue it
self may come to be in danger. Consider the most Populous City, or Nation; what
a solitude would it be, if none should be left there but those that could Stand
the Test of a Severe Justice. We should have neither Judges, nor Accusers; none
either to Grant a Pardon, or to Ask it. More or less, we are all Sinners, and
he that has best purged his Conscience, was brought by Errors to Repentance.
And it is farther Profitable to Mankind; for many Delinquents come to be
Converted. There is a Tenderness to be used, even toward our Slaves, and those
that we have bought with our Money; How much more then, to Free, and to Honest
Men, that are rather under our Protection, than Dominion? Not that I would have
it so General neither, as not to distinguish betwixt the Good, and the Bad, for
that would Introduce a Confusion, and give a kind of encouragement to
Wickedness. It must therefore have a respect to the Quality of the Offender,
and separate the Curable from the Desperate; for it is an equal Cruelty to
pardon All, and to pardon None. Where the Matter is in Balance, let Mercy turn
the Scale: If all Wicked Men should be punished, Who should escape?

THOUGH Mercy, and Gentleness of Nature Clemency does well in Private Persons,
but it is more Beneficial in Princes.
keeps all in Peace, and Tranquillity, even in a Cottage, yet is it much more
Beneficial, and Conspicuous in a Palace. Private Men in their Condition, are
likewise Private in their Virtues, and in their Vices; but the Words, and the
Actions of Princes, are the Subject of Public Rumor; and therefore They had
need have a Care, what Occasion They give People for Discourse, of whom people
will be always a Talking. There is the Government of a Prince over his People;
a Father over his Children; a Master over his Scholars, an Officer over his
Soldiers. He is an Unnatural Father, that for every Trifle beats his Children.
Who is the Better Master, he that Rages over his Scholars, for but missing a
word in a Lesson; or he that tryes by Admonition, and fair Words, to Instruct,
and Reform them? An Outrageous Officer makes his Men run from their Colors. A
skilful Rider brings his Horse to Obedience, by mingling Fair means with Foul;
whereas to be perpetually switching, and spurring, makes him Vicious, and
Jadish: And shall we not have more care of Men, than of Beasts? It breaks the
Hope of Generous Inclinations, when they are deprest by Servility, and Terror.
There is no Creature so hard to be pleased with Ill Usage, as Man.

CLEMENCY does well with All, but best with Mercy is the Interest both of
Prince and People.
Princes, for it makes their Power Comfortable, and Beneficial, which would
otherwise be the Pest of Mankind. It establishes their Greatness, when they
make the good of the Public, their Particular Care, and Employ their Power for
the safety of the People. The Prince, in effect, is but the Soul of the
Community, as the Community is only the Body of the Prince: So that in being
Merciful to Others, he is Tender of Himself: Nor is any Man so Mean, but his
Master feels the Loss of him, as a Part of his Empire. And he takes Care, not
only of the Lives of his People, but also of their Reputations. Now, giving for
granted, that all Virtues are in themselves Equal, it will not yet be denied,
that they may be more Beneficial to Mankind in One Person, than in Another. A
Beggar may be as Magnanimous as a King: For, What can be Greater, or Braver,
than to baffle Ill Fortune? This does not hinder, but that a Man in Authority,
and Plenty, has more Matter for his Generosity to work upon, than a Private
Person: And it is also more taken notice of upon the Bench, than upon the
Level. When a Gracious Prince shows himself to his People, they do not fly
from him as from a Tiger, that had roused himself out of his Den; but they
worship him as a Benevolent Influence, they secure him against all
Conspiracies, and Interpose their Bodies betwixt Him, and Danger. They Guard
him while he sleeps, and defend him in the Field against his Enemies. Nor is it
without Reason, this Unanimous Agreement in Love, and Loyalty; and this
Heroical Zeal of Abandoning themselves for the safety of their Prince, but it
is as well the Interest of the People. In the Breath of a Prince there is Life,
and Death: and his Sentence stands good, Right or Wrong. If he be Angry, no
body dares Advise him; and if he does Amiss, who shall call him to Account?
Now, for him that has so much Mischief in his Power, and yet applies That Power
to the Common Utility, and Comfort of his People, diffusing also Clemency, and
Goodness into Their hearts too; What can be a greater Blessing to Mankind than
such a Prince? Any Man may kill another Against the Law, but only a Prince can
save him so. Let him so deal with his own Subjects, as he desires God should
deal with him: If Heaven should be Inexorable to Sinners, and destroy All
without Mercy, What Flesh could be safe? But, as the Faults of Great Men are
not presently punished with Thunder from Above, let them have a like regard to
their Inferiors here upon Earth. He that has Revenge in his Power, and does not
Use it, is the Great Man: Which is the more Beautiful, and Agreeable State,
that of a Calm, a Temperate, and a Clear day; or That of Lightening, Thunder,
and Tempests? And this is the very difference betwixt a Moderate, and a
Turbulent Government. It Is for Low, and Vulgar Spirits, to Brawl, Storm, and
Transport themselves; but it is not for the Majesty of a Prince to lash out into
Intemperance of Words: Some will think it rather Slavery, than Empire, to be
debarred Liberty of Speech: And what if it be when Government it self is but a
more Illustrious Servitude? He that uses his Power as he should, takes as much
Delight in making it Comfortable to his People, as Glorious to himself. He is
Affable, and easy of Access; his very Countenance makes him the Joy of his
Peoples Eyes, and the Delight of Mankind. He is Beloved, Defended, and
Reverenced, by all his Subjects; and Men speak as well of him in Private, as in
Public: He is safe without Guards, and the Sword is rather his Ornament, than
his Defense; In his Duty, he is like that of a good Father, that sometimes
gently Reproves a Son; sometimes Threatens him; nay, and perhaps Corrects him:
But no Father, in his right Wits, will Disinherit a Son for the First Fault:
There must be Many, and Great Offenses, and only Desperate Consequences that
should bring him to that Decretory Resolution: He will make many Experiments,
to try if he can Reclaim him first, and nothing but the utmost Despair must put
him upon Extremities. It is not Flattery that calls a Prince the Father of his
Country: The Titles of Great, and August, are Matter of Complement, and of
Honor; but, in calling him Father, we mind him of that Moderation, and
Indulgence, which he owes to his Children: His Subjects are his Members. Where,
if there must be an Amputation, let him come slowly to it, and when the Part is
cut off, let him wish it were on again; let him Grieve in the doing of it: He
that passes a Sentence presently, looks as if he did it willingly; and then
there is an Injustice in the Excess.

IT is a Glorious Contemplation, for a The blessed Reflections of a Merciful
Prince.
Prince, first to consider the vast Multitudes of his People, whose Seditious,
Divided, and Impotent Passions would cast All into Confusion, and destroy
Themselves, and Public Order too, if the Band of Government did not restrain
them: And Thence to pass to the Examination of his Conscience, saying Thus to
himself. It is by the Choice of Providence that I am here made God's Deputy
upon Earth; the Arbitrator of Life, and Death, and that upon My breath, depends
the Fortune of my People. My Lips are the Oracles of their Fate, and upon Them,
hangs the Destiny both of Cities, and of Men. It is under my Favor that People
seek for either Prosperity, or Protection; Thousands of Swords are Drawn, or
Sheathed at my Pleasure. What Towns shall be Advanced, or Destroyed; who shall
be Slaves, or who Free, depends upon my Will; and yet in this Arbitrary Power
of Acting without Control, I was never Transported to do any Cruel Thing,
either by Anger, or Hot Blood, in my Self, or by the Contumacy, Rashness, or
Provocations of other Men; though sufficient to turn Mercy it self into Fury. I
was never moved by the Odious vanity of making my self Terrible by my Power
(that Accursed (though Common) Humor of Ostentation, and Glory, that haunts
Imperious Natures.) My Sword has not only been buried in the Scabbard, but in a
manner Bound to the Peace, and Tender even of the Cheapest Blood: And where I
find no other Motive to Compassion, Humanity it self is Sufficient. I have been
always Slow to Severity, and Prone to Forgive, and under as Strict a Guard to
Observe the Laws, as if I were Accomptable for the Breaking of them. Some I
pardoned for their Youth; Others, for their Age. I spare one Man for his
Dignity; Another for his Humility; and when I find no other matter to work
upon, I spare my self. So that if God should at this Instant call me to an
Account, the whole World would agree to witness for me, that I have not by any
Force, either Public or Private; either by my Self, or by any Other, defrauded
the Commonwealth: and the Reputation that I have ever sought for, has been
That which few Princes have Obtained, the Conscience of my Proper Innocence.
And I have not lost my labor neither, for no one Man was ever so Dear to
another, as I have made my self to the whole Body of my People. Under such a
Prince the Subject has nothing to wish for, beyond what he enjoyes; their Fears
are Quieted, and their Prayers heard, and there is nothing can make their
Felicity Greater, unless to make it perpetual; and there is no Liberty denied
to the People, but that of Destroying one another.

IT is the Interest of the People, by the Upon the wellbeing of the Prince,
depends the Safety of the People.
Consent of all Nations, to run all hazards for the Safety of their Prince, and
by a Thousand Deaths to redeem that one Life, upon which so many Millions
depend. Does not the whole Body serve the Mind, though only the One is exposed
to the Eye, and the Other not, but, Thin, and Invisible, the very seat of it
being Uncertain? Yet the Hands, Feet, and Eyes, observe the Motions of it: we
Lie down, Run about, and Ramble, as That Commands us. If we be Covetous, we
Fish the Seas, and Ransack the Earth for Treasure; If Ambitious, we burn our
own Flesh with Scaevola; we cast our selves into the Gulf with Curtius: So
would that vast Multitude of People, which is Animated but with One Soul,
Governed by One Spirit, and Moved by One Reason, destroy it self with its own
Strength, if it were not supported by Wisdom, and Government. Wherefore, it is
for their Own Security, that the People expose their Lives for their Prince, as
the very Bond that ties the Republic together; the Vital Spirit of so many
Thousands, which would be nothing else but a Burden, and a Prey, without a
Governor. When this Union comes once to be Dissolved, All falls to Pieces; for
Empire, and Obedience, must Stand, and Fall together. It is no wonder then, if
a Prince be Dear to his People, when the Community is wrapped up in him, and the
Good of Both as Inseparable as the Body, and the Head; the One for Strength,
and the othet Counsel; for, What signifies the Force of the Body, without the
Direction of the Understanding? While the Prince watches, his People Sleep; his
Labor Keeps Them at Ease, and his Business keeps them at Quiet. The Natural
Intent of Monarchy appears even from the very Discipline of Bees; They assign
to their Master the fairest Lodgings, the Safest Place, and His Office is only
to see, that the Rest perform their Duties. When the King is Lost, the whole
Swarm Dissolves: More than One, they will not Admit; and then they contend who
shall have the Best: They are, of all Creatures, the Fiercest, for their
Bigness; and leave their Stings behind them in their Quarrels; Only the King
himself has None, Intimating, that Kings should neither be Vindictive, nor
Cruel. Is it not a Shame, after such an Example of Moderation in these
Creatures, that Men should be yet Intemperate? It were well if they lost their
Stings too in their Revenge, as well as the Other, that they might hurt but
Once, and do no Mischief by their Proxies. It would tire them out, if either
they were to execute All with their Own hands, or to wound Others, at the Peril
of their Own Lives.

A Prince should behave himself Generously The Prince that is Gracious, is
Beloved.
in the Power, which God has given him, of Life and Death; especially toward
those that have been at any time his Equals; for the One has his Revenge, and
the other his Punishment in it. He that stands Indebted for his Life, has lost
it; but he that Receives his Life at the Foot of his Enemy, Lives to the Honor
of his Preserver: He Lives the Lasting Monument of his Virtue; whereas if he
had been led in Triumph, the Spectacle would have been quickly over. Or what if
he should restore him to his Kingdom again? Would it not be an Ample Accession
to his Honor, to show that he found nothing about the Conquered that was worthy
of the Conqueror? There Is nothing more Venerable than a Prince that does not
Revenge an Injury. He that is Gracious, is Beloved, and Reverenced as a Common
Father, but a Tyrant stands in Fear, and in Danger even of his Own Guards. No
Prince can be safe himself, of whom all Others are Afraid; for to spare None,
is to enrage All. It Is an Error to imagine, that any Man can be secure, that
suffers no body else to be so too. How can any Man endure to lead an Uneasy,
Suspicious, Anxious Life, when he may be Safe, if he Pleases, and enjoy all the
Blessings of Power, together with the Prayers of his People? Clemency Protects
a Prince without a Guard; there is no need of Troops, Castles, or
Fortifications: Security, on the One side, is the Condition of Security on the
Other; and the Affections of the Subject are the most Invincible Fortress. What
can be Fairer, than for a Prince to Live the Object of his Peoples Love, to
have the Vows of their Hearts, as well as of their Lips; and his Health, and
Sickness, their Common Hopes, and Fears? There will be no Danger of Plots: Nay,
on the Contrary, Who would not frankly venture his Blood, to serve Him, under
whose Government, Justice, Peace, Modesty, and Dignity Flourish? Under whose
Influence Men grow Rich, and Happy; and whom Men look upon with such
Veneration, as they would do upon the Immortal Gods, if they were Capable of
seeing them: And, as the True Representative of the Allmighty, they consider
him, when he is Gracious, and Bountiful, and employes his Power to the
Advantage of his Subjects.

WHEN a Prince proceeds to Punishment, Where Punishment is Necessary; let it be
Moderate.
it must be either to Vindicate Himself, or Others. It is a hard matter to
Govern Himself in his Own Case. If a Man should Advise him not to be Credulous,
but to examine Matters, and Indulge the Innocent, this is rather a point of
Justice than of Clemency: But, in Case that he be Manifestly Injured, I would
have him Forgive, where he may Safely do it, and be Tender, even where he
cannot Forgive: But, far more Exorable in his Own Case however, than in
Another. It Is nothing to be free of Another Man's Purse; and it is as Little to
be Merciful in Another Man's Cause. He is the Great Man that Masters his
Passion where he is stung himself; and Pardons, when he might Destroy. The end
of Punishment, is either to Comfort the Party Injured, or to Secure him for the
Future. A Princes Fortune is above the need of such a Comfort, and his Power is
too Eminent to seek an Advance of Reputation, by doing a Private Man a
Mischief. This I speak, in Case of an Affront from those that are Below us: But
he, that of an Equal, has made any Man his Inferior, has his Revenge, in the
bringing of him Down. A Prince has been killed by a Servant, destroyed by a
Serpent; but whosoever preserves a Man, must be Greater than the Person that he
preserves. With Citizens, Strangers, and People of Low Condition, a Prince is
not to Contend, for they are Beneath him: He may spare some, out of Good Will,
and Others, as he would do some little Creatures that a Man cannot touch
without fouling his Fingers: But for those that are to be Pardoned, or exposed
to Public Punishment, he may use Mercy as he sees Occasion; and a Generous
Mind can never want Inducements, or Motives to it: And whether it be Age, or
Sex; High, or Low, Nothing comes amiss.

TO pass now to the Vindication of Others, there must be had a The Ends of
Punishment.
regard, either to the Amendment of the Person Punished, or the making of
Others better, for fear of Punishment; or the taking the Offender out of the
way for the security of Others. An Amendment may be procured by a Small
Punishment; for he lives more Carefully that has something yet to Lose; It is a
kind of Impunity, to be Incapable of a further Punishment. The Corruptions of a
City are best Cured by Few, and Sparing Severities; for the Multitude of
Offenders creates a Custom of Offending, and Company Authorizes a Crime, and
there is more good to be done upon a Dissolute Age, by Patience, than by Rigor:
Provided that it pass not for an Approbation of Ill Manners; but only as an
Unwillingness to proceed to Extremities. Under a Merciful Prince a Man will be
ashamed to offend, because a Punishment that is inflicted by a Gentle Governor,
seems to fall heavier and with more Reproach: And it is Remarkable also, that
Those Sins are Often Committed, which are very often Punished. Caligula, in
five years, Condemned more people to the Sack, than ever were before him; and
there were fewer Parricides Before That Law against them, than After. For our
Ancestors did wisely presume, that the Crime would never be Committed, till by
a Law for Punishing it, they found, that it might be done. Parricides began
with the Law against them, and the Punishment instructed Men in the Crime.
Where there are few Punishments, Innocence is indulged as a Public Good, and
it is a dangerous thing to show a City how strong it is in Delinquents. There
is a certain Contumacy in the Nature of Man, that makes him Oppose
Difficulties. We are better to Follow, than to Drive; as a Generous Horse rides
best with an Easy Bitt. People Obey willingly, where they are Commanded
kindly. When Burrhus the Prefect was to Sentence Two Malefactors, he brought
the Warrant to Nero to sign: who, after a long Reluctance, came to it at last
with this Exclamation, I would I could not Write. A Speech that deserved the
whole World for an Auditory, but all Princes especially; and that the hearts of
all the Subjects would conform to the Likeness of their Masters. As the Head is
Well, or Ill, so is the Mind Dull, or Merry. What Is the Difference betwixt a
King, and a Tyrant, but a Diversity of Will, under one, and the same Power: the
One Destroys for his Pleasure, the Other upon Necessity: A Distinction rather
in Fact, than in Name. A Gracious Prince is Armed as well as a Tyrant; but it is
for the Defense of his People, and not for the Ruin of them. No King can ever
have Faithful Servants, that accustomes them to Tortures, and Executions: The
very Guilty themselves do not lead so Anxious a Life as the Persecuters, for
they are not only afraid of Justice, both Divine, and Humane, but it is
Dangerous for them to mend their Manners; so that when they are once in, they
must continue to be Wicked, upon Necessity. An Universal Hatred unites in a
Popular Rage: A Temperate Fear may be kept in Order, but when it comes once to
be Continual, and Sharp, it provokes people to Extremities, and Transports them
to Desperate Resolutions; as Wild Beasts, when they are pressed upon the Toil,
turn back, and Assault the very Pursuers. A Turbulent Government is a Perpetual
trouble both to Prince, and People; and he that is a Terror to all Others, is
not without Terror also himself. Frequent Punishments, and Revenges may
Suppress the Hatred of a Few, but then it stirs up the Detestation of All. So
that there is no destroying One Enemy, without making Many. It is good to Master
the Will of being Cruel, even while there may be Cause for it, and Matter to
Work upon.

AUGUSTUS was a Gracious A famous Instance of Augustus's Clemency.
Prince, when he had the Power in his own hand; but in the Triumviracy he made
use of his Sword, and had his Friends ready Armed to set upon Anthony, during
That Dispute. But he behaved himself afterward at another rate; for when he
was betwixt forty and fifty years of Age, he was told, that Cinna was of a Plot
to Murder him, with the Time, Place, and Manner of the Design; and This from
one of the Confederates. Upon This, he resolved upon a Revenge, and sent for
several of his Friends to Advise upon it. The thought of it kept him waking, to
consider, that there was the Life of a young Nobleman in the Case, the Nephew
of Pompey, and a Person, otherwise Innocent. He was off and on several times,
whether he should put him to Death, or not. What (says he) shall I live in
Trouble, and in danger my self, and the Contriver of my Death walk Free, and
Secure? Will nothing serve him but That Life, which Providence has preserved in
so many Civil Wars; in so many Battles, both by Sea and Land; and Now, in the
State of an Universal Peace too? and not a simple Murder neither, but a
Sacrifice; for I am to be assaulted at the very Altar; And shall the Contriver
of all this Villainy escape Unpunished? Here Augustus made a little Pause, and
then recollecting himself: No, no ( Caesar, says he) it is rather Caesar, than
Cinna, that I Am to be Angry with: Why do I my self live any longer, after that
my Death is become the Interest of so many People? And if I go on, what end
will there be of Blood, and of Punishment? If it be against My Life that the
Nobility Arms it Self, and levels their Weapons, my Single Life is not worth
the while, if so Many must be destroyed, that I may be preserved, His Wife
^ivia gave him here an Interruption, and desired him, that he would for once
hear a Woman's Counsel. Do (says she) like a Physician, that when common
Remedies fail, will try the Contrary; You have got nothing Hitherto by
Severity: After Salvidiaenus there followed Lepidus; after Him, Muraena; Caepio
followed him, and Egnatius followed Caepio: Try now what Mercy will do; Forgive
Cinna. He is Discovered, and can do you no hurt in your Person; and it will yet
Advantage you in your Reputation. Augustus was glad of the Advice, and he gave
Thanks for it, and thereupon Countermanded the Meeting of his Friends, and
ordered Cinna to be brought to him Alone; for whom he caused a Chair to be set,
and then discharged the rest of the Company. Cinna ( says Augustus) before I
go any further, you must promise not to give me the Interruption of one
Syllable till I have told you all I have to say, and you shall have Liberty
afterward to say what you please: You cannot forget, that when I found you in
Arms against me, and not only Made my Enemy, but Born so, I gave you your Life
and Fortune. Upon your Petition for the Priesthood, I granted it with a Repulse
to the Sons of those that had been my Fellow Soldiers; and you are at this day
so Happy, and so Rich, that even the Conquerors envy him that is Overcome; and
yet after all This, you are in a Plot, Cinna, to Murder me. At that word,
Cinna started, and interposed with Exclamations, That certainly he was far from
being either so Wicked, or so Mad. This is breach of Conditions, Cinna, (says
Augustus) it is not your time to speak yet. I tell you again, that you are in a
Plot to Murder me; and so he told him the Time, the Place, the Confederates,
the Order, and Manner of the Design, and who it was that was to do the Deed.
Cinna, upon This, fixed his eye upon the Ground, without any Reply; not for his
wordsake, but as in a Confusion of Conscience; and so Augustus went on. What
(says he) may your Design be in all this? Is it that you would pretend to step
into my Place? The Commonwealth were in an Ill Condition, if only Augustus
were in the way betwixt you and the Government. You were cast the Other day in
a Cause, by one of your own Freemen; and do you expect to find a weaker
Adversary of Caesar? But, What if I were Removed? There Is Aemilius Paulus,
Fabius Maximus, and Twenty other Families of great Blood, and Interest, that
would never bear it? To cut off the Story short; (for it was a Discourse of
above two Hours; and Augustus lengthened the Punishment in Words, since he
intended That should be all) Well, Cinna, says he, the Life that I gave to you
once, as an Enemy, I will now repeat it to a Traitor, and to a Parricide, and
this shall be the last Reproach I Will give you. For the time to come, there
shall be no other Contention betwixt You and Me, than which shall outdoe the
other in Point of Friendship. After This, Augustus made Cinna, Consul, (an
Honor, which he confessed, he durst not so much as Desire) and Cinna was ever
affectionately Faithful to him, he made Caesar his Sole Heir, and this was the
Last Conspiracy that ever was formed against him.

THIS Moderation in Augustus, was the Augustus's Moderation to his Enemies.
Excellency of his Mature Age; for in his Youth, he was Passionate, and Sudden;
and he did many things, which afterward he looked back upon with Trouble: After
the Battle of Actium, so many Navies broken in Sicily, both Roman, and
Strangers; the Perusian Altars; (where 300 Lives were Sacrificed to the Ghost
of Julius) his frequent Proscriptions, and other Severities; his Temperance at
last seemed to be little more than a Weary Cruelty. If he had not Forgiven
those that he Conquered, Whom should he have Governed? He chose his very
Lifeguard from among his Enemies, and the Flower of the Romans owed their
Lives to his Clemency. Nay, he only punished Lepidus himself with Banishment,
and permitted him to wear the Ensigns of his Dignity without taking the
Pontificate to himself, so long as Lepidus was Living; for he would not possess
it as a Spoil, but as an Honor. This Clemency it was, that Secured him in his
Greatness, and Ingratiated him to the people, though he laid his hand upon the
Government before they had thoroughly submitted to the Yoke; and This Clemency
it was, that has made his Name Famous to Posterity. This is it, that makes us
Reckon him Divine, without the Authority of an Apotheosis, He was so Tender,
and Patient, that though many a bitter Jest was broken upon him (and
Contumelies upon Princes, are the most Intolerable of all Injuries) yet he
never punished any Man upon That Subject. It is Then Generous to be Merciful,
when we have it in our Power to take Revenge.

A Son of Titus Arius being Examined, and found A Merciful Judgment of Augustus.
Guilty of Parricide, was Banished Rome, and Confined to Marseilles, where his
Father allowed him the same Annuity that he had before; which made all people
conclude him Guilty, when they saw that his Father had yet Condemned the Son,
that he could not Hate. Augustus was pleased to Sit upon the Fact in the House
of Arius, only as a Single Member of the Council, that was to Examine it: If it
had been in Caesar's Palace, the Judgment must have been Caesar's, and not the
Fathers. Upon a full hearing of the Matter, Caesar directed, that every Man
should write his Opinion, whether Guilty, or Not, and without declaring of his
Own, for fear of a Partial Vote. Before the Opening of the Books, Caesar passed
an Oath, that he would not be Arius his Heir: and, to show, that he had no
Interest in his Sentence, as appeared afterward, for he was not Condemned to
the Ordinary Punishment of Parricides, nor to a Prison, but, by the Mediation
of Caesar, only Banished Rome, and confined to the Place which his Father
should Name: Augustus insisting upon it, that the Father should content himself
with an Easy Punishment, and Arguing, that the young Man was not moved to the
Attempt by Malice, and that he was but half resolved upon the Fact, for he
waver'd in it, and therefore to remove him from the City, and from his Fathers
sight, would be sufficient. This is a Glorious Mercy, and worthy of a Prince,
to make all things Gentler wherever he comes. How Miserable is that Man in
Himself, who when he has employed his Power in Rapines, and Cruelty upon
Others, is yet more Unhappy in himself? He stands in Fear both of his
Domestics, and of Strangers, the Faith of his Friends, and the Piety of his
Children, and flies to Actual Violence to secure him from the Violence he
Fears. When he comes to look about him, and to consider what he Has done, what
he Must, and what he is About to do; what with the Wickedness, and with the
Torments of his Conscience, many times he Fears Death, Oftener he wishes for it,
and lives more Odious to himself, than to his Subjects: whereas, on the
Contrary, he that takes a Care of the Public, though of One Part more perhaps
than of Another, yet there is not Any Part of it, but he looks upon as Part of
Himself. His Mind is Tender, and Gentle, and even where Punishment is
Necessary, and Profitable, he comes to it Unwillingly, and without any Rancor,
or Enmity in his heart. Let the Authority, in fine be what it will, Clemency
becomes it, and the Greater the Power, the greater is the Glory of it. It is a
truly Royal Virtue, for a Prince to deliver his People from Other Men's Anger,
and not to Oppress them with his Own.

The End.
SENECA'S MORALS. The Third, and Last Part. Digested into XXVIII EPISTLES, By
ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

LONDON: Printed by Tho. Newcomb for Henry Brom, at the Gun in St Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXVIII.

THE Contents.
Epist. I. CErtain General Directions for the Government of the Voice; as in
speaking Soft, or Loud; Quick, or Slow. The Speech is the Index of the Mind.
Page 1. Epist. II. Of Styles, Compositions, and the Choice of Words. That Is the
Best way of Writing, and Speaking, which is Free, and Natural. Advice
concerning Reading. p. 6. Epist. III. Against all sorts of Affectation in
Discourse. Fantastical Studies; Impertinent, and Unprofitable Subtilties. Man's
Business is Virtue, not Words. p. 16. Epist. IV. Business, and want of News,
are no Excuse among Friends, for not Writing. Wise Men are the better for one
another. How far Wisdom may be advanced by Precept. p. 26. Epist. V. Seneca
gives an Account of Himself, his Studies, and of his Inclinations: With many
Excellent Reflections upon the Duties, and the Errors of Humane Life. p. 37.
Epist. VI. The Blessings of a Virtuous Retirement. How we come to the Knowledge
of Virtue. A Distinction betwixt Good and Honest. A Wise Man Contents himself
with his Lot. p. 49. Epist. VII. Of Impertinent Studies, and Impertinent Men.
Philosophers, the Best Companions. p. 60. Epist. VIII. Against Singularity of
Manners, and Behavior. p. 67. Epist. IX. The Blessings of a Vigorous Mind in a
Decayed Body; With some Pertinent Reflections of Seneca, upon his Own Age. p.
72. Epist. X. Custom is a Great Matter, either in Good or Ill. We should check
our Passions Betimes. Involuntary Motions are Invincible. p. 78. Epist. XI. We
are Divided in our Selves; and Confound Good, and Evil. p. 84. Epist. XII. We
are moved at the Novelty of things, for want of Understanding the Reason of
them. p. 92. Epist. XIII. Every Man is the Artisicer of his Own Fortune. Of
Justice, and Injustice. p. 97. Epist. XIV. Of Trust in Friendship. Prayer; and
Bodily Exercise. p. 102. Epist. XV. The Danger of Flattery; and in what Cases a
Man may be allowed to Commend Himself. p. 108. Epist. XVI. A General
Dissolution of Manners: With a Censure of Corrupt Magistrates. p. 114. Epist.
XVII. The Original of All Men is the Same; And Virtue is the Only Nobility.
There is a Tenderness due to Servants. p. 121. Epist. XVIII. We are Juster to
Men, than to God. Of Life, and Death; Of Good, and Evil. p. 127. Epist. XIX. Of
True Courage. p. 137. Epist. XX. It Is Never too Late to Learn. The Advantages
of a Private Life; and the Slavery of a Public. The Ends of Punishment. p.
143. Epist. XXI. The Two Blessings of Life are, a Sound Body; and a Quiet Mind.
The Extravagance of the Roman Luxury. The Moderation, and Simplicity of Former
Times. p. 152. Epist. XXII. Man is Compounded of Soul, and Body: And has
Naturally a Civil War within Himself. The Difference betwixt a Life of Virtue,
and a Life of Pleasure. p. 161. Epist. XXIII. We abuse Gods Blessings, and turn
them into Mischiefs. Meditations upon the Horrors of Earthquakes, and
Consolations against them. Death is the same thing, which way soever it comes:
Only we are more moved by Accidents that we are not used to. p. 167. Epist.
XXIV. A Discourse of Gods Providence, in the Misfortunes of Good Men in this
World, and in the Prosperity of the Wicked. p. 178. Epist. XXV. A Wise, and a
Good Man is Proof against all Accidents. Of Fate. p. 189. Epist. XXVI. All
things are Produced out of Cause, and Matter. Of Providence. A Brave Man is a
Match for Fortune. p. 197. Epist. XXVII. Some Traditions of the Ancients
concerning Thunder, and Lightning; with the Authors Contemplations Thereupon.
p. 204. Epist. XXVIII. A Contemplation of Heaven, and Heavenly Things. Of God,
and of the Soul. p. 211.
Epistles.
EPIST. I. Certain General Directions for the Government of the Voice; as in
speaking Soft, or Loud; Quick, or Slow. The Speech is the Index of the Mind.
YOu say well, that in Speaking, the very Ordering of the Voice, (to say
nothing of the Actions, Countenances, and other Circumstances that accompany
it) is a Consideration worthy of a Wise Man. There are, that prescribe Certain
Modes of Rising, and Falling; Nay, if you will be governed by Them, you shall
not speak a word, move a step, or eat a Bit, but by a Rule: And these perhaps
are too Critical. Do not understand me yet, as if I made no Difference betwixt
entering upon a Discourse Loud, or Soft; for the Affections do Naturally Rise by
Degrees; and, in all Disputes, or Pleadings, whether Public, or Private, a Man
should properly Begin with Modesty, and Temper, and so Advance by little and
little, if need be, into Clamor, and Vociferation. And as the Voice Rises by
Degrees, let it fall so too; not Snapping off upon a sudden, but Abating, as
upon Moderation: The other is Unmannerly, and Rude. He that has a Precipitate
speech, is commonly violent in his Manners: Beside that, there is in it much of
Vanity, and Emptyness; and no Man takes satisfaction in a Flux of Words,
without Choice; where the Noise is more than the Value. Fabian was a Man
Eminent, both for his Life, and Learning; and no less for his Eloquence. His
Speech was rather Easy, and Sliding, than Quick: Which he accounted to be, not
only Liable to many Errors, but to a Suspicion of Immodesty. Nay, let a Man
have Words never so much at Will, he will no more speak Fast, than he will Run,
for fear his Tongue should go before his Wit. The Speech of a Philosopher
should be like his Life, Composed, without Pressing, or Stumbling; which is
fitter for a Mountebank, than a Man of Sobriety, and Business: and then to drop
one word after another, is as bad on the other side. The Interruption is
Tedious, and tires out the Auditor with Expectation. Truth, and Morality,
should be delivered in Words Plain, and without Affectation; for, like
Remedies, unless they stay with us; we are never the better for them. He that
would work upon his Hearers, must no more expect to do it upon the Post, than a
Physician to Cure his Patients, only in passing by them. Not but that I would
have a Wise Man, in some Cases, to Raise himself, and mend his Pace; but still
with a regard to the Dignity of his Manners; though there may be a great force
also in Moderation. I would have his Discourse smooth, and Flowing, like a
River; not Impetuous, like a Torrent. There is a Rapid, Lawless, and
Irrevocable Velocity of Speech, which I would scarce allow, even to an Orator;
for if he be transported with Passion, or Ostentation, a Man's Attention can
hardly keep him Company. It is not the Quantity, but the Pertinence, that does
the business. Let the words of an Ancient Man flow Soft, and Gentle; let those
of an Orator come off Round, and Powerful; but not run on without Fear, or Wit,
as if a whole Declamation were to be but one Period. Cicero wrote with Care,
and that which will for ever stand the Test. All Public Languages are
according to the Humor of the Age: A Wantonness, and Effeminacy of Speech
denotes Luxury; for the Wit follows the Mind: If the Latter be Sound, Composed,
Temperate, and Grave, the Wit is Dry, and Sober too: but if the One be
Corrupted, the other is likewise unsound. Do we not see when a Man's Mind is
heavy, how he Creeps, and Draws his Legs After him? A Finical Temper is read in
the very Gesture, and Cloths; if a Man be Choleric, and Violent, it is also
discovered in his Motions. An Angry Man speaks Short, and Quick; the Speech of
an Effeminate Man is Loose, and Melting. A Queint, and Sollicitous way of
speaking, is the sign of a Weak Mind; but a Great Man speaks with Ease, and
Freedom; and with more Assurance, though less care. Speech is the Index of the
Mind; When you see a Man Dress, and set his Cloths in Print, you shall be sure
to find his Words so too, and nothing in them that is Firm, and Weighty: It
does not become a Man to be Delicate. As it is in Drink, the Tongue never
Trips, till the Mind be Overborn; So it is with Speech; so long as the Mind is
Whole, and Sound, the Speech is Masculine, and Strong; but, if one Fails, the
other follows.

EPIST. II. Of Styles, Compositions, and the Choice of Words. That Is the best
way of Writing, and Speaking, which is Free and Natural. Advice concerning
Reading.
YOU cannot expect any Certain, and Universal Rule, either for the Style, or
for the Manner of Speaking, or Writing, because they vary according to Usage,
and Occasion. So that we must content our selves with Generals. Men Write, and
Speak commonly according to the humor of the Age they live in: And there is
also a Correspondence betwixt the Language, and the Life of Particular Persons;
as one may give a near Guess at a Man, by his very Gate, Furniture, and Cloths.
In the first place, let the Sense be Honest, and Noble; not pinched up into
Sentences; but Substantial, and of Higher Design, with nothing in it
Superfluous. Let the Words be fitted to the Matter; and where the Subject is
Familiar, let the Style be so too. But great thoughts must have suitable
Expressions; and there ought to be a kind of Transport in the One, to Answer it
in the Other. It is not enough to compose a pleasant Fable; and tickle the
Fancy; but he that Treats of Weighty Matters, must do it in Grave, and Sober
Terms. There are some that have not much of the vigor of an Orator; or of that
Sententious Sharpness; and yet the Worthiness of the Sense, makes amends for
the Lowness of the Style. Our Forefathers were not at all delighted with fine
Words, and Flowers: But their Compositions were Strong, Equal, and Manly. We
have now adays here and there a Point; but the Work is Uneven, where only
This, or That Particular is Remarkable. We never admire This, or That single
Tree, where the Whole Wood is all of a Height. A Specious Title Page may
commend a Book to Sale, but not for Use. An Eminent Author is to be taken down
Whole, and not here and there a Bit. It Is a Maiming of the Body to take the
Members of it apart: Nor is it a Handsome Leg, or Arm, that makes a Handsome Man;
but the Symmetry, and Agreement of all together. It is the Excellency of
Speaking, and Writing, to do it Close; and in Words accommodate to the
Intention; and I would yet have somewhat more to be signified, than is
Delivered: It being also a Mark of Strength, and Solidity of Judgment. The
Propriety of words, in some Cases, is Wonderful; especially when we are well
read in the Knowledge of Things, and of Duties; and there is a Singular Grace
in the Gentleness of Numbers, when they run Smooth, and without Perturbation.
Some are raised, and Startled at Words, as a Horse is at a Drum; and indue the
very Passion of the Speaker. Others are moved with the Beauty of things; and
when they hear any thing bravely urged against Death, or Fortune, they do
secretly wish for some Occasion of Experimenting that Generosity in themselves.
But not one of a Thousand of them, that carries the Resolution home with him
that he had conceived. It is an easy matter to excite an Auditory to the Love
of Goodness, having already the Foundation, and the Seeds of Virtue within
themselves: So that it is but awakening the Consideration of it, where all Men
are agreed beforehand upon the Main. Who is so Sordid, as not to be roused at
such a Speech as this? The Poor Man wants many things, but the Covetous Man
wants All. Can any Flesh forbear being delighted with This saying, though a
Satyr against his own Vice. As to forced Metaphors, and wild Hyperbole's, I
would leave them to the Poets. And I am utterly against Fooling with Tinckling
Conceits, and Sounds: Not that I would wholly forbid the use of Hyperboles;
which, although they exceed the Truth, may yet be a means, by things
Incredible, to bring us unto things Credible. And there may be great use made
also of Parables: For the way of Application does usually more affect the Mind,
than the downright. Meaning. That Speech which gains upon the Passions, is much
more Profitable than that which only works upon the Judgment. Chrysippus was a
Great Man, and of an Acute Wit; but the Edge of it was so fine, that every
thing turned it: and he might be said, in truth, rather to Prick the Subject
that he handled, than to Pierce it Through.

As it is not for the Honor of a Philosopher, to be Sollicitous about Words: I
would not have him negligent neither: But, let him speak with Assurance, and
without Affectation. If we can, let our Discourses be Powerful; but however,
let them be Clear. I like a Composition that is Nervous, and Strong; but yet I
would have it Sweet, and Gracious withal. There are many things, I know, that
please well enough in the Delivery, and yet will hardly abide the Test of an
Examination. But, That Eloquence is Mischievous, that diverts a Man from
Things, to Words; and little better than a Prostitution of Letters. For, What
signifies the Pomp of Words, or the Jumbling of Syllables, to the making up of
a Wise Man? Tully's Composition indeed is equal; his Numbers are Harmonious,
Free, and Gentle: And yet he takes a Care, not to make any forfeiture of his
Gravity. Fabian is a Great Man, in being Second to Cicero: Pollio is a Great
Man too, though a step below him; and so is Livy likewise, though he comes
after the other Three. But several Subjects require several Excellencies. An
Orator should be Sharp; the Tragedian, Great; and the Comedian, Pleasant. When
a Man Declaimes against Vice, let him be Bitter; against Dangers, Bold; against
Fortune, Proud; against Ambition, Reproachful: Let him Chide Luxury; Defame
Lust: An Impotency of Mind must be Broken. In these Cases, Words are the least
part of an Honest Man's Business.

In the Matter of Composition, I would Write as I Speak; with Ease, and
Freedom; for it is more Friendly, as well as more Natural: And so much my
Inclination, that if I could make my mind visible to you, I would neither
Speak, nor Write it. If I put my Thoughts in good Sense, the Matter of Ornament
I shall leave to the Orators. There are some things that a Man may Write even
as he Travels; Others, that require Privacy, and Leisure. But however, it is
good in Writing, as in other Cases, to leave the best Bit for the last. A
Philosopher has no more to do, than to speak properly, and in words that
express his Meaning. And this may be done without Tossing of the Hands,
Stamping, or any Violent Agitation of the Body; without either the Vanity of
the Theater, on the one hand, or an Insipid Heaviness, on the other. I would
have his Speech as plain, and single, as his Life; for he is then as good as
his Word, when both Hearing him, and Seeing him, we find him to be the same
Person. And yet if a Man can be Eloquent, without more pains than the thing's
worth, let him use his Faculty: Provided, that he value himself upon the
Matter, More than upon the Words; and apply himself rather to the
Understanding, than to the Phansy; for this is a business of Virtue, not a
Trial of Wit. Who is there that would not rather have a Healing, than a
Rhetorical Physician? But, for esteeming any Man purely upon the score of his
Rhetoric, I would as soon choose a Pilot for a good head of Hair.

In the matter of Reading; I would fix upon some Particular Authors, and make
them my own. He that is every where, is no where; but like a Man that spends
his Life in Travel, he has many Hosts, but few Friends. Which is the very
Condition of him; that skips from one Book to Another; The Variety does but
distract his Head; and, for want of Digesting, it turns to Corruption, in stead
of Nourishment. It Is a good Argument of a Well Composed Mind, when a Man loves
Home, and to keep Company with Himself. Whereas a Rambling Head is a Certain
Sign of a Sickly Humor. Many Books, and many Acquaintances, bring a Man to a
Levity of Disposition, and a Liking of Change. What is the Body the better for
Meat, that will not stay with it? Nor is there any thing more Hurtful in the
Case of Diseases, or Wounds, than the frequent shifting of Physic, or
Plasters. Of Authors, be sure to make Choice of the Best; and, (as I said
before) to stick Close to them; and, though you may take up Others by the By,
reserve some Select Ones however for your Study, and Retreat. In your Reading,
you will every day meet with Consolation, and Support, against Poverty, Death,
and Other Calamities, Incident to Humane Life: Extract what you like; and then
single out some Particular from the rest, for That days Meditation. Reading
does not only Feed, and Entertain the Understanding; but when a Man is doz'd
with One Study, he relieves himself with Another: But, still Reading, and
Writing are to be taken up by Turns. So long as the Meat lies whole upon the
Stomach, it is a Burden to us; but upon the Concoction it passes into
Strength, and Blood. And so it fares with our Studies; so long as they lie
whole, they pass only into the Memory, without affecting the Understanding:
But, upon Meditation, they become our Own, and Supply us with Strength, and
Virtue: The Be that wanders, and Sips from every Flower, disposes what she has
Gathered into her Cells.

EPIST. III. Against all sorts of Affectation in Discourse. Fantastical
Studies; Impertinent, and Unprofitable Subtilties. Man's Business is Virtue, not
Words.
THere are many men, (and some of great Sense too) that lose both the Profit,
and the Reputation of good Thoughts, by the Uncouth manner of Expressing them:
They love to talk in mystery, and take it for a marque of wisdom, not to be
Understood. They are so fond of making themselves Public, that they will
rather be Ridiculous, than not taken Notice of. When the Mind grows Squeamish,
and comes to a Loathing of things that are Common as if they were Sordid, That
Sickness betrays it self in our way of Speaking too: for we must have New
Words, New Compositions, and it passes for an Ornament, to borrow from other
Tongues, where we may be better furnished in our Own. One Man Prizes himself
upon being Concise, and talking in Parables: Another runs himself out in Words;
and that which He takes only for Copious, renders him to Others both
Ridiculous, and Tedious. Others there are, that Like the Error well enough, but
cannot come Up to it. But, take this for a Rule; Wheresoever the Speech is
Corrupted, so is the Mind. Some are only for Words Antiquated, and long since
out of Date; Others only for that which is Popular, and Course; and they are
Both in the Wrong; for the One takes too Little Care, and the Other too Much.
Some are for a Rough, broken Style; as if it were a thing Unmanly to please the
Ear; Others are too Nice upon the Matter of Number, and make it rather Singing,
than Speaking. Some affect not to be understood till the end of the Period, and
hardly then neither. It Is not good; a Style that is either too Bold, or too
Florid; the One wants Modesty, and the Other, Effect. Some are too Starched,
and Formal; Others take a Pride in being Rugged; and if they chance to let fall
any thing that is Smooth, they will transpose, and mangle it on purpose, only to
maim the Period, and Disappoint a Bodies Expectation. These Errors are Commonly
introduced by some person that is famous for his Eloquence; Others follow him,
and so it passes into a Fashion. And we are as much out in the Choice of the
Matter, as in That of our Words.

There are some Studies which are only Matter of Curiosity, and Trial of Skill;
Others of Pleasure, and of Use: but still there are many things worth the
Knowing perhaps, that were not worth the Learning. It is a huge deal of time
that is spent in Cavilling about Words, and Captious Disputations, that work us
up to an Edge, and then Nothing comes on it. There are some Tricks of Wit, like
slight of hand, which amount to no more than the Tying of Knots only to Loosen
them again; And it is the very Fallacy that pleases us; for, so soon as ever we
know how they are done, the Satisfaction is at an End. He that does not
understand these Sophismes, is never the worse, and he that does, is never the
better. If a Man tells me that I have Horns, I can tell him again, That I have
None, without Feeling on my Forehead. Bion's Dilemma makes All Men to be
Sacrilegious, and yet, at the same time, maintains, That there is no such thing
as Sacrilege. He that takes to himself, (says he) what belongs to God, Commits
Sacrilege; but all things belong to God, Therefore he that applies any thing to
his own Use, is Sacrilegious. On the other side, the very Rifling of a Temple
he makes to be No Sacrilege: for it is (says he) but the taking of something out
of One place, that belongs to God, and removing of it to Another that belongs
to him too. The Fallacy lies in This, that though all things Belong to him, all
things are not yet Dedicated to him. There is no greater Enemy of Truth, than
overmuch Subtilty of Speculation. Protagoras will have every thing Disputable,
and as much to be said for the One side, as for the Other. Nay, he makes it
another Question, Whether every thing be Disputable, or no. There are Others
that make it a Science, to prove, That Man knows Nothing: But, the Former is
the more Tolerable Error; for the Other takes away the very Hope of Knowledge;
and it is better to know that which is Superfluous, than nothing at all. And
yet it is a kind of Intemperance to desire to Know more than Enough; for it
makes Men Troublesome, Talkative, Impertinent, Conceipted, etc. There is a
Certain Hankering after Learning, which, if it be not put into a right way,
hinders, and falls foul upon it self. Wherefore the Burden must be fitted to
the Shoulders, and no more than we are Able to Bear. It is, in a great Measure,
the Fault of our Tutors, that teach their Disciples rather how to Dispute, than
how to Live: And the Learner himself is also to blame, for applying himself to
the Emprovement, rather of his Wit, than of his Mind: By which means,
Philosophy is now turned to Philology. Put a Grammarian to Virgil; he never
heeds the Philosophy, but the Verse: Every Man takes Notes for his own Study.
In the same Meadow the Cow finds Grass, the Dog starts a Hare, and the Stork
snaps a Lizzard. Tully's de Republica finds work both for the Philosopher, the
Philologer, and the Grammarian. The Philosopher wonders how it was Possible to
Speak so much against Justice. The Philologer makes This Observation, that Rome
had Two Kings, the One without a Father, and the Other without a Mother; for
it is a Question who was Servius his Mother, and of Ancus his Father, there is
not so much as any Mention. The Grammarian takes notice, that Reapse is used
for Reipsa; and Sepse for Seipse: And so every Man makes his Notes for his own
Purpose. These Fooleries apart, let us learn to do good to Mankind, and put our
Knowledge into Action. Our Danger is the being Mistaken in Things, not in
Words; and in the Confounding of Good, and Evil. So that our whole Life is but
one continued Error, and we live in Dependency upon to morrow. There are a
World of things to be Studied, and Learned, and therefore we should Discharge
the Mind of things Unnecessary, to make way for Greater Matters. The Business
of the Schools is rather a Play, than a Study; and only to be done when we can
do nothing else. There are many People that frequent them, only to Hear, and
not to Learn; and they take Notes too, not to reform their Manners, but to pick
up words, which they Vent, with as little Benefit to Others, as they heard
them, to Themselves. It costs us a great deal of time, and other Men's Ears a
great deal of trouble, to purchase the Character of a Learned Man: Wherefore I
shall even content my self with the Courser Title of an Honest Man. The worst
of it is, that there is a Vain, and Idle Pleasure in it, which tempts us to
squander away many a precious hour to very little Purpose. We spend our selves
upon Subtiltics, which may perchance make us to be thought Learned, but not
Good Wisdom delights in openness and Simplicity; in the Forming of our Lives,
rather than in the Niceties of the Schools, which, at best, do but bring us
Pleasure without Profit. And, in short, the things which the Philosophers
impose upon us with so much Pride, and Vanity, are little more than the same
Lessons over again, which they learned at School. But some Authors have their
Names up, though their Discourses be mean enough; they Dispute, and Wrangle,
but they do not Edify, any farther, than as they keep us from Ill doings, or
perhaps stop us in our speed to wickedness. And there ought to be a Difference
betwixt the Applauses of the Schools, and of the Theater; the One being moved
with every Popular Conceit, which does not at all Consist with the Dignity of
the Other. Whereas there are some Writings that Stir up generous Resolutions,
and do, as it were, inspire a Man with a new Soul. They display the Blessings
of a Happy Life, and possess me at the same time with Admiration, and with
Hope. They give me a Veneration for the Oracles of Antiquity; and a Claim to
them, as to a Common Inheritance; for they are the Treasure of Mankind, and it
must be my Duty to improve the Stock, and transmit it to Posterity. And yet I
do not love to hear a Man site Zeno, Cleanther, Epicurus, without some thing
of his Own too. What do I care for the bare Hearing of That which I may Read?
Not but that word of mouth makes a great Impression, especially when they are
the Speakers own Words: But he that only recites Another Man's Words, is no more
to me than a Notary. Beside that there is an end of Invention, if we rest upon
what is Invented already; and he that only Follows Another, is so far from
finding out any thing New, that he does not so much as look for it. I do not
pretend all this while to be the Master of Truth, but I am yet a most Obstinate
Inquisitor after it. I am no Man's Slave; but as I ascribe much to Great Men, I
challenge something to my self. Our Forefathers have left us, not only their
Invention, but Matter also for farther Enquiry; and perhaps they might have
found out more things that are Necessary, if they had not bent their thoughts
too much upon Superfluities.

Is not This a fine time for us to be fidling, and fooling about Words? How
many Useful, and Necessary things are there, that we are First to Learn, and
Secondly, to Imprint in our Minds? For it is not enough to Remember, and to
Understand, unless we Do what we Know.

EPIST. IV. Business, and want of News, are no Excuse among Friends, for not
Writing: Wise Men are the better for one another. How far Wisdom may be
advanced by Precept.
YOur Last Letter was very short; and the whole Letter it self was little more
than an Excuse for the shortness of it. One while you are so full of Business,
that you cannot write at all; and Another while, you have so little News, that
you do not know what to Write. Now, assure your self, that whosoever has a Mind
to Write, may find Leisure for it: And, for your other Pretense, it looks as if
we our selves were the least part of our own business. Put the Case that the
whole World were Becalmed; and that there were neither Wars, Amors, Factions,
Designs, Disappointments, Competitors, or Lawsuits; No Prodigals, Usurers, or
Fornicators in Nature; there would be a large Field yet left for the Offices of
Friendship; and for the exercise of Philosophy, and Virtue. Let us rather
consider, what we our Selves Ought to do, than hearken after the Doings of
other People. What signifies the Story of our Neighbors Errors, to the
Reforming of our Own? Is it not a more Glorious, and Profitable Employment, to
write the History of Providence, than to Record the Usurpations of Ambitious
Princes; and rather to Celebrate the Bounties of the Allmighty, than the
Robberies of Alexander? Nor is Business any Excuse, for the Neglect, either of
our Studies, or of our Friends. First, we Continue our own Business; and Then,
we Increase it: And in stead of Lending, we do wholly Give our selves up to it;
and hunt for Colorable Pretenses of Misspending our Time. But, I say, that
where ever we are, or with whomsoever, or However Employed, we have our
Thoughts at Liberty.

You have here drawn a long Letter from me; and if you find it Tedious, you may
thank your self, for calling upon me to be as good as my Word. Not but that I
write by Inclination too. For if we love th Pictures of our Friends, by what
hand soever they be drawn, How much more then shall we joy in a Friends
Letters, which are undoubtedly the most Lively Pictures of one another? It is a
shame, you will say, to stand in need of any Remembrancers of an Absent Friend;
and yet sometimes the Place, a Servant, a Relation, a House, a Garment, may
honestly excite the Memory; and it renders every thing as Fresh to us, as if we
were still joined in our Embraces, and drinking up one another Tears. It is by
the Benefit of Letters, that Absent Friends are in a manner brought together;
beside that Epistolary Discourses are much more Profitable than Public, and
Premeditated Declamations: for they Insinuate themselves into the Affections
with more Freedom, and Effect, though with less Pomp, and Pretense. You do
expect, perhaps, that I should tell you, how gentle, and short a VVinter we
have had; how Cold, and unseasonable a Spring; or some other Fooleries, to as
little purpose. But, What are you and I the Better for such Discourses? We
should rather be laying the Foundations of a Good Mind; and learning to
distinguish betwixt the Blessings of Virtue, and the Amusements of Imagination.
There came in some Friends to me yesterday, that made the Chimney smoke a
little more than Ordinary; but not at a rate to make the Neighborhood cry out
Fire. We had variety of Discourse; and passing from one thing to another, we
came at last to read something of Quintus Sextius: (a Great Man, upon my
Credit, deny it that will) Good God! The Force and Vigor of that Man's
Writings! And how much are they above the Common Level of other Philosophers! I
cannot read them methinks, without Challenging of Fortune, and Defying all the
Powers of Ambition, and Violence. The more I Consider him, the more I Admire
him; for I find in him, (as in the World it self) every Day to be a new
Spectacle, and to afford Fresh Matter still for more Veneration. And yet the
Wisdom of our Forefathers has left work enough for their Posterity; even if
there were no more in it than the Application of what they have transmitted to
us of their own Invention. As, suppose that they had left us Remedies for such
and such Diseases; so Certain, that we should not need to look for any other
Medicines; there would be some Skill yet required in the Applying of them in
the proper Case, Proportion, and Season. I have an honor for the Memorials of
our worthy Progenitors. If I meet a Consul, or a Praetor upon the Road, I Will
alight from my Horse, uncover my Head, and give him the way; and, Shall I have
no Veneration now for the Names of the Governors of Mankind? No Man is so wise,
as to know all things; or if he did, one Wise Man may yet be helpful to
another, in finding out a nearer way to the finishing of his work: For, let a
Man make never so much haste, it is some sort of Assistance, the bare
Encouraging of him to continue his Course; beside the Comforts, and Benefits of
Communication, in Loving, and being Beloved, and in the mutual Approbation of
each Other.

The last Point, you know, that you and I had in Debate, was, Whether or no
Wisdom may be perfected by Precept. There are some that account only that part
of Philosophy to be Profitable to Mankind, which delivers it self in Particular
Precepts to Particular Persons, without Forming the whole Man. Teaching the
Husband (for the Purpose) how to behave himself to his Wife; the Father how to
Train up, and Discipline his Children; and the Master, how to Govern his
Servants. As if any Man could be sufficiently Instructed in the Parts of Life,
without Comprehending the whole Sum, and Scope of it. Others, (as Aristo the
Stoique) are rather for the General Decrees of Philosophers; which whosoever
knows in the main, that person understands in every Particular how to Tutor
himself. As he that learns to cast a Dart, when he has by Practice, and
Exercise, gotten a true Aim, he will not only strike This, or That Mark, but
whatever he has a Mind to: So he that is well informed in the Whole, will need
no Direction in the Parts: But under the Principles of a Good Life, Learn how
to behave himself in all the Circumstances of it. Cleanthes allows the
Paraenetick, or Preceptive Philosophy, to be in some sort Profitable; but yet
very Short, and Defective; unless as it flows from the Universal Understanding
of the Heads, and Decrees of Philosophy. Now the question is, Whether This
alone can make a Good Man; and whether it be Superfluous it self; or so
Sufficient, as to make all other Knowledge appear so. They that will have it
Superfluous, argue Thus. If the Eyes be covered, there is no Seeing, without
removing the Impediment; and, in that Condition, it is to no purpose to bid a
Man go to such, or such a Place, or to reach This or That with his hand. And so
it fares with the Mind; So long as That continues Clouded with Ignorance, and
Error, it is Idle to give Particular Precepts; as if you should teach a Poor Man
to act the Part of a Rich; or one that is Hungry, how to behave himself with a
Full Stomach: While the One is Necessitous, and the Other half Starved, they
are neither of them the Better for it. And then shall we give Precepts in
Manifest Cases, or in Doubtful? The Former need none; And in the Latter, we
shall not be believed. Nor is it enough Simply to advise, unless we also give
Reasons for it. There are Two Errors which we are liable to in this Case; either
the Wickedness of Perverse Opinions, which have taken Possession of us; or at
least a Disposition to Entertain Error, under any Resemblance of Truth. So that
our work must be, either to Cure a Sick Mind, that is already Teinted; or to
prepossess an Evil Inclination, before it comes to an Ill Habit. Now the
Decrees of Philosophy enable us in both these Cases; Nor is it possible, by
Particulars, to Obviate all Particular Occasions. One Man Marries a Widow,
another a Maid: She may be Rich, or Poor; Barren, or Fruitful; Young, or
Ancient; Superior, Inferior, or Equal. One Man follows Public Business;
another flies it; so that the same Advice that is Profitable to the One, may be
Mischievous to the Other. Every ones is a Particular Case, and must be suited
with a Particular Counsel. The Laws of Philosophy are Brief; and extend to all;
but the Variety of the Other is Incomprehensible, and can never make that good
to all, which it promises to a few. The Precepts of Wisdom lie Open, but the
Decrees of it are Hidden in the Dark.

Now, in Answer. It does not hold with the Mind, as with the Eye: If there be a
Suffusion, it is to be helped by Remedy, and not by Precept. The Eye is not to
be taught to Distinguish of Colors; but the Mind must be Informed what to do
in Life. And yet the Physician will prescribe Order also to the Patient, as
well as Physic; and tell him, You must bring your Eye to endure the Light by
Degrees; have a Care of Studying upon a full Stomach, etc. We are told, That
Precepts do neither Extinguish, nor Abate false Opinions in us of Good, or
Evil: and it shall be Granted, that of Themselves they are not able to Subdue
Vicious Inclinations: But this does not hinder them from being very useful to
us in Conjunction with other Helps. First, as they refresh the Memory; and
Secondly, as they bring us to a more Distinct view of the Parts, which we saw
but Confusedly in the Whole. At the same rate, Consolatories, and Exhortations
will be found superfluous, as well as Precepts. Which yet upon Daily Experience
we know to be otherwise. Nay, we are the better, not only for the Precepts,
but for the Converse of Philosophers; for we still carry away somewhat of the
Tincture of Virtue, whether we will or no: But the Deepest Impres sion they
make, is upon Children. It is Urged, that Precepts are Insufficient without
Proof; but I say, that the very Authority of the Adviser, goes a great way in
the Credit of the Advice: As we depend upon the Opinion of the Lawyer, without
demanding his Reason for it. And again; whereas the Variety of Precepts is said
to be Infinite, I cannot allow it: For the greatest and most Necessary Affairs
are not Many; and for the Application to Time, Places, and Persons, the
Differences are so small, that a few General Rules will serve the Turn. Nay,
let a Man be never so Right in his Opinion, he may yet be more Confirmed in it
by Admonition. There are many things that may assist a Cure, though they do not
perfect it; Even Mad men themselves may be kept in Awe by Menaces, and
Correction. But, it is a hard matter, I must confess, to give Counsel at a
Distance. For Advice depends much upon the Opportunity; and That perhaps which
was Proper, when it was Desired, may come to be Pernicious, before it be
Received. Some indeed may be Prescribed, as some Remedies, at any Distance; and
transmitted to Posterity; but for Others, a Man must be upon the Place, and
deliberate upon Circumstances; and be not only Present, but watchful, to Strike
in with the very Nick of the Occasion.

EPIST. V. Seneca gives an Account of Himself: Of his Studies, and of his
Inclinations: With many Excellent Reflections upon the Duties, and the Errors
of Humane Life.
YOur Letters were Old, before they came to my hand; so that I made no Enquiry
of the Messenger what you were a doing; beside that wherever you are, I take it
for granted, that I know your Business; and that you are still upon the great
Work of Perfecting your Self: A Thing, not to be done by Chance, but by
Industry, and Labor. We are all of us Wicked, before we come to be Good. We are
prepossessed, so that we must unlearn Iniquity, and study Virtue. The great
Difficulty is, to Begin the Enterprise: For a weak Mind is afraid of New
Experiments. I have now given over troubling my self for fear of you; because I
have that security for your well doing, that never failed any Man. The Love of
Truth, and of Goodness, is become Habitual to you. It may so fall out, that
Fortune perhaps may do you an Injury; but there is no Fear of your doing your
self one. Go on as you have begun, and compose your Resolutions; not to an
Effeminate Ease, but to a Frame of Virtuous Quiet. It is a Double Kindness that
you call me to so strict an Account of my Time; that nothing less than a Diary
of my Life, will satisfy you: for I take it as a Mark, both of your Good
Opinion, and of your Friendship; The Former, in believing that I do nothing
which I care to Conceal; and the Other; in assuring your self, that I will make
you the Confident of all my Secrets. I will hereafter set a Watch upon my Self;
and do as you would have me; and acquaint you, not only with the Course, and
Method, but with the very Business of my Life.

This Day I have had entire to my self, without any Knocking at my Door, or
lifting up of the Hanging; But I have divided it betwixt my Book, and my Bed;
and been left at liberty to do my own Business: For all the Impertinents were
either at the Theater, at Bowls, or at the Horse-match. My Body does not
require much Exercise, and I am beholden to my Age for it: A Little makes me
Weary; and That Is the end also of that which is most Robust. My Dinner is a
Piece of Dry Bread, without a Table, and without fouling of my Fingers. My
Sleeps are short, and in truth a little Doubtful, betwixt slumbering and
waking. One while I am reflecting upon the Errors of Antiquity; and then, I
apply my Self to the Correcting of my Own. In my Reading, with Reverence to the
Ancients, Some things I Take, Others I Alter; and some again I Reject; Others I
Invent; without enthralling my self so to another Judgment, as not to preserve
the Freedom of my Own. Sometimes of a sudden, in the Middle of my Meditations,
my Ears are struck with the Shout of a Thousand People together, from some
Spectacle or other: The Noise does not at all discompose my Thoughts; it is no
more to me than the Dashing of Waves, or the Wind in a Wood; but possibly
sometimes it may divert them. Good Lord! think I, if Men would but exercise
their Brains, as they do their Bodies; and take as much Pains for Virtue, as
they do for Pleasure; For Difficulties Strengthen the Mind, as well as Labor
does the Body.

You tell me, That you want my Books more than my Counsels; which I take just
as kindly, as if you should have asked me for my Picture. For I have the very
same Opinion of my Wit, that I have of my Beauty. You shall have both the One,
and the Other, with my very Self into the Bargain.

In the Examination of my own Heart, I find some Vices that lie Open; Others
more Obscure, and out of Sight; and some that take me only by Fits. Which Last
I look upon as the most Dangerous, and Troublesome; For they lie upon the
Catch, and keep a Man upon a Perpetual Guard: Being neither provided against
them, as in a State of War; nor Secure, as in any Assurance of Peace. To say
the Truth, we are all of us as Cruel, as Ambitious, and as Luxurious as our
Fellows. But we want the Fortune, or the Occasion, perchance, to show it. When
the Snake is Frozen, it is Safe; but the Poison is still in it, though it be
Num'd. We hate Upstarts, that use their Power with Insolence; when yet if we
had the same Means, it is Odds that we should do the same thing our selves. Only
our Corruptions are Private, for want of Opportunity to Employ them. Some
things we look upon as Superfluous; and Others, as not worth the while. But, we
never consider, that we pay dearest for that which we pretend to receive
Gratis. As Anxiety, Loss of Credit, Liberty, and Time. So Cheap is every Man in
effect, that pretends to be most Dear to Himself. Some are Dipped in their Lusts,
as in a River; there must be a hand to help them out: Others are Strangely
Careless of Good Counsel; and yet well enough disposed to follow Example. Some
again must be forced to their Duties: Because there is no Good to be done upon
them, by Persuasion. But, out of the whole Race of Mankind, How few are there
that are able to help themselves? Being thus Conscious of our own Frailty, we
should do well, to keep our selves quiet; and not to Trust Weak Minds with
Wine, Beauty, or Pleasure. We have much ado you see to keep our Feet upon Dry
Ground: What will become of us then, if we venture our selves where it is
Slippery? It Is not to say, This is a hard Lesson, and we cannot go through with
it. For we Can, if we Would Endeavor it; But we Cannot, because we give it for
granted That we Cannot, without trying whether we Can or No. And what is the
Meaning of all This; but that we are pleased with our Vices; and willing to be
Mastered by them. So that we had rather Excuse, than cast them off. The true
Reason is, we Will not; but the Pretense is, that we Cannot. And we are not
only under a Necessity of Error, but the very Love of it.

To give you now a Brief of my own Character; I am none of Those that take
Delight in Tumults, and in Struggling with Difficulties; for had rather be
Quiet, than in Arms: for I account it my Duty to bear up against Ill Fortune;
but, without Choosing it. I am no Friend to Contention; Especially to That of
the Bar: But I am very much a Servant to all Honest Business, that may be done
in a Corner. And there is no Retreat so Unhappy; as not to yield Entertainment
for a great Mind; by which he may make himself Profitable, both to his Country,
and to his Friends, by his Wisdom, by his Interest, and by his Counsel. It is
the Part of a good Patriot, to prefer Men of Worth; to Defend the Innocent; to
Provide Good Laws; and to Advise in War, and in Peace. But, is not He as good a
Patriot, that instructs Youth in Virtue; that furnishes the World with Precepts
of Morality, and keeps Humane Nature within the Bounds of Right Reason? Who is
the Greater Man, he that Pronounces a Sentence upon the Bench; or he that in
his Study reads us a Lecture of Justice, Piety, Patience, Fortitude; the
Knowledge of Heaven, the Contempt of Death, and the Blessing of a Good
Conscience? The Soldier that guards the Ammunition and the Baggage, is as
Necessary as he that fights the Battle. Was not Cato a greater Example than
either Ulysses, or Hercules? They had the Fame, you know, of being
indefatigable; Despisers of Pleasures, and great Conquerors both of their
Enemies, and of their Appetites. But Cato, I must Confess, had no Encounters
with Monsters; nor did he fall into those Times of Credulity, when people
believed, that the weight of the Heavens rested upon one Man's Shoulders. But he
grappled with Ambition, and the unlimited Desire of Power; which the whole
World, divided under a Triumvirate, was not able to satisfy. He Opposed
himself to the Vices of a degenerate City; even when it was now sinking under
its own weight. He stood single, and supported the falling Commonwealth, till
at last, as Inseparable Friends, they were crushed together: For Neither would
Cato Survive the Public Liberty; nor did That Liberty Outlive Cato.

To give you now a Farther Accomp^ of my Self; I am Naturally a Friend to all
the Rules and Methods of Sobriety, and Moderation. I like the Old Fashioned
Plate that was left me by my Country Father: It is Plain, and Heavy; And yet
for all this, there is a kind of Dazzling methinks in the Ostentations of
Splendour, and Luxury. But it strikes the Eye, more than the Mind; and though it
may shake a Wise Man, it cannot Alter him. Yet it sends me home many times
sadder perhaps than I went out; but yet, I hope, not Worse: though not without
some secret Dissatisfaction at my Own Condition. Upon these Thoughts I betake
my self to my Philosophy; and then, methinks, I am not well, unless I put my
self into some Public Employment: Not for the Honor, or the Profit of it; but
only to place my self in a Station where I may be serviceable to my Country,
and to my Friends. But, when I come, on the other side, to consider the
Uneasiness, the Abuses, and the Loss of Time that attends Public Affairs, I
get me home again as fast as I can; and take up a Resolution of spending the
Remainder of my days within the Privacy of my own Walls. How great a madness
is it to set our hearts upon Trifles; especially to the neglect of the most
serious Offices of our Lives, and the most important End of our Being? How
Miserable, as well as Short, is their Life, that Compass, with great Labor,
what they Possess with Greater; and Hold with Anxiety, what they Acquire with
Trouble? But, we are governed in all things by Opinion, and every thing is to
us, as we Believe it. What is Poverty, but a Privative; and not intended of
what a Man Has, but of that which he has Not? The great Subject of Humane
Calamities, is Money. Take all the Rest together, as Death, Sickness, Fear,
Desire, Pain, Labor; and those which proceed from Money, exceed them all. It Is a
Wonderful Folly, that of Tumblers, Rope-Dancers, Diverse, and what pains they
take, and what hazards they run for an Inconsiderable Gain. And yet we have not
Patience for the Thousandth Part of that trouble, though it would put us into
the Possession of an everlasting Quiet. Epicurus for Experiment sake confined
himself to a narrower Allowance, than that of the Severest Prisons to the most
Capital Offenders; and found himself at Ease too in a stricter Diet than any
Man in the Worst Condition needs to Fear. This was to prevent Fortune, and to
Frustrate the Worst which she can do. We should never know any thing to be
Superfluous, but by the Want of it. How many things do we provide, only because
Others have them, and for fashion sake? Caligula offered Demetrius 5000 Crowns;
who rejected them with a Smile, as who should say, It was so little, it did him
no honor the refusing of it. Nothing less, says he, than the Offer of his
whole Empire could have been a Temptation to have tried the Firmness of my
Virtue. By this Contempt of Riches, is intended only the Fearless Possession of
them. And the way to attain That, is to persuade our selves, that we may live
Happily without them. How many of those things, which Reason formerly told us
were Superfluous, and Mimical, do we now find to be so by Experience? But we
are misled by the Counterfeit of Good on the One hand, and the Suspicion of
Evil on the Other. Not that Riches are an Efficient Cause of Mischief; but they
are a Precedent Cause, by way of Irritation, and Attraction For they have so
near a Resemblance of Good, that most People take them to be Good. Nay, Virtue
it self is also a Precedent Cause of Evil; as many are Envied for their Wisdom,
or for their Justice. Which does not arise from the thing it self, but from the
Irreprovable power of Virtue, that forces all Men to Admire, and to Love it.
That is not Good, that is More Advantageous to us, but That which is Only so.

EPIST. VI. The Blessings of a Virtuous Retirement. How we come to the
Knowledge of Virtue. A Distinction betwixt Good, and Honest. A Wise Man
Contents himself with his Lot.
THere is no Opportunity of Enquiring Where you are, What you do, and, What
Company you keep, that scapes me. And, I am well enough pleased, that I can
hear nothing concerning you; for, it shows, that you live Retired. Not but that
I durst trust you with the wide World too; But, however, it is not easy, such
a General Conversation: Nor is it absolutely safe neither, for, though it could
not Corrupt you, it would yet Hinder you. Now, wheresoever you are, know, that
I am with you; and you are so to Live, as if I both heard, and saw you. Your
Letters are really Blessings to me; and the sense of your Emprovements relieves
me, even under the Consideration of my own decay. Remember, that as I am Old,
so are you Mortal. Be true to your Self, and Examine your self, whether you be
of the same Mind to day, that you were yesterday; for, That Is a Sign of Perfect
Wisdom. And yet give me leave to tell you, that though Change of Mind be a
Token of Imperfection; it is the Business of my Age to Unwill One day, that
which I Willed Another. And let me recommend it to your Practice too, in many
Cases; for the Abatement of our Appetites, and of our Errors, is the best
Entertainment of Mankind. It is for Young Men to Gather Knowledge, and for Old
Men to Use it: And assure your self, that no Man gives a fairer Account of his
time, than he that makes it his daily Study, to make himself Better. If you be
in Health, and think it worth your while to become the Master of your Self; it
is my Desire, and my Advice, that you apply your self to Wisdom with your whole
Heart: and judge of your Emprovement, not by what you Speak, or by what you
Write; but by the firmness of your Mind, and the Government of your Passions.
What Extremities have some Men endured in Sieges; even for the Ambition, and
Interest of other People! And, Shall not a Man venture the Crossing of an
Intemperate Lust, for the Conquest of himself? You do very well to betake your
self to a Private Life; and better yet in keeping of that Privacy Private: For,
otherwise, your Retreat would look like Ostentation: The greatest Actions of
our Lives are those, that we do in a Recess from Business: Beside, that there
are some Governments, and Employments, that a Man would not have any thing to
do withal. And then it is to be considered, that Public Offices, and
Commissions, are commonly bought with our Money; Whereas the great Blessings of
Leisure, and Privacy, cost us Nothing. Contemplation is undoubtedly the best
Entertainment of Peace; and only a Shorter Cut to Heaven it Self: Over and
above that, Business makes us Troublesome to Others, and unquiet to our Selves;
For, the End of One Appetite, or Design, is the Beginning of Another: To say
nothing of the Expense of Time in Vexatious Attendances, and the Danger of
Competitors. Such a Man perhaps has more Friends at Court, than I have; a
larger Train; a Fairer Estate; more profitable Offices; and more Illustrious
Titles: But, What do I care to be overcome by Men, in Some Cases, so long as
Fortune is overcome by Me in All? These Considerations should have been
Earlyer; for, it is too late, in the Article of Death, to Project the Happiness
of Life. And yet there is no Age better Adapted to Virtue, than that which
comes by many Experiments, and long Sufferings, to the Knowledge of it: For our
Lusts are then weak, and our Judgment Strong; And Wisdom is the Effect of Time.

Some are of Opinion, That we come to the Knowledge of Virtue by Chance; (which
were an Indignity.) Others, by Observation; and by Comparing Matters of Fact,
one with another; The Understanding, by a kind of Analogy, approving This, or
That, for Good, and Honest. These are two Points which Others make wholly
Different; but the Stoics only Divide them. Some will have every thing to be
Good, that is Beneficial to us: As Money, Wine; and so Lower, to the meanest
things we use. And they reckon That to be Honest, where there is a Reasonable
Discharge of a Common Duty: As Reverence to a Parent; Tenderness to a Friend;
the Exposing of our Selves for our Country, and the Regulating of our Lives
according to Moderation, and Prudence. The Stoics reckon them to be Two; but
so, as to make those Two, yet, out of One. They will have nothing to be Good,
but what is Honest; nor any thing to be Honest, but that which is Good: So that
in some sort they are Mixed, and Inseparable. There are some things that are
neither Good, nor Bad; as War, Embassy, Jurisdiction: but these, in the
Laudable Administration of them, do, of Doubtful, become Good; which Good is
only a Consequent upon Honesty: But honesty is Good in it self, and the Other
flows from it. There are some Actions that seem to us Matter of Benignity,
Humanity, Generosity, Resolution; which we are apt to admire, as Perfect: And
yet, upon farther Examination, we find, that Great Vices were concealed under
the Resemblances of Eminent Virtues. Glorious Actions are the Images of Virtue;
but yet many things seem to be Good, that are Evil; and Evil, that are Good:
And the Skill is, to Distinguish betwixt things that are so much Alike in Show,
and so Disagreeing in Effect. We are led to the Understanding of Virtue, by the
Congruity we find in such and such Actions to Nature, and Right Reason: By the
Order, Grace, and Constancy of them; and, by a Certain Majesty, and Greatness,
that surpasses all other things. From hence proceeds a Happy Life: To which,
nothing comes Amiss; but, on the Contrary, every thing succeeds to our very
Wish. There is no wrangling with Fortune; No being out of Humor for Accidents:
whatsoever befalls me, is my Lot, and whether in Appearance it be Good, or Bad,
it is Gods Pleasure; and it is my Duty to bear it. When a Man has once gotten a
Habit of Virtue, all his Actions are Equal: He is constantly One, and the Same
Man; and he does Well, not only upon Counsel, but out of Custom too. Shall I
tell you now, in a Word, the Sum of Human Duty? Patience, where we are to
Suffer* and Prudence, in the things we Do. It is a frequent Complaint in the
World, that the things we Enjoy are but Few, Transitory, and Uncertain* So
Ungrateful a Construction do we make of the Divine Bounty. Hence it is, that we
are neither willing to Dye, nor Contented to Live; betwixt the Fear of the One,
and the Detestation of the Other. Hence it is, that we are perpetually shifting
of Counsels; and still craving of More; because that which we call Felicity, is
not able to Fill us. And what is the Reason? But that we are not yet come to
that Immense; and Insuperable Good, which leaves us nothing farther to desire!
In that Blessed Estate we feel no want; we are abundantly pleased with what we
Have; and what we have Not, we do not Regard: So that every thing is Great,
because it is Sufficient. If we quit this Hold, there will be no place for the
Offices of Faith, and Piety: In the Discharge whereof, we must both Suffer many
things, that the World calls Evil, and part with many things which are commonly
accounted Good. True Joy is Everlasting; Pleasures are False, and Fugitive. It
is a great Encouragement to well-doing, that when we are once in the Possession
of Virtue, it is our own for ever. While I speak This to you, I prescribe to my
self; what I Write, I Read; and Reduce all my Meditations to the Ordering of my
own Manners. There is nothing so Mean, and Ordinary; but it is Illustrated by
Virtue; and Externals are of no more Use to it, than the Light of a Candle to
the Glory of the Sun.

It is often Objected to me, that I Advise People to quit the World, to Retire,
and Content themselves with a good Conscience. But, What becomes of your
Precepts then (say they) that enjoin us to Die in Action? To whom I must answer,
That I am never more in Action, than when I am alone in my Study; where I have
only Locked up my self in Private, to attend the Business of the Public* I do
not Lose so much as One Day; nay, and part of the night too I borrow for my
Book. When my Eyes will serve me no longer, I fall Asleep; and, till Then, I
Work. I have Retired my Self, not only from Men, but from Business also: And my
Own, in the First Place, to attend the Service of Posterity; In hope that what
I Now Write, may, in some Measure, *be Profitable to Future Generations.

But it is no New thing, I know, to Calumniate Virtue, and Good Men; for Sick
Eyes will not endure the Light, but, like Birds of Night, they fly from it into
their Holes. Why does such a Man talk so much of his Philosophy, and yet live
in Magnificence? Of Contemning Riches, Life, Health; and yet Cherish, and
Maintain them, with the greatest Care Imaginable? Banishment, he says, is but
an Idle Name; and yet he can grow old within his own Walls. He puts no
difference betwixt a Long Life, and a short; and yet he Spins out his Own, as
far as it will go. The thing is This; He does not Contemn Temporary Blessings,
so as to Refuse, or Drive them away; but if they Come, they are Welcome; if
not, he will never break his heart for the want of them: He takes them into his
House, not into his Soul; and he makes use of them, only as Matter for his
Virtue to work upon. There is no doubt but a Wise Man may show himself better
in Riches, than in Poverty: That is to say, his Temperance, his Liberality; his
Magnificence, Providence, and Prudence* will be more Conspicuous. He will be a
Wise Man still, if he should want a Leg, or an Arm; but yet he had rather be
Perfect. He is pleased with Wealth, as he would be at Sea, with a Fair Wind; or
with the Glance of the warm Sun, in a Frosty Morning: So that the things which
we call Indifferent, are not yet without their Value; And some greater than
Others. But, with this Difference, betwixt the Philosophers, and the Common
People, Riches are the Servants of the One, and the Masters of the Other. From
the One, if they Depart, they carry away nothing but Themselves; but from the
Other, they take away the very Heart, and Peace of the Possessor along with
them. It is true, that if I might have my Choice, I would have Health, and
Strength; And yet if I come to be visited with Pain, or Sickness, I will
endeavor to improve them to my Advantage, by making a Righteous Judgment of
them: as I ought to do, of all the Appointments of Providence. So that as they
are not Good, in themselves, neither are they Evil; But matter of Exercise for
our Virtues; of Temperance, on the One hand, and of Resignation, on the Other.

EPIST. VII. Of Impertinent Studies, and Impertinent Men. Philosophers the Best
Companions.
HE that duly Considers the Business of Life and Death, will find, that he has
little time to spare from That Study: And yet how we trifle away our hours upon
Impertinent Niceties, and Cavils! Will Platoe's Imaginary Idea's make me an
Honest Man? There Is neither Certainty in them, nor Substance. A Mouse is a
Syllable; but a Syllable does not eat Cheese; Therefore a Mouse does not eat
Cheese. Oh! these Childish Follies! Is it for This that we spend our Blood, and
our Good Humor, and grow Gray in our Closets? We are a jeasting, when we
should be helping the Miserable; as well our Selves as Others. There Is no
Sporting with Men in Distress. The Felicity of Mankind depends upon the Counsel
of Philosophers. Let us rather consider what Nature has made Superfluous, and
what, Necessary: how Easy our Conditions are, and how Delicious That Life,
which is governed by Reason, rather than Opinion. There are Impertinent
Studies, as well as Impertinent Men. Didymus the Grammarian Wrote 4000 Books;
wherein he is much Concerned to discover Where Homer was born; Who was Aeneas's
true Mother; and whether Anacreon was the greater Whoremaster, or Drunkard:
With other Fopperies, that a Man would labor to Forget, if he Knew them. Is it
not an Important Question, which of the Two was First, the Mallet, or the
Tongs? Some people are extremly Inquisitive, to know how many Oars Ulysses had:
Which was first Written, the Illyads* or the Odysses; or if they were Both done
by the same hand. A Man is never a Jote the more Learned for this ^uriosity,
but much the more Troublesome. Am I ever the more Just, the more Moderate,
Valiant, or Liberal, for knowing, that Curious Dentatus was the First that
carried Elephants in Triumph? Teach me my Duty to Providence, to my Neighbor,
and to my Self: To Dispute, with Socrates; to Doubt, with Carneades; to set up
my Rest, with Epicurus; to Master my Appetites, with the Stoiques, and to
Renounce the World, with the Cynick. What a deal of Business there is, First,
to make Homer a Philosopher; and Secondly, in what Classis to Range him? One
will have him to be a Stoique; a Friend to Virtue, and an Enemy to Pleasure;
preferring Honesty even to Immortality it self: Another makes him an Epicurean;
One that loves his Quiet, and to spend his Time in Good Company: Some are
Positive in it, that he was a Peripatetique; and Others, that he was a
Sceptique. But it is Clear, that in being all these things, he was not any One
of them. These Divided Opinions do not at all hinder us from agreeing, upon the
Main, that he was a Wise Man. Let us therefore apply our selves to those things
that made him so, and even let the Rest alone.

It was a Pleasant Humor of Calvicius Sa^us, a Rich Man, and one that menag'd a
very Good Fortune with a very Ill Grace. He had neither Wit, nor Memory; but
would fain pass for a Learned Man, and so took several into his Family; And,
whatsoever they knew, he assumed to Himself. There are a sort of People that
are never well but at Theaters, Spectacles, and Public Places: Men of
Business, but it is only in their Faces; for they wander up and down without
any Design, like Pismires, Eager, and Empty; and every thing they do, is only
as it happens. This is an humor, which a Man may call a kind of Restless
Lazyness. Others you shall have, that are perpetually in Haste, as if they were
Crying Fire, or running for a Midwife: and all this Hurry, perhaps, only to
Salute some body, that had no mind to take Notice of them, or some such
Trivial* Errant* At Night, when they come Home ^ir'd, and weary, ask them, Why
they went out? Where they have been? and, What they have done? it is a very
Slender Account they are able to give you; and yet the next day they take the
same* Iaunt* over again* This is a kind of Fantastical Industry; a great deal
of Pains taken to no purpose at all; Twenty Visits made, and no body at home
(they themselves least of all.) They that have this Vice, are commonly
Harkeners, Tale-Bearers, News-Mongers; Meddlers in other Peoples Affairs, and
Curious after Secrets, which a Man can neither safely Hear, nor Report. These
Men of Idle Employment, that run up and down eternally, vexing Others, and
themselves too; that thrust themselves into all Companies, What do they get
by it? One Man's Asleep; Another, at Supper; a Third, in Company; a Fourth, in
Haste; a Fifth, gives them the Slip: and when their folly has gone the Round,
they close up the Day with Shame, and Repentance. Whereas, Zeno, Pythagoras,
Democritus, Aristotle, Theophrastus, and all the Patrons of Philosophy, and
Virtue; they are always at Leisure, and in Good Humor; Familiar, Profitable; a
Man never comes away empty handed from them; but, full of Comfort, and
Satisfaction: They make all Past Ages Present to us; or Us, Their
Contemporaries. The Doors of these Men are open Night, and Day; and in their
Conversation there is neither Danger, Treachery, nor Expense; but we are the
Wiser, the Happier, and the Richer for it. How blessedly does a Man spend his
time in this Company, where we may advise, in all the Difficulties of Life.
Here Is Counsel, without Reproach; and Praise, without Flattery. We cannot be
the Chusers of our Own Parents, but of our Friends we may; and Adopt our Selves
into these Noble Families. This is the way of making Mortality, in a Manner, to
be Immortal. The time Past, we make to be our Own, by Remembrance; the Present,
by Use; and the Future, by Providence, and Foresight. That only may properly be
said to be the Long Life, that draws all Ages into One; and That a short one,
that Forgets the Past; Neglects the Present, and is Sollicitous for the Time to
Come. But it is not yet sufficient to know what Plato or Zeno said, unless we
make it all our Own by Habit, and Practice, and Improve both the World, and our
Selves, by an Example of Life Answerable to their Precepts.

EPIST. VIII. Against Singularity of Manners, and Behavior.
IT is the Humor of many People, to be Singular in their Dress, and Manner of
Life; only to the End that they may be taken Notice of. Their Cloths, forsooth,
must be Course, and Slovenly; their Heads, and Beards neglected; their Lodgings
upon the Ground, and they live in Open Defiance against Money. What is all this,
upon the whole Matter, but an Ambitious Vanity that has crept in at the Back
Door? A Wise Man will keep himself Clear of all these Fooleries, without
disturbing Public Customs, or making himself a Gazing Stock to the People.
But, Will This Secure him, think you? I can no more warrant it, than that a
Temperate Man shall have his Health: But it is very Probable that it may. A
Philosopher has enough to do to stand right in the World, let him be never so
modest: And his outside shall be still like That of Other people, let them be
never So Unlike within. His Garments shall be neither Rich, nor Sordid. No
matter for Arms, Motto's, and other Curiosities upon his Plate: But he shall
not yet make it a Matter of Conscience, to have no Plate at all. He that likes
an Earthen Vessel as well as a Silver, has not a greater Mind then he that uses
Plate, and reckons it as Dirt. It is our Duty to Live Better than the
Common People, but not in Opposition to them; as if Philosophy were a Faction;
for by so Doing, in stead of Reforming, and gaining upon them, we drive them
away; and when they find it unreasonable to Imitate us in All things, they will
follow us in Nothing. Our Business must be to live according to Nature, and to
own the Sense of Outward things with other people: Not to Torment the Body;
and, with Exclamations against that which is Sweet, and Cleanly, to Delight in
Nastiness; and, To use, not only a Course, but a Sluttish, and Offensive Diet.
Wisdom Preaches Temperance, not Mortification; and a Man may be a very Good
Husband, without being a Sloven. He that Stears a Middle Course, betwixt
Virtue, and Popularity: That is to say, betwixt Good Manners, and Discretion,
shall gain both Approbation, and Reverence. But, What if a Man Governs himself
in his Cloths, in his Diet, in his Exercises, as he ought to do? It is not that
his Garments, his Meat, and Drink, or his Walking, are things Simply Good; but
it is the Tenor of a Man's Life, and the Conformity of it to Right Nature, and
Reason. Philosophy obliges us to Humanity, Society; and the Ordinary Use of
External things. It is not a thing to please the People with, or to entertain
an Idle Hour; but a Study for the Forming of the Mind, and the Guidance of
Humane Life. And a Wise Man should also Live as he Discourses; and in all
Points be like himself: And, in the first place, set a Value upon himself,
before he can pretend to become Valuable to Others. As well our Good Deeds, as
our Evil, come home to us at last. He that is Charitable, makes others so by
his Example; and finds the Comfort of That Charity, when he wants it himself.
He that is Cruel, seldom finds Mercy. It Is a hard Matter for a Man to be both
Popular, and Virtuous; for he must be Like the People, that would oblige them:
and the Kindness of Dishonest Men, is not to be acquired by Honest Means. He
Lives by Reason, not by Custom; He shuns the very Conversation of the
Intemperate, and Ambitious. He knows the Danger of Great Examples of
Wickedness, and that Public Errors impose upon the World, under the Authority
of Presidents: For they take for Granted, that they are never out of the way,
so long as they keep the Road.

We are beset with Dangers; and therefore a Wise Man should have his Virtues in
Continual Readiness to Encounter them. Whether Poverty, Loss of Friends, Pain,
Sickness, or the like; He still maintains his Post: Whereas a Fool is Surpised
at every thing; and afraid of his Very Succors: Either he makes no Resistance
at all, or else he does it by Halves. He will neither take Advice from Others,
nor look to himself: He reckons upon Philosophy, as a thing not worth his time,
and if he can but get the Reputation of a Good Man among the Common People, he
takes no farther Care, but Accounts that he has done his Duty.

EPIST. IX. The Blessings of a Vigorous Mind, in a Decayed Body; with some
Pertinent Reflections of Seneca upon his Own Age.
WHen I call Claranus my Schoolfellow, I need not say any thing more of his
Age; having told you, that He, and I, were Cotemporaries. You would not
Imagine, how Green, and Vigorous his Mind is; and the perpetual Conflict that
it has with his Body. They were Naturally Ill-match'd; unless to show, that a
Generous Spirit may ^e lodged under any shape. He has Surmounted all
Difficulties; and, from the Contempt of Himself, is advanced to the Contempt of
All things else. When I consider him well, methinks his Body appears to me as
fair as his Mind. If Nature could have brought the Soul Naked into the World,
perhaps she would have done it: But yet she does a greater thing, in Exalting
that Soul above all Impediments of the Flesh. It is a great Happiness, to
preserve the Force of the Mind, in the Decay of the Body; and to see the Loss
of Appetite More than Requited, with the Love of Virtue. But, whether I Owe
This Comfort to my Age, or to Wisdom, is the Question. And whether, if I Could
any longer, I Would not still, do the same things over again, which I Ought not
to do. If Age had no other Pleasure than This, that it neither Cares for any
thing, nor stands in need of any thing; it were a Great one to me, to have left
all my painful, and troublesome Lusts Behind me. But, ' It Is uneasy, you will
say, to be always in Fear of Death. As if That Apprehension did not Concern a
Young Man as well as an Old; Or that Death only called us, according to our
Years. I am however beholden to my Old Age, that has now confined me to my Bed;
and put me out of Condition of doing those things any longer, which I should
not do. The Less my Mind has to do with my Body, the Better: And if Age puts an
end to my Desires, and does the Business of Virtue, there can be no Cause of
Complaint; nor can there be any Gentler End, than to melt away in a kind of
Dissolution. Where Fire meets with Opposition, and Matter to work upon, it is
Furious, and Rages; but where it finds no Fuel, as in Old Age, it goes out
quietly, for want of Nourishment. Nor is the Body the Settled Habitation of the
Mind; but a Temporary Lodging, which we are to leave whenever the Master of
the House pleases. Neither does the Soul, when it has left the Body, any more
Care what becomes of the Carcass, and the several parts of it, than a Man does
for the shavings of his Beard under the hand of the Barber. There is not any
thing that Exposes a Man to more Vexation, and Reproach, than the overmuch Love
of the Body: For Sense neither looks Forward, nor Backward, but only upon the
Present: Nor does it judge of Good, or Evil; or Foresee Consequences which give
a Connection to the Order, and Series of Things, and to the Unity of Life. Not
but that every Man has Naturally a Love for his Own Carcass, as Poor People
Love even their Own Beggarly Cottages; they are Old Acquaintances, and Loath to
Part: And I am not against the Indulging of it neither; provided that I make
not my Self a Slave to it; for he that serves it, has Many Masters. Beside
that, we are in Continual Disorder; One while with Gripes, Pains in the Head,
Toothache, Gout, Stone, Defluxions; some time with too Much Blood, other while
with too Little: And yet this Frail, and Putrid Carcass of Ours values it self
as if it were Immortal. We put no Bounds to our Hopes, our Avarice, our
Ambition. The same Man is Vatinius to Day, and Cato to Morrow: This hour as
Luxurious as Apicius, and the next as Temperate as Tubero: Now, for a Mistress;
by and by, for a Wise: Imperious This hour; Servile, the Next; Thrifty, and
Prodigal, Laborious, and Voluptuous, by turns. But still the Goods, or Ills of
the Body, do but Concern the Body, (which is Peevish, Sour, and Anxious)
without any effect upon a Well-Compos'd Mind. I was the Other day at my Villa;
And, Complaining of my Charge of Repairs; My Bailiff told me, ' It Was none of
his Fault; for the House was Old, and he had much ado to keep it from falling
upon his Head. Well (thought I) and what am I my Self then, that saw the laying
of the First Stone? In the Gardens, I found the Trees as much out of Order; the
Boughs Knotted, and Withered, and their Bodies overrun with Moss. This would
not have been, said I, if you had Trench'd them, and Watered them, as you
should have done? By my Soul, Master, says the poor Fellow, I have done what I
could: But al ass! they are all Dotards, and Spent. What am I then, (thought I
to my self) that planted all these Trees with my own Hands. And then I come to
bethink my Self, that Age it self is not yet without its Pleasures, if we did
but know how to use them; and that the Best Morsel is reserved for the Last: Or
at worst, it is Equivalent to the Enjoying of Pleasures, not to stand in need
of any. It is but yesterday, methinks, that I went to School. But Time goes
faster with an Old Man, than with a Young: Perhaps, because he reckons more
upon it. There is hardly any Man so Old, but he may hope for One day more yet:
and the Longest Life is but a Multiplication of Days, nay, of Hours, nay of
Moments. Our Fate is Set; and the First Breath we draw, is but the First Step
toward our Last. One Cause depends upon another; and the Course of All things,
Public, and Private, is only a Long Connection of Providential Appointments.
There is great Variety in our Lives; but all Tends to the same Issue Nature may
use her own Bodies as she Pleases; but a Good Man has this Consolation, that
nothing Perishes that he can call his Own. What Must be, Shall be; and that
which is a Necessity to him that Struggles, is little more than Choice to him
that is Willing. It Is Bitter, to be Forced to any thing; but things are Easy,
when they are Complied with.

EPIST. X. Custom is a great Matter, either in Good, or Ill. We should check
our Passions Betimes. Involuntary Motions are Invincible.
THere is nothing so Hard; but Custom makes it Easy to us. There are some,
that never Laughed; Others, that Wholly abstained from Wine, and Women; and
almost from Sleep. Much use of a Coach makes us lose the Benefit of our Legs:
So that we must be Infirm, to be in the Fashion; and, at last, lose the very
Faculty of Walking, by Disusing it. Some are so plunged in Pleasures, that they
cannot Live without them. And, in This, they are most Miserable; that what was,
at First, but Superfluous, is Now, become Necessary. But their Infelicity seems
to be then Consummate, and Incurable, when Sensuality has laid hold of the
Judgment; and Wickedness is become a Habit. Nay, some there are, that both
Hate, and Persecute Virtue; and that is the last Act of Desperation. It is much
Easier to Check our Passions in the Beginning, than to stop them in their
Course: For, if Reason could not hinder us at first; they will go on in despite
of us. The Stoics will not allow a Wise Man to have any Passions at all. The
Peripateticks Temper them; but That Mediocrity is altogether False, and
Unprofitable. And, it is all one, as if they said, That we may be a Little Mad,
or a Little Sick. If we give any sort of Allowance to Sorrow, Fear, Desires,
Perturbations, it will not be in our Power to restrain them. They are fed from
Abroad; and will increase with their Causes. And if we yield never so little to
them, the least disorder works upon the whole Body. It is not my Purpose all
this while, wholly to take away any thing, that is either Necessary,
Beneficial, or Delightful to Humane Life; but, to take That away, which may be
Vicious in it. When I forbid you to desire any thing, I am yet content that you
may be Willing to have it. So that I permit you the same things: And those very
Pleasures will have a Better Relish too, when they are enjoyed without
Anxiety; and when you come to Command those Appetites, which before you served.
It Is Natural you will say, to weep for the Loss of a Friend; to be Moved at the
Sense of a Good, or Ill Report, and to be Sad in Adversity. All this I Will grant
you; and there is no Vice, but something may be said for it. At First, it is
Tractable, and Modest; but, if we give it entrance, we shall hardly get it out
again. As it goes on, it gathers strength, and becomes Quickly Ungovernable. It
cannot be denied, but that all Affections flow from a Kind of Natural
Principle; and that it is our Duty to take Care of our selves. But then it is
our Duty also, not to be over Indulgent. Nature has mingled Pleasures, even
with things most Necessary; Not that we should value them for their Own Sakes,
but to make those things which we cannot live without, to be more Acceptable to
us. If we Esteem the Pleasure for it self, it turns to Luxury, It is not the
Business of Nature to Raise Hunger, or Thirst, but to Extinguish it.

As there are some Natural Frailties, that by Care, and Industry, may be
Overcome; So there are Others, that are Invincible: As, for a Man that values
not his Own Blood, to Swoun at the Sight of another Man's. Involuntary Motions
are Insuperable, and Inevitable; As the Staring of the Hair at Ill News;
Blushing at a Scurrilous Discourse; Swiming of the head upon the sight of a
Precipice, etc. Who can Read the Story of Clodius Expelling Cicero, and
Anthony's Killing of him; the Cruelties of Marius, and the Proscriptions of
Sylla; without being moved at it? The Sound of a Trumpet, the Picture of any
thing that is Horrid, the Spectacle of an Execution, Strikes the Mind, and
works upon the Imagination. Some People are strangely subject to Sweat, to
Tremble, to Stammer; their very Teeth will Chatter in their Heads, and their
Lips Quiver; and especially in Public Assemblies. These are Natural
Infirmities; and it is not all the Resolution in the World, that can ever
Master them. Some Redden when they are Angry. Sylla was one of those; and when
the Blood Flushed into his Face, you might be sure he had Malice in his Heart.
Pompey, on the other side (that hardly ever spoke in Public without a Blush)
had a wonderful Sweetness of Nature; and it did exceedingly well with him. Your
Comedians will represent Fear, Sadness, Anger, and the like; but when they come
to a bashful Modesty, though they will give you humbleness of Looks, softness of
Speech, and down-Cast-Eyes, to the very Life, yet they can never come to
express a Blush; for it is a thing neither to be Commanded, nor Hindered; but it
comes and goes of its own accord. The Course of Nature is Smooth, and Easy;
but when we come to Cross it, we strive against the Stream. It is not for one
Man to Act another Man's Part. For Nature will quickly Return, and take off the
Mask. There is a kind of Sacred Instinct that moves us. Even the worst, have a
Sense of Virtue. We are not so much Ignorant, as Careless. Whence comes it,
that Grazing Beasts distinguish Salutary Plants, from Deadly? A Chicken is
afraid of a Kite; and not of a Goose, or a Peacock, which is much Bigger: A
Bird of a Cat, and not of a Dog. This is Impulse, and not Experiment. The Cells
of Bees, and the Webs of Spiders, are not to be imitated by Art, but it is
Nature that teaches them. The Stage Player has his Actions, and Gestures in
Readiness; but This is only an Emprovement by Art, of what Nature teaches them;
who is never at a Loss for the Use of her self. We come into the World with
This Knowledge; and we have it by a Natural Institution; which is no Other,
than a Natural Logic. We brought the Seeds of Wisdom into the World with us;
but not Wisdom it self. There is the Goodness of God, and That of Man; the One
is Immortal, the Other Mortal: Nature perfects the One, and Study the Other.

EPIST. XI. We are Divided in our Selves; and Confound Good, and Evil.
IT is no wonder that Men are Generally very much Unsatisfied with the World;
when there is not One Man of a Thousand that agrees with himself: and that is the
Root of our Misery; only we are willing to Charge our Own Vices, upon the
Malignity of Fortune. Either we are Puffed up with Pride; Wracked with Desires;
Dissolved in Pleasures, or Blasted with Cares; and, which perfects our
Unhappiness, we are never Alone, but in perpetual Conflict, and Controversy
with our Lusts. We are Startled at all Accidents. We Boggle at our own Shadows,
and Fright one Another. Lucretius says, that we are as much afraid in the
Light, as Children in the Dark; but, I say, That we are altogether in
Darkness, without any Light at all; and we run on blindfold, without so much as
Groping out our way: Which Rashness in the Dark is the worst sort of Madness.
He that is in his way, is in hope of coming to his Journeys End; but Error is
Endless. Let every Man therefore Examine his Desires, whether they be according
to Rectified Nature, or Not. That Man's Mind can never be Right, whose Actions
Disagree. We must not Live by Chance; for there can be no Virtue without
Deliberation, and Election. And, where we cannot be Certain, let us follow that
which is most Hopeful, and Probable. Faith, Justice, Piety, Fortitude,
Prudence, are Venerable, and the Possessions only of Good Men; but, a Plentiful
Estate, a Brawny Arm, and a Firm Body, are Many times the Portion of the
Wicked. The Perfection of Humane Nature, is that State, which supports it self,
and so is out of the Fear of Falling. It is a great weakness for a Man to value
himself upon any thing, wherein he shall be Outdone by Fools, and Beasts. We
are to consider Health, Strength, Beauty, and other Advantages of That Kind,
only as Adventitious Comforts: We may preserve them with Care, provided that we
be always ready to Quit them, without Trouble. There is a Pleasure in
Wickedness, as well as in Virtue, and there are, that take a Glory in it too;
wherefore our Forefathers prescribed us the Best Life, and not the most
Plentiful; and allowed us Pleasure for a Companion, but not for a Guide. We do
many times take the Instruments of Happiness, for the Happiness it self; and
rest upon those Matters, that are but in the way to it. That Man only lives
Composed, who thinks of every thing that May Happen, before he Feels it. But
this is not yet to advise, either Neglect, or Indifference; For I would avoid
any thing that may hurt me, where I may honorably do it. But yet I would
consider the worst of things beforehand. Examine the Hope, and the Fear; and,
where things are uncertain, favor your self, and believe That which you had
rather should come to pass. There are not many Men that know their own Minds,
but in the Very Instant of Willing any thing. We are for One thing to Day,
another thing to Morrow; So that we Live and Die without coming to any
Resolution: Still seeking That Elsewhere, which we may give our Selves; That is
to say, a Good Mind. And, in truth, we do persuade our selves, that in several
Cases, we do Desire the thing which effectually we do not Desire. And all This,
for want of Laying down some Certain Principles, to make the Judgment
Inflexible, and Steady. When we do any Evil, it is either for fear of a greater
Evil, or in Hope of such a Good, as may more than Balance that Evil. So that
we are here Distracted betwixt the Duty of Finishing our Purpose, and the Fear
of Mischief, and Danger. This Infirmity must be discharged. In the Pursuit of
Pleasures, we should take Notice, that there are not only sensual, but sad
Pleasures also, which Transport the Mind with Adoration, (though they do not
Tickle the Senses) and give us a Veneration for those Virtues, that exercise
themselves in Sweat, and Blood. All True Goods hold an Affinity and Friendship
one with another; and they are Equal; but False Ones have in them much of
Vanity; they are large, and Specious to the Eye; but, upon Examination, they
want weight. Now, though Virtues are all Alike, they may yet be distinguished
into Desirable, and Admirable; Virtues of Patience, and of Delight: But, in the
Matter of Common Accidents, there is not any thing which is truly worthy,
either of our Joy, or of our Fear. For Reason is Immovable, and does not
Serve, but Command our Senses. What is Pleasure, but a Low and Brutish thing?
Glory is Vain, and Volatile; Poverty only hard to him that does not Resist it;
Superstition is a Frantic Error, that Fears where it should Love; and Rudely
Invades where it should Reverentially Worship. Death it self is no Evil at all,
but the Common Benefit, and Right of Nature. There is a great Difference,
betwixt those things which are Good in Common Opinion, and those which are so
in Truth, and Effect: The Former have the Name of Good things, but not the
Propriety: They may Befall us, but they do not Stick to us: And they may be
taken away without either Pain to us, or Diminution. We may Use them; but, not
Trust in them; For, they are Only Deposited; and, they must, and will Forsake
us. The only Treasure is That, which Fortune has no Power over: And, the
Greater it is, the Less Envy it carries along with it. Let our Vices Die before
us, and let us Discharge our Selves of our Dearbought Pleasures, that hurt us,
as well Past, as to Come; for, they are followed with Repentance, as well as
our Sins. There Is neither Substance in them, nor Truth; for a Man can never be
weary of Truth, but there is a Satiety in Error. The Former is always the same,
but the Latter is Various; and, if a Man looks near it, he may see through it.
Beside that, the Possessions of a Wise Man are Maintained with Ease. He has no
need of Ambassadors, Armies, and Castles; but, like God himself, he does his
Business without either Noise, or Tumult. Nay, there is something so Venerable,
and Sacred in Virtue, that if we do but meet with any thing like it, the very
Counterfeit Pleases us. By the help of Philosophy the Soul gives the slip to
the Body, and Refreshes itself in Heaven. Pleasures, at best, are Short-lived;
but the Delights of Virtue are Secure, and Perpetual. Only we must Watch,
Labor, and attend it our selves. For, it is a Business, not to be done by a
Deputy. Nor is it properly a Virtue, to be a little better than the Worst. Will
any Man boast of his Eyes, because they tell him that the Sun shines? Neither
is he presently a Good Man, that thinks Ill of the Bad. For Wicked Men do That
too; and it is perhaps the Greatest punishment of Sin, the Displeasure that it
gives to the Author of it. The saddest Case of all is, when we become Enamored
of our Ruin, and make Wickedness our Study. When Vice has got a Reputation,
and when the Dissolute have lost the Only Good thing they had in their
Excesses, the Shame of Offending. And yet the Lewedest part of our Corruptions,
is in Private, which, if any body had looked on, we should never have
Committed. Wherefore, let us bear in our Minds the Idea of some great Person,
for whom we have an Awful Respect; and his Authority will even Consecrate the
very Secrets of our Souls; and make us, not only mend our Manners, and purify
our very Thoughts; but in good time render us Exemplary to Others, and
Venerable to our Selves. If Scipio, or Laelius were but in our Eye, we should
not dare to Transgress. Why do we not make our selves then such persons, as in
whose Presence we dare not offend?

EPIST. XII. We are Moved at the Novelty of things, for want of Understanding
the Reason of them.
THe whole Subject of Natural Philosophy, falls under these Three Heads; the
Heavens, the Air, and the Earth. The First Treats of the Nature of the Stars;
their Form, and Magnitude: The Substance of the Heavens; whether Solid, or not;
and whether they move of Themselves, or be moved by any thing Else; whether the
Stars be Below them, or fixed in their Orbs: In what manner the Sun divides the
Seasons of the Year: and the like. The Second Part Enquires into the Reason of
things betwixt the Heavens and the Earth; as Clouds, Rain, Snow, Thunder, and
whatsoever the Air either Does, or Suffers. The Third handles matters that have
a regard to the Earth; as the difference of Soils, Minerals, Metalls, Plants,
Groves, etc. But, these are Considerations wholly foreign to our Purpose, in
the Nature of them; though they may be of very Proper, and Pertinent
Application. There is not any Man so Brutal, and so Grovelling upon the Earth,
but his Soul is roused, and carried up to higher Matters, and Thoughts, upon
the Appearance of any New Light from Heaven. What can be more worthy of
Admiration, than the Sun, and the Stars in their Courses, and Glory? And yet so
long as Nature goes on in her Ordinary way, there is no body takes Notice of
them: But, when any thing falls out beyond Expectation, and Custom, what a
Gazing, Pointing, and Questioning, is there presently about it. The People
gather together, and are at their Wits End; not so much at the Importance of
the Matter, as at the Novelty. Every Meteor sets People agog to know the
Meaning of it, and what it Portends; and whether it be a Star, or a Prodigy: So
that it is worth the while to enquire into the Nature, and Philosophy of these
Lights, ( though not the business of this Place) that by discovering the
Reason, we may overcome the Apprehension of them. There are many things which
we know to Be, and yet we know nothing at all of what they Are. Is it not the
Mind that Moves us, and Restreins us? But, What that Ruling Power is, we do no
more understand, than Where it is. One will have it to be a Spirit: Another
will have it to be a Divine Power: Some, only a Subtle Air; Others, an
Incorporeal Being; and some again will have it to be only Blood, and Heat. Nay,
so far is the Mind from a Perfect understanding of Other things, that it is
still in search of it Self. It is not long since we came to find out the Causes
of Eclipses: And farther Experience will bring more things to Light, which are
as yet in the Dark; But, one Age is not sufficient for so many Discoveries. It
must be the Work of Successions, and Posterity; and the time will come, when we
shall wonder that Mankind should be so long Ignorant of things, that lay so
open, and so easy to be made Known. Truth is offered to all; But we must yet
content our selves with what is already found; and leave some Truths to be
retriv'd by After Ages. The Exact truth of things is only known to God; but, it
is yet Lawful for us to Enquire, and to Conjecture, though not with too much
Confidence: Nor yet altogether without Hope. In the First place however, let
us Learn things Necessary; and if we have any time to spare, we may apply it to
Superfluities.

Why do we trouble our selves about things which Possibly May Happen, and
peradventure, Not? Let us rather provide against those Dangers that Watch us,
and lie in wait for us. To suffer Shipwreck, or to be Crushed with the Ruin of
a House, these are great Misfortunes, but they Seldom Happen. The Deadly, and
the hourly danger that threatens Humane Life, is from One Man to Another. Other
Calamities do Commonly give us Some Warning: The Smoke gives us notice of a
Fire; the Clouds bid us provide for a Storm; but Humane Malice has no
Prognostic; and the Nearer it is, ^he Fairer it Looks. There is no Trust to
Countenances; we carry the Shapes of Men, and the Hearts of Beasts. Nay, we are
worse than Beasts; for a Beast ^as only no Reason at all; but the Other is
Perverted, and turns his Reason to his Mischief. Beside that, all the Hurt
which They do, is out of Fear, or Hunger; but Man takes delight in Destroying
his Own Kind. From the Danger we are in from Men, we may Consider our Duty to
Them; and take Care that we neither Do, nor Suffer Wrong. It is but Humane, to
be Troubled at the Misfortunes of Another, and to Rejoice at his Prosperity.
And, it is likewise Prudent, to Bethink our selves what we are to Do, and what
we are to Avoid: by which means we may keep our selves from being either
Harmed, or Deceived. The things that most Provoke One Man to do Hurt to
Another, are, Hope, Envy, Hatred, Fear, and Contempt: but, Contempt is the
Slightest, Nay, many Men have betaken themselves to it for their Security.
There is no doubt, but he that is Contemned, shall be Trod upon; but then his
Enemy passes over him as not worth his Anger.

EPIST. XIII. Every Man is the Artificer of his Own Fortune. Of Justice, and
Injustice.
THe short of the Question betwixt you and me, is This. Whether a Man had
better part with Himself, or something else that belongs to him? And, it is
Easily Resolved, in all Competitions betwixt the Goods of Sense, and Fortune;
and those of Honor, and Conscience. Those things which all Men Covet, are but
Specious Outsides; and there is nothing in them of Substantial Satisfaction. Nor
is there any thing so Hard, and Terrible in the Contrary, as the Vulgar
Imagine; only the word Calamity, has an Ill Reputation in the World: and the
very Name is more Grievous than the Thing it Self. What have I to Complain of,
if I can turn That to a Happiness, which others Count a Misery? A Wise Man
either Repells, or Elects, as he sees the Matter before him; without Fearing
the Ill which he Rejects, or Admiring what he Chooses. He is never Surpised;
but in the midst of Plenty he prepares for Poverty; as a Prudent Prince does
for War, in the Depth of Peace. Our Condition is Good enough, if we make the
Best on it; and our Felicity is in our own Power. Things that are Adventitious,
have no Effect upon him that Studies to make sure of his Happiness within
Himself. Every Man should stand upon his Guard against Fortune; and take most
heed to himself, when she speaks him Fairest. All the Advantage she gets upon
us, is at Unawares; whereas he that is Provided for her, and stands the First
Shock, carries the Day. It is not with Common Accidents of Life, as with Fire,
and Sword, that Burn, and Cut, all alike; but Misfortunes work more or less,
according to the Weakness, or Resolution of the Patient. He that grieves for
the Loss of Casual Comforts, shall never want Occasion of Sorrow. We say
Commonly, That every Man has his weak side: But, give me leave to tell you,
That he that Masters One Vice, may Master all the Rest. He that subdues
Avarice, may Conquer Ambition. It is not for Philosophy to Excuse Vices. The
Patient has little Hope of Health, when the Physician prescribes Intemperance:
Though I know, on the other side, that he that does any thing above the
Ordinary, does but set up himself for a Mark to Malevolence, and Envy. Where
Laws are Neglected, Corruptions must Inevitably be Introduced: for the
Authority of Virtue is Shaken. And what are Laws but only Precepts mingled with
Threats? with This Difference, that the Former Deter us from Wickedness, and
the Latter Advise us to Virtue. A Preamble, methinks, Derogates from the Honor
of a Law, which ought to be Short, and Clear; and to Command, without Suffering
any Expostulation. It is a Flat, and an Idle thing, a Law with a Prologue. Let
me only be told my Duty, and I am not to Dispute, but to Obey.

If I have not acquitted my self of my Last Promise to you; know, that in all
Promises, there is a Tacit Reserve; If I Can; If I Ought; or if things
Continue in the same State: So that by the Change of Circumstances, I am
discharged of my Obligation. I know very well the Bonds of Justice; and yet the
Practices of the World to the Contrary. There are no greater Exacters of Faith,
than the Perfidious; no greater Persecuters of Falsehood, than the Perjurious.
He that loves his Neighbors Wife, and for that very Reason, because she is
another Man's, Locks up his Own. The Wickedness of other Men we have always in
our Eye, but we cast our own over our Shoulders. A worse Father Chastises a
Better Son: He that denies nothing to his Own Luxury, will Pardon Nothing in
Another Man's. A Tyrant is offended at Bloodshed; the Sacrilegious Punishes
Theft, and the greater part of the World Quarrels rather with the Offender,
than with the Offense. It is very Rare, that either the Joy, or the Benefit of
an Estate, Injuriously gotten, continues Long. Men go together by the Ears
about the Booty, and we pay dear for things of Little Vasue. We live and die,
Lugging one another, Breaking one another Rest, and our Lives are without
Fruit, and without Pleasure. Justice is a Natural Principle. I must Live Thus
with my Friend, Thus with my Fellow-Citizen, Thus with my Companion. And why?
Because it is just; not for Design, or Reward: For it is Virtue it Self, and
nothing Else, that pleases us. There is no Law Extant for keeping the Secrets
of a Friend, or for not breaking Faith with an Enemy. And yet there is Just
Cause of Complaint, if a Body betrays a Trust. If a Wicked Man call upon me
for Money that I owe him; I Will make no Scruple of Pouring it into the Lap of a
Common Prostitute, if she be appointed to Receive it. For my Business is to
Return the Money, not to Order him how he shall Dispose of it. I must pay it,
upon Demand, to a Good Man, when it is Expedient; and to a Bad, when he Calls
for it.

EPIST. XIV. Of Trust in Friendship. Prayer; and Bodily Exercise.
THere are some People, that if any thing goes Cross with them, though of a
quality only fit for the Ear of a Friend; out it goes at a Venture to the next
Comer: Others again are so Suspicious, and so obstinately Close, that they will
rather Perish, than trust the best Friend they have with it; They are, Both of
them, in the Wrong, only the One is the Better-natur'd Error, and the Other the
Safer. Now, as to the Trust of a Friend: there are many Innocent things, which,
in their Own Nature, may seem to be Privacies, and which Custom has ever
Reputed So; in which Cases, there is place enough for the Offices of
Friendship, in the mutual Communication of our most Secret Cares, and Counsels.
But yet we are so to govern our selves, that even an Enemy should not turn our
Actions to Reproach. For, an Honest Man lives not to the World, but to his own
Conscience. There is a Certain Softness of Nature, and Spirit, that Steals upon
a Man, and, like Wine, or Love, ^raws all things from him. No Man will either
Conceal, or Tell, all that he Hears. But he that tells the Thing, will hardly
conceal the Author: So that it passes from One to Another; and That which was
at first a Secret, does presently become a Rumor. For This, and for many other
Reasons, we should set a Watch upon our Lips; and attend the more useful, and
necessary Work of Contemplation. The First Petition that we are to make to God
Allmighty, is for a Good Conscience: The Second, for Health of Mind; and Then,
of Body. There are some things which we directly wish for, as Joy, Peace, and
the like: Some that we Pray for, only in Case of Necessity: as Patience in
Pain, or Sickness, etc. Others, that Concern our External Behavior, as Modesty
of Countenance, Decency of Motion, and such a Demeanor, as may become a Prudent
Man. Many things may be Commodious; that is to say, they may be of more Use
than Trouble; and yet not Simply Good. Some things we have for Exercise, others
for Instruction, and Delight. These things belong to us only as we are Men, but
not as we are Good Men. Some things serve to Correct, and Regulate our Manners;
Others, to Enquire into the Nature, and Original of them. How shall we know
what a Man is to do, if we do not search into his Nature, and find out what is
best for him, and what he is to Avoid, and what to Pursue? Humanity not only
keeps us from being Proud, and Covetous, but it makes us Affable, and Gentle,
in our Words, Actions, and Affections. We have no Precepts from the Liberal
Arts, neither for This, nor for Sincerity, Integrity of Manners, Modesty,
Frugality; no nor for Clemency it self, That makes us as Tender of Another
Blood, as of our Own, and distinguishes Men in Society, from Beasts of Prey.
Some People are ever Complaining of the Iniquity of the Times: But, let no Man
depend upon the Goodness of his Cause, but rather upon the Firmness of his
Courage; there may be Force, or Bribery I would hope the Best, but prepare for
the Worst. What if I have served an Ungrateful Interest, and suffered
wrongfully? An Honest Man is more Troubled for the Injustice of a Severe
Sentence, than for the Cruelty of it: and that his Country has done an Ill
thing; rather than that he himself suffers it. If he be Banished, the shame is
not His, but the Authors of it. He Tempers his Delights, and his Afflictions,
and says to himself, That if our Joys cannot be Long, neither will our
Sorrows. He is Patient in his Own Misfortunes; without Envy at the Advantages
of his Neighbor. His Virtue is Bolder, in the Opposition of Ill things, than
Tyranny it self can be in the Imposing of them. This is rather to tell you what
you do already, than what you should do. Go on, as you have begun, and make
haste to be Perfect: But take notice, that the Mind is to be now and then
Unbent; a Glass of Wine, a Journey, a Mouthful of Fresh Air relieves it: But
then there is a Difference betwixt a Remission, and a Dissolution. Without
Exercise a Dull Tumor Invades us; and it is Remarkable, that Men of Brawny
Arms, and Broad Shoulders, have commonly Weak Souls. Some Exercises are short,
and Gentle; and set the Body Right Presently. But, whatever we do, let us
return quickly to the Mind; for That must not lie Idle. A little Labor serves
it; and it works in all Seasons: in Summer, Winter, Old Age; Nothing hinders
it. And, to make it more Valuable, it is every day better than Other. Not that
I would have you perpetually Poring upon a Book neither; but allow your self
seasonable Respites, and to it again. A Couch, or a Walk, does your Body Good,
without Interrupting your Study: For you may Discourse, Dictate, Read, Hear, at
the same time. Now though the Exercises be Laudable, and Healthful; yet the
Masters of them are for the most part of Lewd Example. They divide their Lives
betwixt the Tavern, and the Hothouse; and a Swingeing Debauch is a good days
work with them. But, how apt we are to set Bounds to Others, and none to our
Selves; and to Observe their Warts, when our own Bodies are Covered with
Ulcers? What is more Ordinary, than for People to Reverence, and Detest the
Fortunate, at the same time, even for Doing those things which they themselves
would do, if they Could? There might be some Hope of our Amendment, if we would
but Confess our Faults; as a Man must be awake that tells his Dream. There are
some Diseases which are absolutely Hopeless, and past Cure; but they may yet be
Palliated; and Philosophy, if it cannot help in One Case, it may in Another. To
a Man in a Fever, a Gentle Remission is a Degree of Health, and it is
something, if a Man be not perfectly sound, to be yet more Curable. But, we are
loath to be at the Pains of Attending our Own business. We lead the Life in the
World, that some Lazy People do in a Market, that stand gaping about them,
without either Buying, or Selling. We slip our Opportunities; and if they be
not caught in the very Nick, they are Irrecoverably Lost.

EPIST. XV. The Danger of Flattery; and in what Cases a Man may be allowed to
Commend himself.
Demetrius was wont to say, That Knavery was the Ready way to Riches; and that
the Casting off of Virtue, was the First Step to Thriving in the World. Study
but the Art of Flattery, (which is now adays so acceptable, that a Moderate
Commendation passes for a Libel.) Study That Art, (I say) and you shall do your
Business, without Running any Risque upon the Seas, or any hazards of
Merchandising, Husbandry, or Suits at Law. There is not one Man of a Million
that is Proof against an Artificial Flatterer; but something or other will
Stick, if we do but give him the Hearing. Nay, we like him well enough, though
we shake him off, and the Quarrel is easily Reconciled. We seem to Oppose him,
but we do not shut the Door against him; or if we do, it is but as a Mistress
will do some time upon her Servant, She would be well enough content to be
Hindered; and take it much better yet, to have it broke open. Beside that, a
Man lies Commonly most Open where he is attacked. How shamefully are Great Men
Fawned upon by their Slaves; and inured to Fulsome Praises? When the Only
business of those, that call themselves Friends, is to try, who can most
Dexterously deceive his Master. For want of knowing their own Strength, they
believe themselves as Great, as their Parasites Represent them: And venture
upon Broils, and Wars, to their Irreparable Destruction. They break Alliances,
and Transport themselves into Passions, which, for want of Better Counsels,
hurry them on to Blood, and Confusion. They pursue every wild Imagination as a
Certainty, and think it a greater Disgrace to be Bent, than to be Broken. They
set up their Rest upon the Perpetuity of a Tottering Fortune, till they come at
last to see the Ruin of themselves, and their Possessions; and too late, to
Understand, that their Misfortunes, and their Flatteries were of the same Date.
There is a Sparing, and a Crafty Flattery, that looks like Plain-Dealing. But
all Flatteries are words of Course, and he that Receives them will give them.
Nay* let it be never so shameless, a Man takes all to himself, though his very
Conscience gives him the Lie. Cruelty shall be Translated Mercy; Extortion and
Oppression shall be called Liberality: Lust, and Gluttony, to the Highest
Degree in the World, shall be magnified for Temperance. Now, What hope is there
of his Changing for the Better, that values himself for the best of Men
already? The stroke of an Arrow Convinced Alexander, that he was not the Son of
Jupiter, but a Mortal Man. And thus, upon the Experiment of Humane Frailty,
should every Man say to himself. Am not I sad sometimes, and tortured betwixt
Hope and Fear? Do I not Hanker after Vain Pleasures? He that is not yet
satisfied, is not so good as he should be. The words of Flatterers, and
Parasites seldom Die in the Hearing; and when they have gained admittance,
they grow more and more upon you; and shortly they will tell you, that Virtue,
Philosophy, and Justice, are but Empty Sounds. Let every Man Live while he may,
and make the best of the Present: And not Govern himself at a rate, as if he
were to keep a Diary for his Father. What Madness is it, to enrich a Man's
Heir, and starve Himself; And to turn a Friend into an Enemy. For, his Joy will
be proportioned to what you leave him. Never trouble your self for these
superfluous Censors of other Men's Lives, and Enemies of their Own. These
Pedagogues of Mankind are not worth your Care. These are the People that draw
us from our Parents, and Country, our Friends, and other Necessary Duties.

I would neither be deceived my self, nor Deceive Others; but, if a Man cannot
Live without it, let him Commend himself, and say thus. I have Applied my Self
to Liberal Studies, though both the Poverty of my Condition, and my own Reason,
might rather have put me upon the Making of my Fortune. I have given Proof,
that all Minds are Capable of Goodness; and I have Illustrated the Obscurity of
my Family, by the Eminency of my Virtue. I have preserved my Faith in All
Extremities: and I have ventured my Life for it. I have never Spoken one Word
contrary to my Conscience, and I have been more Sollicitous for my Friend, than
for my Self; I never made any Base submissions to any Man; and I have never
done any thing Unworthy of a Resolute, and of an Honest Man. My Mind is raised
so much above all Dangers, that I have Mastered all Hazards; and I bless my
self in the Providence which gave me that Experiment of my Virtue: For, it was
not fit, methought, that so great a Glory should come Cheap. Nay, I did not so
much as deliberate, whether Good Faith should suffer for Me, or I for it. I
stood my Ground, without laying violent hands upon my Self, to escape the Rage
of the Powerful; though under Caligula I saw Cruelties, to such a Degree, that
to be killed outright was accounted a Mercy. And yet I persisted in my Honesty,
to show, that I was ready to do more than Dye for it. My Mind was never
Corrupted with Gifts, and when the humor of Avarice was at the I never laid my
hand upon any Unlawful Gain; I have been Temperate in my Diet; Modest in my
Discourse; Courteous and Affable to my Inferiors, And I have ever paid a
Respect, and Reverence to my Betters. After all; what I have said, is either
True, or False; If True, I have Commended my self before a Great Witness, my
own Conscience; If False, I am Ridiculous, without any Witness at all. Let
every Man retire into himself; For the Old, the Young, Men, Women, and
Children, they are all Wicked. Not every One only, or a Few, But there is a
General Conspiracy in Evil. We should therefore Fly the World, withdraw into
our Selves; and in some sort avoid even our selves too.

EPIST. XVI. A General Dissolution of Manners; With a Censure of Corrupt
Magistrates?
THe Corruption of the Present Times, is the General Complaint of all Times; It
ever has been so, and it ever will be so: Not considering that the Wickedness
of the World is always the same, as to the Degree of it; though it may Change
Places perhaps, and vary a little in the Matter. One while Whoring is in
Fashion; Another while Gluttony: To day, Excess in Apparel; and more care of
the Body, than of the Mind: To morrow comes up the Humor of Scoffing; and after
That, perchance, a Vein of Drinking; when he shall be accounted the Bravest
Man, that makes himself the veriest Beast. This Prostitute Looseness of
Manners, makes way for Sedition, and Cruelty. Under Tiberius, the Plague of
your Delatores, or Enformers, was worse than any Civil War. It was an Age,
wherein the Words of Men, in their Cups; the most Innocent Railleries* and
Ingenious Freedoms of Conversation, were made Capital. When it was Dangerous to
be Honest, and only Profitable to be Vicious. And not only Ill Things, but Vice
it self was both Commended, and Preferred: For all Insolences, when they come
to be Exemplary, they pretend to be Lawful. Authority in Sin, is an Incentive
to it: And, it is at least an Excuse, if not a Warrant, to Transgress, after
Great Example. Beside that, we are prone enough to do Amiss, even of our
Selves, without either a Leader, or a Companion. But, it is a Malevolent sort
of Comfort, that which Men take in the Number of the Wicked.

The worst of all is This; that whereas in Other Cases the People are Ashamed
of their Errors, in That of Life, they are Delighted with them, and so become
Incurable. The Pilot takes no pleasure in Running upon a Rock; nor the
Physician in the Death of his Patient; nor the Advocate in the Loss of his
Clients Cause. But, on the other side, the Criminal Rejoices in his
Uncleanness, in his Ambition, and in his Theft; and never troubles himself for
the Fault, but for the Miscarriage. He makes Infamy the Reward of Lewdness, and
values himself upon his Excellency in Ill-doing. The Question is, who shall be
most Impious; we have every day, Worse Appetites, and Less Shame. Sobriety, and
Conscience, are become Foolish, and Scandalous things; and, it is half the
Relish of our Lusts, that they are committed in the Face of the Sun. Innocence
is not only Rare, but Lost: And Mankind is entered into a Sort of Confederacy
against Virtue. To say nothing of Intestine Wars; Fathers, and Sons, in League
against one another; Poisoned Fountains, Troops in search of the Banished, and
Proscribed, Prisons crammed with Worthy Men, Cities Demolished; Rape, and
Adultery Authorized; Public Perjuries, and Frauds; a Violation of Common
Faith; and all the Bonds of Humane Society Cancelled. Adultery is the ready way
to Wedlock; and Marriage, to a Single Life again; For, Parting, is One
Condition of it. For, They Divorce, to Mary; and they Marry to be Divorced.
That which they often talk, and hear of, they easily do. What shame can there
be of Incontinence, when Modesty is become a Reproach; and when it is the Mode
for every Wife to provide her Self a Gallant or two, beside her Husband? It Is
an Idle thing to think of ever converting those People, that find both
Advantage, and Reputation in their Wickedness.

Would any Man ever have Imagined, that Clodius should have come off by
Bribery, for Debauching the Wife of Caesar, and profaning the Public Vows for
the Safety of the People? But, the Judges were Corrupted; and not only with
Money, but with the Bodies of Young Men, and Women; So that his Absolution was
fouler than his Crime; The Bribe was Adultery, as well as the Offense; and he
had no way to be Safe, till he had made his Judges like himself. Name the Woman
you have a Mind to (says he) and you shall have her. And when you have
Committed the Sin, Condemn it if you dare. Appoint the Time, and the Place, and
she shall be ready for you; Nay, the Practice was so gross, that the Bench
desired a Guard of the Senate, to secure them from the People. Before the
Sentence was given, he was an Adulterer; in the Menage of the Cause, he was a
Pandar, and his way of Escaping Punishment, was Fouler than the Offense that
Deserved it. A Lust, that spared not the Altar, and perverted Justice upon the
very Seat of Judgment. The Question was, Whether any Adulterer should escape
Unpunished; and the Resolution was; That, without being an Adulterer, he could
not be secure. Nor is it likely, that their Conversation was one Jote honester
than their Sentence: These things have been done, and will be done. Discipline,
and Fear, may Restrain the License of the People, but, it is not to be thought,
that they will ever be Good of their own Accord. But, let us not yet speak of
Luxury, and Dissolution, as the Vices of the Age, which, in truth, are only the
Vices of the Men. The Practices of our times are Moderate, compared with those,
when the Delinquent pleaded Not Guilty to the Bench, and the Bench confessed it
self Guilty to the Delinquent; and when one Adultery was excused by Another. In
those days it passed for Great Piety, not to be very Impious. He that Gave
most, Carried the Cause; and it is but according to the Laws of Nations, for him
that Buys, to Sell. And, it is to be Noted, that a Man may be as Covetous of
Getting, what he intends to squander away, as if he were to hoard it up. The
Contempt of Poverty in Others, and the Fear of it in our Selves. Unmerciful
Oppressions, and Mercenary Magistrates, are the Common Grievances of a
Licentious Government. The Baths, and the Theaters, are Crowded, when the
Temples, and the Schools are Empty; for Men mind their Pleasures, more than
their Manners. All Vices gain upon us by the Promise of Reward; Avarice
Promises Money; Luxury Sensual Satisfactions; Ambition promises Preferment, and
Power. And it is no excuse to say, that a Man is not Very Covetous; a Little
Ambitious, Choleric, Inconstant, Lustful; and the Like. He had better have one
Great Vice, than a Spice of all Little ones. We say Commonly, that a Fool has
all Sorts of Vices in him; that is to say, he is Free from none: But they do
not all Appear; and he is more Prone to One, than to Another. One is given to
Avarice; Another to Luxury; a Third to Wantonness; But we are not yet to ask
the Stoics, if Achilles be a Coward; Aristides, Unjust; Fabius, Rash; Mucius,
a Traitor; Camillus, a Deserter. We do not say, that all Vices are in all Men,
as some are in Some Particulars.

EPIST. XVII. The Original of all Men, is the Same; and Virtue is the only
Nobility. There is a Tenderness due to Servants.
IT is not well done, to be still murmuring against Nature, and Fortune, as if
it were Their Unkindness that makes You Inconsiderable, when it is only by your
Own Weakness that you make your self So: For it is Virtue, not P^degree, that
renders a Man either Valuable, or Happy. Philosophy does not either Reject, or
Choose any Man for his Quality. Socrates was no Patrician; Cleanthes, but an
Under Gardener; Neither did Plato Dignify Philosophy by his Birth, but by his
Goodness. All these Worthy Men are our Progenitors; if we will but do our
selves the Honor to become their Disciples. The Original of all Mankind was the
Same; and, it is only a Clear Conscience, that makes any Man Noble: For, That
derives even from Heaven it self. It is the Saying of a Great Man, That if we
could trace our Descents, we should find all Slaves to come from Princes, and
all Princes from Slaves. But Fortune has turned all things Topsy-Turvy, in a
long Story of Revolutions. It is most Certain, that our Beginning had nothing
Before it; and our Ancestors were some of them Splendid, others Sordid, as it
happened. We have lost the Memorials of our Extraction, and, in truth, it
matters not whence we Came, but whither we Go. Nor is it any more to our
Honor, the Glory of our Predecessors, than it is to Their Shame, the Wickedness
of their Posterity. We are all of us composed of the Same Elements; why should
we then value our selves upon our Nobility of Blood, as if we were not all of
us Equal, if we could but recover our Evidence? But, when we can carry it no
farther, the Herald provides us some Hero to supply the Place of an Illustrious
Original; and there is the Rise of Arms, and Families. For a Man to spend his
Life in pursuit of a Title, that serves only when he dies, to furnish out an
Epitaph, is below a Wise Man's Business.

It pleases me Exceedingly, to understand by all that come out of your
Quarters, that you demean your self humanely, and tenderly toward your
Servants. It is the Part of a Wise, and of a Good Man, to deal with his
Inferior, as he would have his Superior deal with him: For Servants are not
only Men, but a kind of Humble Friends; and Fortune has no more Power over
Them, than over their Masters: And he that duly considers, how many Servants
have come to be Masters, and how many Masters to be Servants, will lay no great
Stress of Argument, either upon the One, or upon the Other. Some use their
Servants worse than Beasts, in Slavish Attendances, betwixt their Drink, and
their Lusts: Some are brought up only to Carve, others to Season; and all to
serve the Turns of Pomp, and Luxury. Is it not a Barbarous Custom, to make it
almost Capital, for a Servant only to Cough, Sneeze, Sigh, or but wag his Lips,
while he is in waiting; and, to keep him the whole Night, Mute, and Fasting?
Yet so it comes to pass, that they that dare not speak Before their Masters,
will not forbear talking Of them; and those, on the other side, that were
allowed a modest Freedom of Speech in their Masters Entertainments, were most
obstinately silent upon the Torture, rather than they would betray them. But we
live, as if a Servant were not made of the same Materials with his Master, or
to Breath the same Air, or to Live, and Dye, under the Same Conditions. It is
worthy of Observation, that the most Imperious Masters over their own Servants,
are, at the same time, the most Abject Slaves to the Servants of other Masters.
I will not distinguish a Servant by his Office, but by his Manners: The One is
the work of Fortune, the Other of Virtue. But, we look only to his Quality, and
not to his Merit. Why should not a Brave Action rather Dignify the Condition of
a Servant, than the Condition of a Servant Lessen a Brave Action? I would not
value a Man for his Clothes, or Degree, any more than I would do a Horse for
his Trappings. What if he be a Servant? show me any Man that is not so; to his
Lusts, his Avarice, his Ambition, his Palate, to his Queen; nay, to other Men's
Servants; and we are all of us Servants to Fear: Insolent we are, many of us,
at Home; Servile, and Despised Abroad; and none are more Liable to be trampled
upon, than those that have gotten a habit of Giving Affronts, by Suffering
them. What matters it how many Masters we have, When it is but One Slavery? And,
whosoever Contemns That, is perfectly Free, let his Masters be never so Many.
That Man is only Free, not whom Fortune has a Little Power over, but over whom
she has none at all: Which State of Liberty is an Inestimable Good, when we
desire Nothing, that is either Superfluous, or Vicious. They are Asses that are
made for Burden, and not the Nobler sort of Horses. In the Civil Wars betwixt
Caesar, and Pompey, the Question was not, who should be Slaves, or Free, but
who should be Master. Ambition is the same thing in Private, that it is in
Public; and the Duties are Effectually the same, betwixt the Master of a
Kingdom, and the Master of a Family. As I would treat some Servants kindly,
Because they are Worthy; and Others, to make them so; so on the Other side, I
would have a Servant to Reverence his Master; and rather to Love him, than Fear
him. Some there are, that think this too little for a Master, though it is all
that we pay even to God himself. The Body of a servant may be bought, and sold;
but his Mind is Free.

EPIST. XVIII. We are Iuster to Men, than to God: Of Life, and Death, of Good,
and Evil.
IT is without Dispute, that the Loss of a Friend is one of the greatest Trials
of Humane Frailty; and no Man is so much exalted above the sense of that
Calamity, as not to be affected with it. And yet if a Man bears it Bravely,
they cry, he has no Sense of Piety, or Good Nature in him; if he sink under it,
they call him Effeminate: so that he lies both ways under a Reproach. But,
What Is the Ground of your Trouble, I beseech you, but that he might have Lived
Longer, in respect of his years; and, in effect, that he ought to have done so,
in regard of his Usefulness to the World? I cannot but wonder to see, that a
Person so Just, and so Temperate in all his Dealings with Men, and in Business,
should so exceedingly forget himself in This Point. But you have in Excuse of
this Error, the Failings of the whole World with you for Company. For even
those that are the most scrupulously Conscientious toward Men, are yet
Unthankful, and Injurious to Providence.

It is not the Number of Days that makes a Life Long, but the Full Employment
of them, upon the main End, and Purpose of Life; which is, the Perfecting of
the Mind, in making a Man the Absolute Master of Himself. Ireckon the Matter of
Age among External things, the main point is to Live, and Die, with Honor.
Every Man that Lives, is upon the way, and must go through with his Journey,
without stopping, till he comes at the End: And wheresoever it ends, if it ends
well, it is a Perfect Life. There is an Invincible Fate, that attends all
Mortals; and, one Generation is condemned to tread upon the Heels of another.
Take away from Life, the Power of Death, and it is a slavery. As Caligula was
passing upon the way, an Old man that was a Prisoner, and with a Beard down to
his Girdle, made it his request to Caesar, that he might be put to death. Why,
says Caesar to him, are you not dead already? So that you see Some Desire it,
as well as others Fear it: And why not? When it is one of the Duties of Life,
to Dye. And it is one of the Comforts of it too: For the Living are under the
Power of Fortune, but she has no Dominion at all over the Dead. How can Life be
Pleasant to any Man, that is not prepared to part with it? Or what Loss can be
easier to us, than that which can never be Missed; or Desired again? I was
brought by a Defluxion into a hopeless Consumption; and I had it many times in
my Thought to Deliver my self from a Miserable Life, by a Violent Death. But
the Tenderness I had for an Aged, and Indulgent Father, held my hand; for,
thought I to my self, it will be very hard for my Father to be without me,
though I could most willingly part with my self. In the Case of a Particular
Disease, a Physician may propound a Remedy; but the only Remedy for all
Diseases, is the Contempt of Death. (Though I know too, that it is the business
of a Long Life, to Learn That Lesson.)

Oh! The Happiness of distinguishing Good from Evil, in the Works of
Providence! But, in stead of raising our Thoughts to the Contemplation of
Divine Matters, and enquiring into the Original, the State, and the Appointed
Issue of Created Nature; we are digging of the Earth, and serving of our
Avarice; Neglecting all the good things that are so frankly offered us. How
great a Folly and Madness is it, for Men that are Dying, and in the hands of
Death already, to extend their Hopes, and to carry their Ambition, and Desires
to the Grave, Unsatisfied? For, whosoever is tainted with those Hydroptick
Appetites, can never have enough, either of Money, or Power. It is a Remarkable
thing, that among those that place their Happiness in Sense, they are the most
miserable that seem to be happiest. The Riches of Nature are the most precious
Treasures. What has any Man to desire more, than to keep himself from Cold,
Hunger, and Thirst? It is not the Quantity, but the Opinion, that Governs in
this Case; That can never be Little, which is Enough: Nor does any Man account
That to be Much, which is too Little. The Benefits of Fortune are so far
Comfortable to us, as we enjoy them without losing the Possession of our
selves. Let us Purge our Minds, and follow Nature; we shall otherwise be still
either Fearing, or Craving, and Slaves to Accidents. Not that there is any
Pleasure in Poverty; but it is a great Felicity for a Man to bring his Mind to
be contented even in That State, which Fortune it self cannot make worse.
Methinks our Quarrels with Ambition, and Profitable Employments, are somewhat
like those we have with our Mistresses; we do not Hate them, but Wrangle with
them. In a word; betwixt those things which are Sought, and Coveted, and yet
Complained of; and those things which we have Lost, and pretend that we cannot
live without, our Misfortunes are purely Voluntary: and we are Servants, not so
much by Necessity, as by Choice. No Man can be Happy, that is not Free, and
Fearless: And no Man can be so, but he, that by Philosophy has got the better
of Fortune. In what Place soever we are; we shall find our selves beset with
the Miseries of Humane Nature: Some, Without us; that either Encompass us,
Deceive us, or Force us: Others, Within us; that eat up our very Hearts, in the
Middle of Solitude. And it is not yet, as we imagine, that Fortune has Long
Arms; She meddles with no body, that does not first lay hold upon Her. We
should keep a Distance therefore, and withdraw into the Knowledge of Nature,
and of our Selves. We Understand the Original of things; the Order of the
World, the Circulation of the Seasons, the Courses of the Stars, and that the
whole Frame of the Universe (only the Earth excepted) is but a Perpetual
Motion. We know the Causes of Day, and Night; of Light, and of Darkness; but it
is at a distance: Let us direct our Thoughts then to That Place, where we shall
see all nearer Hand. And, it is not This Hope neither, that makes a Wise Man
Resolute at the Point of Death, because Death lies in his way to Heaven; For,
the Soul of a Wise Man is there beforehand: Nay, if there were nothing after
Death, to be either Expected, or Feared, he would yet leave this World with as
great a Mind, though he were to pass into a State of Annihilation. He that
reckons every hour his Last; a Day, or an Age, is all one to him. Fate is doing
our Work while we Sleep; Death steals upon us Insensibly; and the more
Insensibly, because it passes under the name of Life. From Childhood we grow
up, without perceiving it, to Old Age; and this Increase of our Life, duly
considered, is a Diminution of it. We take Death to be Before us; but it is
Behind us; and has already swallowed up all that is past. Wherefore, make use
of the Present; and trust nothing to the Morrow; for Delay is just so much time
lost. We catch hold of Hopes, and Flatteries, of a little longer Life; as
Drowning Men do upon Thorns, or Straws, that either Hurt us, or Deceive us. You
will ask, perhaps, what I do my Self, that Preach at this Rate. Truly I do
like some ill Husbands, that spend their Estates, and yet keep their Accounts:
I run out; but yet I can tell which way it goes. And, I have the Fate of Ill
Husbands too, another way; for every Body Pitties me, and no Body Helps me. The
Soul is never in the Right place, so long as it fears to quit the Body. Why
should a Man trouble himself to extend Life, which, at Best, is a kind of
Punishment; And, at Longest, amounts to very little more, than Nothing? He is
Ungrateful, that takes the Period of Pleasure for an Injury; and he is Foolish,
that knows no Good, but the Present. Nay, there are some Courses of Life, which
a Man ought to quit, though with Life it self: As the Trade of Killing Others,
in stead of Learning to Dye, Himself. Life it self is neither Good, nor Evil;
but only a Place for Good, and Evil. It is a kind of Trage-Comedy. Let it be
well Acted, and no matter whether it be Long, or Short. We are apt to be missed
by the Appearances of things; and when they come to us, recommended in Good
Terms, and by Great Example, they will impose many times upon very Wise Men.
The Mind is never Right; but when it is at peace within it self, and
Independent upon any thing from Abroad. The Soul is in Heaven, even while it is
in the Flesh; if it be purged of Natural Corruptions, and taken up with Divine
Thoughts: And, whether any body sees us, or takes notice of us, it matters not.
Virtue will of it self break forth, though never so much pains be taken to
suppress it. And it is all one, whether it be known, or no: But After Ages
however will do us Right; when we are Dead, and Insensible of the Veneration
they allow us. He that is wise, will compute the Conditions of Humanity; and
contract the Subject both of his Joys, and Fears. And it is time well spent,
so to Abate of the One, that he may likewise Diminish the Other. By this
Practice he will come to understand, how short, how uncertain, and how safe,
many of those things are, which we are wont to Fear. When I see a Splendid
House, or a glittering Train, I look upon it, as I do upon Courts, which are
only the Schools of Avarice, and Ambition; and they are at best but a Pomp,
which is more for Show, than Possession. Beside that, Great Goods are seldom
Long-lived; and That is the Fairest Felicity, which is of the shortest Growth.

EPIST. XIX. Of True Courage.
FOrtitude is (properly) the Contempt of all Hazards, according to Reason;
though it be commonly, and promiscuously used also, for, a Contempt of all
Hazards, even Without, or Against Rea-Reason: Which is rather a Daring, and a
Brutal Fierceness, than an Honorable Courage. A Brave Man fears Nothing more
than the Weakness of being affected with Popular Glory. His Eyes are not
Dazzled, either with Gold, or Steel; he tramples upon all the Terrors, and
Glories of Fortune; he looks upon himself as a Citizen, and Soldier of the
World, and, in despite of all Accidents, and Oppositions, he maintains his
Station. He does not only Suffer, but Court the most Perilous Occasions of
Virtue, and those Adventures which are most Terrible to Others: for he values
himself upon Experiment; and is more Ambitious of being reputed Good, than
Happy. Mucius Lost his hand with more Honor, than he could have Preserved it:
He was a greater Conqueror Without it, than he could have been With it: For
with the very Stump of it, he overcame two Kings, Tarquin, and Porsenna.
Rutilia followed Cotta into Banishment; she stayed, and she returned with him
too; and soon after, she Lost him, without so much as shedding a Tear: a Great
Instance of her Courage, in his Banishment, and of her Prudence, in his Death.
This (says Epicurus) is the Last, and the Blessed'st day of my Life; when he
was ready to Expire in an extreme torment of the Stone. It is never said of the
300 Fabii, that they were Overcome, but that they were Slain; Nor of Regulus,
that he was Vanquished by the Carthaginians, but that he was Taken. The
Spartans prohibited all Exercises where the Victory was declared by the Voice,
and Submission, of him that was worsted. When Phaeton begged of Phoebus the
Government of the Chariot of the Sun for one day, the Poet makes him so far
from being Discouraged by his Fathers telling him of the Danger of the
Undertaking, and how he himself had much ado to keep his Seat for Fear, when
he looked down from the Meridian, that it proved a Spur to his Importunity.
That Is the thing (says Phaeton) that I would be at; to stand Firm in That
difficulty, where Phoebus himself Trembles. Security is the Caution of Narrow
Minds. But, as Fire tries Gold, so does Difficulty, and Hazard try Virtuous
Men. Not but that he may be as Valiant that Watches upon the Tower as he that
fights upon his Knees; only the One has had the good Fortune of an Occasion for
the Proof of his Resolution. As some Creatures are Cruel; Others Crafty, and
some Timorous; so Man is endu'd with a Glorious, and an Excellent Spirit, that
prompts him, not so much to regard a Safe Life, as an Honest. Providence has
made him the Master of this Lower World; and he reckons it his Duty to
Sacrifice his Own Particular to the Advantage of the Whole. And yet there is a
vast Difference, even in the same Action done by a Brave Person, and by a
Stupid: as the Death of Cato was Honorable; but that of Brutus was Shameful.
Nor is it Death it self that we recommend for Glorious; but it is a glorious
thing to Dye as we Ought. Neither is it Poverty, Banishment, or Pain, that we
commend; but the Man that behaves himself Bravely under those Afflictions. How
were the Gladiators Contemned, that called for Quarter? And those on the other
side Favored, that Despised it. Many a Man saves his Life, by not fearing to
Lose it; and, Many a Man Loses his Life, for being over-sollicitous to save it.
We are many times afraid of Dying by One thing, and we come to Dye by Another.
As for Example; we are Threatened by an Enemy, and we Dye by a Pleurisy. The
Fear of Death enlarges all other things that we Fear. To Bear it with
Constancy, we should Compute, that whether our Lives be long, or short, it
comes all to a Point; Some Hours we lose: What if they were Days, Months,
Years? What matters it if I never Arrive at that which I must certainly Part
with when I have it. Life is but one Point of Flying Time; and, that which is
to come, is no more Mine, than that which is Past. And, we have this for our
Comfort too, that whosoever now Fears Death, will, some time or other come to
Wish it. If Death be Troublesome, or Terrible; the Fault is in us, and not in
Death it self. It is as great a Madness for a Man to Fear that which he is not
to Feel, as that which he is not to Suffer. The Difference lies in the Manner
of Dying, and not in the Issue of Death it Self. It Is a more Inglorious Death
to be Smothered with Perfumes, than to be torn to pieces with Pincers. Provided
my Mind be not Sick, I shall not much heed my Body. I am Prepared for my last
Hour, without tormenting my self when it will come. It is betwixt the Stoics
and other Philosophers, as betwixt Men, and Women. They are Both, Equally,
Necessary for Society; only the one is Born for Government, and the other for
Subjection. Other Sects deal with their Disciples, as Plausible Physicians do
with their Patients; they Flatter, and Humor them; whereas the Stoics go a
Bolder way to work; and consider rather their Profit, than their Pleasure.

EPIST. XX. It Is never too Late to Learn. The Advantages of a Private Life; and
the Slavery of a Public. The Ends of Punishment.
LEt no Man presume to advise Others, that has not first given Good Counsel to
himself: And he may, Then, pretend to help his Neighbor. It is, in short, as
hard a matter to Give Good Counsel, as to Take it: Let it however be agreed,
betwixt the Two Parties, that the One designs to Confer a Benefit, and the
Other, to Receive it. Some People Scorn to be Taught: Others are Ashamed of it,
as they would be of going to School when they are Old: But, it is never too
late to Learn, what it is always Necessary to Know; And, it is no Shame to
Learn, so long as we are Ignorant; that is to say, so long as we Live. When any
thing is Amiss in our Bodies, or Estates, we have Recourse presently to the
Physician, or the Lawyer, for Help: And why not to the Philosopher in the
Disorders of our Mind? No Man Lives, but he that applies himself to Wisdom; for
he takes into his own Life the Supplement of all Past Ages. It Is a Fair Step
toward Happiness, and Virtue, to Delight in the Conversation of Good, and of
Wise Men: And where That cannot be had, the next point is, to keep no Company
at all. Solitude affords Business enough; and the Entertainment is Comfortable,
and Easy. Whereas Public Offices are Vexatious, and Restless. There Is a great
Difference betwixt a Life of Leisure, and of Lazyness. When People will Express
their Envy of a Man in a Happy Condition; they will say, He lives at his Ease.
When, in truth, the Man is Dead; Alive. There is a Long Life, and there is a
Long Death: The Former, when we enjoy the Benefits of a Right Mind; and the
Other, when the Senses are Extinguished; and the Body Dead beforehand. He that
makes me the Master of my Own Time, and places me in a State of Freedom, lays
a great Obligation upon me. As a Merchant, that has a Considerable Fortune
Aboard, is more sensible of the Blessing of a Fair Wind, and a Safe Passage,
than he that has only Ballast, or some Course Commodity in the Vessel: So, That
Man that employes his Privacy upon Thoughts Divine, and Precious, is more
sensible of the Comfort of that Freedom, than he that bends his Meditations an
Ill way. For, he considers all the Benefits of his Exemption from Common
Duties, he enjoyes himself with Infinite Delight, and makes his Gratitude
Answerable to his Obligations. He is the best of Subjects, and the Happiest of
Men; and he lives to Nature, and to himself. Most Men are to Themselves, the
worst Company they can keep. If they be Good, Quiet, and Temperate, they are as
good Alone, as in Company: But, if otherwise, let them converse with Others,
and Avoid themselves: But, he that has made himself good Company, can never be
too much alone. Many a Ship is lost in the Harbor, but more in the Ocean; as
many an Honest Man is Condemned, but more Guilty. This however, is Certain. He
that cannot secure himself in Privacy, shall be much more exposed in Public.
That which the World calls Felicity, is Greedy, it Self, and exposed to the
Greediness of Others. Prosperity, like a Fair Gale upon a Strong Current,
carries a Man, in a Trice, out of the very fight of Peace, and Quiet; and i^ it
be not Tempered, and Regulated, it is so far from Easing us, that it proves an
Oppression to us. A busy, and a Fortunate Man in the World, calls many Men his
Friends, that are at most but his Guests. And, if People flock to it, it is but
as they do to a Fountain, which they both exhaust, and trouble.

What greater slavery can there be, than that of Princes, in this very Respect,
that they are Chained to their Post; and cannot make themselves less: All their
Words, and Actions are descanted upon, and made Public Discourse; and there
are many things allowable to a Private Man, that are not fit for a Governor. I
can walk Alone, where I please; without a Sword, without Fear, and without
Company: whereas a Prince must be Armed in Peace, and cannot, with Dignity,
quit his Guards. Fortune has him in Custody. A Train besets him wherever he
goes; and there is no making of an Escape. He is little better than nailed to
his Place, and it is the Perfection of his Misery, that he cannot go less. He
can no more Conceal himself, than the Sun in the Firmament; whereas his
Subjects may Go and Come, change Habits, and Humor, without being taken Notice
of. Servitude is the Fate of Palaces. The Splendour of a Crown draws all Men's
Eyes upon it. When Caesar speaks, the whole World hears his Voice, and trembles
at his Displeasure; and where it falls, it shakes whatsoever is near it. His
Lips are the Oracles of the People; and Government is the Ciment that Binds
them together. But still he that is Master of Many, is the Servant yet of More
The Power, it is true, of all things, belongs to the Prince; but the Propriety
to Particular Persons. And the same thing may be both Yours, and mine, in
Several Respects. We cannot say that a Son, or a Servant has Nothing, because a
master, or a father may take it away if he will; or that he cannot Give
Willingly, because they may hinder it; whether he will, or no. This is Power,
and true Dominion, not to Rule, and Command, when we may do it if we please.
The Strength of a Prince is in the Love of his People; For there is nothing so
great, but it must it self perish, when it is become the Common Safety that it
should be so. Tyrants are Hated, because they are Feared; and because they are
Hated, they will be Feared. They are rendered Odious to Posterity; and they had
better never have been born, than to stand upon Record for the Plagues of
Mankind. Miserable is that People, where their very Keepers are their
Executioners. And, it is not an Armed Tyranny neither, but the Unarmed Vices of
Avarice, and Envy, that we ought to be most afraid of. Some will not endure to
have their Vices touched, but will shrink, and struggle under the Operation, as
if they were under the hand of a Surgeon. But, this shall not hinder me from
Lancing, and Probing, because of the Cries, and Groans of the Patient. Every
Man should have a Monitor at his Elbow, to keep him from Avarice, by showing
him how Rich a Man may be with a Little: From Ambition, by representing the
Disquiets, and Hazards that accompany Greatness; which makes him as great a
Burden to Others, as he is to Himself. When it comes to That once; Fear,
Anxiety, and Weariness, make us Philosophers. A Sickly Fortune produces
wholesome Counsels; and we reap this Fruit from our Adversity, that it brings us
at last to Wisdom.

Now, though Clemency in a Prince be so necessary, and so Profitable a Virtue;
and Cruelty so dangerous an Excess; it is yet the Office of a Governor, as of
the Master of an Hospital, to keep Sick, and Mad Men in Order. And, in Cases of
Extremity, the very Member is to be cut off with the Ulcer. All Punishment is
either for Amendment, or for Example, or that Others may live more Secure. What
is the End of Destroying those Poisonous, and Dangerous Creatures, which are
never to be reclaimed, but to prevent Mischief? And yet there may be as much
Hazard in doing too Much, as too Little. A Particular Mutineer may be punished;
but when the whole Army is in a Revolt, there must be a General Pardon. The
Multitude of Offenders, is their Security, and Protection: For there is no
Quarelling with a Public Vice, where the Custom of Offending takes away the
Shame of it; and it is not Prudent neither, by many Punishments, to show a
City, that the Wicked are so much the Major Part: Beside that, it is as great a
Dishonor for a Prince to have many Executions, as for a Physician to have many
Funerals. Shall a Father Disinherit a Son for the First Offense? Let him first
Admonish, then Threaten, and afterward Punish him. So long as there is Hope, we
should apply gentle Remedies. But, some Nations are Intractable, and neither
Willing to Serve, nor Fit to Command; And, some Persons are Incorrigible too.

EPIST. XXI. The Two Blessings of Life are, a Sound Body; and a Quiet Mind. The
Extravag^nce of the Roman Luxury. The Moderation, and Simplicity of Former
Times.
EPicurus makes the Two Blessings of Life, to be a Sound Body, and a Quiet
Mind: Which is only a Compendious Reduction of Humane Felicity to a State of
Health, and of Virtue. The way to be Happy is to make Vice, not only Odious,
but Ridiculous; and every Man to mind his own Business; for he that Torments
himself for other Peoples Misfortunes, shall never be at Rest. A Virtuous Life
must be all of a Piece; and not advance by Starts, and Intervals; and then to
go on where it Left; for this is Losing of Ground. We are to press, and
persevere, for the main difficulties are yet to come. If I discontinue my
Course, when shall I come to pronounce these words? I am a Conqueror: Not a
Conqueror of Barbarous Enemies, and Salvage Nations; but I have subdued
Avarice, Ambition, and those Lusts, that have subjected even the greatest of
Conquerors. Who was a Greater than Alexander? that extended his Empire from
Thracia, to the Utmost bounds of the East: But yet he Burnt Persepolis at the
request of a Prostitute, to gratify his Lust. He overcame Darius, and slew
many Thousands of the Persians; but yet he Murdered Calisthenes. And that
single Blot has Ternish'd all the Glory of all his Victories, All the wishes of
Mortals, and all the Benefits which we can either Give, or Receive, are of very
little Conducement to a Happy Life. Those things which the Common People gape
after, are Transitory and Vain. Whereas Happiness is Permanent; Nor is it to be
Estimated by Number, Measure, or Parts: For it is Full, and Perfect. I do not
speak, as if I my self were arrived at that Blessed State of Repose: But, it is
something yet to be on the Mending hand. It is with me, as with a Man that is
Creeping out of a Disease; he Feels yet some Grudgings of it, he is every Foot
Examining of his Pulse; and suspects every Touch or Heat to be a Relick of his
Fever. Just at That rate, am I jealous of my self. The best Remedy that I know
in this Case, is to go on with Confidence, and not to be missed by the Errors
of Other People. It is with our Manners, as with our Healths; it is a Degree of
Virtue, the Abatement of Vice, as it is a Degree of Health, the Abatement of a
Fit.

Some Place their Happiness in Wealth; Some in the Liberty of the Body; and
Others in the Pleasures of the Sense, and Palate. But, What are Metals, Tastes,
Sounds, or Colors, to the Mind of a Reasonable Creature? He that sets his
Heart upon Riches, the very Fear of Poverty will be grievous to him. He that is
Ambitious, shall be galled with Envy at any Man that gets before him: For, in
that Case, he that is not First, is Last. I do not speak against Riches
neither: For if they hurt a Man, it is his Own Folly. They may be indeed the
Cause of Mischief; as they are a Temptation to those that do it. In stead of
Courage, they may Inspire us with Arrogance; and, in stead of Greatness of
Mind, with Insolence; which is in truth but the Counterfeit of Magnanimity.
What is it to be a Prisoner, and in Chains? It is no more than that Condition
to which many Princes have been Reduced; and out of which, Many Men have been
Advanced to the Authority of Princes. It Is not to say, I have no Master; In
time you may have one. Might not Hecuba, Croesus, and the Mother of Darius have
said as much? And where is the Happyness of Luxury either; when a Man divides
his Life betwixt the Kitchen, and the Stews; betwixt an Anxious Conscience, and
a Nauseous Stomach? Caligula, who was born to show the World what mischief
might be done by a Concurrence of Great Wickedness, and a Great Fortune. Spent
near 10 000 l. Sterling upon a Supper. The Works, and Inventions of it are
Prodigious, not only in the Counterfeiting of Nature, but even in Surpassing
it. The Romans had their Brooks even in their Parlors; and found their Dinners
under their Tables. The Mullet was reckoned stale, unless it died in the Hand
of the Guest: And they had their Glasses to put them into, that they might the
better observe all the Changes, and Motions of them in the Last Agony betwixt
Life, and Death. So that they fed their Eyes, before their Bodies. Look how it
Reddens, says one, there is no Vermilion like it. Take notice of these Veins;
and that same gray brightness upon the Head of it. And now he is at's Last
Gasp: See how Pale he turns, and all of a Color. These people would not have
given themselves half this trouble with a Dying Friend; Nay, they would leave a
Father, or a Brother, at his Last Hour, to entertain themselves with the
Barbarous Spectacle of an expiring Fish. And that which enhances the Esteem of
every thing, is the Price of it: Insomuch, that Water it self, which ought to
be Gratuitous, is exposed to Sale, in their Conservatories of Ice, and Snow.
Nay, we are troubled that we cannot buy Breath, Light; and that we have the Air
it self Gratis. As if our Condition were Evil, because Nature has left
something to us in Common. But Luxury contrives ways to set a Price upon the
most Necessary, and Communicable Benefits in Nature: Even those Benefits, which
are Free to Birds, and Beasts, as well as to Men; and serve Indifferently for
the Use of the most Sluggish Creatures. But, How comes it that Fountain Water
is not Cold enough to Serve us, unless it be bound up into Ice? So long as the
Stomach is Sound, Nature discharges her Functions without Trouble: But, when
the Blood comes to be enflamed with Excess of Wine, or Meats, Simple Water is
not Cold Enough to Allay that Heat; and we are forced to make use of Remedies,
which Remedies themselves are Vices. We heap Suppers upon Dinners, and Dinners
upon Suppers, without Intermission. Good God! How easy is it to quench a
Sound, and an Honest Thirst? But, when the Palate is grown Callous, we Taste
nothing; and that which we take for Thirst, is only the Rage of a Fever.
Hippocrates delivered it as an Aphorism, that Women were, never Ball'd, nor
Gouty, but in one Singular Case. Women have not altered their Natures since,
but they have Changed the Course of their Lives; for, by taking the Liberties
of Men, they partake as well of their Diseases, as of their Wickedness. They
sit up as much, Drink as much; nay, in their very Appetites they are Masculine
too; they have lost the Advantages of their Sex, by their Vices.

Our Ancestors, when they were Free, lived either in Caves, or in Arbours: But
Slavery came in with ^ildings, and with Marble. I would have him that comes
into my House, take more Notice of the Master, then of the Furniture. The
Golden Age was before Architecture: Arts came in with Luxury, and we do not
hear of any Philosopher that was either a Locksmith, or a Painter. Who was the
Wiser Man, think you? he that Invented a Saw, or the Other; who, upon seeing a
Boy drink Water out of the Hollow of his Hand, Brake his Pitcher: with this
Check to himself; What a Fool am I to trouble my self with Superfluities?
Carving is one Man's Trade; Cooking is Another: Only he is more miserable that
teaches it for Pleasure, than he that learns it for Necessity. It was Luxury,
not Philosophy, that Invented Fish-Pools, as well as Palaces. Where, in Case of
Foul weather at Sea, they might have Fishes, to supply their Gluttony, in
Harbor. We do not only Pamper our Lusts, but Provoke them: As if we were to
Learn the very Art of Voluptuousness. What was it but Avarice, that Originally
brake the Union of Society; and Proved the cause of Poverty, even to those that
were the most Wealthy? Every Man Possessed All, till the World came to
Appropriate Possessions to themselves. In the First Age, Nature was both a Law,
and a Guide; and the Best Governed; Which was but according to Nature too. The
largest, and the strongest Bull leads the Heard; the Goodliest Elephant; and,
among Men too, in the Blessed times of Innocence, the Best was Uppermost. They
chose Governors for their Manners; who neither Acted any Violence, nor suffered
any. They Protected the Weak against the Mighty; and Persuaded, or Dissuaded,
as they saw Occasion. Their Prudence Provided for their People; their Courage
Kept them Safe from Dangers; their Bounty both Supplied, and Adorned their
Subjects. It was a Duty, Then, to Command, not a Government. No Man, in those
Days, had either a Mind to do an Injury, or a Cause for it. He that commanded
well, was Well Obeyed: And, the worst Menace the Governors could then make to
the Disobedient, was, to Forsake them. But, with the corruption of Times,
Tyranny crept in, and the World began to have Need of Laws; and those Laws were
made by Wise Men too, as Solon, and Licurgus, who Learned their Trade in the
School of Pythagoras.

EPIST. XXII. Man is Compounded of Soul, and Body: And has Naturally a Civil
War within Himself. The Difference betwixt a Life of Virtue, and a Life of
Pleasure.
THere is not so Disproportionate a Mixture in any Creature, as that is in Man,
of Soul, and Body. There is Intemperance, joined with Divinity; Folly, with
Severity; Sloth, with Activity, and Uncleanness with Purity. But, a Good Sword
is never the worse for an Ill Scabbard. We are moved, more by Imaginary Fears,
than Truths; for Truth has a Certainty, and Foundation; but, in the other, we
are exposed to the License, and Conjecture of a Distracted Mind, and our
Enemies, are not more Imperious, than our Pleasures. We set our Hearts upon
Transitory things; as if they Themselves were Everlasting; or We, on the other
side, to Possess them for Ever. Why do we not rather advance our Thoughts to
things that are Eternal, and contemplate the Heavenly Original of all Beings?
Why do we not, by the Divinity of Reason, triumph over the weaknesses of Flesh,
and Blood? It is by Providence that the World is preserved; and not from any
Virtue in the Matter of it; for the World is as Mortal as we are: Only the
Allmighty Wisdom carries it safe through all the Motions of Corruption. And so
by Prudence, Humane Life it self may be prolonged; if we will but stint our
selves in those Pleasures that bring the greater part of us untimely to our
End. Our Passions are nothing else but Certain Disallowable Motions of the
Mind; Sudden, and Eager; which, by Frequency, and Neglect, turn to a Disease;
as a Distillation brings us first to a Cough, and then to a Pthisique. We are
carried Up to the Heavens, and Down again into the Deep, by Turns; so long as
we are governed by our Affections, and not by Virtue. Passion, and Reason, are
a kind of Civil War within us; and as the one, or the other has Dominion, we
are either Good, or Bad. So that it should be our Care, that the worst Mixture
may not prevail. And they are linked, like the Chain of Causes, and Effects,
one to another. Betwixt violent Passions, and a Fluctuation, or Wambling of the
Mind, there is such a Difference, as betwixt the Agitation of a Storm, and the
Nauseous Sickness of a Calm. And they have all of them their Symptoms too, as
well as our Bodily Distempers: They that are troubled with the Falling
Sickness, know when the Fit is a Coming, by the Cold of the Extreme^ Parts; the
Dazzling of the Eye; the failing of the Memory; the Trembling of the Nerves, and
the Giddiness of the Head. So that every Man knows his own Disease, and should
provide against it: Anger, Love, Sadness, Fear, may be read in the Countenance;
And so may the Virtues too. Fortitude makes the Eye Vigorous; Prudence makes it
Intent; Reverence shows it self in Modesty; Joy, in Serenity; and Truth in
Openness, and Simplicity. There are Sown the Seeds of Divine things in Mortal
Bodies. If the Mind be well Cultivated, the Fruit answers the Original; and, if
not, all runs into Weeds. We are all of us Sick of Curable Diseases: and it
costs us more to be Miserable, than would make us perfectly Happy. Consider the
Peaceable State of Clemency, and the Turbulence of Anger; the Softness, and
Quiet of Modesty, and the Restlessness of Lust. How Cheap, and easy to us is
the Service of Virtue, and how Dear we pay for our Vices? The Sovereign Good of
Man, is a Mind that Subjects all things to it self; and is it self subject to
Nothing: His Pleasures are Modest, Severe, and Reserved, and rather the Sauce,
or the Diversion of Life, than the Entertainment of it. It may be some
Question, whether such a Man goes to Heaven, or Heaven comes to Him: For a Good
Man is Influenced, by God himself; and has a kind of Divinity within him. What
if one Good Man Lives in Pleasure, and Plenty, and another in Want, and Misery?
it is no Virtue, to contemn Superfluities, but Necessities: And they are both of
them Equally Good, though under several Circumstances, and in Different
Stations. Cato (the Censor) waged War with the Manners of Rome; Scipio, with
the Enemies. Nay, bating the very Conscience of Virtue, Who is there, that upon
Sober Thoughts, would not be an Honest Man, even for the Reputation of it.
Virtue you shall find in the Temple, in the Field, or upon the Walls, covered
with Dust, and Blood, in the Defense of the Public. Pleasures you shall find
Sneaking in the Stews, Sweating-Houses, Powdered, and Painted, etc. Not that
Pleasures are wholly to be Disclaimed, but to be used with Moderation, and to
be made Subservient to Virtue. Good Manners always please us; but Wickedness
is Restless, and perpetually Changing; not for the Better, but for Variety. We
are torn to pieces betwixt Hopes, and Fears; by which Means, Providence (which
is the greatest Blessing of Heaven) is turned into a Mischief VVild Beasts,
when they see their Dangers, fly from them: and when they have escaped them,
they are Quiet; but wretched Man is equally tormented, both with things Past,
and to Come: For the Memory brings back the Anxiety of our Past Fears, and our
Foresight Anticipates the Future: Whereas the Present makes no Man Miserable.
If we Fear all things that are Possible, we live without any Bounds to our
Miseries.

EPIST. XXIII. We abuse Gods Blessings, and turn them into Mischiefs.
Meditations upon the Horrors of Earthquakes, and Consolations against them.
Death is the same thing which way soever it comes: Only we are more moved by
Accidents that we are not used to.
THere is nothing so Profitable, but it may be Perverted to our Injury. Without
the Use of the Winds, how should we do for Commerce? Beside that, they keep the
Air Sweet, and Healthful, and bring seasonable Rains upon the Earth. It was
never the Intent of Providence, that they should be Employed for War, and
Devastation; and yet that is a great Part of the Use we make of them; pursuing
one Hazard through another. We expose our selves to Tempests, and to Death,
without so much as the Hope of a Sepulcher. And all this might be Born too; if
we only ran these Risques in order to Peace: But, when we have escaped so many
Rocks, and Flats, Thunder, and Storms, What Is the Fruit of all our Labor, and
Terror? It is only War; and to Burn, and Ravage, as if the Earth were not
large enough for the Scene of our Destruction. Whereas we might live, and dye
at Ease, if we had a mind to it; and draw out our Lives in Security. Why do we
Press our own Dangers then, and Provoke our Fates? What do we look for? Only
Death; which is to be Found every where. It will find us in our Beds, in our
Chambers: But, wheresoever it finds us, let it find us Innocent. What a Madness
is it to pursue Mischieves; to fall foul upon those we do not know; to be Angry
without a Cause; to Overrun whatsoever is in our way; and, like Beasts, to
kill what we have no Quarrel to? Nay, worse than Beasts; We run great Hazards,
only to bring us to Greater. We force our way to Gold, without any regard,
either to God, or Man. But, in all this, without any Cause of Complaint, we
abuse the Benefits of God, and turn them all into Mischiefs. We dig for Gold;
we Leave the Light, and Abandon the Courses of a better Nature. We Descend,
where we find a new Position of Things; Hideous Caves, Hollow, and Hanging
Rocks; Horrid Rivers; a Deep, and Perpetual Darkness, and not without the
Apprehensions even of Hell it self. How Little now, and how Inconsiderable are
those things that Men venture for, with the Price of their Lives! But, to pass
from those Hazards, that we may avoid, to others, which we cannot. As in the
Case of Earthquakes.

In what Condition can any Man be Safe; when the World it self is shaken; and,
the only thing that passes for fixed, and Unmovable in the Universe, Trembles,
and Deceiv^ us? VVhither shall we fly for security, if wheresoever we are, the
Danger be still under our Feet. Upon the Cracking of a House, every Man takes
himself to his heels; and leaves all to save himself: But, What Retreat is
there, where that which should Support us, Fails us; when the Foundation, not
only of Cities, but even of the World it self, Opens, and VVavers? What Help,
or what Comfort; where Fear it self can never carry us off? An Enemy may be
Kept at a Distance with a Wall: A Castle may put a stop to an Army; a Port may
Protect us from the Fury of a Tempest; Fire it self does not follow him that
runs away from't: A Vault may Defend us against Thunder; and we may quit the
Place in a Pestilence: There is some Remedy in all these Evils. Or however, no
Man ever knew a Whole Nation destroyed with Lightning. A Plague may Unpeople a
Town, but it will not Carry it away. There is no Evil of such an Extent, so
Inevitable, so Greedy, and so Publicly Calamitous, as an Earthquake. For, it
does not only Devour Houses, Families, or Single Towns, but Ruins Whole
Countries, and Nations: Either Overturning, or Swallowing them up, without so
much as leaving any Footstep, or Mark of what they were. Some People have a
greater Horror for this Death, than for any Other: To be taken away alive, out
of the Number of the Living; as if all Mortals, by what Means soever, were not
to come to the same End. Nature has Eminently this Justice, that when we are
all dead, we are all Alike. And, it is not a Pin Matter, whether I be Crushed to
Pieces by one Stone, or by a whole Mountain; whether I perish by the Fall of a
House, or under the Burden of the whole Earth; Whether I be swallowed up
alone, or with a Thousand more for Company. What does it signify to me, the
Noise, and the Discourse that is made about my Death; when Death is every
where, and in all Cases, the same? We should therefore Arm our selves against
that blow, that can neither be Avoided, nor Foreseen. And, it is not the
Forswearing of those Places, that we find Infested with Earthquakes, that will
do our Business; for there is no Place that can be warranted against them. What
if the Earth be not yet moved? It is still Movable; for the whole Body of it
lies under the Same Law, and exposed to Danger; only some part at One time, and
some at Another. As it is in great Cities, where all the houses are subject to
Ruin, though they do not all Fall Together: So in the Body of the Earth, now
This Part Fails, and then That. Tire was Formerly Subject to Earthquakes; In
Asia Twelve Cities were swallowed up in a Night; Achaia, and Macedonia have had
their Turns, and now Campagnia. The Fate goes Round; and Strikes at last where
it has a great while passed by. It falls out oftener it is true, in some Places,
than in Others: But, no Place is totally Free, and Exempt. And, it is not only
Men, but Cities, Coasts, nay the Shores, and the very Sea it self, that suffer
under the Dominion of Fate. And yet we are so vain, as to Promise our selves
some sort of Assurance in the Goods of Fortune. Never considering, that the
very Ground we stand upon is Unstable. And, it is not the Frailty of this or
that Place, but the Quality of every Spot of it; For, not one Inch of it is so
compacted, as not to admit many causes of its Resolution; And, though the Bulk
of the Earth remain Entire, the Parts of it may yet be broken.

There is not any thing, which can promise to it self a Lasting quiet. And it
is no small Comfort to us, the Certainty of our Fate: For, it is a Folly to
Fear where there is no Remedy. He that troubles himself sooner than he needs,
grieves more also than is Necessary: For the same weakness that makes him
Anticipate his Misery, makes him Enlarge it too. The Wise fortify themselves by
Reason, and Fools by Despair. That saying which was applied to a Conquered
Party under Fire, and Sword, might have been spoken to all Mankind. That Man is
in some Sense, out of Danger, that is out of Hope. He that would Fear nothing,
should Consider, that if he fears Any thing, he must fear Every thing. Our very
Meat, and Drink, Sleeping, and Waking, without Measure, are Hurtful to us. Our
Bodies are Nice, and Weak; and a Small Matter does their Work. That Man has too
high an Opinion of himself, that is only afraid of Thunder, and of
Earthquakes. If he were Conscious of his own Infirmities, he would as much
fear the being Choked with his own Phlegm. What do we see in our Selves, that
Heaven, and Earth should join in a Distemper to Procure our Dissolution; when
the Ripping of a Hangnail is sufficient to Dispatch us? We are Afraid of
Inundations from the Sea, when a Glass of Wine, if it goes the wrong way, is
Enough to Suffocate us. It is a great Comfort in Death, the very Mortality it
self. We creep under Ground for fear of Thunder; we dread the sudden
Concussions of the Earth, and the Rages of the Sea, when yet we carry Death in
our Own Veins; and it is at hand in all Places, and at all Times. There is
nothing so little, but it is of Force enough to bring us to our Last End. Nay,
so far should we be from dreading an Eminent Fate, more than a Vulgar, that on
the Contrary, since Dye we must, we should rather Rejoice in the Breathing of
our Last, under a more Glorious Circumstance. What if the Ground stand still
within its bounds, and without any Violence? I shall have it over me at Last;
and it is all one to me, whether I be laid under That, or That lays it Self
over me: But, it is a Terrible thing for the Earth to gape, and swallow a Man
up into a Profound Abyss: And what then? Is Death any Easier Above Ground? What
cause have I of Complaint, if Nature will do me the honor to Cover me with a
Part of her Self? Since we must Fall, there is a Dignity in the very Manner of
it, when the World it self is Shocked for Company. Not that I would wish for a
Public Calamity; but it is some Satisfaction in my Death, that I see the World
also to be Mortal.

Neither are we to take these Extraordinary Revolutions for Divine Judgments;
as if such Motions of the Heavens, and of the Earth, were the Denouncings of
the Wrath of the Allmighty: but they have their Ordinate, and their Natural
Causes: Such as, in Proportion, we have in our own Bodies; and while they seem
to Act a Violence, they Suffer it. But yet for want of knowing the Causes of
things, they are Dreadful to us; and the more so, because they happen but
seldom. But why are we commonly more Afraid of that which we are not Used to?
Because we look upon Nature with our Eyes, not with our Reason: Rather
Computing what she Usually Does, than what she is Able to do. And we are
Punished for this Negligence, by taking those things to which we are not
Wonted, to be New, and Prodigious. The Eclipses of the Sun, and Moon, Blazing
Stars, and Meteors, while we Admire them, we Fear them; and since we Fear them,
because we do not Understand them, it is worth our while to Study them, that we
may no longer Fear them. Why should I fear a Man, a Beast, an Arrow, or a
Lance, when I am exposed to the Encounter of Greater Dangers? We are Assaulted
by the Nobler parts of Nature it self; by the Heavens, by the Seas, and the
Land. Our Business is therefore to Defy Death, whether Extraordinary, or
Common. No matter for the Menaces of it, so long as it Asks no more of us than
Age it self will take from us; and every petty Accident that befalls us. He
that Contemns Death, What does he Care for either Fire, or Water; the very
Dissolution of the Universe? or if the Earth should Open Under him, and show
him all the Secrets of the Infernal Pit, He would look Down without Trouble. In
the Place that we are all of us to go to, there are no Earthquakes, or
Thunderclaps; no Tempestuous Seas; Neither War, nor Pestilence. Is it a Small
Matter? Why do we fear it then? Is it a Great Matter? Let it rather once fall
upon us, then always hang over us. Why should I dread my Own End, when I know
that an End I must have, and that all Created things are Limited.

EPIST. XXIV. A Discourse of Gods Providence, in the Misfortunes of Good Men in
this World, and in the Prosperity of the Wicked.
YOu are troubled, I perceive, that your Servant is run away from you; but I do
not hear yet that you are either Robbed, or Strangled, or Poisoned, or
Betrayed, or Accused by him: So that you have escaped well, in Comparison with
your Fellows. And, Why should you complain then; especially under the
Protection of so gracious a Providence as suffers no Man to be miserable but by
his own Fault? Nor is this a Subject worthy of a wise Man's Consideration.
Adversity indeed is a terrible thing in Sound, and Opinion; and that is all.
Some Men are Banished, and stripped of their Estates; Others again are Poor, in
Plenty; (which is the basest sort of Beggary.) Some are overborn by a Popular
Tumult, that breaks out like a Tempest, even in the highest security of a Calm;
Or like a Thunderclap, that frights all that are near it: There is but One
Struck, perhaps, but the Fear extends to all, and affects those that May
Suffer, as well as those that Do. As in the Discharge of a Piece only with
Powder; It Is not the Stroke, but the Crack, that frights the Birds. Adversity,
I Will grant you, is not a thing to be wished; no more than War; but, if it be my
Lot to be Torn with the Stone, Broken upon the Wheel, or to receive Wounds, or
Maims; It shall be my Prayer, that I may bear my Fortune as becomes a Wise, and
an Honest Man. We do not Pray for Tortures, but for Patience; nor for War, but
for Generosity and Courage, in all the Extremities of War, if it happens.
Afflictions are but the Exercise of Virtue; and an Honest Man is out of his
Element, when he is Idle. It must be Practice, and Patience, that Perfects it.
Do we not see see how one Wrestler provokes another? And if he find him not to
be his Match, he will call for some Body to help him, that may put him to all
his strength.

It is a Common Argument against the Justice of Providence, in the matter of
Reward, and Punishment; the Misfortunes of Good Men in this World, and the
Prosperity of the Wicked: But, it is an easy matter to vindicate the Cause of
the Gods. There are many things that we call Evil, which turn very often to the
Advantage of those that suffer them; or at least, for the Common Good, whereof
Providence has the greater Care. And further; they either befall those that
bear them willingly, or those that deserve them by their Impatience under them:
And Lastly, they come by Divine Appointment; and to those that are Good Men,
even for that very Reason, because they are Good. Nor is there any thing more
Ordinary, than for that which we feared as a Calamity, to prove the Foundation
of our Happiness. How many are there in the World that enjoy all things to
their Own Wish, whom God never thought worthy of a Trial? If it might be
imagined, that the Allmighty should take off his Thought from the Care of his
Whole Work, What more Glorious Spectacle could he reflect upon, than a Valiant
Man Struggling with Adverse Fortune: Or Cato's Standing Upright, and Unmoved,
under the Shock of a Public Ruin? Let the Whole World (says he) fall into one
hand, and let Caesar encompass me with his Legions by Land, his Shipping at
Sea, and his Guards at the Gates; Cato will yet cut out his way; and with That
Weapon that was untainted, even in the Civil War, give himself that Liberty,
which Fate denied to his Country. Set upon the great Work then, and deliver
thy self from the Clog of thy Humanity. Juba, and Petreius have already done
the good office One for the Other, by a Generous Concurrence of Resolution, and
Fate; but Cato is above Example, and does as much scorn to ask his Death of any
Man, as his Life. With what Joy did this Great Man Contemplate Immortality;
when he took his Book, and his Sword together; and, in Cold Thoughts dispatched
himself? Let this suffice of Cato, whose Virtue Providence made use of to Cope
with all the Powers of the Earth. His Courage took delight in, and sought for
all Occasions of Hazard; keeping his Eye still upon the End, without valuing
the Difficulties of the Passage. The Sufferance is one Part of the Glory; and
though one Man may escape without Wounds, yet he is still more Reverend, and
Bemarkable, that comes off Bloody. The Malice of Great Men is grievous, you will
say; and yet he Supported the Oppositions of Pompey, Caesar, and Crassus. Is it
troublesome to be Repulsed. Vatinius was preferred before him. Prosperity shows
a Man but one part of Humane Nature. No Body knows what such a Man is good for:
Neither in truth does he understand himself, for want of Experiment. Temporal
Happiness is for weak, and Vulgar Minds, but, the subduing of Public Terrors
is a Work that is reserved for more Generous Spirits. Calamity is the
Touchstone of a Brave Mind, that resolves to Live, and Dye Free, and Master of
it self The Combatant brings no Metal into the Field, that was never Battered:
He that has lost Blood, and yet keeps his Stomach; he that has been under his
Enemy, and worsted, and yet comes on again, and gathers heart from his
Misfortunes; That Is the Man of Hope, and Courage.

But, Is it not a very Unjust, and a Rigorous Fate, that Good Men should be
Poor, and Friendless? All this is no more than the Natural Work of Matter, and
Form. Mean Souls are meanly Principled: But, there goes more to the making up
of a Brave Man, that is to work out his way through Difficulties and Storms. We
are condemned to Terrible Encounters; and because we cannot, according to the
Course of Nature, Avoid them, we have Faculties given us, that will Enable us
to Bear them: Or at the worst, we have a Retreat; If we will not fight, we may
fly. So that nothing is made more Easy to us, than that which is most
Necessary to us, to Dye. No Man is kept in the World against his Will. But
Adversity is the Better for us all; for, it is Gods Mercy, to show the World
their Errors, and that the things they Fear, and Covet, are neither Good, nor
Evil; being the Common and promiscuous Lot both of Good Men, and Bad. If they
were Good, only the Good should enjoy them: And if Bad, only the Wicked should
suffer them. One Man is taken away in a Scuffle for a Wench, and another in the
Defense of his Country; and we find Silver, and Gold, both in a Temple, and in
the Stews.

Now to show you, that the Virtue which I affect, is not so Imaginary, and
Extravagant, as it is taken to be, I will allow a Wise Man to Tremble, to turn
Pale; nay, and to Groan too: And to suffer all the Affections of his Bodily
Sense, provided that he keep his Mind Firm, and Free from submission to his
Body; and that he do not Repent of his Constancy, (which is, in it self, so
great a Virtue, that there is some Authority, even in a pertinacious Error.) If
the Body may be brought by Exercise, to the Contempt of Bruises, and Wounds,
How much more easily then may the Mind be Fortified against the Assaults of
Fortune; And though perhaps thrown down, and Trod upon, yet Recover it self?
The Body must have Meat and Drink, much Labor, and Practice; whereas the Food,
and the Business of the Mind is within it self; and Virtue is maintained
without either Toil, or Charge. If you say, That many Professors of Wisdom are
wrought upon by Menaces, and Mischiefs, these, let me tell you, are but
Proficients, and not as yet arrived at the State of Wisdom. They are not strong
enough to practice what they know. It is with our Dispositions, as with our
Clothes: They will take some Colors at One Dipping: But others must be steeped
over and over before they will Imbibe them. And so for Disciplines; they must
Soke, and lie long before they take the Tincture. No Man can receive an Injury,
and not be moved at it: But yet he may keep himself Free from Perturbations;
and so far from being troubled at them, that he may make use of them for the
Experiment, and Trial of his Virtue; keeping himself still moderate, Placid
Cheerful, and Safe in a Profound quiet; and Fixed in his Station. But if a Wise
Man cannot be Poor; How comes it that he is many times without either Meat,
Drink, Clothes, or Lodging? If only Fools are Mad, How comes it then, that
Wise Men have their Alienations of Mind, and talk as Idly in a Fever as other
people? It Is one thing, the Receiving of an Injury, and another thing, the
Conceiving of an Indignation for it: It is the Body in This Case that suffers,
(which is the Fools Part) but not the Mind. That Man is never the worse Pilot
that by foul weather is forced beside his Business. When a Ship springs a Leak,
we do not presently quarrel either with the Mariners, or with the Vessel. But,
some to the Pump, others into the Hold, to keep the Ship above Water. And if we
cannot absolutely Master it, we must still work on; For it is then a great
point gained, if we can but keep it at a stay. Some Men are strangely
Transported at the Insolence of the Porter that refuses to let them into a
Great Man's House. They forget that the door of a Prison is more strictly
guarded than that of a Palace. He that has Business must pay for his Passage,
and Sweeten him, as he would do a Churlish Curr with a Sop. That which is to be
Sold, is to be Bought: He Is a weak Man, that rates himself according to the
Civility of a Slave. Let him have a Reverence for himself, and then no matter
who despises him. What if he should break his Staff, or Cause his Master to
turn him away, or to correct, him? He that Contends, supposes an Equality; and
even when he has got the better of him, admits that there Was one. What if he
should receive a Blow? Cato (the greatest Man of his Age) did not only Forgive
it, but Forget it.

It Is not to say, That This, or That is Tolerable to a Wise Man, or
Intolerable: If We do not totally subdue Fortune, Fortune Overcomes Us. It is
the Foundation of a Happy Life, for a Man to depend upon himself; but an
Absolute Tranquillity of Mind, and a Freedom from Errors, must be the Business
of another World.

EPIST. XXV. A Wise, and a Good Man is Proof against all Accidents. Of Fate.
THe Book you promised me is now come to my hand; and I opened it with an
Intent to read it over at Leisure. But, when I was once in, I could not lay it
down again, till I had gone through with it. At Present I shall only tell you,
that I am exceedingly pleased with the Choice of the Subject: but I am
Transported with the Spirit, and Gentleness of it. You shall hear farther from
me upon a Second Reading; and you need not fear the hearing of the Truth, for
your Goodness leaves a Man no place for flattery. I find you still to be one
and the same Man, which is a great Matter; and only proper to a Wise Man: for
fools are Various: One while Thrifty, and Grave; Another while Profuse, and
Vain. Happy is the Man that sets himself Right at first, and cntinues so to the
End. All Fools, we say, are Mad Men, though they are not all of them in Bed^am.
We find some at the Bar, some upon the Bench, and not a few even in the Senate
it self. One Man's Folly is sad; Another, Wanton; and a Third's is Busy, and
Impertinent. A Wise man carries all his Treasure within himself: What Fortune
Gives, she may Take; but he leaves nothing at her Mercy. He Stands Firm, and
keeps his Ground against all Misfortunes, without so much as Changing
Countenance. He is Free, Inviolable, Unshaken; Proof against all Accidents; and
not only Invincible, but Inflexible. So long as he cannot Lose any thing of his
own, he never troubles himself for what is Another. He is a Friend to
Providence, and will not murmur at any thing that comes to pass by Gods
Appointment. He is not only Resolute, but Generous, and Good Natured; and ready
to lay down his Life in a Good Cause; and for the Public Safety, to Sacrifice
his Own. He does not so much consider the Pleasure of his Life, as the Need
that the World has of him: And he is not so Nice neither, as to be weary of his
Life, while he may either serve his Wife, or his Friends. Nor is it all, that
his Life is Profitable to Them; but, it is likewise Delightful to Himself, and
carries its own Reward; for, What can be more Comfortable, than to be so Dear
to Another, as for that very Reason to become Dearer to Himself. If he Loses a
Child, he is Pensive; he is Compassionate to the Sick, and only Troubled, when
he sees Men wallowing in Infamy, and Vice. Whereas, on the Other side, you
shall see nothing but Restlessness; One Man Hankering after his Neighbors Wife;
Another in Pain about his Own; A Third in Grief for a Repulse; Another a^ much
out of humor for his Success. If He loses an Estate, he parts with it as a
thing that was only Adventitious. Or if it was of his own acquiring, he
computes the Possession, and Loss; and says thus to himself, I shall live as
well afterward, as I did before. Our Houses, (says he) may be Burnt, or Robbed;
Our Lands taken from us; and we can call nothing our Own, that is under the
Dominion of Fortune. It is a Foolish Avarice, that restrains all things to a
Propriety; and believes nothing to be a Man's Own, that is Public. Whereas a
Wise Man judges Nothing so much his Own, as That wherein Mankind is allowed a
share. It is not with the Blessings of Providence, as it is with a Dole; where
every Man receives so much a Head; but every Man there has All. That which we
Eat, and either Give, or Receive with the Hand, may be broken into Parts: But
Peace, and Freedom of Mind are not to be Divided. He that has First cast off
the Empire of Fortune, needs not fear that of Great Men, for they are but
Fortunes Hands; nor was any man ever broken by Adversity, that was not first
betrayed by Prosperity. But, What signifies Philosophy, you will say, if there
be a Fa^e; If we be Governed by Fortune, or some overruling Power? For
Certainti^ are Unchangeable, and there is no Providing against Uncertainties. If
what I shall Do, and Resolve, be already Determined, What use of Philosophy?
Yes, great Use; for, taking all this for granted, Philosophy Instructs, and
Advises us to obey God, and to follow him Willingly; to oppose Fortune
Resolutely, and to Bear all Accidents.

Fate is an Irrevocable, an Invincible, and an Unchangable Decree; a Necessity
of all Things, and Actions, according to Eternal Appointment. Like the Course
of a River, it moves forward, without Contradiction, or Delay, in an
Irresistible Flux, where one Wave pushes on another. He knows little of God,
that Imagines it may be Controlled. There is no Changing of the Purpose even of
a Wise Man. For he sees beforehand what will be best for the Future. How much
more Unchangeable then is the Allmighty, to whom all Futurity is always
Present? To what end then is it, if Fate be Inexorable, to offer up Prayers,
and Sacrifices, any further, than to relieve the Scruples, and the Weaknesses
of Sickly Minds? My Answer is, First. That the Gods take no Delight in the
Sacrifices of Beasts, or in the Images of Gold, and Silver, but in a Pious, and
Obedient Will. And Secondly That by Prayers, and Sacrifices, Dangers, and
Afflictions may be sometimes Removed; sometimes Lessened; other whiles
Deferred: and all this without any Offense to the Power, or Necessity of Fate.
There are some things which Providence has left so far in Suspense, that they
seem to be, (in a manner) Conditional; in such sort, that even Appearing Evils
may, upon our Prayers, and Supplications, be turned into Goods. Which is so far
from being against Fate, that it is even a Part of Fate it self. You will say,
That either This shall come to Pass, or not. If the Former, It will be the same
thing if we do not Pray: And if the Other, it will be the same thing if we do.
To this I must Reply; That the Proposition is False, for want of the Middle
Exception betwixt the One, and the Other. This will be, (say I;) that is, if
there shall any Prayers Interpose in the Case. But then do they Object on the
Other side. That this very thing also is Necessary; for it is likewise
determined by Fate, either that we shall Pray, or not. What if I should now
grant you, that there is a Fate also even in our very Prayers? A Determination
that we shall Pray; and that therefore we shall Pray? It is Decreed that a Man
shall be Eloquent: But, upon Condition, that he apply himself to Letters. By
the same Fate it is Decreed, that he shall so apply himself, and that therefore
he shall learn. Such a Man shall be Rich, if he betake himself to Navigation.
But, the same Fate that promises him a great Estate, appoints also that he
shall Sail, and therefore he puts to Sea. It is the same Case in Expiations. A
Man shall Avoid Dangers, if he can, by his Prayers, avoid the threatenings of
Divine Vengeance. But this is Part of his Fate also, that he shall so do, and
therefore he does it. These Arguments are made use of, to Prove, that there is
nothing left to our Will, but that we are all Overruled by Fatalities. When we
come to handle that Matter, we shall show the Consistency of Free Will with
Fate, having already made it appear, that notwithstanding the Certain order of
Fate, Judgments may be Averted by Prayers, and Supplications: And, without any
Repugnancy to Fate; for they are part even of the Law of Fate it self. You will
say Perhaps, What am I the better for the Priest, or the Prophet; for whether
he bid^ me Sacrifice, or no, I lie under the necessity of doing it? Yes, in
this I am the better for it, as he is the Minister of Fate. We may as well say,
that it is Matter of Fate, that we are in Health; and yet we are indebted for
it to the Physician; because the Benefit of that Fate is conveyed to us by his
Hand.

EPIST. XXVI. All things are Produced out of Cause, and Matter. Of Providence.
A Brave Man is a Match for Fortune.
I Had yesterday but the one Half of it to my Self; My Distemper took up the
Morning; the Afternoon was my Own. My First Trial was, how far I could endure
Reading: and when I saw I could bear That, I fell to Writing: and pitched upon
a Subject Difficult enough, for it required great Intention; but yet I was
resolved not to be Overcome. Some of my Friends coming in, told me, that I did
Ill; and took me off: So that from Writing, we passed into Discourse; and made
you the Judge of the Matter in Question; The Stoics, you know, will have all
things to be Produced out of (...) and Matter. The Matter is Dull, and (...)
sive; Susceptible of any thing, but (...) Capable of Doing any thing it Sel^
(...) Cause is that Power that Form^ (...) Matter, this or that way, at
Pleasure. Some thing there must be, of which every thing is Made; and then
there must be a Workman to Form every thing. All Art is but an Imitation of
Nature; and that which I speak in General of the World, holds in the Case of
every Particular Person. As for Example. The Matter of a Statue is the Wood,
the Stone, or the Marble; the Statuary shapes it, and is the Cause of it.
Aristotle assigns Four Causes to every thing. The Material; which is the Sine
qua non (or That without which It could not be.) The Efficient; as the
Workman. The Formal; as That which is stamped upon all Operations; and the
Final; which is the Design of the whole Work. Now to explain This. The First
Cause of the Statue (for the Purpose) is the Copper; For it had never been
made, if there had not been something to work upon. The Second, is the
Artificer, for if he had not understood his Art, it had never Succeeded. The
Third Cause is the Form; For it could never properly have been the Statue of
such, or such a Person; if such a Resemblance had not been put upon it. The
Fourth Cause is the End of making it, without which it had never been made: As
Money, if it were made for Sale; Glory, if the Workman made it for his Credit;
or Religion, if he designed the Bestowing of it upon a Temple. Plato adds a
Fifth, which he calls the Idea, or the Exemplar, by which the Workman draws his
Copy. And he makes God to be full of these Figures, which he represents to be
Inexhaustible, Unchangable, and Immortal. Now, upon the whole Matter, give us
your Opinion. To me it seems, that here are either too many Causes assigned, or
too few; and they might as well have Introduced Time, and Place, as some of the
rest. Either Clear the Matter in Question; or deal Plainly, and tell us that
you cannot: And so let us return to those Cases, wherein all Mankind is agreed,
the Reforming of our Lives, and the Regulation of our Manners. For these
Subtilties are but time lost. Let us search our selves in the first Place, and
afterward the World.

There Is no great Hurt in passing over those things which we are never the
better for, when we know; and, it is so ordered by Providence, that there is no
great difficulty in Learning, or Acquiring those things, which may make us
either Happier, or Better. Beside that, whatsoever is Hurtful to us, we have
drawn out of the very Bowels of the Earth.

Every Man knows, without Telling, that this Wonderful Fabric of the Universe
is not without a Governor; and that a Constant Order cannot be the Work of
Chance: For the Parts would then fall foul one upon another. The Motions of the
Stars, and their Influences, are Acted by the Command of an Eternal Decree. It
is by the Dictate of an Allmighty Power, that the Heavy Body of the Earth hangs
in Balance. Whence comes the Revolution of Seasons, and the Flux of Rivers?
The wonderful virtue of the smallest Seeds? (as an Oak to arise from an Acorn.)
To say nothing of those things that seem to be most Irregular, and Uncertain;
as Clouds, Rain, Thunder, the Eruptions of Fire out of Mountains, Earthquakes,
and those Tumultuary Motions in the Lower Region of the Air, which have their
Ordinate Causes; And so have those things too, which appear to us more
Admirable, because less Frequent. As, Scalding Fountains, and New Islands
started out of the Sea: Or, What shall we say of the Ebbing, and Flowing of the
Ocean; the Constant Times, and Measures of the Tides, according to the Changes
of the Moon that Influences moist Bodies? But this needs not; For, it is not
that we Doubt of Providence, but Complain of it. And it were a good Office to
Reconcile Mankind to the Gods, who are undoubtedly Best to the Best. It is
against Nature that Good should hurt Good. A Good Man is not only the Friend
of God, but the very Image, the Disciple, and the Imitator of him, and the true
Child of his Heavenly Father. He is true to himself; and Acts with Constancy,
and Resolution. Scipio, by a Cross Wind, being forced into the Power of his
Enemies; cast himself upon the Point of his Sword; and, as the People were
enquiring, what was become of the General; The General (says Scipio) is very
well, and so he expired. What is it for a Man to Fall, if we consider the End,
beyond which no Man Can Fall? We must repair to Wisdom for Arms against
Fortune; for it were unreasonable for her to furnish Arms against her self. A
Gallant Man is Fortunes Match: His Courage Provokes, and Despises those
terrible Appearances, that would otherwise Enslave us. A Wise Man is out of the
Reach of Fortune, but not Free from the Malice of it; and all Attempts upon him
are no more than Xerxes his Arrows; they may darken the Day; but they cannot
Strike the Sun. There is nothing so Holy, as to be Priviledg'd from Sacrilege.
But, to Strike, and not to Wound, is Anger Lost; and he is Invulnerable that is
Struck, and not Hurt. His Resolution is tried; the Waves may dash themselves
upon a Rock, but not Break it: Temples may be Profaned, and Demolished; but the
Deity still remains untouched.

EPIST. XXVII. Some Traditions of the Ancients concerning Thunder, and
Lightning; with the Authors Contemplations Thereupon.
THere is no question, but that Providence has given to Mortals the Tokens, or
Forerunners of things to Come; and by those means, laid open, in some
measure, the Decrees of Fate: Only we take Notice of some things, without
giving any heed to Others. There is not any thing done, according to the Course
of Nature, which is not either the Cause, or the Sign of something that
follows: So that wheresoever there is Order, there is place for Prediction. But
there is no judgment to be given upon Accidents. Now, though it is a very hard
matter to arrive at the Foreknowledge of things to come, and to predict
particularly what shall hereafter fall out, Upon a Certain Knowledge of the
Power, and Influences of the Stars: It is yet unquestionable, that they have a
Power, though we cannot expressly say what it is. In the Subject of Thunder,
there are several Opinions, as to the significations of it. The Stoics hold,
that because the Cloud is Broken, therefore the Bolt is shot ( according to
Common Speech.) Others Conjecture, that the Cloud is broken to that very End,
that it may discharge the Thunderbolt, referring all in such sort to God, as
if the signification did not arise from the thing done, but as if the thing it
self were done for the signification sake: But, whether the signification goes
before, or follows, it comes all to the same Point. There are Three sorts of
Lightning; the First is so pure, and subtle, that it pierces through
whatsoever it Encounters. The Second Shatters, and Breaks every thing to
pieces: the Other Burns; either by Blasting, Consuming, Inflaming, or
Discoloring, and the like. Some Lightnings are Monitory; Some are M^nacing,
and others they Phansy to be Promising. They Allot to Jupiter Three Sorts; the
First is only Monitory, and Gentle, which he casts of his own Accord; The
Second they make to be an Act of Counsel, as being done by the Vote, and Advice
of Twelve Gods. This, they say, does many times some Good, but not without some
Mischief too. As the Destruction of One Man may prove the Caution of another.
The Third is the Result of a Council of the Superior Deities; from whence
proceed great Mischiefs, both Public, and Private. Now, this is a great Folly
to Imagine, that Jupiter would wreak his Displeasure upon Pillars, Trees, nay,
upon Temples themselves, and yet let the Sacrilegious go Free: To strike Sheep,
and Consume Altars, and all this, upon a Consultation of the Gods; as if he
wanted either Skill, or Justice, to Govern his own Affairs by himself; either
in Sparing the Guilty, o^ in Destroying the Innocent. Now, What should be the
Mystery of all this? The Wisdom of our Forefathers found it necessary to keep
Wicked People in Awe, by the Apprehension of a Superior Power; And to Fright
them into their good Behavior, by the Fear of an Armed, and an Avenging
Justice over their Heads. But, How comes it, that the Lightning which comes
from Jupiter himself, should be said to be harmless; and That which he casts,
upon Counsel, and Advice, to be so Dangerous, and Mortal? The Moral of it is
This. That all Kings, should, after Jupiters Example, do all Good by
themselves. And when Severity is Necessary, permit That to be done by Others:
Beside that, as Crimes are Unequal, so also should be the Punishments. Neither
did they believe That Jupiter to be the Thunderer, whose Image was worshipped in
the Capitol, and in other Places; but intended it of the Maker, and Governor of
the Universe, by what Name soever we shall call him. Now, in truth, Jupiter
does not Immediately cast the Lightning himself; but leaves Nature to her
Ordinary Method of Operation; so that what he does not Immediately by himself,
he does yet Cause to be done; For, whatsoever Nature does, God does. There may
be something gathered out of all things, that are either said, or done, that a
Man may be the better for: And he does a greater thing that Masters the Fear of
Thunder, than he that discovers the Reason of it. We are Surrounded, and Beset
with Ill Accidents, and since we cannot avoid the stroke of them, let us
prepare our selves honestly to bear them. But, How must that be? By the
Contempt of Death we do also Contemn all things in the way to it; as Wounds,
Shipwracks, the Fury of Wild Beasts, or any other violence whatsoeever; which,
at the worst, can but part the Soul, and the Body. And, we have this for our
Comfort, though our Lives are at the Mercy of Fortune, she has yet no power
over the Dead.

How many are there that call for Death in the Distress of their Hearts, even
for the very Fear of it? And, this Unadvised Desire of Death, does, in Common,
affect both the best, and the worst of Men; only with this Difference, the
Former Despise Life, and the other are Weary of it.

It Is a Nauseous thing to serve the Body, and to be so many years a doing so
many Beastly things, over and over. It is well, if in our Lives, we can please
Others; but, whatever we do, in our Deaths, let us be sure to please our
selves. Death is a thing which no Care can avoid; no Felicity can Tame it; no
Power Overcome it. Other things are Disposed of by Chance, and Fortune; but,
Death treats all Men alike.

The Prosperous must Dye, as well as the Unfortunate; and, methinks the very
Despair of overcoming our Fate, should inspire us with Courage to Encounter it:
For, there is no Resolution so Obstinate, as that which arises from Necessity.
It makes a Coward as bold as Julius Caesar, though upon different Principles.
We are all of us reserved for Death; and, as Nature brings forth One
Generation, she Calls back Another. The whole Dispute is, about the Time, but
no body doubts about the Thing it self.

EPIST. XXVIII. A Contemplation of Heaven, and Heavenly Things. Of God; and of
the Soul.
THere is a great Difference betwixt Philosophy, and other Arts; and a greater
yet, betwixt That Philosophy it self, which is of Divine Contemplation, and
That which has a regard to things here Below. It is much Higher, and Braver; It
takes a Larger Scope; and being unsatisfied with what it sees, it aspires to
the Knowledge of something that is Greater, and Fairer, and which Nature has
placed out of our Ken. The One only teaches us what is to be done upon Earth;
the Other reveals to us That which Actually is done in Heaven: The One
discusses our Errors; and holds the Light to us, by which we distinguish in the
Ambiguities of Life; the Other Surmounts that Darkness which we are wrapped up
in, and carries us up to the Fountain of Light it self. And then it is that we
are in a special manner to acknowledge the Infinite Grace, and Bounty of the
Nature of things; when we see it, not only where it is Public, and Common; but
in the very secrets of it; as being admitted into the Cabinet of the Divinity
it self. There it is that we are taught to understand what is the Matter of the
World; who is the Author, and Preserver of it. What God himself is; and whether
he be wholly Intent upon Himself; or at any time descends to Consider Us.
Whether he has done his work once for all; or whether he be still in Action:
Whether he be a Part of the World, or the World it self: Whether he be at
Liberty, or no, to determine any thing anew to day, and to Control, or
Derogate from the Law of Fate. Whether it be any Diminution of his Wisdom, or
any Confession of Error, to Do, and Undo. Or to have made things that were
afterward to be altered: For, the same things must of Necessity always please
him, who can never be pleased, but with that which is Best. Now, this is no
Lessening, either of his Liberty, or of his Power; for he himself is his own
Necessity. Without the Benefit, and the Comfort of these Thoughts, it had been
even as well for us never to have been Born. For, to what end do we Live? Is it
only to Eat, and to Drink? To Stuff up an Infirm, and Fluid Carcass, that would
Perish without it; and to live only a Servant to one that is Sick? To Fear
Death, to which we are all Born? Take away this Inestimable Good, and Life it
self is not worth the Labor, and the Care of it. Oh! how wretched, how
Contemptible a thing were Man, if he should not advance himself above the State
of Humane Affairs? So long as we struggle with our Passions, What is there in
This World that we do, which is Glorious? Nay, if we advance our selves so far
as to Overcome them; It is but the destroying of so many Monsters. And, Have we
not then a mighty Exploit to value our selves upon, when we have made our
selves a little more Tolerable than the Worst of Men? Is it not a wondrous
matter to brag of, that we are a little stronger than a Man that is Sick?
Alas! Alas! My Friend, there is a large Difference betwixt Strength, and
Health. You have not a Wicked Mind perhaps; you may have a Clear Brow, a Tongue
that will not Flatter, and a Single Heart: You have not That Avarice perchance,
that refuses to it self whatsoever it takes from other people; nor That Luxury,
that squanders away Money Shamefully, and yet more shamefully repaires it: Nor
that Ambition, that leads you by Unworthy Ways to places of Preferment. These
are only Negatives; and you have Got nothing all this while. You will tell me,
that* you have escaped many things: But you have not yet Escaped your ^elf. The
Virtue that we recommend is High, and Illustrious. Not that it is a Happiness
in it self, to be Free from Evil: but because it Dignifies, and Enlarges the
Mind; Because it prepares it for the Knowledge of Heavenly Things, and makes it
Capable even of Conversing with God Himself. It is then arrived at the highest
Pitch of Humane Felicity; when it soars Aloft, and enters into the Privacies of
Nature, trampling all that is Evil, or Vulgar, under its Feet. What a Delight,
what a Transport is it, for a Soul that is wandering among the Stars; to look
down, and Laugh at the Palaces of Princes, and the whole Globe of the Earth,
with all its Treasures? I do not speak of That only that is converted into
Money, and Plate, but of That also which is reserved in the Bowels of the Earth,
to gratify the Insatiable Covetousness of Posterity. Nor can we ever bring our
selves to the Absolute Contempt of Luxurious Ornaments; Rich Furniture; Stately
Buildings, Pleasant Gardens, and Fountains; till we have the World Under us,
and till looking down from the Heavens, and beholding That Spot of Ground we
Live upon; (the Greater Part of it Covered with the Sea; beside a great deal of
it Desolate, and either Scorched, or Frozen) we shall say Thus to our selves.
Is This Miserable Point the Ball of Contention, that is divided among so many
Nations with Fire, and Sword? How Ridiculous are the Bounds, as well as the
Contests of Mortals! Such a Prince must not pass such a River; nor another
Prince those Mountains; and, Why do not the very Pismires Canton out their
Posts, and Jurisdictions too? For, What does the Bustle of Troops, and Armies
amount to, more, than the business of a Swarm of Ants upon a Molehill? The
Scene of all the Important Actions here Below, where, both at Sea, and Land, we
Tug, and Scuffle for Dominion, and Wealth, is but a wretched Point of Earth;
Whereas the Dominions of the Soul Above, are Boundless. This very Contemplation
gives us Force, Liberty, and Nourishment; The Mind is There, at Home: And it
has This Argument of its Divinity, that it takes Delight in what is Divine. It
Contemplates the Rising, and the Falling of the Stars, and the Admirable
Harmony of Order, even in their Various Motions: Discussing, and Enquiring into
every thing, as properly appertaining unto it self. With how much scorn does it
then Reflect upon the Narrowness of its Former Habitation? There it is, that it
learns the End of its Proper Being; the Knowledge of God. And, What is God? An
Immense, and an Allmighty Power: Great, without Limits; and he does whatsoever
pleases him: He that applies himself to This Study, Trans^ends the very Lot,
and Condition of his Mortality. That Allmighty Power is all that we do see, and
all that we do not see. What is the difference betwixt the Divine Nature, and
Ours? Man is Compounded; and his best part is his Mind: But, the Allmighty is
All Mind, and all Reason; and yet Mortals are so Blind, that the Actions of
this Incomprehensible Power, so excellent for Beauty, Constancy, and
Disposition, are looked upon by many Men only as Fortuitous, and the Work of
Chance: And subject to all the Tumults of Thunder, Clouds, and Tempests, that
affect poor Mortals. And, this is not only the Folly, and Madness of the Common
People; but the Weakness also of Wise Men. There are, that arrogate to
Themselves, the Faculties of Providence, and Reason, and the Skill of
Disposing, as well Other Peoples Affairs, as their Own: And yet these very Men
are so besotted, as to imagine, the World only to be Governed by an Unadvised
Rashness: As if Nature knew not what she did* How Profitable would it be for
Us, to know the Truth of Things, and to allow them their due Terms, and
Measures? To enquire into the Power of the Allmighty, and the Method of his
Workings; Whether he made the Matter it self, or found it ready to his hand;
and whether was First, the Matter it Self, or the Idea of it? Whether or no he
does what he pleases; and what may be the Reason of so many seeming
Imperfections in his Operations? It is well said of Aristotle, that we should
handle Divine Matters with Modesty, and Reverence. When we enter into a Temple,
or approach the Altar; we compose our Looks, and our Actions to all the
Decencies of Humility, and Respect. How much more then does it concern us, when
we treat of Heavenly things, To deal heartily; and not to let one Syllable pass
our Lips that* may Savor of Confidence, Rashness, or Ignorance? Truth lies
deep, and must be fetched up at Leisure. How many Mysteries are there, which
God has placed our of our ^ight; and which are only to be reached by Thought,
and Contemplation! The Notions of the Divinity are Profound, and Obscure* or
else perhaps we see them without understanding them. But, the Divine Majesty is
only Accessible to the Mind. What This is (without which Nothing is) we are not
able to Determine: And, when we have guessed at some Sparks of it, the greatest
part lies yet concealed from us. How many Creatures have we now in this Age,
that never were known to us before? And, How many more will the next Age know
more than we do? And many yet will be still reserved for After times. The very
Rites of Religion are at this day a Secret, and unknown to many People. Nay,
the very thing that we most eagerly pursue, we are not yet arrived at: That is
to say; a Perfection in Wickedness. Vice is still upon the Emprovement: Luxury,
Immodesty, and a Prostitute Dissolution of Manners finds still new Matter to
work upon. Our Men are grown Effeminate in their Habits, in their Motions, and
in their Ornaments, even to the Degree of Whorishness. There Is no body minds
Philosophy, but for want of a Comedy perhaps, or in foul weather, when there is
nothing else to be done.

Postscript.
BEfore I take my Last Leave of Seneca, I will here discharge my Conscience, as
if I were upon my Last Leave with the Whole World. I have been so Just, both
to the Reader, and to the Author, that I have neither Left out any thing in the
Original, which I thought the One might be the Better for, nor Added any thing
of my Own, to make the Other Fare the Worse. I have done in This Volume of
Epistles, as a good Husband does with his Cold Meat; They are only a Hache made
up of the Fragments that remained of the Two Former Parts; which I could not
well dispose of into any Other Form; or so Properly Publish under any Other
Title. Let me not yet be understood to Impose This Piece upon the Public, as
an Abstract of Seneca's Epistles; any more than I did the Other, for the
Abstracts of his Benefits, and Happy Life. It is in works of This Nature, as it
is in Cordial Waters, we Taste all the Ingredients, without being able to
Separate This from That; but still we find the Virtue of every Plant, in every
Drop. To return to my Allegory; Books, and Dishes have This Common Fate; there
was never any One, of Either of them, that pleased All Palates. And, in Truth,
it is a Thing as little to be Wished for, as Expected; For, an Universal
Applause is at least Two Thirds of a Scandal. So that though I deliver up these
Papers to the Press, I Invite no Man to the Reading of them: And, whosoever
Reads, and Repents; it is his Own Fault. To Conclude, as I made this
Composition Principally for my Self, so it agrees exceedingly Well with My
Constitution; and yet, if any Man has a Mind to take part with me, he has Free
Leave, and Welcome. But, let him Carry This Consideration along with him, That
He Is a very Unmannerly Guest, that presses upon another Bodies Table, and then
Quarrels with his Dinner.

The End.

