Sad and Lamentable News FROM VVapping: Giving a true and just Account of a
most horrible and Dreadful Fire, Which happened on Sunday the 19th. of Nov.
1682.

Beginning at the House of one Capt. Allen. in Cinnamon-street, by the
carelessness of a drunken Fellow, a Sawyer, who lodged in the House aforesaid,
and by letting the Candle fall into some Shavings, he proved ruinous to some
Thousands now undone by the out-ragious Flames, which with uncontrollable force
burned down Two Thousand Houses, destroying all before it for a whole Mile in
length, and a quarter of a Mile in breadth, burning down Streets, Lanes,
Allies, Courts, Yards, Wharfs, Cranes, the like never known before since the
great Fire of London. It continued Twenty Hours or more, to the ruin of many
Men's good Estates, besides the loss of forty men's lives, who were destroyed in
endeavoring to assuage the force of this terrible fire.

Also, giving you a particular account of the great losses of several Men,
namely, Sir William Warren, the Lady Ivy, Mr. Hooper, Mr. Hains, Mr. Wilson,
Mr. Jackson; with many hundreds more, too tedious to particularize.

Printed for J. Clarke, Seignior, at the Bible and Harp, near the
Hospital-Gate, in West smithfield, 1682.

Sad and Lamentable News from VVapping, etc.
AMongst the rest of the Punishments inflicted upon us for our Iniquities, as
Sword, Pestilence, and Fire, the last has proved very destructive at several
times, yea, and so frequently, that it now begins to be terrible to our
remembrance, especially when we take Remarques of the direful effects thereof;
But to proceed.
On Sunday November the 19th. 1682. about 9 or 10 of the Clock at night, a most
dreadful and terrible, outrageous and consuming Fire broke out at Wapping, in
Cinnamon-Lane, at the house of one Captain Allen, a person who usually bore
Command at Sea, and by the most true and exact account as we can yet get, but
it is supposed true enough, by the means of a Drunken Fellow, whose senses
being drowned in the superfluity of strong drink, rendered him as much like a
Beast* as it uses to do by all men, who inconsiderately drink to excess; but
he coming home with his mind as careless as his brain witless, and lodging in a
Garret of the aforesaid Captain Allens, he being drowsy and over-loaded with
Liquor, let his Candle fall into some Shavings which were in the Garret, which
immediately took fire, and burnt with such vehemence, that it soon set the
house all on a Flame, and in a moment as it were, consumed that house even to
the very ground, notwithstanding the immediate discovery made by a Boy of about
eight years of Age, and the great Industry of the Neighborhood, who were
extraordinary active to suppress the raging Flame, yet by the strength of the
Wind, which then blew exceeding hard, the Flames increased, and run on with
such violence, that it is scarce imaginable, that all the Inhabitants were put
into a fearful consternation, some of them so affrighted, that they came
running into the street in their shift only; but yet the Fire grew fiercer and
fiercer, and all their endeavors to obstruct or hinder its progression, proved
ineffectual, for by the severity of the Wind it was carried along irresistably,
water being at that time scarce, and the Inhabitants so amazed, that they had
not sense enough to secure what they might, the fire violently running through
3 or 4 houses as it were even at once, destroying all before it, for the
Buildings many of them being old, took fire as it were like Tinder, and run on
for the space of an hour and a half, before any Engines came to the assistance
of the Sufferers, and by the narrowness of the Streets, the Flames had the
advantage of firing on both sides of the way; so that then it became terrible
to behold; at last Engines came, but water being scarce, many of them proved
unserviceable, the Engineirs used their utmost Industry, but to small effect.

And after, by the outrage of these consuming flames, about a hundred houses
were destroyed, it was ordered that Powder should be conveyed thither from the
Tower by Water, which was accordingly done, and Orders were given for blowing
up, so that immediately six houses were Levelled; but the Timber lying in the
way, took fire, and burnt more firecely then before, and so run down in spite
of opposition, to the very Thames fide, which caused the Ships to weigh Anchor,
and stand for the other shore; much damage was sustained, but some of them that
lay nearest the shore had their Shrowds fired; and one amongst the rest, was
fired in her Fore-Castle, but by the double diligence of the Sailers, she was
preserved; but, it is said, that two Seamen hastily getting on Board, fell into
the River, and one of them was lost.

The poor Inhabitants disorderly flying away from the outrage of the fire, and
endeavored to save what they could from the Flame; the Neighboring fields
were overspread with the Goods that hasty removing had much damaged. About One
in the morning the Lifeguard came with Powder, in hopes to Extinguish the
fire, which then was hoped might be conquered, but the Wind rising and turning
into another Quarter, together with the fear of the people, several having been
killed by Timber and the fall of Chimneys, Walls, and other places, the Flame
went on without opposition, fiercely burning toward Shadwel, destroying the
new Buildings that were built after the great Fire, about five or six years
ago; also Store Houses, Warehouses, and Cranes, with great quantities of
Tobacco and Brandy, Wood-yards in abundance were consumed; and not a Cart to be
got for money; and the Tide being low; all hopes of help by Water were
frustrated, so that by eight in the morning 6 or 7 hundred houses were thought
to be burnt, and about twenty blown up, and many more pulled down,
notwithstanding the diligence of the Watermen employed by the Insurers, who
very boldly adventured their lives, hoping to secure the houses Insured.

It is unknown how many people were destroyed by this sad accident, but it is
without doubt there were many, three or four of which lay openly as objects of
pity to the sorrowful beholders, and it is thought about forty more are burnt
and maimed; one was knocked on the head by the fall of some part of a house
which was blown up, and it is yet not known how many lost their lives by this
deplored Fire.

The greater Sufferer, as we are informed, is Sir William Warren, who it is
reported, has lost some hundreds a year, besides what he had Insured. The Lady
Ivey, so much commended both far and near for her great pity and Charity, has
been a considerable sufferer, whose loss is much lamented by the poor, and I
hope by the Rich also. All the Fields belonging to her, and between that and
Stepney, and also up to White Chapel, were covered and filled with the Goods
of those poor and much to be lamented people, who the day before, many of them
thought themselves to be in a happy condition, but now ruined and undone by the
merciless Flame. Besides, several Ships that lay in the River were filled with
Goods, the like, except the great Fire of London, was scarce ever known; and
greater would the loss have been to several Timber-men, if they had not had the
opportunity of saving their Timber by the Water; some do affirm that it began
by the carelessness of the person aforesaid, but it would be well if this might
be a warning to all others to take care of their Candles, lest the product of
their negligence prove fatal and destructive, as this has done, to the utter
ruin of some, and the great detriment of thousands.

We have this account also of one Fellow that was seized, and had several
Fireballs found about him, who was with much difficulty, conveyed to the
Watch-house, and there preserved from the fury of the incensed people, who
otherwise would have undoubtedly killed him, but more of this you may expect
hereafter.

On the Tuesday there was heard a most lamentable and mournful noise like
groaning, near to a Celler belonging to a house that was blown up, which
occasioned many to suspect that there might be some poor creatures even buried
alive under the Rubbish, which being removed proved even so, for there they
found five persons in a miserable plight, three of them being dead, and the
other two not like to live; Lord grant that it may never be our lots, who now
escaped this Calamity, ever to be left to the mercy of the merciless Flames;
Amen.

On Tuesday November the 21th. 1682. we had account that the number of Houses
computed to be consumed, were 2000. amongst which were two or three hundred
blown up, and we hear, in the Execution thereof, about 40 were killed, and many
more bruised and wounded; we hear at present only of one old woman that
perished in the Flame, except it were the Maid of the house where it began, who
it was feared, did taste of the like Calamity. Sir John Wettwang who had a Ship
a building there worth about 6 or 7 hundred pound, was very active, and by
encouraging the Seamen by giving them Guinnies, happily preserved her from the
Flames, who had it been Burned, would have done much damage to other Houses.

Amongst the Houses that were destroyed, the most chief and eminent were as
follows; Sir William Warrens, Mr. Hoopers, Mr. Wilsons, Mr. Hains, and Master
Jacksons, who all kept considerable Deal-Yards, besides one Mr. Grinball who
kept a Mast-Yard, and lost several hundreds of pounds worth, besides great
store of other Commodities of all sorts consumed by the fire.

At Wapping-wall it took hold of a pile of Building, called the old
Water-house, which it consumed in less then an hour, and then crossing the way,
burnt violently toward the Waterside, and had it not been for the vigilance
and industry of his Grace the Duke of Albermarle, and the Earl Craven, and the
two Sherriffs of London, who by their wisdom and industry put courage into the
hearts of the never-daunted Seamen, it had been far worse, by their ordering
some houses to be blown up, did put some present stop to it, which else had set
fire to a great Ship which lay by Wapping-wall, but Tide coming in, they got
her off, with several others which lay on Ground there.

The Fire, notwithstanding the many Houses which were blown up, burnt very
fiercely to Kings-street-bridg, and near to New-Gravel-Lane, and there met with
some Timber-Houses, and others who were built with boards and Tarr'd on the
outside, which took Fire immediately and burnt like Tow almost, so that it was
8 a Clock at night almost before they could get a head of it, the wind being
very high, and continued westerly all night and all day on Monday.

Finis.

