A ROMAN

A BRITAIN

A SAXON

A DANE

A NORMAN

frontispiece

THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND.

GIVING A True and Impartial Account of the most Considerable Transactions in
CHURCH and STATE, in PEACE and WAR, during the Reigns of all the KINGS and
QVEENS, from the coming of Julius Caesar into Britain.

WITH An Account of all the Plots, Conspiracies, Insurrections, and Rebellions.

LIKEWISE A Relation of the Wonderful Prodigies, Monstrous Births, Terrible
Earthquakes, Dreadful Sights in the Air, Lamentable Famines, Plagues,
Thunders, Lightnings, and Fires, etc. to the Year 1696. Being the Eighth Year
of the Reign of his present Majesty King WILLIAM the III.

TOGETHER With a particular Description of the Rarities In the several Counties
of England and Wales: With Exact MAPS of each County,

By JOHN SELLER, Hydrographer to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by Job and John How, for John Gwillim, against Crossby-Square,
in Bishopsgate-street, 1696.

MVNIFICENTIA REGIA. 1715.

GEORGIUS D.G. MAG. B^. ^^ ET HER ^^^ FD.

J. Pu^^ sculp
bookplate

TO THE KING.
Great Sir!
MY Presumption in this Dedication would be Unpardonable, were it not that the
Subject Matter of this Book is such, as does particularly Entitle Your Majesty
thereunto, and makes it fit for a Prince to Patroni^e: For it is not only the
History of the Lives and Reigns of Your Majesty's Royal Predecessors, but also
a Description of Your Majesty's Kingdom of England, and Principallity of Wales:
A Country that has been Rescued by Your Majesty out of the Jaws of those
Devouring Monsters, Popery and Slavery, which were ready to swallow it up:
'Twas when the Nation lay Exposed to the Will and Lust of her Insulting
Ravishers, that Your Majesty, as the Guardian Angel of Great Britain, came to
her Timely Rescue; Exposing Your Royal Person to the Danger of the Sea in the
worst Season of the Year, that You might Save It from impending Ruin. And to
whom could the History of England be better Dedicated, than to a Prince who has
done such Great Things for it? Who has Raised it from that Oblivion to which
the Supineness of the late Reigns had Reduced it, to make the most considerable
Figure of any Kingdom in Europe, of which Your Majesty has also again made it
the Arbiter: Having Raised the Genius of the Nation, by Your Own Heroic
Example, above what it was in our Third Edward, or Fifth Henry's Days. It Is
true indeed, both those Princes obtained Great Victories over France; but it
was then Weak and Divided; Void of all those Acquisitions that Lewis the 14th
has Unjustly Ra^ish'd from his Neighbors: Whereas Your Majesty has Humbled
France in the very Zenith of her Glory, when she was Laying the Foundation of
an Universal Monarchy.

But it would be too great a Boldness in so Weak a Pen to attempt any thing in
Your Majesty's Just Praise, when even the most Celebrated Writers must fall far
short of Performing it as they ought.

That Your Majesty may long Live and Reign, the Terror of Your Enemies, the
Joy of Your Subjests, and the Delight of all Mankind, shall be the daily Prayer
of

Your Majesty's most Humble Subject and Servant, John Seller.

A New Mapp of ENGLAND and WALES By John Seller.
map of England and Wales

THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND.
CHAP. I. Of its Situation and Fruitfulness. The Manners, Customs, and Religion
of the Ancient Britains. How it was first Inhabited. Why called Britain; and
the Name of ENGLAND given to the Part we Inhabit. Julius Caesar Invited over,
etc.
THIS Island of Great Britain (containing at present Three Nations or People,
of different Languages) is the largest in Europe; and inferior to none in the
other parts of the World, for Fertility, Power, good Government, and Glory of
it is Great Actions. It is Situated in a healthful Climate, between 51 and 58
Degrees of North Latitude. Bounded on the East with Germany and Denmark; on the
West with Ireland and the Atlantic Ocean; on the North with the Ducalidonian
Seas; and on the South with France and Normandy.

ENGLAND (the noblest and largest part of it, and a distinct Kingdom of it
self, though at present all under One happy Monarch) formerly sustained many
Kings at once, all of them commanding great Powers, as will appear in the
Series of History. For in spaciousness it extends it self from North to South,
in the broadest place, 386 Miles; and from the Lands End in Cornwall, to the
Isle of Thanet in the East of Kent, it stretches 340 Miles; besides the
spaciousness of the many Islands, as Wight, Man, Anglesey, and others of note,
which I shall have occasion to mention, with every thing else that may give
satisfaction to the Reader. It is, for Longitude, placed between the Parallels
of 14 and 16, Containing 25 Cities, in which are Bishops Seas. It Is full of
Parks, Rivers, and Forests; and abounding in plenty of Arable Ground, Pleasant
Pastures and Cattle, throughout its 40 Counties; and the like in the 13
Counties of Wales, once a distinct Kingdom, but now annexed to the English
Diadem.

As to the time of the first Peopling this fruitful Land, some will have it
soon after the Flood, by Sememoth^us, Sixth Son of Japhet; others that it was
Peopled by King Brutus, in the 2887th Year of the Worlds Creation; and that we
are of Trojan Original: So that this must be about 1231 Years after the Deluge,
when Elie was High Priest. But it is rather generally accepted (though many
other Stories, without any good ground, or much credit, are mentioned) That a
Colony of some neighboring Nation (viz) from Germany, wafted over, and finding
it so pleasant a Soil, gladly planted themselves in it.

But since this is doubtful, and all we can gather concerning the Natives,
before the Landing of Julius Caesar, is from Foreign Authors, we must be
content to pass these over.

As for the Name of this Island, being called Britain, it is held to come from
the word Brith, which signifies Painting, or Staining their Skins; and also
going Naked, (which was the Custom of the Ancient Britains.) They Raced their
Skins, drawing on them the Figures of Birds, Beasts, Flowers, Suns, Stars, etc.
to distinguish their Dignity; which, like the sliced Bark of a Tree, growing
wider as they grew up, made them appear Terrible to their Enemies; and indeed
they were, for the most part, Fierce and Cruel, (especially those in the
Northern parts, who Traded not with the Civilized Gauls) insomuch that they
Sacrificed every Tenth Captive (taken in the Wars among themselves) to their
Idols, of which they had a great number, called by the Names of Planets, and in
the form of diverse living Creatures. And to these senseless Stocks their
Druid's, or Magi (whom they accounted their Wise Men, and served in stead of
Flamins and Priests) compelled them to pay their Adoration; Worshipping in
Groves, accounting Fortified Woods their Towns and Cities.

They wore about their Middles Iron Chains, and to them, both Men and Women had
short Swords girded; bearing in their Hands a Spear with a Brass Knob or Bell
at the end of it, to make a great noise of Terror in Combats; the Women
usually going to War with them, and not only Fighting Courageously by their
Husbands sides, Animating them by their Courage, but often Commanding
Battalions and Armies, as the Romans too fatally found, when they strugled, with
much Slaughter, 123 Years for this Island.

The Britains appear by all Authors to have been very sparing in their Diet;
and not much given to Venery: Though they had many Wives in Common, amongst
Brothers and Kindred, yet the Children redounded to his credit who first Cropped
the Mothers Virgin Rose. And by this means, as Plutarch (a very judicious
Author) affirms, they were of so Healthful and Lively a Constitution, That
many, if not most, in the warm Southern parts, according to the Term of a
Natural Life, exceeded 130 Years. Yet they much delighted in Ornaments, as
Bracelets, Beads, Iron Rings, etc. And preferred their Paint'd and Carved Skins
before the most gaudy Clothing.

Their Agriculture was but little, though the Earth much invited them to it, by
its promising Fruitfulness. They had not the use of Ploughs, and only Sowed
their Grain on the Mellowest Land after Rain; then laying great weights on
bundles of Bushes drag it over, in the nature of Harrowing. Yet they had found
out the way of making their Drink with sodden Barley, which (though perhaps in a
higher Improvement) continues to this day, to the great Advantage and Health of
the Moderate People of the Nation. As for the flesh of Fowl and Wild Creatures,
they declined it; as they did likewise Fish and Milk. Then Hares were found in
such abundance, That they Flocked together like Sheep, fearless of the Hunter
or his Hounds.

Their Opinions in Theology were, That the Souls of Men Dyed not, but
(according to Pythagoras) had a Transmigration from one Body to another. And on
their Solemn Days their Druid's and Bards Sung the Praises of Renowned Heroes,
such as had Dyed in War, or been Famous for any Rare Invention; and this they
did to Encourage and stir up others to Imitation.

Their Coin was either Rings, or Iron, Imbossed Shieldwise, with the Device
outward, on the Imbossment; valued at a rate proper to answer the price of such
things as they Traded for at Home or Abroad, which was but little, especially
Abroad, for want of Shipping. Caesar observing at his coming, that their
Vessels were INSULAE ALBION et HIBERNIA cum minoribus adjacentibus
map of Albion and Hibernia made of Light Wood; and some of the Carkases of
their Boats Covered with Skins, etc.

Nor did they carry any Provisions with them when they set out, only creeping
along the Shore, or, in Calm Weather, Wafting over to the Gallick or Belgian
Shore: And most of their Business was to carry Grain and Metals, with the
latter of which the Island did then, and still abounds: And some are apt to
think, for that cause, the Greeks Coasting in these Seas, and finding the
Island abounding with Metals, Named it Britania, from Prutania, Metal, or the
Metal-Island.

As for ENGLAND (that now so called, Exempt from Wales and Scotland) it had its
Denomination from the East Angloens, who seated themselves in the East Angle
Kingdom, to the Eastern Sea, in the time of the Saxon Heptarchie, or Seven
Kingdoms; and that Name (through all Revolutions and Changes) it has retained
for above 900 Years. This Land has been taken for the Fortunate Island, set
forth with many Praises and Encomiums by the Greek Poets; and Charles the Great
(rightly) termed it, The Grainary and Storehouse of the Western World.

Thus having given you a Brief Account of the Ancient Inhabitants of this
Country, I proceed to show how it was divided amongst their several Tribes; and
so come closer to the more sollid Body of History.

ENGLAND and WALES was possessed by 17 Tribes of Native Britains, under these
distinctions, viz. 1. The Canti, possessed Kent. 2. Regni, Sussex and Surry. 3.
Durotriges, Dorsetshire. 4. Damnonij, Cornwall and Devonshire. 5. Belgae,
Somersetshire, Wilts^^re and Southamptonshire. 6. Artabatij, Berkshire. 7.
Dobuni, Oxfordshire and Gloucestershire. 8. Catieuclani, Warwickshire,
Buckinghamshire and Bedfordshire. 9. Trinobants, Hartfordshire, Middlesex and
Essex. 10. Iceni, Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge and Huntingtonshires. 11.
Coritani, Rutland Northamptonshire, Lincolnshire, Leicestershire, Derbyshire,
and Notinghamshire. 12. Cornabij, Staffordshire, Worcestershire, Shropshire,
and Cheshire. 13. Ordovices, Flintshire, Denbighshire, Carnarvanshire,
Montgomeryshire, and Merionethshire. 14. Brigantes Parisi, Lancashire,
Yorkshire, Richmondshire, Durham, Westmoreland, and Cumberland. 15. Silulers,
Herefordshire, Radnorshire, Monmouthshire, and Glamorganshire. 16. Dimetae,
Caermarthenshire, Pembrookshire, and Cardiganshire. 17. Ottodoni,
Northumberland, Tweedale, Tiffedale, March, and Louthain.

Whilst these Tribes were scattered up and down in the several Counties, then
full of Woods, which they Inhabited, Lud, King of the Trinobants, Dyed: He was
wonderfully beloved, not only of his own Subjects, but of all the Britains, for
the good offices he had done them, in reconciling their Differences, putting an
End to many Bloody Wars that fell out amongst them; and civilizing their
Manners, constituting sundry wholesome Laws, thereby making them lay aside many
of their Barbarous Customs. He held a free correspondence with the Gauls, and
was much Honored by them; their Kings sending him diverse Rich Presents, as
also Artificers to assist him in Building or Enlarging Troy Novant, or New
Troy, which he afterward called by his own Name, Care Lud, or Lud Town, now the
famous City of London, which then reached no further than Dowgate Eastward; the
Houses standing up and down Angular, and not Regular in Streets: Yet he
Enclosed it with a good Wall, defended by Bullwarks, and on it many
Watch-Towers, calling its Western Gate Lud's Gate, which Name it retains to
this day, placing his own Effigies, in Marble, on the Inside of it. At his
Death he Recommended his two Sons, Andragius and Temantius (being very Young)
to the care of Cassibelan his Brother, who held his Regal Seat at Verulam, now
called St. Albanes, in Hartford-shire. Upon the Death of King Lud the People
came and offered the Principality to him, and the Heirs of his Body, by consent
of the Three Estates of the Trinobants, viz. those of Essex, Middlesex, and
Hartford-shire. But in consideration of his Trust, and his Nephews Rights, he
contented himself with only a Part, for when they came to Age, he placed
Andrageus in Troynovant, or London, joining to it all Middlesex, and the
Dukedom of Kent, which in that time he had Conquered, bringing the Canti under
his Subjection. And to Temantius he gave the Dukedom of Cornwall, his Right by
Marriage, Reserving to himself Hartfordshire and Essex only.

Thus, for the space of Seven Years, the Nation continued in a happy state,
after the Death of King Lud, before whose Departure a Terrible Blasing-Star,
with a Bloody Tail, appeared at South West, for the space of Fifteen Nights;
being likewise seen in many other Lands: Fore-running the Miserys that
afterward befell this Kingdom. For now Andrageus, a Prince of a haughty Spirit,
considering his Uncle detained from him part of his Inheritance, raised a
mighty power and Invaded Hartfordshire: But three Miles beyond Barnet, being
Fought with by Cassibelan, he was there overthrown, with a fearful Slaughter,
and soon after driven out of most of his Possessions; which so possessed him
with Anger and desire of Revenge, That hearing Julius Caesar, who was then but
a Roman Consul, had subdued all Gallia, now called France, and a great part of
Germany, and given Refuge to diverse distressed Princes, restoring them to their
Principalities upon their submiting to become Tributaries to Rome; and that he
rather sought Fame and Glory, than to Enslave the People he subdued, being the
greatest Captain that, or any former, Ages had produced, he resolved to cast
himself upon him for Protection; preferring his Revenge before the Safety of
his Country; and great was the Destruction, and many the Miseries the War
brought upon it.

The Young Prince, Armed with this Resolution, (notwithstanding the Grave
Counsels of his Fathers Courtiers to dissuade him from it, laying before him,
That he ought to submit his Private Injuries to the Public Peace of all the
People of the Nation) he took with him his Treasure, and some of his trusty
Confidents, and Sailed in a small Vessel to that part of Gallia now called
Normandy, where he found Caesar retired from the Toiles of War, and settling the
affairs of the Country, with a design to return to Rome, and obtain of the
Senate a renewal of his Consulship, or longer continuation of his Government:
When being Introduced by Caesar's Lictor's, he bending one Knee to the Ground,
and Rising again, Spoke, in the Gallick Language, to this effect.

Most Mighty Caesar, Great Captain of Rome, and of the World; behold a
Distressed Prince of the Britains before you, craving your Protection; and
Imploring a Redress of my Wrongs, from you who are the Scourge of Tyrants, and
ever compassionate to the Injured.

Caesar wondering at first (by the strangeness of his Garb) who he should be,
or to what this Discourse might tend, till having heard at large (as has been
related) the cause of his coming, and the Fruitfulness of the Country; and
Thirsting after more Honor to raise his Fame to what it at last aspired to,
viz. The Empire of the World, he not only comforted him, and ^eated him in his
own Pavillion, but promised him ^^stance, as Romes Confederate, to make War on
his ^^kle so soon as the season would permit, and his ^^^ires were settled with
the Gauls and Germans.

CHAP. II. (...) Account of Julius Caesar's Landing in this Island. The Battles
Fought between Him and the Britains, with various Success. The British Princes
that for the Liberty of their Country withstood him and the succeeding
Emperors: With Strange Wonders and Prodigies, etc.
WHilst Caesar sent for fresh Legions of Roman Soldiers, to reinforce his
Army, and all Warlike ^^ovisions to Invade the Britains, they had notice of it
^^^m the Friendly Gauls, which much startled them in (...) parts of the Island.
Yet, preferring their Liberty be^^^e their Lives; and finding their Embassy's
rejected, ^^less they would become Tributary to Rome) they, (...) General
Council of all the Estates, Resolved on a ^^ve Defense: And among other Warlike
Furniture, ^^ey brought into the Field Five Hundred Wagons, ^^^led, by some
Authors, British War Charriots. These (...) fastened to the Sides of them long
Sythe-Blades, and ^^^rp hooked Sickles, so ranked and ordered, That if ^^ey
were Worsted, they might retire amongst them (...) shelter, or else, drawn with
strong Horses, break (...) among the Enemies Foot, and violently hurrying
(...), cut and tear them in pieces. And so Dexterous ^^ey were in this manner
of War, That he who man^ged, or drove it, would Run swiftly on the Coppis,
(...) Rail, smite his Enemy, and return to the Body of (...) Wagon, or
Chariot, before he could be Charged (...) Annoyed.

Cassibelan having gotten a numerous Army, Fortified, as well as he could, the
Shoars toward France; feting a great number of Men on the Chalkie Cliffs, to
watch, and give notice of the Enemies approach. So that when Caesar, with
twelve choice Legions, which he brought in 300 Vessels, thought to have Landed
by Surprise, he found himself deceived, being beaten off three times by the
Britains, leaving many Hundreds of his Legionary Soldiers Dead on the Sands;
and the last time had his own Sword wrested from him by one Scaeva, a Britain,
whom he afterward Knighted, and for his Valor made him a Centurion, who did
wonders for him in his Wars against Pompey, stopping, at a Breach, a whole
Army, with his mighty Sword, till his Body being stuck with Darts like a Wood,
after he had Slain a Hundred of his Enemies, he fell Dead on the heap of
Carcasses, and gained a lasting Memory in History.

Caesar finding the Britains so desperately bent, to Sacrifice their Lives for
the Liberty of their Country, Manned out Open Vessels with Arohers, and such as
were dexterous at Sling-Stones and Casting-Piles, or Roman Darts; and lying out
of the reach of the Britains Weapons, (who were not acquainted with that manner
of War) found them selves obliged to retire from the Shore: Whereupon the Roman
Footmen thrust on Land, and made good their Station till the Cohorts of Horse
came to assist them. Their place of Landing being where the Town of
Bright-Hemsted now stands, in the County of Sussex.

Cassibelan perceiving himself at this time over-Match'd, made an orderly
Retreat to the Fortified Woods, of which they had then great numbers; sending
to the Princes in Confederacy with him for Assistance: But more Romans coming
from Belgia to Caesar's Aid, in a Bloody Battle Fought on Barham Downs, Anno.
Mundi 3873. he overthrew Cassibelan, wherein 40000 of his People were Slain,
and almost as many Romans. Among the Slain Britains were found many Women, whom
the Victor caused to be honorably Interred; and then pursued the flying
Prince, who got into Troynovant, now called London, and Fortified himself;
causing Stakes to be driven down, with Lead about the Heads of them, at the
places where the Ferrys usually passed, to hinder the Enemies Boats: For the
Thames (running out of its Banks broad, and scattering in the Fields) was full
of Ouse, and not passible but at certain places. However Caesar (who was
Fortune's Darling) with mighty labor laid over Bridges of Boats, and Planks of
Timber, etc. and took the City by Storm, yet spared the Lives of the
Inhabitants. Cassibelan fled to Verulam, but Cingitorix, King of Kent, was made
Prisoner. And Caravill, Taximagul, and Segonax, (Princes of the Southern parts
of the Island) for siding with Cassibelian, had their Countries taken from
them. Which so startled the Senimagues, Cegontians, Ancalits, Bribrosses, and
Caffians, (the States of the Icenians) Seeing Caesar's swift progress, they sent
Ambassadors to Treat of Peace; and submitted themselves Tributaries to Rome.
And then he fixed Andrageus in his Principality; but he afterward left it, to
go with Caesar to Rome; and attended him in his Wars abroad. Yet Caesar (who
had seen but a little part of the Country, and took it for a Main Continent,
or, as his Soldiers complained, when he Encouraged them to Invade the Britains,
another World, different from what they had been in before) was no sooner
called to repass the Seas, upon his other affairs, but the British Princes
joining together, made a great Slaughter of the Roman Soldiers, which
compelled him to come over again to quiet them. The like, upon the same
Occasion, he did a Third Time: Laying a Tax of 300 l. per Annum Tribute. But
having cast in his Mind the gaining the Supreme Dominion over Rome, he left
Comius his Deputy; and carrying away great numbers of the British Youth to
serve him in his Wars, he departed. And by Pompey's Overthrow in Pharsalia, and
two other Bloody Battles, made himself Emperor: But soon after was Stabbed by
the Senators, with 23 Wounds, in the Senate House.

Augustus Caesar, Nephew to Julius Caesar, Succeeding him in his Empire, more
Forces were sent into Britain; who still Incroached upon the Natives, and put
them to diverse servile Labors, as Building Forts, Digging Trenches, and Hewing
Timber. So that finding themselves uneasy, betook them again to their Arms:
Which made this Emperor three times prepare to come in Person, but was as
often hindered by other Business. Till at last the Prince of Peace, in the 24th
Year of his Reign, being Born, for the Salvation of Mankind, Anno. Mundi, 3870.
A Universal Peace spread it self into all Nations: So the Gates of Janus Temple
at Rome was shut, which had not happened for 300 Year^ before.

And in this Emperors time Cunobeline, a British Prince, who held his Royal
Seat at Malden in Essex, and was Knighted, had leave to Stamp his Image on his
Coin, after the Roman manner; and was made Deputy of Britain by Augustus, and
Succeeded by Guiderius, his Son, in his Principality, who denied the Romans
Tribute; but was thereupon Overthrown by Claudius Drusius, in which Battle
himself was Slain, as some Historians have it, by one Hamo, a Britain, who
privately sided with the Romans, and got near him under pretense of receiving
Orders from him, so Treacherously thrust him through and Fled: But being
furiously pursued by Anviragus, the Kings Brother, he Slew him at the Sea side:
From whose Death the Place was called Hamo's Haven; and is that where the
Commodious Town of Southampton, in the County of Southampton, now stands.

Tiberius Caesar Succeeded Augustus in the Empire. The Romans finding how
advantageous this Island was to them (by reason of the large quantities of
Metal and Corn they every Year Received by the Barks they sent; Loading
Annually about 800) Increased their Collonies, as not being willing to have so
valuable a Prize wrested out of their Hands. Yet the British Princes Labored
earnestly to be rid of so uneasy an Encumbrance; but their designs did not end
with Success: Wherefore they applied themselves to the Neighboring Gaulls for
succor, but they were in as bad, or worse condition themselves; being every
where bridled with Roman Forts and Garrisons. So that Cogidunus, a Prince of
great esteem among the Britains, Submiting, The Emperor bestowed several
Cities on him to Hold and Govern them, paying a small Tribute; and by that
means he brought over the rest. So that a settled Peace ensued; and Arts began
to Flourish, the Romans Teaching them to the Natives: And so each Nation grew
more familliar and friendly.

In the 18th Year of this Emperors Reign, the Sun Rising Fair and Bright in
the Morning, immediately drew in its Light; so that a palpable Darkness was
over the Earth, which Frighted and Astonished the People; and made them think
that the Light of that Glorious Planet was quite Extinguished; Yet, in some
Hours, it recovered its Luster: The Cause not proceeding from any Eclipse of
the Sun, by the Interposing Moon, but from the Wickedness of Man, who were at
that time Crucifying The Son of Righteousness. Which made Dyonisius Areopagita,
a Learned Philosopher, who wondered at the Cause of it, truly say, That either
the God of Nature Suffered, or the frame of the World was about to be Dissolved.

Caius Caligula Succeeding Tiberius, his Debaucheries and Gluttony gave him
leave to look but little after his Affairs in Britain. Yet he Banished Pontius
Pilate, who Adjudged Christ to Death, whereupon, in Despair, he Slew himself,
Anno. Dom. 41. He, more for humor and extravagancy, than advantage, plained
Mountains, caused Fish Ponds to be filled with Rose Water, and Built Towers in
the Sea.

But hearing that the Britains had Raised a Formidable War, and overthrown his
Legions, he came with a powerful Army to the Belgian Shore; but being Frighted
at the Noise of such a War, he caused a Charge to be Sounded, and his Soldiers
immediately to March to the Seaside; where they were Commanded to fill their
Helmets with Cockle-shells; and so Returned, braging them to be the spoils of
the Ocean.

He Reigned but Three Years and Ten Months; in which time the Britains had
Recovered a great part of what they had Lost. Yet many of them Dyed of a
lamentable Famine, which happened in the Last Year of this Emperor, by Reason
most of their Corn was spoiled with mighty Raines, Hail, and a strange
Lightening, accompanied with Prodigious Thunder, that not only Burnt and
Destroyed the Corn, but many Houses; and Killed Numbers of People and Cattle.

There also Gushed a great Stream of Blood out of a Rock near Flint in Wales,
for Three Days; Foreshewing that the Poor Britains must again Bleed: As in the
following part of this History will appear.

CHAP. III. A Continuation of the Succession of Roman Emperors Commanding in
Britain: The British Princes that Opposed their Conquest. Christian Religion
first Planted here by the Apostles St. Paul and St. Peter; their Martyrdoms,
and the Ten Heathen Persecutions; with the Dreadful Signs and Wonders
fore-running them. By what means the Gospel was Established in a National
Church. The Romans leaving the Kingdom, etc.
THE Britains, in the Reign of Caius Caligula, finding by the neglect of his
Government, they had a fair prospect of regaining their Ancient Liberty (which
they prized above all Earthly things, and of the like Value it continues to
this day among the Natives of the Kingdom) flew again to Arms, (denying the
Taxes that were laid upon them, and Exacted by the Roman Lieutenants with
Rigor) making a great Slaughter of the Roman Soldiers at York and diverse
other places; which compelled them to send for Aid, when as

Claudius Drusius, who Succeeded Caligula in the Roman Empire, sent Aulius
Plautus with a mighty power, constituting him Lieutenant; against whom
Charactacus, a British Prince of the Silures, raised great Forces, and many
Bloody Battles were Fought, Victory giving the Lawrells sometimes to one side,
and sometimes to the other: But in the many conflicts the Roman Host was so
much wasted and Intimidated, that Plautus found himself constrained to Write to
the Emperor speedily to come over with Succor, and restore the face of War by
his Authority and Conduct, or in neglecting it expect one of the most fruitful
Provinces to be rent from the Empire: Upon this notice, he delayed not to waft
over with 500 Armed Vessels, Fought diverse Battles, and took Caractacus
Prisoner; and so settling affairs returned to Rome in Triumph; and the Britains
finding themselves much weakened (the Plains being almost every where strewed
with their Dead Bodies) were constrained to live Peaceably during the remaining
part of his Reign, which Began Anno. Dom. 43, and Ended Anno. 57. In his Reign
the Virgin Mary Dyed, in the 72 Year of her Age, and was Honorably Buried at
Jerusalem: Not Translated, or taken up Alive, and made Queen of Heaven, as the
Papists foolishly imagine, to color their Idolatry, in paying Divine Adoration
to He^ St. Peter in this Emperors Reign is held by Authentic Authors to have
come into Britain, at the time that the Jews by several Edicts were Banished
Rome; and successfully Preached the Gospel, turning many to the Christian
Faith; and having Ordained Bishops, Priests and Deacons, he returned to Rome;
where, soon after, he was Crucified by Nero, the succeeding Emperor, with his
Head downward; at the same time St. Paul (of whose being in this Island, and
dispencing the Gospel, there are many pregnant Testimonies, was Beheaded with a
Sword.

In this Emperors Reign there was so hard a Frost, that all the Lakes and
Rivers were Passible from the mindle of November to the beginning of April. A
Co^ at Glasenbury broughtforth a Lamb. And a Star appeared Triangular, darting
its Fiery Beams, like Swords and Javelins, toward the Earth for Three Weeks.

Nero geting himself chosen Emperor after the Death of Claudius Drusius (by
the assistance of his Mother) sent Suetonius his Lieutenant into Britain, where
he found Patrusagus, a British Prince of great Fame, Dead, who, by his Last
Will, had Bequeathed Boduo, his Queen, (by some called Bonduca) and his two
Daughters to the Protection of the Emperor, together with his Principality:
But the Young Ladies (being very Beautiful) contrary to the Trust reposed, were
Ravished by a Roman Tribune, after he had labored in vain to tempt their
Chastity with Gifts and Flatteries. The Queen (upon knowledge of this great
Injury done to her Children) exceedingly Grieved; and perceiving she was like
to have no Redress, though she had complained of the Injury and violation of
Trust: Moved by her Daughters Tears and her own Courage, she resolved to
Revenge the Treachery. Whereupon, calling together the chief of her People, and
some of the Neighboring Princes, she presented the Young Ladies before them,
with dishelved Hair, Raining a shower of Tears from their Sorrow-clouded Eyes;
and rising from her Seat in a Majestic manner, declared her Misfortunes,
inciting them to Revenge, and the regaining their Liberties, in these Words:

Let us Remember, worthy Princes (and others that are Assembled on this
occasion) That we are Britains, the rightful Owners of this Country, by so long
a possession that none knows any other than the Race we are descended of: You
see (through Covetousness of our Wealth, and Thirst of Glory to Tyrannize over
us, and Enslave our Liberties) these Romans having enough of their own,
notwithstanding, first without a cause Invaded, and then Encroached on our
Country, to bring us into Slavery: Behold what breach of Trust they have made,
what Insolence they have offered; for which, and many other Injurys, there is
no Redress but by the Sword: Let us take Courage then, and to regain our
Liberties, and free our Country from such a Yoke of Bondage, freely expose our
Live^, and so Armed with that resolution, we shall find them fly before us like
a timorous Hare.

Hereupon opening the Lappets of her Robe, there started out a Hare that she
had purposely concealed, which flying upon the shouts that arose, animated the
Assembly, and made them resolve on War.

And so secretly was the business managed, that the Britains Assembling by
many small Troops in Woods, all on a sudden, at the time prefixed, joined
their Forces and fell upon the Enemy, little suspecting it, with such fury,
that before they could gather their scattered Forces, Forty Thousand were
Slain, and Suetonius compelled to immure himself in Troynovant, or London, and
send speedily for succors; so that most of the Midland Counties were
recovered, and the Roman Fortresses, built to bridle the Britains with
Garrisons, Demolished: But the Carcasses lying un-bury'd corrupted the Air, and
brought on a Plague which made great desolation. Yet the Queen pursuing this
good success, in diverse Skirmishes destroyed 40000 more; however, at last being
betrayed for a sum of Gold, she Poisoned her self to prevent her Captivity, or
being carried to Rome to grace the Victors Triumph.

In this Emperors Reign began the First Persecution of the Christians, he
causing the City of Rome to be Fired, and laying the Guilt to their charge: St.
Peter and St. Paul fell Sacrifices to his Revenge, and he Tortured Christians
by Day for his Pastime, and Burnt their Bodies by Night to light him to his
Drunken Revels. His Mother Agripina, he caused to be riped open, on no other
account than to see the place where he had layn; his Wife Popaea being great
with Child, he Kicked on the Belly that she Dyed; and so far his Cruelty
Extended to all Degrees of People, that the Senate Proclaimed him an Enemy to
the Roman State, and Proscribed and Condemned him to be Whipped to Death;
whereupon he Fled, and in Despair Slew himself, when he had Reigned about 14
Years Anno Dom. 70.

Sergius Galba Succeeding Nero, recalled Suetonius and appointed Maximinus his
Lieutenant in Britain; yet scarce had he Reigned Seven Months, e're his
Soldiers Mutinied against him for his wicked course of Life; and as he
endeavored to secure himself from their Rage, by geting into a strong hold,
one Locrian, a Legionary Soldier, pursued him, and struck off his Head. In his
time Britain had Peace, yet a pressing Famine began, which lasted two Years,
through exceeding Rains in Winter, and Droughts in Summer, so that many
Thousands perished for want of Bread. And to him, Succeeded

Marcus Selvius Otho who Reigned only three Months and five Days, and then was
Deposed and Murdered by the unruly Soldiers.

Aulus Vitellius, for large Sums of Money procuring the Soldiers and others to
Proclaim him Emperor, enjoyed it but a short time; for Flavius Vespasian
waring with a Consulary Army against the Jews that had Rebelled, being chosen
Emperor by the Asian Army, he sent 20000 of them to Depose Vitellius, and
Proclaim him in Rome; which they performed, throwing the Murdered Body of
Vitellius into the River Tyber which runs by that City, when he had Reigned in
Drunkenness and Luxury about Eight Months.

Flavius Vespasian having thus gained the Empire, left his Son Titus to manage
his Wars in Asia and came to Rome. This Titus after Three Years hard Siege,
took the famous City of Jerusalem and utterly Destroyed it, as had been
foretold by our Savior. So that from that time the Jews were scattered into
all Nations of the Earth.

Upon this change of Affairs in the Roman Empire, the Britains were not slow to
take the advantage for the regaining the Liberty of their Country; the Brigants
and Silures, gathering great Forces, Fought with Julius Frontius the Roman
Lieutenant, and put his Legions to the Rout with so great a Slaughter, that the
Fields and Ditches in the place of Battle were filled with the Bodies and Blood
of the Slain; but fresh Forces arriving, they found themselves constrained to
submit; and had (to augment their Miseries) great Tribute laid on them, so
that they groaned under the burden of their Opression. This Emperor began his
Reign Anno Dom. 72, and Reigned Nine Years.

Titus Vespasian his Son succeeded him in the Empire, and sent Offers of Peace
to the Britains who accepted them. He, for his good Nature and Humanity, was
styled Delicii Humani Generis, The Delight of Mankind: He took off part of the
Taxes, and permitted the Exercise of the Christian Religion, which began to
flourish in this Island; making it his business every Evening to Examine his
Actions of the past Day; and if he had done no Good Deeds, he accounted that
Day lost; yet his Reign was short, viz. Two Years and Three Months, Dying
greatly Lamented throughout the Empire.

Domitian his Brother Succeeded him, a Person of a cruel Nature, who had sought
his Death but was prevented: This Man began his Reign Anno Dom. 83, he turned
his rage and fury against the Christians, causing multitudes of them to be
Tortured to Death, not only in this Land, but throughout his Empire, inventing
New Torments, which he first tried in his Solitudes, on Flys and other Insects;
so that when any one asked Who was with the Emperor? It was the usual answer
Non Musca; not so much as a Fly. He appointed Julius Agricola his Lieutenant,
whom the British Princes of the North opposed, making a great Slaughter of his
Soldiers; but after many Skirmishes, in a set Battle were overthrown on the
borders of the Tweed: Whereupon he Marched his Army through that Country now
called Scotland, with little opposition; and was the first Roman that found
this Country to be an Island, 136 Years after the Landing of Julius Caesar.
This Emperor began his Reign Anno Dom. 83, and Reigned 15 Years, having caused
to be destroyed by several sorts of Deaths 10000 Christians: At his Death, a
terible Tempest and Earthquake happened, Flames ascended out of the Ground in
Cornwall, and the Sea broak in on the Essex-Shoar, destroying many Villages,
Towns, People and Cattle; and Ebbing again, left many Monstrous Fishes on the
Plains.

Coceeius Nerva Succeeding this cruel Emperor, recalled his Edicts against the
Christians, gave Peace to the Britains, and had done many good things, had he
not been too hastily disappointed by Death: He was called the Patron of the
Poor, being very Charitable. His Reign began Anno 99. and continued only Ten
Months.

Trajan Succeeded Nerva; and at his first entrance began the Third Persecutian
against the Christians; he appointed Spartianus his Lieutenant in Britain, with
whom the British Princes Fought diverse Battles with various success, but were
at last compelled to submit, being wasted with Slaughter and a grievous Famine
that happened amongst them. This Emperors Reign began Anno 100, and continued
21 Years and six Months; before his Death a terrible Blazing-Star appeared, and
the Sea in many places seemed all on Fire in the Nightime; Strange and
Amazing Voices were heard in the Air, and the Water of the Humber seemed for
two Days of the color of BLOOD.

Adrian continued the Persecution of the Christians with great earnestness,
making the Streets of the Principal Towns stream with their Blood. He appointed
Trebellus his Lieutenant in Britain, and though he had no open War with the
Britains, he wasted great numbers of them, in digging Mines, draining Marshes,
and making Bridges over Rivers; to which servile Labors they were compelled
with rigor. He began his Reign Anno Dom. 121, and continued it 22 Years.

Antonius Pius Succeeding Adrian stayed the Persecution of the Christians,
restoring them to their Goods and Lands that had been taken from them. He
constituted Lollius Vrbicus his Lieutenant in Britain, against whom the
Brigantes made head, surprised him in his security, and cut off a great number
of his Soldiers: But afterward, in a bloody Battle, they were overthrown,
compelled to submit, and pay large Taxes to be restored to their possessions.
This Emperor was called the Patron of Virtue, from the gifts and rewards he
distributed among pious and learned Men. In his time the Christian Religion
flourished, and many places of Public Worship were errected in Britain. He
began his Reign Anno 139, and Reigned 23 Years.

Marcus Aurelius Succeeding Antonius, Abrogated his Edicts in favor of the
Christians, and Persecuted them with great fury. Agricola was his Lieutenant in
Britain, and kept the Country in Peace all his time. He began his Reign Anno
162, and continued it 19 Years.

Commodus, though of a very wicked Life, was, however, moved at the Sufferings
of the Christians, and restrained the Persecution. In his time flourished King
Lucius, a Britain, Son to King Coillus, who Built Colchester, and great
Grandson to King Arviragus, who Married the Emperor Drusius's Daughter. He (to
the honor of this Nation) was the first King in the World that embraced
Christianity; and by it set a good Example to others; and to be the better
informed in so Sacred a matter, he sent Elvanus and Medvinus, two of his
Learned Counselors, to Elutherius Bishop of Rome, to commune with him, and
receive Instructions from him for the good Government of his Kingdom: The good
Bishop at this greatly rejoiced, and not only Instructed them in the Holy
Faith, but sent Faganus and Damianus to the King with the following Letter.

Good King, you have received (as I understand by your Messengers, to my great
Rejoicing) in the Kingdom of Britain, by Gods Mercy, both the Law and the Faith
of Christ Jesus our ever Blessed Lord; you have both the Old and New Testament;
out of the same, through Gods Grace, by the Advice of your Realm, take a Law;
and by the same, through Gods sufferance, Rule you your Kigndom of Britain; for
in that Kingdom you are Gods Vicar.

By this we see what different Spirits the Bishops of Rome were of in the time
of Primitive Christianity, to what they have since been; they were then too
Modest to Usurp Authority out of their own Jurisdiction, and claim Supremacy
over Kings; yet Luxury, Pride and Riches has since brought them not only to
such a prodigious height of Arrogance to set the World in a Flame with Wars and
Mischiefs, but even to dare to Corrupt the Holy Scriptures, and by bringing in
Traditions of their own, jostle out the Doctrine of our Savior and his
Apostles, filling the Nations with Blood, and laying them Disolate, where they
have been opposed, or their Revenge could take place.

The King, upon this Advice, called a Council, and changed the Seats of the
three Arch Flammins, or Heathen Priests, into Arch Bishoprics, Viz. at London,
Gloucester, and York; and the 24 Subordinate Flammins into so many Bishops Sees.
The Idol Gods of the Britains were laid in the Dust, who were many, viz.
Taramis, or Jupiter; Tutates, or Mercury; Helus, or Mars; Hues, or Bacchus;
Belenus, or Apollo; Belisama, or the Moon; Owvana, or Minerva; Adreste, or
Venus, Victrix of the Romans, Ceres, Proserpina, and other Infernal Deities, to
whom they made Nightly Sacrifice, so that now Christian Churches and Temples
were Built in most Cities, Religion and Arts flourished, and the Nation had a
prospect of Peace and Happiness, after many Miseries and Toils of War. This
Commodus began his Reign 182, and Reigned 13 Years; the Britains living
peaceably under him. To him Succeeded

Didus Julianus. In this Emperors Reign little can be expected; he began it
Anno. 194, and Reigned only two Months. Julius Severius his Lieutenant in
Britain, keeping things quiet in his time. Yet a terrible Blazing-Star
appeared, fore-running Miseries at hand.

Septimus Severus Reigned next. This Man raised The fifth Persecutian; and
Heraclianus his Lieutenant being worsted by the Calledonians, a People
Inhabiting the South of Scotland, he found himself constrained to come hither
with a great power; and in cuting down Woods, building Bridges, and draining
Fens, Bogs, and Moors, to follow those retiring Britains, and their
Confederates, he lost above 50000 of his Men; yet at last he brought them under
subjection: But upon his departure, they again betook them to Arms; which
caused him to make a second Expedition, resolving utterly to destroy them from
Sea to Sea; but Death prevented him, he Dying at York, when he had Reigned 18
Years, beginning it Anno Dom. 195. After his Death,

Bassianus Caracalla was Proclaimed Co-Emperour with his Brother Geta, but he
quickly Slew him, and took the Government upon himself: He had no War with
Britain, but lived a Lewd Life, lying with his Mother-in-Law, being very Proud
and Cruel to his Subjects during his Reign, which began Anno Dom. 218; and
lasted six Years.

Opilius Macrinus began his Reign Anno 218, he Continued it but one Year and
two Months; in whose time Britain was at Peace, and Trade Flourished.

Heliogabilus, or The Priest of the Sun, being taken from his Priestly Office,
and Crowned Emperor, became so Debauched, and great a Glutton, that he was
abhorred of all Men; his wishes were, That his Neck might be as long as a
Crane's, that he might the longer taste the sweetness of Food in its passage to
his Stomach; and That the whole People of Rome had but one Neck, so that he
might gain him a lasting Memory by striking it off: He lay with his own Mother,
and diverse of his near Kinswomen; so that his not minding Public Affairs, gave
the Britains Peace, and Religion time to Increase and flourish. He began his
Reign Anno 219, and Continued it about Four Years. The next was

Alexander Severus. This Man proved a good friend to the Christians; suffered
the Britains to live in Peace, and caused Arts and Sciences to be Taught them.
In his time Armies of Footmen and Horsemen were seen in the Air over London and
diverse other places, Fighting; together with great Blasts, Thunders and
Lightening, followed by mighty Storms of Hail and Tempests, that did much
Damage. He had no Wars with the Britains. The Almain Soldiers Mutinied
against him when he had Reigned 14 Years and six Months; and having first put
his Eyes out, Slew him.

Maximinus, a Person of a Cruel Nature, raised The Sixth Persecution against
the Christians, more violent (for the time) than any before: He designed to War
on the Britains, but Death prevented him. He began his Reign 237, and Reigned
only Three Years.

Gordianus Reigned but Forty Days, and had no War with Britain. Yet in his time
the Iceni and Coritani Warred on each other about settling the Boundaries of
their Provinces, and made great Slaughter of their People, till the Roman
Lieutenant decided the matter and set them at Peace.

Claudius Puppienus and Celinus Balbinus were Co-Emperours, but little in
Britain was done in their time, they beginning their Reign 239, and continued it
only Two Years; nor in the time of

Antonius Gordianus who Reigned Four Years. Also Julius Phillipus who succeeded
him had no War with Britain. He was a great favourer of the Christians, and
some Historians allow he was Baptized into the Christian Faith; so that the
Natives of this Kingdom finding Advantages from the Arts they Learned of the
Romans, and considering how long they had strugled in vain, to the vast
effusion of Blood, quietly submited, and became Companions with them as one
Incorporated People.

Decius sent out his cruel Edicts for The Seventh Persecution against the
Church of Christ, wherein many fell here for their Religion; but no open War
happened. At his coming to the Throne, it Rained Blood in diverse parts of this
Kingdom, and a Terrible Bloody Sword was seen in the Air for Three Nights, a
little after Sunset. He began his Reign Anno Dom. 250, and continued it Two
Years.

Trebonianus and Volusianus Succeeded him, as joint Emperors, Anno Dom. 252,
they had no War with Britain, their Reign continuing but Two Years and odd Days.

Emelianus, who Succeeded them, Reigned only Two Months; for indeed the
Praetorian Soldiers having taken upon them to make and unmake Emperors, set
the Empire to Sale as often as they pleased, displacing one and placing another
for Gain; some of which they Murdered, and others they Banished, as the humor
served them.

Valerianus, an Enemy to the Christians, being placed on the Throne,
notwithstanding their supplications, and protesting to do any thing for him, so
they might enjoy their Religion, he sent out his Bloody Edicts to Persecute
them in all the Roman Provinces, spilling their Blood like Water: He caused St.
Lawrence to be Broyled Alive on a Gridiron, which the Martyr endured with
Invincible Patience, only saying, Turn the other Side, O Tyrant; for this is
broyled enough; and so by his constancy in Suffering, Converted even some of
his Tormentors, who afterward, for public owning the Faith, were put to Death.
St. Cyprian likewise suffered Martyrdom under him. But God stayed this issue of
precious Blood, by cuting off the Tyrant, when he had Reigned about two Years;
in which time Britain had no Wars, nor in the time of Galienus who Succeeded
him, though he Reigned Fifteen Years.

Flavius Claudius began his Reign Anno* Dom. 269; he Invented diverse new
Torments to be put in practice against the Christians, but God cut him off
before he could put them in practice, when he had Reigned two Years. During his
time the Britains were in Peace; but a Terrible Earthquake happened, that
overthrew many Buildings.

Quintillius, soon after he had taken the Empire, finding a Conspiracy of the
Great Ones against his Life, retired to a Summer House in his Garden, and there
opening his Veins, prevented their Malice by voluntarily Bleeding to Death. In
his time peace was continued in Britain.

Aurelianus began his Reign Anno Dom. 271, he raised The Ninth Persecution
against the Christians; and in his five Years Reign, by casting them to wild
Beasts in the Amphitheatres, Burning them at Stakes, and diverse other Torments,
destroyed the Lives of 300000 of them.

Tacitus, who Succeeded him, recalled his Bloody Edicts, and sent Letters of
Comfort to the Afflicted Britains, who Suffered Grievously in the General
Persecution. But his good intentions were cut off by Death, he Reigning only
Six Months.

Florianus, Succeeding him, had a shorter Reign, viz. Two Months: These had no
War with Britain, nor Probus his Successor; so that they having a long Peace,
built large Ships, and Traded Abroad in diverse Countries before unknown to
them, bringing home store of Riches from other Countries, for the native
product of their own; Establishing many wholesome Laws; some of which were,

1. That Religious Worship should be Observed under great Penalties; for the
Despisers or Contemners of it were to suffer Death.

2. That a certain number of Ploughs should be used in every County, to prevent
Scarcity of Bread, with Penalties to be Inflicted on those that lessened the
Number.

3. That no Oxen, or Laboring Beast, should be Seized for Debt.

4. That Buying and Selling should be by certain set Weights and Measures.

5. That Thieves, Robers, and Idle Persons, should be severely Punished.

Marcus Aurelius Carus began his Reign Anno Dom. 282. In his time the Britains
Levied War against Carancius his Lieutenant, and he being displeased that
Alectus was sent to take his Command, after diverse Battles, reconciled himself
to them, and became of their party; but was Slain by Alectus in a Bloody
Battle, wherein near 40000 on both sides fell. This Emperors Reign lasted not
above a Year; and was Succeeded by

Dioclesian, Anno Dom. 284. This Emperor found the Britains in War against
him, after they had Enjoyed Eighty Years Peace, which had much Enriched the
Country: Alectus was his Lieutenant, who Slew Carancius; but pursuing the
flying Britains into Lud's- Town, or London, he was Slain by Asclepiodotus,
Duke of Cornwall, with many Thousands of his Romans; and among them one Gallus a
great Commander, flying to a Brook on the East Side of the City, was Slain;
from whose Death it took the Name of Gallus-Brook; afterward called Gallbrook,
now corruptly Walbrook. But in the next Battle the Duke of Cornwall was Slain by
Coilus, Duke of Colchester. This Dioclesian began The Tenth and Last Heathen
Persecution against the Christians, which was continued so Sharp and Bloody by
new invented Torments, that Cities were left desolate, many Thousands flying
into Dens and Caves, where in Wildernesses and Mountains, among Wild Beasts,
they led (tho poor, yet) contented Lives, in the enjoyment of their Religion.
With him Maximinianus was Co-Emperour. Dioclesians Reign continued but Three
Years, and the other Four Years, in which time a Sea of Christian Blood (as I
may term it) was shed.

Constantinus Clorus came into Britain to quiet the Calledonians and Picts, who
took Arms in the Northern parts; which done, he cast his Eyes on the admirable
Beauties of Hellena, Daughter to King Coilus of Colchester, and finding her
Chastity proof against Gold, Threats or Persuasions, he Married her; and for
her sake was a great favourer of the Christians; who, like another Hester,
stood between them and the Grave: For Alban, stilled The First, or Proto-Martyr
of this Island, had lost his Head, and gave the Name of St. Albans to Verulam,
the place where he Suffered: Aron and Julius were Martyred at Leicester, and
about 1000 Christians (in Dioclesians time) at Litchfield. On this Christian
Princess he Begat Constantine the Great, the First Christian Emperor: He began
his Reign Anno Dom. 291, and Reigned Thirteen Years, Dying at York, then the
chief Seat of the Romans.

Constantinus, Galerius, Maximianus, Severus, Maxentinus, Licinius and
Martinianus, after the Death of Constantinus Grasped the Empire; sometimes
Reigning Single, and at other times Jointly; Opressing the People with great
Cruelties, giving up whom they pleased to each others Revenge, Destroying many
Christians, and tying the Living to the Dead, Mouth to Mouth, till they were
Poisoned with the Stench of the Carcasses: At last, in the height of their
Tyrany, they were Overthrown by Constantine the Great, who, before the joining
of the Battle, saw a Bright Cross in the Air with these Words, In hoc Vincis;
In this thou shall overcome; so gaining the Victory, and being established on
the Throne, he became a Christian.

Constantinus Magnus, or Canstantine the Great, was Born in Britain, and by the
Mothers side of this Nation, as has been said. He associated with him in the
Empire his Sons Crispus, Constantinus, Constantius, and Constance; each Ruling
large Provinces. He Built Constantinople, and removed the Imperial Seat
thither; he Commanded the Christians every where to Build Churches and Temples,
threw down the Idols of the Heathen Gods, Endowed the Churches and Bishops with
large Possessions; he appointed Silvester, then Bishop of Rome, by whom he had
been Baptized, to wear a Crown of Gold; but he, in Humility, refused it, for a
Phrygian Miter; though a Triple-Crown of Gold adorned with Precious Stones has
not been held Ornamental enough for some of his Successors, the Bishops of
Rome. The Government continued under these Co-Emperours from the Year 312, to
the Year 350.

Constantine built St. Paul's and St. Peter's Churches at Rome, himself Digging
in the Foundations, and carrying away Twelve Baskets of Earth, in honor of the
Twelve Apostles. Some say his Conversion was wrought by a Vision, which told
him his Leprosy (a Disease with which he was troubled) should be Cured, if he
recalled Sylvester, and the rest of the Clergy, from Banishment; others, that
being in distress for Water, he commanded the Legion of Christians in his Army
to Implore their God to send Rain on the Earth; at whose Prayers the clear Sky
was Mantled in Blackness, and the Clouds being rent with Thunder and Lightning,
such abundance of Water poured down, that the Army was supplied, and from that
time that Legion was called The Thundering Legion. In his time was the first
General Council at Nice against the Arians.

Julius Apostata, or Julian the Apostate, began his Reign after an Interregnum
of Six Years, Anno Dom. 256. He was (before his coming to the Empire) a
Christian, but then changed to be their mortal Enemy, Writing a Blasphemous
Book against Christianity, denying Christ to be the Son of God, calling him
Gallilean, and the Carpenters Son, in derision. But going to War against the
Persians, he was stricken by an Arrow, from what Hand was never known; when
pulling it from his Side, he threw Handfulls of his Blood into the Air, saying
Vicisti Galilaea, Thou have overcome me, O Galilean! and thereupon breathed out
his wicked Soul. He had no Wars with the Britains, though he Reigned Seven
Years.

Jovinianus began his Reign 363. He was Baptized into the Christian Faith,
confirmed the Peace with the Britains, lead a good Life, and was used to say, O
that I might Govern Wise Men, and Wise Men Govern me! He gave large Gifts to
the Church, etc.

Valentinianus defended the Britains, by Theodosius his Lieutenant, against the
Picts, who began to Invade them; he promoted Christianity, and caused
Idolatrous Sacrifices to be laid aside throughout his Empire.

Gratian and Valens were Co-Emperours; the latter Ruling with the former Four
Years, beginning his Reign Anno 365. He at first recalled Nazianzen and Basil
from Banishment, and was Baptized by Eudoxius; but after turned Arian and
Persceuted the Orthodox Clergy; and when they sent Petitions to him, he caused
Eighty of them to be carried to Sea in a Ship, and the Ship set on Fire. But
Gratian was more Merciful, and did many good Acts; Building the ruined
Churches, and calling home the Banished Clergy: He Reigned Six Years; but
neither of them had any Wars with Britain.

Maximinus and Valentinas began to Reign Anno Dom. 373, and are held to reign
about Six Years; though History seems to take but little notice of the former.
The Brita^ in their time were free from Wars.

Theodosius began his Reign, and continued it about Four Years. Flavius
Stillico was his Deputy in Britain; but I read of no Wars with this Nation, his
Hands being otherwise filled in opposing the Goths, and other Barbarous
Nations, who broke like a Torrent into the Roman Provinces. In his time was
held The Second General Council, and the First at Constantinople. Great Damages
by Sea and Land were sustained by an Earthquake, which lasted Six Months.

Arcadius and Honorius, Co-Emperours, began their Reign 384, and ended it 402.
In their time, at Noonday, a strange Fire from Heaven penetrated the great
Church at Constantinople, fastened on the Bishops Seat, and consumed it;
afterward, sprouting up like a Pira^d, it destroyed the Roof; then passing
through the ENGLAND As it was divided in the time of the English Saxons
especially during their Heptarchy
map of England midest of the People, seized on the Senate House, and laid it
in Rubish. And soon after the Church and Roman Empire were overrun, and laid
wast by the Barbarous Nations, viz. Huns, Goths, Vandals, Alabars, etc. which
God by these things no doubt fore-shewed, and afterward suffered, for their
Pride, and other reigning Sins.

Theodosius the Younger, and Valentinianus, began their Reign 402. In their
time The Third General Council was held at Ephesus, the first held there. And
now the Red Horse with his Rider mentioned in the Revelation seemed to be sent
forth to take Peace from the Earth: The Roman Empire was Invaded in all parts,
so that they were forced to re-call their Soldiers from Britain and other
remote Provinces, to aid them nearer home; leaving this Island after they had
possessed it 597 Years. And then the Saxons (being called in as Friends to
assist them against the Picts) proved greater Enemies; as will appear in the
following Chapter.

CHAP. IV. How, on the Departure of the Romans, the Picts and Scots Invaded the
Britains. The Succors the Romans sent them; and the Wall built from Sea to
Sea, to prevent Incursions. By what means the Saxons were called In, in the
Reign of King Vortigern, and how they got Footing so Strongly, as to setle
their Heptarchie, or Seven Kingdoms. Their Original, Manners, Laws, Customs and
Religion.
THE Romans (as is said) being embroyled in dangerous Wars in Italy, (and other
Provinces in their vast Empire) having left this Kingdom naked and defenseless,
by draining the Youths of Britain to serve them in Transmarine parts, of whom
afterward they settled a Colony in France, or ancient Gallia, which is now
called Britany: The Picts, a People of Germany, who had Established a Kingdom
in the Marches of England and Scotland, took this opportunity to encroach on
the Britains, in the South and West Counties; but finding themselves too weak
to make any considerable advances, they Leagued with the Scots, who possessed
the Northern parts of the Island, and diverse small Islands scattered in the
Ocean toward the Coast of Denmark and Norway. These jointly raising great
Forces broke in violently, making great Slaughter and Ravages in Cumberland,
Northumberland, Durham, Yorkshire, and other Northern Counties; laying all
Religious Places waste with Sword and Fire, so that the distressed People fled
before them: Yet the Britains took Courage, and gave them Battle; but after
this, and several other overthrows, they found themselves so weakened, that
they were constrained to send Ambassadors to Honorius the Roman Emperor,
Imploring his Protection, to save their sinking Country out of the Hands of
their Merciless Enemies.

This good Emperor, compassionating their Sufferings, sent a choice Legion by
whose assistance (and instructing them in the Millitary Art) they with great
Slaughter drove the far-advanc'd Picts and Scots beyond the Marches; and to
exclude them the British Provinces, a mighty Wall, with vast Labor and
Expense, was erected from the Frith of Edenborough, to the City Alcluith on
Dumbriton, with Bullwarks and Watch-Towers, in which Guards were placed, to
give notice of the Enemies approach, and to defend the Stupendous Work: But it
little availed, for no sooner was the Roman Legion recalled, but the Picts and
Scots assembled in great Numbers, and with their long Hooks and Bills pulled
the half-Starved Britains from their Battlements, and with an Engine called a
War-wolfe broke a passage through, and then with all their power rushed in like
a Torrent, laying every thing waste before them, whilst others from Scotland
came in their Carroghs or small Barks, and Landed on the Banks of the Humber,
in swarms. The poor Britains finding themselves so hardly distressed between
two insolent Enemies, sent their Ambassadors a second time to Valentinian the
Third, then Emperor of Rome, with Rent Garments, and Dust on their Heads, in a
mournful manner, to implore him That he would not suffer a Province which had
been so serviceable to the Roman State, to fall under the Scorn and Insolence
of Merciless Pagans; setting forth at large the Miseries their Country labored
under, with such moving Oratory, that the Emperor compassionating their
Sufferings, sent two Legions of Foot, and three Cohorts of Horse, who coming
unexpectedly on the Ravenous Spoilers, overthrew them with a terrible
Slaughter, covering the Fields and Lanes with their Dead Bodies, beating and
pursuing them beyond the Wall, taking Camelon the chief City of the Picts,
building a stronger Wall than the former, of Stone, and mighty Piles of Timber,
the Ruins of which are visible at this Day; it being then Twelve Foot high, and
Eight broad; traversing the Island from Sea to Sea; and for the goodwill the
Romans bore the Britains, they taught them the Art of Arms, and manner of
Intrenching, furnishing them with Weapons and other Necessaries; and having
settled affairs, they took their leave, telling the Natives, who Mourned their
Departure, That they must take Courage and Defend themselves, for as much as
the Romans could not any more undertake such chargeable and hazardous Voyages,
for their sake, seeing they had powerful Enemies to contend with nearer home.
However, the Romans departing, and they being Oppressed again by their old
Enemies, sent thhs Deplorable Letter to Aetius President of Galia, for
Assistance; Superscribed

To Aetius the third time Consul, the Groans of the BRITAINS, Viz.
The Barbarians drive us to the Sea, and the Sea beats us back upon them;
between these Extremes we are exposed either to be slain with the Sword, or
drowned in the Waves; and to avoid either, we find no Remedy, unless, most
Excellent Roman, you will compassionate our extreme Misery, and send us speedy
Aid, to repel our cruel Enemies.


This, however, prevailed not; for the Romans unable to defend themselves
against the Huns and Vandals, renounced their claim to this Island, refusing to
send any more Forces: Whereupon, after diverse unsuccessful, Battles, some of
the Britains, through Famine, were forced to yield themselves Slaves to their
Enemies; but others (preferring Liberty before Life) betook them to the
Fastnesses in Mountains and Caves, where many Perished through Cold and Hunger;
and soon after a dreadful Blazing Comet appearing, such a Pestilence ensued,
that the Living were not able to bury the Dead; which obliged the Picts and
Scots (as if driven out by the hand of Heaven) to relinquish their Conquests,
and retire to their own Country's, which gave the Britains leave to come out of
their Woods, Caves, etc. and Till the Land, which brought forth such Plenty,
that the Famine was soon forgot.

And now they thought of choosing from among themselves, (according to the
manner of the Romans) a chief Captain or Governor, to Lead their Armies; when
calling a Council, Vortigern was Elected King; who being too weak to oppose the
returning Picts and Scots, (in a fatal time) he sent Ambassadors to a
prevailing People in Germany called Saxons, imploring their Aid, with a
description of the pleasant Situation and Fruitfulness of the Island; which so
enflamed them with a desire of possessing it, that they made no difficulty to
consent to what was required by the King; so that in the Year of Christ 449.
Hengist and Horsas two Brethren of chief Command among them, Landed at
Ebs-fleet in the Isle of Thanet, with about 15000 Men, who joining with the
Britains marched against the Picts and Scots who had ravaged the Country as far
as Stamford in Lincolnshire and in a great and memorable Battle overthrew them,
killing diverse of their principal Leaders, pursuing and forcing them within
their own Borders.

For this good Service, the Saxons had the Isle of Thanet appointed them to
reside in, with a considerable Pension; but their two Generals, having before
cast in their minds no less than the possession of the Kingdom, Hengist
prevailed with Vortigern to put away his Virtuous Queen, by whom he had Three
Sons, Viz. Vortimer, Catigern, and Pascentius, to make way for Rowena his
Daughter, with whom the King was Enamoured upon her Drinking to him, and seeing
her naked Breasts at a public Feast; and no sooner had he Married her, but the
Saxons were put in possession of Kent; which spacious County, abundantly
fruitful in all things, did not satisfy his Ambition; but taking advantage of
the Discontent the Britains showed for the Divorce of their Queen, and
advancing a Pagan in her stead, he Quarrelled for enlargement of Pay; which not
being speedily complied with, he made a League with the Picts; so that one Army
advancing from the South, and the other from the North, laid the Country waste
in a miserable manner; especially upon the coming over of fresh Forces from
Germany, as Jutes, Angles and Saxons; whereupon the British Nobles assembled,
and represented the danger to the King, who (ruled by his new Wife) took little
notice of it; which made them, after he had Reigned Sixteen Years, desert him,
and Swear Allegiance to Vortimer his Eldest Son; who being a courageous young
Prince, assembled to his Standard the whole power of the Britains, and in
several Battles overthrew the Saxons, and Picts, forcing the former to retire
to their Ships and leave the Kingdom; but in the midst of the British hopes
from these flourishing successes and Victories, Cartigern his Brother being
Slain in Kent, and Buried at Alestrew, now Alesford where a Monument erected
for him is at this day, called Keith Coty House: Rowena, Vortimers Stepmother,
finding by this means a way opened to her own Issue, caused him to be Poisoned
at a Banquet of Fruits; whereupon Pascentius fearing his Life, fled into the
Mountains, where he lay obscure for a time, so that the Britains were compelled
to send their Ambassadors to Ambrosius a British Prince, Governing in Armorica,
or Britany in Gallia, to take the Government upon him, as being near Allied to
the Crown.

When he had heard their supplications, and what distress the Country was in,
he called a Council, in which it was Resolved he should pass over with an Army
to assist the Britains; which accordingly he brought, in 56 Ships, accompanied
by his Brother Vter-Pendragon, and in conjunction with the Britains, Fought
with Hengist the Saxon General, who was returned with great Forces, desiring
only upon his Landing to have his Daughter delivered to him; but at a Treaty of
the British Nobles on Salisbury-Plain, with the like number of his, for
Adjusting Affairs, upon giving the Watchword, Viz. Nem Cour Saxes; that is
Take (or handle) your Swords, in the Saxon Language, he caused them
Treacherously to be Slain with those Weapons which his Men that Treated with
them had privately concealed under their Cassocks; except one Nobleman, then
Earl of Warwick, who leaping aside when he saw what was intended, and geting a
Hedge-stake, beat out several of their Brains, making his Escape through the
rest.

Ambrosius (though his Successes answered not his expectation, yet having
pretty well allayed the fury of the Saxons, by the Slaughter he made of them,
in diverse Battles which he Fought against them) retired for the recruit of his
Army into Walish-Land (so Named by the Invaders, now called Wales) where being
informed that Vortigern had been the chief cause of the Miseries his Country
suffered, by the calling in of the Pagan Saxons, and too long indulging their
Rapins and Encroachments, as being Married to the Daughter of the common Enemy,
he Besieged him and his Queen in the Castle of Genura, which he consumed with
Wildfire cast upon it by the force of certain Engines, in whose Flames they
Perished.

Vortigern being thus Dead, Ambrosius was by the consent of the British Nobles
Crowned King, Anno Dom. 481, and Fought many successful Battles against the
Saxons, wresting out of their hands many of the Western Counties, as
Worcestershire, Herefordshire, Shropshire, and diverse others; so that his Name
grew Terrible to the Enemy. This however raised the Envy of Pascentius, (the
only surviving Son of Vortigern) against him, who secretly withdrawing into
Germany raised an Army to restore him to the possession of his Father; but was
over-thrown in a Battle Fought near Exceter in Devonshire, and thereupon fled
into Scotland, Anno 496; but Five Years after returning privately, and hearing
that Ambrosius lay Sick, he hired one Cop^ to attend him in the nature of a
Physician, by feigning himself to be a British Monk, though indeed he was a
Saxon, and so to take the advantage of Poisoning him; which he Effected:
Whereupon Pascentius raised an Army, and laid claim again to the Crown: But
being Fought with by Vter-Pendragon, the Kings Brother, he and most of his
chief Commanders were Slain; so that the Line of Vortigern was extinguished in
his Death. Yet this ended not the Wars, for swarms of Pagans continually
coming over from Germany, they grew too Numerous and Strong for the Britains;
though all the time of Vter-Pendragon and King Arthur, who Succeeded him, they
maintained fierce Wars with them, though with various success; sometimes one, and
sometimes the other prevailing. But the Britains at length weakened, and having
no recruits, were in a manner shut up, or straightened in the Mountains or
Fastnesses of Wales, and Cornwall; which gave the Saxons by degrees an
opportunity to form the several Counties their Chiefs had possessed, into
Kingdoms.

1. Hengist, the first Invader, made himself King of Kent, in the time of
Vortigern, Anno Dom. 455, erecting there the Kentish Kingdom.

2. Ella a Duke of the Germans who brought fresh Supplies, and Landed at Shoram
in Sussex, his Dominions extending through the Counties of Sussex and Surry; he
began his Reign Anno Dom. 488.

3. Childrick, a Captain of the Low Country Germans, erected the West Saxon
Kingdom, containing Cornwall; Devonshire, Dorcetshire, Somersetshire, Hampshire,
and Barkshire; Anno Dom. 501.

4. The East Saxons Kingdom was erected by Erchenwin. Anno Dom. 527, containing
Essex and Middlesex.

5. The Kingdom of Northumberland, containing Yorkshire, the Bishopric of
Durham, Lancashire, Westmoreland, Cumberland, and Nortbumberland, was erected
by two Saxon Chiefs, viz. Ida and Ella, who, as Copartners, began their Reign
Anno Dom. 547.

6. The Kingdom of Mercia, containing Huntingtonshire, Rutlandshire,
Lincolnshire, Northamptonshire, Shropshire, Leicestershire, Derbyshire,
Notinghamshire, Oxfordshire, Cheshire, Glocestershire, Warwickshire,
Staffordshire, Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire and Hartfordshire, being the
largest of all, was erected by Crida one of their great Captains Anno Dom. 582.

7. The Kingdom of the East Angles, containing Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridgshire,
and the Isle of Ely, was erected by Vffa, who brought fresh Aids against the
Britains, when the Saxons were in many parts distressed, Anno Dom. 575.

Thus you see how this Island was coveted and strugled for by strange Nations
as soon as they had tasted of its Sweetness, and saw its Fertility: Its
Fruitfullness and abundant plenty of all things necessary for the subsistence
of Mankind, being a great Motive to encourage them in its Conquest; and in that
sense, a great cause of its own Misery.

But ere I come to give a direct Account of the Kings that Governed these
Kingdoms, before they were United under a Sole Monarch, and the British Princes
that Opposed them in their Settling, I think it necessary to say something as to
what these Saxons were in their Original, with a Brief Discourse of their Laws,
Manners, Habits, Customs, Idolatrous Worship, and other things that shall
Occur, suitable to History.

As for their Original, Historians report them to have sprung from the Sacae, a
People in the Lesser Asia, who being distressed with great Droughts and Famine,
sent Colonies abroad to seek more agreeable Habitations, who coming into the
North-East part of Europe, and finding Plentiful Countries, they sent for
greater Forces to Enable them to settle therein; and so after a long and
doubtful War with the Strong Nations that bordered on Germany, viz. Prusia,
Poland, and Hungary, they got possession; planting their Families in the most
Fruitful part of that large Region, calling it Sacaesons Land, or Saxony. And
in a short time by Warring on their Neighbors, stretched their Dominions from
the River Albis to the Rhine, in Length; and in Breadth from the German Ocean,
and River Oder, to the Borders of Hessia and Turingia: But the Country held at
present by the Dukes of Saxony, is crowded into a narrower compass, having lost
by its Neighbors encroachments much of its former Extension. Their Leader in
this Expedition was one Tuysco, whom (for his Valiant Exploits, and giving them
Laws to Govern by) they styled a God, seting his Image on a Pillar, in the
Figure of an Aged Man, in flowing Robes of Purple, holding a Scepter in his
Hand; signifying he was the first Establisher and Governor of their European
Dominions; and ascribed to him a Day in the Week, by the Name of Tuysco's Day;
and now by us called Tuesday.

Their Garments were Red Cassocks, Clasped together, or Pinned with sharp Wire
or Thorn, that so if The Idols of the Ancient Saxons

Sun

Moon

Tuysco

Woden

The Idol of the Sun was made as here Appears, lile half a naked man set upon
a Pillar, his face like the Image of the Sun.

The Idol of the Moon made for a Woman, but had a short coat like a man, with a
cap with a larg ears the holding the Moon before her breast.

The Idol Tuysco the first and Chiefest man of name among the Germans.

The Idol Woden after ye name of a most valient and Victorious Prince and
Captain and his Idol was worshipped like God

depictions of idols Wounded in Battle, they might not see their Blood (to
discourage them) from the color of their Garments. Their Weapons were broad
Battel-Axes, and bending Swords like Falchions, with three Nicks or Dents on
the Backs of them: When they were drawn out to Battle, they used to go to the
Encounter Singing Songs made of Ancient Heroes, stirring up their Spirits
thereby to a fierce Emulation of their Deeds, always Fighting in a square
Battle, and standing very firm together.

As for their Laws or Customs; They Punished Robbers and Adulterers with Death:
Their Virgins were permitted to be Married but Once, and their Men restrained
from Plurality of Wives, unless the Chief of their Tribes, for the sake of
Children, to keep up their Names and Families; tho Barrenness was accounted
among them an immediate Curse from their Gods: If any great Difference arose
among them, it was usually decided by Champions in single Combat.

As for their Worship or Religion, upon their first coming over, and a long
time after, it was paid to Idols, of which they had many, and with their
Abominations and Heathenish Sacrifices they poluted the Christian Churches, and
Temples, grievously Afflicting and Persecuting the Mournful Christians, making
them to Wander in Desolate Places.

1. They set up the Image or Idol of the Sun, in the form of half a naked Man,
on a Pillar, with Rays or Sunbeams, about his Face, holding in his two Hands,
before his Breast, a Wheel of Circling Flame, representing the Element of Fire;
and this Image was Worshipped on the day attributed to it, viz. Sunday: And
Offerings made of Wheat, and other products of the Earth, in its Temple.

2. They had another Idol to represent the Moon having the Face of a Woman, a
short Coat to the middle of the Thighs, and a Hood with long Ears, holding the
Figure of the Moon in its Increase with both her Hands before her Breast; and
to it they did Nightly Sacrifice in Groves and Mountains: This Idol claimed
peculiar Devotions on her day called Moonday.

3. Tuysco who claimed Veneration on Tuesday, which I have already described;
his Feast was kept every third Moon with Songs declaring his Actions, with
Dancing and much Jollitry.

4. Woden; this Idol was set up in Memory of one of their Victorious Princes,
who had Fought successfully against the Huns and Lumbards, who entered Germany
in the wain of the Roman Empire: They placed him in King-like State, on a
Pillar, a Crown on his Head, and a Shield on his Left Arm, holding up a Sword
in his Right Hand. To him they Offered Humane Sacrifice of the Tenth Captives
taken in War; and forbid any to Name him, unless with Reverence and profound
Respect, ascribing to him a day, viz. Wodensday now Wednesday; and Lamps were
always Burning before his Shrine.

5. Thor, another of their Idols, was seated in Kingly manner, on rising Steps,
under a Canopy of State, in Royal Robes, with a Crown of Gold on his Head, and
a Scepter in his Hand; To whom they Prayed in doubtful matters for success in
affairs, and that in the deciding of any weighty thing, they might not Err in
their Judgments. He, The Idols of the Ancient Saxons

Thor

Friga

Seater

Flint

This Idol was Majestically placed upon a Covered bed, on his head a Crown of
Gold.

This Idol Represents both sexes as Hermophrodite, in her Right hand she held a
drawn sword, and in her left a Bow.

This Idol was placed on a Perch with a sharp prickled back, bare headed, and
bare footed.

This Idol was set on a great Stone made like the Image of Death, with a sheet
about him

depictions of idols it seems, having been a great Lawgiver among them, and
very prudent in deciding their Controversies; and to him they Offered on
Thursdays Garlands of fragrant Herbs and Flowers; That day taking from him its
denomination, viz. Thorsday, now called Thursday.

6. Friga, or Frea, was Wodens Queen; upon the account of Chastity and other
Virtues, after her Death they set up an Idol in her Likeness, on a Pillar,
resembling Diana, completely Armed to the Waste, with a Bow and a Sword; and to
her were often Sacrificed those Females that had Violated their
Virgin-Chastity: Some Authors allow her to have been Expert in Arms, by whose
Prowess the Ancient Saxons extended their German Territories: and to her was
Dedicated the Sixth Day, called then Frea's-Day, now Friday.

7. Seater: This Idol was placed in the shape of an Old Man, on a Pillar,
treading with his bare Feet on a Perch with sharp pricks on its Back, holding
in his Right Hand a Basket of Fruits, signifying Plenty, and in his Left a
Wheel, signifying Time, when we ought to be careful in laying up our Stores to
prevent Scarcity: He was held in his Life time to be a great Prophet and
Astrologer, telling things to come, and Teaching the Saxons the Course of the
Sun, Moon, and Stars; and to him they Prayed for Knowledge, Wisdom, and hopeful
Children. Spring and Fall, they Offered Fruits to him, and strewed the way to
his Temple with Flowers. For his Worship they appointed the Seventh Day of the
Week, calling it Sater's Day, now Saturday.

They had another Idol resembling the Image of Death, with Flowing Crimson
Robes, holding a Lighted Torch in his Right Hand, and a Lion Rampant on his
Head, by the Left Foot, with his Left Hand. He was placed on a Tomb or
Gravestone, to put them in mind of Mortality, and to show Deaths Obduracy and
Inexorableness, they called him Flint. Before his Shrine, which was set in a
large place, Walled about, without any Covering, they Executed or Sacrificed
Offenders for Extraordinary Crimes, by Fire, Racks, and other Exquisit Tortures.

Having thus given you a Brief Description of the Original and Manners of the
Ancient Saxons, before their coming into this Island; I should now proceed to
give you an Account of the Succession of their several Kings here, during the
time of their Heptarchy, or Seven Kingdoms, until King Edgar overcoming and
subduing all the rest, reduced it again to a Monarchy. But that shall be the
business of the next Chapter.

CHAP. V. The Succession of the Petty Monarchs of the Kentish, South-Saxon, and
East-Saxon Kingdoms; with what Remarkably Happened, during their respective
Reigns, in Peace and War: The Time when they Began and Ended them; with the
Limits of their Dominions.
1. Of the Kingdom of Kent, and the Succession of its seventeen Kings.
HEngist, the first Saxon Invader, as is formerly noted, settled Himself and his
People in the County of Kent, a Fertile part of England, large in Extent,
bounded on the North with the River Thames, by which it is divided from Essex;
on the East, with the Channel; on the West, with Surry; and on the South, with
Sussex: He began to Erect a Saxon Kingdom there, Anno Dom. 455; and had, during
his Thirty Four years Reign, continual War with the Britains; his Brother Horsa
Dying of the Wounds he received in Battle, gave Name to a place called Horsa's
Tomb, now corruptly called Horsted, where he was Buried, and had a famous
Monument erected over his Grave, the Ruins of which, some Hundred Years since
were visible. It is held by Authors of great repute those Stones of a
prodigious bigness on Salisbury Plain, which have created Admiration in the
Beholders, were erected as a Monument where he caused the British Nobles to be
Treacherously Slain, by which means he gained his design on this Kingdom,
making way to its Subjection; for indeed they are commonly to this day called
Stone Hing, or Hengist Stones. They appear to have been a Treble Row of Stones,
circularly placed one within another, Twenty Eight Foot long for the most part,
and Seven Foot broad, viz. those that are reared upright; besides others of
prodigious bigness that lie overthwart from one to another, and are fastened
with Tenants and Mortises; but at this day, the Form of this Wonderful
Structure is very much defaced, some of the greater Stones being either fallen,
or reclining toward the Earth.

Eske, by some called Osea, succeeded Hengist in the Kingdom of Kent; a Man
much inferior to him in Valor and Conduct, therefore to make the People (if
possible) to forget what they were, that he might live the more at Ease, he
Tolerated such of the C^nti as would, to live among his Saxons, on condition
they would take upon them the Name or Epithet of Eskins; and though he Reigned
Twenty Four Years, nothing very Memorable is Recorded of him in History; for
the other Saxon Princes, in settling their Kingdoms, Screening him from the
Incursions of the Britains, and making the seat of War in the Northern and
Western Counties, he had for the most part a Peaceable Reign.

Octa, the Third King of Kent, began his Reign Anno Dom. 513; he provided
prudent and wholesome Laws for the Government of his People, Built several Castles
on the Seacoast, and the Inland Frontiers, commanded the Pagan Idolatries to
be strictly Observed, and Christianity to be Extirpated, sheding much Innocent
Blood on that occasion. In his time strange sights were seen of Dragons, Lions,
and other furious wild Beasts, Fighting in the Air. In the West of Kent it
Rained Wheat, and soon after great Drops of Blood; upon which ensued extreme
Dearth, succeeded by much Bloodshed between his People and the South Saxon
borders about settling their Territories, at the latter end of his Reign, which
continued Twenty Years.

Imerick began his Reign Anno Dom. 533: He made an Edict, That Strangrs should
be Courteously Entertained, and caused Houses of Public Resort to be built on
the Roads, and the Highways to be Mended, and made Passable, at the Public
Charge; building Watch-Towers on the Seacoasts, and setting Lights in them for
the guidance of Saylors: He restrained the severity against the Christians, and
is numbered among the good Saxon Kings; in his time was the Second General
Council held at Constantinople, for all Christendom, Anno Dom. 553. He Reigned
Twenty Nine Years, during which space nothing Memorable of any Warlike Actions
are Recorded of him.

Ethelbert, The Fifth King of Kent, began his Reign 562: He had not long
Reigned, before Cheuline, King of the West Saxons, raised an Army against him;
to Oppose whom, he Mustered great Forces, and at Wimbleton both Hosts joined
Battle, where Ethelbert lost the day; Two of his Dukes, and Five Thousand of
his People, being Slain; and this is Recorded to be the first Open War among
the Saxon Kings; However, a Peace was soon after concluded, and Gregory,
Archdeacon of Rome, seeing some fair Youths of this Island standing in the
Market of that City to be Sold, he demanded from whence they were, and being
told from Britain, out of a Province called Deira, he sighing said, (when he
understood Paganism predominated) Ah it is great pity but their Country should
be Delivered Ira Dei, from the Wrath of God: And coming soon after to be Pope,
he Remembering what he had said, sent Augusting the Monk, accompanied with Forty
Men of several Religious Orders, into Britain, Anno Dom. 596; who making their
Address to King Ethelbert, were by him kindly received, and had Canterbury
(then but a poor Village) allowed them for their Residence, with Liberty to
Convert his Subjects to the Christian Faith; so that by their painful industry
in Preaching, and exemplary Lives, they made a considerable progress in the
Glorious work of Salvation to poor Souls, leading them out of the Darkness of
Paganism, into the Marvelous Light of the Gospel; so that again the Candle was
Lighted, (which God, for the Pride and Lukewarmness of the Christians, had
suffered in a great measure to be Extinguished in this Island; and the King
falling in Love with their Inoffensive Lives, and conceiving a good Opinion of
their Doctrine, was Baptized, with many Thousands of his Subjects, in the
Thirty Sixth Year of his Age, and Fourteenth of his Reign, Anno Dom. 596 for
which God Blessed him with a long and prosperous Reign, viz. Fifty Six Years.

Edelbard the Sixth King of Kent, soon after his coming to the Crown was
Converted by Lawrence Archbishop of Canterbury, (whom Augustine on his
Deathbed had appointed his Successor in that See) whereupon he Divorced
himself from his Mother-in-Law, whom he had Married after his Fathers Death,
and recalled Militus and Jus^us whom he had caused to fly beyond the Seas for
fear of Persecution, restoring them to their Bishoprics. In his time Two
mighty Whales were taken on the Coast of Kent, and a Fight of Birds of various
kinds, were seen in the Air near Rochester, about Noon, whose numbers in that
place in some measure Darkened the Sun for the space of an Hour. He began his
Reign Anno Dom. 618, and Reigned Twenty Four Years.

Ercombert, the Seventh King of Kent, began his Reign Anno Dom. 642. This Man
was a great Lover of the Christians, everywhere in his Dominions suppressing
the Idol Temples, causing the Christian Worship strictly to be Observed
throughout his Dominions, Building diverse Churches, commanding the Fast of Lent
to be kept. He Reigned Twenty Four Years.

Egbert, the Eighth King of Kent, began his Reign Anno Dom. 666. He was of a
cruel Nature, Murdering his two Nephews Ethelred and Ethelbert, to secure the
Kingdom to his Posterity, casting their Dead Bodies into the Medway, a River
running by Rochester and Chattam, whose Water thereupon for a time seemed of the
color of Blood, and was so corrupted that a number of Fish dyed in it; which
was held as a Divine Judgment to upbraid the Murderer; after which he had a
troublesome Reign, his own People murmuring against him, and being often ready
to Rebel: A little before his Death, a terrible Blazing-Star appeared for six
Nights, at South East, soon after the seting of the Sun. He Reigned Nine Years
and odd Days.

Lothaire, the Ninth King of Kent, began his Reign Anno Dom. 675. In his time
there was held the Third General Council at Constantinople, where 600 Bishops
were present, Three of which went from England and had the Precedence given
them before diverse other Nations; Agatho being then Bishop of Rome. Afterward
engaging in a War against Ethelred King of Mercia, and Edrick King of the South
Saxons, he charging in the thickest of the Battle, and endeavoring to break in
upon the Mercian Standard, where that King stood Environed with his Nobles, a
Dart being thrown overthwart with a strong hand, struck him on the Left Side,
and pierced through the Right, so that he instantly fell Dead on the place,
when he had Reigned Eleven Years; and his death so discouraged his Soldiers,
who had before near-gained the Victory, that they quitted the Field and fled.

Ederick, the Tenth King of Kent, was a Man of great Courage; but using some
Cruelty toward his Nobility, they grew displeased with him, and labored to
stir up the common People to a dislike of his Government, and at last raised a
Rebellion against him; and in a great Battle near Maidstone, he was Slain, and
his Body very despitefully used. The Night before this Battle, there were
Groans and Cries heard, as proceeding out of the Air, and most of the Laurels
throughout the Country Withered; after which, great Mischief happened; for the
Victors not agreeing about dividing the spoil, fell into parties, and in
clandestine Broils shed much Blood; so that there was no King in Kent for six
years. This Ederick Reigned only two Years, and ten Days, beginning it Anno Dom.
682.

Withred, the Eleventh King of Kent, upon his Brothers Overthrow, fled from the
Popular Fury to Ine King of the West Saxons, with whom he remained till the
expiration of the six Years; when agreeing with him for a considerable sum of
Money, he Restored him to the Kingdom; which sum, not exceeding 6000 l. being
raised on the Subject, caused great Murmurings; but he quieted them by
promising to Live Frugally, Proclaiming a general Pardon, and granting them
many Privileges which in former Reigns they enjoyed not; so that he lived
rather like a Private Man, than a Sovereign Prince: Yet he had great Wars with
Ethelred, King of Mercia. He Reigned 33 Years, beginning it Anno Dom. 694.

Edbert, the Twelfth King of Kent, Succeeded Withred: He at the beginning of
his Reign labored for Peace, and settled the Kingdom that had been harrassed,
and in a manner destroyed, by the Mercians in the former Reign; Rebuilding the
Churches and Monastries they had Ruinated. But in the Fourth Year of his Reign
the Beacons of Heaven foreshewed more Misery to the already suffering Kingdom,
two Blazing-Stars appearing successively, the one in the South West and the
other at South East; after which, great Dissentions arose among the Saxon
Kings, and much Blood was spilt in diverse places; the Britains were likewise
extremely distressed by the Invading Norhumbers and West Saxons, who penned
them within the Streights and Mountains of Wales, till Famine coming on,
numbers were Starved in the Rocks and Caves whither they had retired for
shelter. He began his Reign Anno Dom. 727, and Reigned 23 Years.

Ethelbert, the Thirteenth King of Kent, began his Reign Anno Dom. 750. At his
coming to the Crown he labored to promote Christianity, gave large Gifts to
the Cathedral Church of Canterbury, and to St. Andrews in Rochester, Built by
Ethelbert the Second, King of Kent: He labored also to keep Peace with his
Neighbors, yet such was the greedy desire of the Saxons to incroach on each
other, having beaten the poor Britains out of all the Counties that were worth
Possessing, that Wars ensued, and much Blood was shed: Yet he Dyed in Peace,
when he had Reigned Eleven Years.

Alrick, the Fourteenth King of Kent, began his Reign Anno Dom. 761; but after
he had Reigned 34 Years, Offa the great King of the Mercians Quarrelled with
him, for Entertaining Duke Edesin who Fled from his Fury; yet this seemed only
a pretense, his Ambition aiming to Annex Kent to his own large Dominions;
whereupon both Armies approaching near Ottford, joined in a Bloody Battle which
lasted Twelve Hours, when Alrick being beaten down and slain with a Battel-Ax,
his Men fled the Field, and were so hotly pursued that many of them were put to
the Sword, and great spoil made through all the Country; which was continued
from the South to the North, as far as the River Humber. In his time The second
General Council was held at Nice, being the seventh General Council for all
Christendom.

Ethelbert the Third, and Fifteenth King of Kent, Usurped the Kingdom after
the Death of Alrick, whereupon Kenwolfe the Mercian (upon his denying to pay
him Tribute and Homage) came against him with a powerful Army, and in a fatal
Battle he was overthrown and taken Prisoner, and carried into Mercia, where he
continued some Years: But Kenwolfe having erected a stately Church at Winchcomb
in Glocestershire, at the Dedication of it, where were present Ten Dukes and
Thirteen Bishops, he sent for him, and at the High Altar freely Released him
without any Ransom, so he returned again to his People. He began his Reign Anno
Dom. 795, and Reigned Three Years.

Cuthred the Sixteenth King of Kent, was (contrary to the mind of the People)
placed in the Throne by Kenwolfe King of Mercia: but nothing Memorable is
Recorded of him. He began his Reign 798 and Reigned Three Years. In his time a
terrible Earthquake happened in this Island, which overthrew many stately
Buildings.

Baldred the Seventeenth and last King of Kent, began his Reign 806 but
displeasing Kenwolfe King of Mercia, he drove him out of the Kingdom, when he
had Reigned Eighteen Years; for the Conqueror annexed it to his own Dominions,
when it had continued a distinct Kingdom 372 Years.

2. Of the South Saxon Kingdom, in the Succession of Four Kings.
Ella, a Captain of the Low Germans, was the first Founder of this Kingdom, as
in the foregoing Chapter is mentioned: At his Landing at Shor^ham in Sussex, he
divided his Forces under his three Sons, viz. Cymen, Plettinger, and Cissa; but
finding he was too weak for the Britains that Inhabited Sussex and Surry, he
was constrained to go over-Sea, to fetch greater Strength: Then in a set Battle
he gave them a fatal Overthrow, forcing them into a vast Wood on the South of
Kent called Andersleger, where many of them perished for want, others stole
away by Night, and some submitted to the Victor; whereupon he settled his
Borders, Bounded on the North with the Thames, dividing it from Middlesex and
part of Buckinghamshire; on the South, with the Ocean; on the West, with
Hampshire; and on the East, with Kent; being Counties exceeding fertile in Corn
and Rich Pastures stored with excellent Fruits, and great numbers of Cattle. He
began his Reign Anno Dom. 488, and continued it 32 Years.

Cissa, Son to Ella, Second King of the South Saxons, began his Reign 520; and
confederating with Cherdick King of the West Saxons, allowing him a small
Tribute for some part of his Country which that King laid claim to by
Priority, he Built Chichester in Sussex, and Chisbury, Fortifying the
Seacoast, opposing France; after that, he laid heavy Taxes on his Subjects;
which Money, when raised, he sent to Cherdick, to maintain his War against the
Britains. So that being sheltered on all sides from their Invasions, he had a
long and peacable Reign, some Historians allow him 76 Years; but this must needs
be a mistake, considering he was at Man's Estate when he came into this Land,
and that his Father Reigned 32 Years; so that the more moderate allow him to
have Reigned only 36 Years.

Ethelwolfe, the Third King of the South Saxons, began his Reign Anno Dom. 596;
at which time diverse terrible and amazing Sights appeared in the Air, of Armies
in Rout, with great noises of Thunder, and flashes of Lightening, many drops of
the color of Blood falling at the same time in diverse parts of Surry, which
seemed to Prognosticate the great Bloodshed that afterward happened, when this
Kingdom was Invaded by Ceadwald, then a Banished Prince of the West Saxons, who
gathering to him Outlaws and other Resolute Persons, in a Mortal Battle slew
Ethelwolfe, and diverse of his Nobles; and pursuing his Victory, entered the
Kingdom of Kent, where he put the Monks to the Sword, levelling with the Ground
all the Religious Houses that he found in his Progress, and then made himself
King of the South Saxons; after which he greatly lamented the desolation he had
made. This Ethelwolfe, a considerable time before his Death, as Bede, a very
Venerable Clergyman Reports, was Converted to the Christian Religion, by Bishop
Wilfrid, though some affirm it to be done by Berinus Bishop of Dorchester. He
Reigned Twenty Five Years.

Barthun, the Fourth King of the South Saxons, and Duke Autban his assistant,
soon after Ethelwolfes Death, prevailed with the People to Banish their
Intruding King Ceadwell, and within a short time Barthun geting the sole Power
into his hands, Ceadwell returned with a great Army, and after a Fight of Eight
Hours, on the Plain now called Banstead-Downs, Barthun was Slain and his
Subjects submitted to the Conqueror, who made himself by this Victory a second
time King of the South Saxons, annexing it by right of Conquest to the West
Saxon Kinghom, after the Succession of Four Kings, who upheld it One Hundred
and Thirty Three Years; It Beginning Anno Dom. 488, and Ending 621. So that by
this Addition the West Saxons became very formidable, not only to the Britains,
but their own Countrymen who bordered on them.

3. The Kingdom of the East Saxons, in the Succession of Fourteen Kings.
This Kingdom Commenced Anno Dom. 522, containing Middlesex and Essex, Counties
abounding in Cattle, Corn, Warrens, store of Deer, Fowl, Fish, and other
advantageous Commodities: Bounded on the North, with Suffolk, Cambridgshire,
and Hartfordshire; on the South, with the River Thames, dividing it from Kent
and Surry; on the West, with Buckinghamshire, and on the East, with the Sea.

Erchenwin was the First Saxon that framed it into a Kingdom, after he had
assisted the other Saxons with the Forces he brought over to drive the Britains
out of their possessions in the Fertile parts of England, and then giving
himself much to Peace, and framing such Laws from those in Germany as best
suited to the welfare of his People in this Country, he continued his Reign
Sixty Years, Dying in Peace Anno Dom. 582.

Sleadda, the Second King of the East Saxons, Succeeding Erchenwin, Encouraged
the Idol Temples, and much Oppressed the Christians at the beginning of his
Reign; but upon seeing a threatening Vision of Angels with drawn Swords
opposing his Progress, he grew much milder at the Latter-end of his Reign,
which began Anno Dom. 582, and ended 591.

Sebert the Third King of the East Saxons (though at first a Persecutor of the
Christians) was at last so far overc^me by their harmless and inoffensive
Lives, that he applying himself to Miletus, the first Bishop of St. Paul's in
London, by his grave Advice was induced to embrace the Christian Religion. This
famous Church was Founded by him and Ethelbert, King of Kent, in the place
where before stood a Temple Dedicated to Diana, wherein many Bloody Sacrifices
had been offered to the supposed Goddess, and so becoming the first Christian
King of the East Saxons, he was a great Encourager of Religious Men and Women,
building at their request diverse other Churches in London and elsewhere. He
began his Reign Anno Dom. 591, and Reigned 21 Years.

Sered, the Fourth King of the East Saxons, began his Reign Anno Dom. 611; He
revoked the Indulgences of his Predecessors to the Christians, and in
attempting to Profane The Lords Table, being withstood by Miletus, the Bishop
of St. Paul's, he Banished him his Dominions; but afterward entering on a War
with Kingills, King of the West Saxons, which continued for some time, he was
in the conclusion of it Slain, when he had Reigned Six Years: A little before
his Death he had a Dream like to that of Smyrdis Son to Cyrus the Great, and
Brother to King Cambysis of Persia, viz. That he sat on the West Saxon Throne,
and his Head reached the Skies; which being falsely Interpreted by his
flatterers, who pushed him on in his Ambitiaus designs, whilst like the other
he lost his Life, though by different means; the first Murdered by his
Brothers command, on a Jealousy he designed to Usurp the Persian Monarchy; and
the latter Fighting to enlarge his Dominions.

Sigesbert, the Fifth King af the East Saxons, began his Reign Anno Dom. 620.
He made several Laws against Murderers and Thieves, that then much abounded in
the Country: In his time a dreadful Fire happened in London, consuming most of
the Eastern part of it; but it was soon Rebuilt, and much enlarged by this
Kings Encouragement; and the Michaelmas following a number of Porpoises came up
the River; whereupon preat Storms followed, and the Thames overflowing laid
many Hundreds of Acres under Water in Kent and Surry. He Reigned Twenty Three
Years.

Sigebert, the Sixth King of the East Saxons, began his Reign Anno Dom. 643. He
Restored again the True Worship in that Kingdom, being persuaded by Oswy King
of the Northumbers to be Baptized by Bishop Finnan, giving Large Gifts to the
Churches and Monasteries, earnestly laboring to settle Peace among his
Neighbors; but being of a very wild temper, and soft by Nature, his two
Brothers took the advantage of his weakness, Conspired against him, and
Murdered him, when he had Reigned Fifteen Years.

Swithelm, the Seventh King of the East Saxons, began his Reign Anno Dom. 658;
upon the entrance on it he became a Christian, and was Baptized by Bishop
Cedda, Ethelwald King of the East Angles being his Godfather. In his time
London began to flourish very much in Trade, the Merchants and Traders having
large Privileges granted them. A little before his Death, A Globe of Fire fell
on St. Paul 's Church, and Burnt the Roof of it. His Reign continued only Three
Years and odd Days.

Sighere, the Eighth King of the East Saxons, began his Reign Anno Dom. 661. He
had embraced the Christian Faith, but Apostatized on a slight Occasion; and of
a Father of the Church, became a Persecutor; but being afflicted with a
grievous Disease, he was smitten with Remorse of Conscience, and (many
Thousands of his Subjects being Destroyed by a raging Pestilence) he Remembered
frem whence he was Fallen, and Returned to the Christian Communion, into which
he was gladly received by an Assembly of the Clergy, who prevailed with him to
destroy the Idols and demolish their Altars. He Reigned Five Years.

Sebba, the Ninth King of the East Saxons, began his Reign Anno Dom. 666, being
given much to a Religious Life, and much Repenting the Blood he had shed when
he was General in the Wars; whereupon, when he had Reigned Thirty Years, he
laid down his Scepter, and took on him a Religious Habit, in the Monastery of
St. Paul's at London, bequeathing his Kingdom to Sigherd his Kinsman.

Sigherd, the Tenth King of the East Saxons, began his Reign Anno Dom. 696. He
sent Forces to assist the West Saxons against the Britains, who made strong
Incursions into their Territories, and carried away great Booties; in the mean
time diverse Pirates from Denmark and Norway Invaded his Seacoasts, Burning and
Plundering many Villages, but a mighty Tempest arising, they suffered
Shipwreck, and so many of them as Escaped to Shore, were destroyed by the
Country Peasants: He Built many Religious Houses, and Reigned Seven Years.

Seofrid, the Eleventh King of the East Saxons, began his Reign Anno Dom. 703.
He Built Forts on the advantageous Havens to the Seacoast, to prevent the
Landing of Foreign Enemies by surprise, encouraging his People to Trade with
the Neighbor Nations; so that many of the North East Countries were
discovered, and great Riches brought home; which caused others, who had
advantageous Havens, to take the like Measures; whereupon the Shiping
increased. He Reigned Seven Years.

Offa, the Twelfth King of the East Saxons, began his Reign Anno Dom. 711. He
was a great Encourager of the Christians, and in his time the Christian
Religion spread into all parts of his Dominions: He Invited over Religious Men
out of other Countries, and ordered Public Schools to be Erected; and being
desirous to see Rome, which he had heard so much of by Fame, when he had
Reigned Eight Years he went thither; and being much taken with the Devotion of
the Religious there, he became a Monk, and Dyed in that station; leaving large
Legacies to the Church.

Selred, the Second, and Thirteenth King of the East Saxons, began his Reign
Anno Dom. 719. In his time a grievous Famine was in this Kingdom for the space
of three Years, so that People in many places were compelled to Eat Grass,
Roots, Leaves, and Barks of Trees; and yet many Thousands were Famished: Great
flashes of Fire likewise Issued out of the Earth, which Burnt up the Trees and
Grass, and Destroyed some People and much Cattle; but soon after a great Plenty
ensued. He Reigned Thirty Eight Years.

Suthred, the Fourteenth and Last King of the East Saxons, began his Reign Anno
Dom. 757. He had great Wars with Egbert King of the West Saxons, so that in
various Battles Fifty Thousand of his People being Slain, he was so weakened,
that not being able to make head any longer, he withdrew himself, and left his
Dominions to the prevailing Enemy, when in much Trouble he had upheld them
Eight Years: So that Egbert annexing it as a Province to his own Kingdom,
Extinguished the Name of the East-Saxon-Kingdom about the Year of Christ 827.

CHAP. VI. A Description of the Kingdoms of Northumberland and Mercia; with the
Succession of their Kings; and the most Memorable Transactions, Portents and
Prodigies, both in Peace and War, that happened during their Reigns.
4. The Kingdom of Northumberland as it Began and continued in the Reigns of
Twenty Five Kings.
THE Kingdom of Northumberland Extended very largly in the North of England,
containing Yorkshire, Durham, Lancashire, Westmorland, Cumberland and
Northumberland: Bounded on the North, with the German Ocean; on the West, with
the Irish Sea, and part of Scotland; on the South, with Cheshire, Derbyshire,
Notinghamshire, and Lincolnshire; abounding with Sea-Coale, Mineralls, Quarries
of Stone, Cattle; Rivers stored with Salmon, Trouts, and other Fish; Fat
Pastures, Fowl, and abundance of Corn.

Ida and Ella, two Saxon Dukes, first Modelled it into a Kingdom, Anno Dom.
597, causing diverse Towns to be Built that had been ruined in the Wars, keeping
strong Guards on their Borders, to defend them against Encroachments; yet after
they had Reigned Fifteen Years, finding themselves too weak to bandy against
the Britains, Picts, and East Angles, who greatly disturbed them in their
Settlement, to render them able to keep what they had Seized, they sent for
five German Captains, who came with more Forces; by which additional Strength,
the Kingdom was Established: But about that time Ida Dying, they Quarrelled
with Ella for their Parts or Shares; whereupon (to prevent the effusion of
Blood, and rending it in pieces by Civil Dissension) it was agreed they should
Reign with him as Co-Parteners Anno Dom. 562.

The Continuance of their Reigns were as follows, 2. Theadwold, 1 Year. 3.
Elappea, 5 Years. 4. Adda, 7 Years. 5. Ferthuf, 7 Years. 6. Theodorick, 7
Years.


But Ella Out-living some, and Banishing others, when he found he was powerful
in the Love of his People, and they hated for their Tyranny, Reigned singly
many Years after, and in all Forty Two, Viz. till 589.

Elthelrick, Accounted (by the foregoing means) the Seventh King of
Northumberland, Succeeding Ella, Anno Dom. 589. His Accession to the Throne was
ushered in by a fearful Blazing Star, and the Sea breaking in near Hortle Pool
in the Bishopric of Durham, swept away diverse Villages, Drowning many People
and Cattle. He had Wars with the Picts, who bordered on the North of his
Kingdom, and in a set Battle, near Wark in Northumberland, gave them a great
overthrow, as also the Scots their Confederates; entering their Kingdom, and
bringing away large Booties, so that they were constrained to sue for Peace,
which was granted: But intending to War on the Britains, Death put a period to
that Enterprise, when he had Reigned four Years Anno 593.

Ethelfrid, the Eighth King of Northumberland, began his Reign Anno Dom. 593,
being a mortal Enemy to the poor Britains, making Inroads into their
Territories, and destroying all before him; when coming to the Monastery of
Bangor in Carnarvanshire, the Monks came out with Presents to meet him, Singing
a Hymn, as a demonstration of his Welcome; but this, and their Innocence (which
they too much trusted in) little availed to Skreen them from his Fury, for
being of a Bloody temper, Eleven Hundred of them in that Monastry, and others
Adjacient, were miserably Massacred at his Command, a little while after the
meeting of Augustine Bishop of Canterbury, with the British Bishops, at
Austin's- Oak in Worcestershire, to settle matters of Religion according as it
was practiced at Rome; but those Bishops in many Points Dissenting from him,
the Assembly abruptly broke up; and for this he is hardly censured (and not
without ground) to be the Instigater of Ethelfrids Cruelty. This Ethelfrid
Fought with Cadwan King of the Britains near West-Chester, and overthrew him
with great slaughter; and after a Peace concluded, which lasted during their
Lives, he Warred on the Scots, and defeated Edanaden their King, at Degsaxton
on the Marches of Scotland, and Banished Edwin his Kinsman, and Heir Apparent
to the Crown; who flying for protection to Redwald King of the East Angles,
they raised an Army; and joining Battle, many of Ethelfrids Soldiers, who bore
good will to Edwin, seeing his Standard in the Field, Revolted; whereupon
Ethelfrid laboring to restore the declining Battle, threw himself like a
desperate Man among the thickest of the Enemies, and was slain when he had
Reigned Thirty Two Years.

Edwin, after the Death of Ethelfrid, was placed by Redwald in the Throne of
the Northumbrian Kingdom, and is accounted the Ninth King. He began his Reign
Anno Dom. 626. It is reported by the Monks of those times (who were mightily
addicted to such Foolish and Superstitious Fables) That in his Banishment the
Apostle St. Paul Appeared to him in a Vision, Preaching to him the Gospel, and
telling him if he would cause it to be freely Preached in the Northumbrian
Kingdom, he should be shortly placed in the Throne; which he then promised to
do; whereupon the Vision laying one Hand on his Head, and Commanding him to
remember that Sign, Vanished: But after he gained his desires, forgeting his
promise, the same Apostle appeared to Paulinus the Bishop of York, and
commanded him to lay his Hand on the Kings Head, and demand if he remembered
that Sign; which he had no sooner done, but Edwin fell at his Feet, begging
Pardon for his neglect, and was thereupon, with many of his Nobles, Baptized at
York; after which he Built many Religious Houses, and was himself a great
promoter of Christianity, sheltering and relieving such as fled the Persecution
of Pagan Kings; which Charitable succor of the distressed, was the main ground
on which Penda, King of the Mercians, founded his Quarrel; so that a Bloody War
ensuing, Edwin and Offrid his Son were slain in Battle; the Mercians at that
time being assisted by Cadwallo King of the Britains, when he had Reigned Seven
Years. In his time he much enlarged the Northumbrian Kingdom, subduing the
Coasts of Britain and the Islands of the Hebrides. To prevent whose progress,
one Eumerius was sent by the West Saxon King to Murder him, but was prevented
by Lillia the Kings Chamberlain, steping between on the push, and receiving the
Mortal Wound in his own Body. He Built the Cathedral at York of Stone, which
before was only of Wood.

Offride, or Osrick, the Tenth King of Northumberland, began his Reign Anno
Dom. 633. By Edwin's Example encouraging and promoting the Christian Religion.
In his time a Little Stream of the Color of Blood burst from a Rock near York,
and soon after entering on a War against Cadwallo King of the Britains he was
Slain, when he had Reigned about a Year.

Oswald, the Eleventh King of Northumberland, began his Reign Anno Dom. 634, he
followed the steps of his Two Predecessors, in promoting the Christian Religion
sending for Adian, a Scotch Bishop of great note, to assist him in so good a
Work; who Preaching in Landesfeorn, or Holy Island, in Scotland, and the King
Interpreting it to the People, many of them were Converted and Baptized. He had
great Wars with the Britains, and in a set Battle slew Cadwallo, the last but
one of the race of the British Kings, and the greatest part of his Army, at
Deniseburn, so that he had Peace on that side; but thinking to gain the like
advantage over Penda the Mercian King, instead of revenging the Death of Edwin,
he underwent the same fate, being slain in Battle after he had Fought
courageously six Hours, and hemmed himself in with Dead Bodies. This great
Battle was Fought at Oswaltree in Shropshire. Nor did the Mercians Cruelty
cease after he was slain, for he Inhumanly caused his Body to be torn in
pieces, when he had Reigned Nine Years.

Oswye, the Twelfth King of Northumberland, began his Reign Anno Dom. 643. And
though he labored for Peace, yet the greatness of his encroaching Neighbors
suffered him to enjoy little quiet; however, he Encouraged Religion and Trade,
and made many wholesome Laws, and one in particular for the Relief of the Poor,
and to prevent Robberies and Murders on the Northern borders; and continued
his Reign 28 Years.

Egfride, the Thirteenth King of Northumberland, began his Reign Anno Dom. 671;
but long he had not enjoyed the Throne, before a fierce War broke out between
him and Ethelred King of Mercia, he first drawing it on his Kingdom, whereby
his People greatly suffered; yet not content with several Defeats, or seeing
the weakness his Subjects were reduced to, he made War on the Irish, because
some of that Nation had Pirated on his Coast; but pursuing them too far among
the Mountains and Fastnesses of craggy Rocks, he was there slain, and most of
his Soldiers that escaped the overthrow, perished for want of Provision, when
he had Reigned Fifteen Years.

Alfrid, the Fourteenth King of Northumberland, began his Reign Anno Dom. 686,
finding the Kingdom much Impaired in its People and Treasure, so that he made
it his first endeavor to restore the face of Trade, appointing Fairs and
Marts, allowing them great Privileges to Invite the Borderers to Trade with
him; and gave Liberty for as many as would, with their Families, to setle in
his Dominions; which caused him to be Envyed by the Saxon Kings his Neighbors;
yet he pacified them with fair Words and Friendly Offices, making a Law, That
distressed Strangers, Traveling about their Lawful Occasions, should be
Maintained at the Public Charge: So that his Reign continued for the most part
Peaceable, Religion flourishing under it Twenty Years.

Osred, the Fifteenth King of Northumberland, began his Reign Anno Dom. 706 but
led a Life very contrary to his Predecessor, giving himself up to all manner
of Debauchery, making it his Business to visit the Nunneries, that he might
single out the fairest for his Lust, which he Commanded to his Bed with great
rigor; insomuch that some of those Virgins preferring their Chastity before
Life, suffered Martyrdom rather than they would yield to his desires; so that
whilst he held on this course, the Kingdom was much distracted with Intestine
Broils, his Nobles grew unruly, and the poorer sort were Oppressed; so that to
free the Kingdom from impending Ruin, Kenred and Oswick, two of his near
Kinsmen, Conspired against him, and Slew him, when he had Reigned Nine Years,
and then Successively Governed the Relm.

Kenred, the Sixteenth King of Northumberland, having Conspired with Oswick,
and Slain Osred, caused the Crown to be placed on his Head Anno Dom. 716; yet
found a very troublesome Reign, his Co-partner in the Conspiracy laboring to
supplant him; and indeed his Reign was very short, continuing only two Years.

Oswick having made his way to the Throne, Anno Dom. 718, labored to settle
himself in the Affections and good liking of the People, by giving large Gifts
to the Nobles, and in distributing Corn to the Poor out of his Granaries, in
his Second Year when a great Scarcity happened; so that in his Eleven Years
Reign, he kept his People quiet at home, and for the most part free from Wars
abroad.

Cealnulf, the Eighteenth King of the Northumberian Kingdom, began his Reign
Anno Dom. 722, devoting himself soon after his coming to the Crown to a
Religious Life, causing many Abbeys and Monasteries to be Builded, Endowing
them with competent Annuities, for the Maintenance of Men and Women qualified
to enter into Religious Orders; so that a great many resorted to him from
beyond the Seas, whom he kindly entertained; and being much taken with their
manner of Living, when he had Reigned Eight Years, growing weary of an Earthly
Diadem, he laid the weight of Government aside, and withdrawing himself to
Holy Island, took on him the Habit of a Monk; where in a little Monastery he
had caused to be Built, he spent the remainder of his Days. In the last Year of
his Reign, Two Blazing Stars Appeared; the one after Sunset, and the other a
little before its Rising, continuing so to do for the space of a Fortnight,
Terrifying the People by seeming often to dart Firey Lances from their Blazing
Tails.

Egbert, the Nineteenth Monarch of Northumberland, began his Reign Anno Dom.
738, in the beginning of which, Fleeces like Wool seemed to drop out of the
Clouds, covering many large Fields and Plains, as if it had been Snow; and soon
after a terrible Rot happened among Sheep all over England, etc. He appointed
his Nobles to here the Complaints of the Poor, and to redress their Wrongs and
Grievances; studdying to keep his Subjects Quiet at Home, by securing Peace
Abroad; and when he had Reigned Twenty Years, following the Example of his
Predecessor, he was shorn a Monk, and Dyed in that state.

Oswulph, the Twentieth King of Northumberland, began his Reign Anno Dom. 758,
and continued it but one Year; for growing Proud and Cruel, putting diverse
undeservedly to Death, his own Servants grew into such a hatred of him, that
attending him in his Progress, they found an Opportunity to Murder him at
Mickewoughton; of which Conspiracy though he was Informed the day before, yet
Fate consented not to its Prevention.

Edilwald, the One and Twentieth King of Northumberland, began his Reign Anno
Dom. 759; but being of an easy Temper, and somewhat Supine in the Management
of his Affairs, which (after many Troubles that thereupon arose, through the
Male Administration of the Government, by such as he placed under him, in Trust
and Great Offices) gave Alured, a Duke, and high in Favor with him, an
opportunity to Conspire against him, and Murder him in his Palace, in the
Sixth Year of his Reign.

Alured, having Trecherously Slain Edilwald, compelled some through fear, and
won others by large Gifts, to Proclaim him King, Anno Dom. 765. But using much
Cruelty, and giving himself up to Riot and Luxury, his Subjects grew weary of
his Government, and by General Consent, Expelled him the Kingdom, when he had
Reigned Nine Years.

Ethelred, upon the Expulsion of Alured, was admitted to the Throne, Anno Dom.
774. But his Government being distasted by the Nobles, because he advanced mean
Persons to great Dignities, and made them his Favorites, two of them, Viz.
Edibald and Herbert, made a Faction, and Banished him the Kingdom, in the Fifth
Year of his Reign; but he was afterward Re-called, upon promise of Amendment;
yet not keeping of his Word, in many nice particulars, his Subjects rose up in
Arms, and Slew him, after his Seven Years Second Reign; whereupon much Misery
ensued to the Kingdom by Usurpers, who Tyrannized over the People, and Slew
whom they pleased at their pleasure: Till

Alfwald, a Prince of the Royal Blood, took the Government upon him, putting
some of the Usurpers to Death, and Banished others; but he was Murdered by the
Conspiracy of one Siga, when he had Reigned Eleven Years. During these
Disturbances and Murders of Kings, many terrible Sights appeared in the Air,
hollow Groanings, and, as it were, Laments, were heard in the Earth, in diverse
places; and affrighting Apparitions of Ghosts and Spectrums Haunted the
Palaces and Houses of Noblemen and others.

Osred, the Twenty Fifth King of the Northumbrians, Entered upon the Government
much distracted and disordered by Intestine Troubles, so that wanting Power to
keep a steady rein, to bridle the unruly People, they Justled him from the
Throne, and Expelled him the Kingdom, when he had Reigned about a Year. And
though this Kingdom is held by some to last much longer, Viz. to Anno Dom. 926,
yet no Historian, I can find, making mention of any other Kings, I rather choose
to End here, than wade into uncertainties, which would not only break the
Thread of History, but leave the Reader to wander in Dark and Doubtful Notions:
Therefore concluding that some Authors, who have allotted so long a time, were
Mistaken, for want of comparing the Continuance of this, with the rest of the
Petty Kingdoms of the Saxon Heptarchy, from the times they Began till they were
reduced under a Sole Monarch; I shall proceed to the next, which is the Kingdom
of Mercia, etc.

5. The Kingdom of Mercia, in the Succession of its Twenty Kings, or Petty
Monarchs, etc.
The Kingdom of Mercia, seized and settled by the most powerful of the Saxon
Invaders, is accounted the Largest of the Seven. It Contained Hartfordshire,
Bedfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Warwickshire, Staffordshire, Worcestershire,
Gloucestershire, Shropshire, Cheshire, Oxfordshire, Notinghamshire, Derbyshire,
Leicestershire, Northamptonshire, Lincolnshire, Huntingtonshire, and the County
of Rutland; so that it was Enclosed by the other six Kingdoms, and consequently
(when the Britains were brought Low, and the Saxons Elbowed each other, to
Enlarge their Territories) most exposed to War, as will appear in the ensuing
Account of the Actions of its Kings, in the Succession of Twenty of them; for
so many Reigned, before it ceased to be a distinct Kingdom. It was Bounded on
the East, with the Kingdoms of the East Angles, East Saxons, and German Ocean;
on the South, with the East Saxon and West Saxon Kingdoms; on the West, with
Wales; and on the North, with the Kingdom of Northumberland: Abounding with
Cities, Towns, Cattle, Corn, Lead, Fruit, Pastures, Rivers, Parks, Chaces,
Woods, and Pleasant Rising Hills, and Flowery Meadows; which soon made them
grow Rich and Powerful.

Crida was the First Saxon who made himself King of so spacious a Country;
Beginning his Reign Anno Dom. 582. Against him the Britains Warred, but with
various success; sometimes the one, and sometimes the other, prevailing; so
that much Blood was spilt: But at last, the Britains being mightily weakened in
a Bloody Battle, Carecticus their King immured himself within the walls of
Chester. But being Besieged by Grummond, an Arch Pirate, who commanded part of
Cridas Forces; and the Saxons not being able to force the Walls, which were
stoutly defended by the broken Army of the Britains, retired thither with their
King: Grummond Invented a Stratagem to Fire the City, and drive them out like
Bees Smok'd from their Hive, or Perish in the Flames; which was effected by
tying Wildfire to the Feet of Sparrows and Swallows, who lighting on the
Thatched Houses set them on Fire, and laid the whole City in a heap of Ruins;
but the British King with a few Followers Escaped by Night to the Mountains of
Wales, and there soon after Dyed of Grief, for the loss of his People, and
desolation of his Country. This Crida Reigned Twelve Years.

Wibba, the Second King of Mercia, began his Reign Anno Dom. 594. This Man
Warred with the Britains, and took from them almost all the pleasant Countries
they held on his Borders, considerably Enlarging what he at first Possessed,
though not without great effusion of Blood on both sides; so that the Dead
Bodies lying unburied, corrupted the Air, and caused a Pestilence that
destroyed many Thousands. He Reigned Twenty Years.

Ceorle, the Third King of Mercia, began his Reign Anno Dom. 614; He finding
his Kingdom Large, sent over for more Collonies to People it, and repair the
loss of those that fell in the Wars; and then having settled his Borders, and
placed Garrisons on the Frontiers, his next business was, to provide such Laws
as might the better Establish him in his Kingdom; especially for The preventing
Treason, and apprehending Outlawes, or those desperate Persons that lurked in
Woods, Robbing and Murdering such as passed by them; Commanding a certain
quantity of Land to be Sowed every Year, on great Penalties to the Counties
where the Land enjoined lay, if neglected. He had some Wars with the Britains,
but nothing considerable to those of his Predecessors. He Reigned Ten Years.

Penda, the Fourth King of Mercia, began his Reign Anno Dom. 624, and made
great War upon his Neighbors. He joined with Cadwallo the Twelfth King of the
Britains, against Edwin King of Northumberland, and in a Memorable Battle Slew
him, with Prince Offrid his Son; and afterward Oswald, who succeeded Edwin: And
Warring on the East Angles, he made great waste of their Country, Slaying
successively three of their Kings, Viz. Sigesbert, Eyrick, and Anna; and being
a Pagan, he pursued with Cruel Hatred those who Professed the Christian
Religion, so that The Church mourned his Anger in Tears of Blood, he turning
the places of Religious Worship into heaps of Rubbish, and Slaying as many as
fell into his hands, that were the Heads or Chief of the Religious Orders. Then
making War on the West Saxons, he defeated Redwald their King, in a bloody
Battle, and Slew him with many Thousands of his Subjects, much Enlarging his
own Kingdom; so that aspiring to the sole Monarchy, and having strongly Pushed
and Elbowed his Neighbors in the East and West, enterprizing the like in the
North, he was Slain by Oswy King of Northumberland, in a pitched Battle, with
Ten Thousand of his Subjects, when he had Reigned 32 Years.

Peada, alias Wedda, the Fifth King of Mercia, began his Reign Anno Dom. 665.
He was the first Christian King of the Mercians, causing the Idols every where
to be destroyed throughout his Kingdom, Banishing their Priests that refused to
be Baptized, building Churches and Monasteries; but before he had fully brought
to pass what he intended in this Matter, the Pagan Priests incited his Wife
(some Authors say his Mother) secretly to Murder him, when he had Reigned
Three Years.

Wolfer, the Sixth King of Mercia, began his Reign Anno Dom. 659; He Warred on
the West Saxons, and won the Isle of Wight from Remald, then King of that
Island, and gave it to Edilwach King of the South Saxons, to whom he stood
Godfather, upon condition of his being Baptized into the Christian Faith;
though so great an Enemy he was to the Christians, before his Conversion, That
he Caused his two Sons to be put to Death for being Baptized; but as a Penance
for that Sin, and to Atone for Innocent Blood, he Founded the Abbey Church at
Peterbourough in Northamptonshire, and Endowed it with large Gifts. He Reigned
Sixteen Years, and odd Months.

Ethelred, the Seventh King of Mercia, began his Reign Anno Dom. 675. He made
Wars on the Kentish Kingdom, laying it desolate in a manner with Fire and
Sword; not sparing Churches, or any Religious Houses. This Desolation was
forewarned by the appearance of two dreadful Blazing Stars, which were Vissible
for the space of three Months; at the Instance of his Wife, he turned
Willfridus out of his Bishopric; but at last being stricken with Remorse of
Conscience, for the Slaughters and other Wastes he had made, he resigned his
Crown and Government to Kenred his Nephew, whose Right it was before; and
turning Monk, made a Religious End, though he had Lived Wickedly the greatest
part of his days. He Reigned Twenty Nine Years.

Kenred began his Reign Anno Dom. 704; but seemed little to affect an Earthly
Diadem, laboring to be at Peace with his Neighbors, by restoring as much as
lay in his power what his Predecessor had Violently taken from them; and when
he had Reigned Five Years, he resigned his Kingdom to his Cousin Chelred, and
took his Journey to Rome, with Offa King of the East Saxons, and Edwin Bishop
of Winchester; where he became a Monk, and Dyed in that station. He was the
Eighth King of Mercia.

Chelred, the Ninth King of the Mercians, began his Reign Anno Dom. 709, but
had not long been in the Throne, e're Ine, or Inas King of the West Saxons,
emulating his spreading greatness, Quarrelled with him about the Boundaries of
their Kingdoms; so that a fatal War ensued, and much Blood was shed, they being
now the Two most Powerful Kings of the Heptarchy; so that others siding with
them, the whole Nation was Embroyled in their Quarrel; nor ended it with his
Reign, which lasted Seven Years.

Ethelbald, the Tenth King of Mercia, began his Reign Anno Dom. 716. He raised
great Forces, and laying Siege to Summerton, had it Surrendered; Then he turned
his whole Power on the Northumbrians, Ravaged the Country, and took great
Spoil; but in his return, Cuthred, King of the West Saxons, gave him Battle,
for lucre of the spoil, and routed him at Burford in Oxfordshire; and after
that, another great Overthrow near Tamworth in Warwickshire, where by the
procurement of one Bernzed, a principal Captain in his Host, he was Slain in a
Mutiny of his People, when he had Reigned Twenty Four Years. He is said to have
Builded the Monastery of Crowland, and diverse other Religious Houses.

Offa, the Eleventh King of Mercia, began his Reign Anno Dom. 758. He Warred
upon Alrick King of Kent, Slaying him in Battle near Otteford, and made great
Spoil and Destruction in his Kingdom, as also that of the South Saxons; and
puffed up with Victory, not so contented, he Marched through the Countries of
the East Saxons, as far as the Mouth of the River Humber, bringing great Terror
on the Northumbrian Kingdom; and at his Return Kenwolf King of the West Saxons,
endeavoring to Intercept him with great Power, in hopes to be Master of the
Rich Booty he had gathered in diverse Counties, he was by him Overthrown, with
much Slaughter, near Merton. This Offa caused a Ditch of Forty Eight Foot Wide,
and Fifteen Deep, to be Cut or Thrown up, running a Line between England and
Wales; (the tract of which is yet visible, and retains the Name of Offa's
Ditch) commanding the Britains under the Penalty of being pursued with Fire and
Sword, not to pass this Bound. But they little regarding his Threats, threw it
down in diverse places, and came Armed into Mercia, making great Spoil, though
it proved to their disadvantage; for Offa entering Wales with a Potent Army,
Overthrew Marmodius their Prince, and most of his Followers, wasting the Towns
and Villages with Fire, for near Fifty Miles. This Offa Reigned Thirty Nine
Years. In his time a terrible Earthquake overthrew many Churches and stately
Buildings.

Egfrid, the Twelfth King of Mercia, began his Reign Anno Dom. 797. This Man
was well affected to the Christian Religion; Restoring the Church to all her
Ancient Privileges, which his Father had deprived her of, contributing to the
Rebuilding those that had been laid in Ruins by Offa in Kent, and other
Counties. He was a great lover of Peace, and labored to reconcile those that
were at difference; yet his Reign was very short, continuing only Four Months
and odd Days.

Kenwolf, the Thirteenth King of Mercia, began his Reign Anno Dom. 797. He
Warred on the Kingdom of Kent and made great Spoil, Overthrowing Ethelbert the
Third, and taking him Prisoner, but Released him at the Dedication of a new
Church he had Builded at Winchcomb, and afterward much Enlarged his Borders,
during his Twenty Two Years Reign.

Kenelm coming Young to the Crown, Anno Dom. 819, was much given to Pleasure
and Recreations, leaving the chief Management of his weighty Affairs to
Askbert his Tutor, who greatly Enriched himself by Oppressing the People; and
fearing to be called to a strict Account, upon the many Complaints made against
him, he Conspired with Quendride, the Kings Sister, whose Favorite he was, to
cover the Guilt of his crimes with a greater; so that taking an opportunity,
when the King was in his Retirement, he Murdered him, when he had Reigned
about Five Months. He was the Fourteenth King of Mercia.

Ceolwolfe Succeeding Kenelm, labored to settle Affairs, which were much out
of order; but the Methods of his proceedings being disliked, one Bernulfe, (a
Duke, very Powerful at that time, among the common People) stirred them up to
Rebellion; so that rising Tumultuously, they forced him to Abdicate the Throne
by a secret withdrawing, to prevent the dire effects of Popular-Fury, when he
had Reigned One Year. So that for a time, great Distractions were amongst them;
but Anno Dom. 821 Bernulfe got possession of the vacant Throne. This Ceolwolfe
was the Fifteenth King of Mercia.

Bernulfe by Flattery, distribution of Money, and fair Promises, getting
possession of the Kingdom, found great Troubles from his Powerful Neighbors
the West Saxons and East Angles; Egbert, King of the former, making fierce Wars
upon him, wasting his Borders, and destroying multitudes of his People; and
after, Bernulfe Warring on the East Angles, who had entered Lincolnshire, and
made great Spoil, was Slain in a bloody Battle with many Thousands of his
Subjects, in the Third Year of his Reign, Anno Dom. 824. He was the Sixteenth
King of Mercia.

Ludecan, the Seventeenth King of the Mercians, began his Reign Anno Dom. 824;
but being embroyled in the dangerous War his Predecessor had set on foot,
engaging in a Battle against Egbert King of the West Saxons, who joined with
the East Angles against him, he was Slain in the Second Year of his Reign;
after which, most of the Towns on the East and Western Borders were Sacked, and
some reduced to Ashes: Which Desolation was fore-run by a Comet with a Tail
pointing downward, like a flaming Sword.

Watlaf, the Eighteenth King of Mercia, began his Reign Anno Dom. 826; and with
the Kingdom, was constrained to espouse the Wars his Predecessors had left, as
it were, Entailed on it; so that raising the Strength of his much harassed and
weakened Dominions, he drove the West Saxons out of Worcestershire, and other
Western Encroachments; yet not without considerable loss, in the several
Bickerings between them: But in the Thirteenth Year of this King, Egbert the
West Saxon, came upon him with a potent Army, and in a set Battle overthrew
him, putting a Period to his Life and Reign.

Berthulf, the Nineteenth King of Mercia, came to the Kingdom in a troublesome
time, viz. Anno Dom. 839; for he not only found his People in War with his
Countrymen, but a more cruel Enemy had Invaded the Country, viz. The Pagan
Danes, who being Enemies to all alike, as desirous of grasping the sole
Monarchy of this Island, they made such Havoc and Desolation in all places
where they prevailed, That the People of whole Counties, in the Northern parts,
flying their fury, left the Towns Naked and Defenseless; for the Saxons in
Civil War having much impaired their strength, found that they at this time
were too weak to oppose the Torrent of those Multitudes that were poured in
upon them from Denmark and Gothland, and also from Shetland, the Orcades, and
other Northern Islands, which the Danes possessed beyond Scotland; from one of
which they brought a Cruel People called Redshanks, from the Redness of their
long Legs, occasioned by the coldness of that Climate, they going for the most
part Naked, except a Mantle thrown over their Shoulders; and are supposed, by
some Authors, for their mighty stature, to be of the Race of the Titans or
Giants, held once to Inhabit part of Britain: However, they brought such a
Terror on the Mercian Kingdom, etc. That Berthulf was forced to quit it in the
Thirteenth Year of his Reign; after which, in compassion to the oppressed
People, who were Slain and Spoiled at the pleasure of the Danes,

Burdred took upon him the Government; and being a Prince of great Courage, he
fought diverse Battles with the Danes, and at last gained a great Victory;
insomuch that the Fields and Lanes were strewed with the Dead Bodies. But
greater Forces arriving to recruite their broken Army, he was forced, after
some struggling, to quit his Kingdom, when he had Reigned Twenty Two Years, viz.
Anno Dom. 872. And with him Ended the Succession of Saxon Kings, as petty
Monarchs of the Mercian Kingdom.

CHAP. VII. The Kingdoms of the East Angles and West Saxons, with their
respective Succession of Kings; and what Happened of Note during their Reigns,
in Peace and War; Particularly the Danish Invasion; and by what means England
was reduced under a Sole Monarchy.
6. The East Angle Kingdom Described, with the Succession of its Fifteen Kings.
THE Kingdom of the East Angles contained Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridgeshire, and
the Isle of Ely; Bounded on the East, with the German Ocean; on the South, with
Essex and Hartfordshire; on the West, with Notinghamshire, Huntingtonshire, and
part of Bedfordshire; on the North, partly by the German Ocean, and partly by
the River Trent, and Northumbrian Kingdom; Commodiously Situate for Navigation,
as being accommodated with diverse good Havens, famous for Butter, Cattle, Corn,
Wool, Cloth, Stuffs, etc. The First Saxon Founder of this Kingdom was

Offa, a High German Nobleman, who brought over considerable Forces, upon
notice his Countrymen were parcelling out the Southern parts of this Island;
and Landing at Yarmouth, he prevailed, with some difficulty, to settle himself
and his People, in the Counties abovementioned; beginning his Reign Anno Dom.
575, and Reigned Seven Years, being for the most part at peace. In his time, a
great Eclipse of the Sun happened about Noon, almost total, so that it
continued in a great degree Dark, for the space of an Hour.

Titulus Succeeding Vffa, Anno Dom. 583, labored to settle his Borders, and
keep a good understanding with his Neighbors; and perceiving the British
Forces were rather Retired than Subdued, he made many wholesome Laws to keep his
People in order, repaired the Ruined Towns, built Forts on the Seacoast, and
Reigned about 32 Years, keeping his Country for the greater part of that time
in Quiet, he was the Second King of the East Angle Kingdom.

Redwald, the Third King of the East Angles, began his Reign Anno Dom. 616.
Soon after his coming to the Throne, he was Baptized into the Christian Faith;
but upon some distaste, renounced his Baptismal Vows, and became a great
Persecutor of the Christians; amongst others, he intended the Death of Edwin
afterward King of Northumherland, who fled to his Court for Refuge, because he
interceeded for them. But he being a Favorite of the Queens, and the King
imparting his design to her, she pitying the young Prince, so labored to
dissuade him from it, that he not only laid aside his wicked purpose, but
entered into a strict League with him, and an Army was raised to place him in
the Kingdom of Northumberland; when in a great Battle they Slew Ethelfrid, who
had got possession of the Throne, and had Banished Edwin. This Redwald Reigned
Eight Years.

Erpenwald, the Fourth King of the East Angles, began his Reign Anno Dom. 624.
He, by the persuasion of Edwin King of Northumberland, became a Favourer of the
Christians, and was Baptized; he built diverse Churches, and Monasteries; but
when he had Reigned about Twelve Years, Richebert a Pagan Saxon, (out of a Zeal
to their False Gods, whose Idol Temples this King had caused to be converted
into places of Christian Worship) Assnssinated him, and fled; but being taken,
endeavoring to pass the Seas, he was put to death by exquisit Torments.

Sigebert, the Fifth King of the East Angles, began his Reign Anno Dom. 636. He
was Son to Redwald, and having received a good opinion of the Christian
Religion, (when he was very Young) he upon his Fathers Apostatizing fled into
that Country now called France, anciently Gallia; where he improved in the
Study of Divine things, so that being a great lover of Learned Men, at his
coming to the Crown he Founded a College, Endowing it with a plentiful
Maintenance, viz. Anno Dom. 637; and so passionately he was in love with a
Religious manner of Living, that laying aside his Crown, when he had Reigoed
Two Years, he took on him the Habit of a Monk; yet out of compassion to his
suffering People, Invaded and driven to great distress, by Penda King of the
Mercians, he laid aside his Cowl, and reassumed his Crown; when in Battle
against him, he was Slain, in the Third Year after his coming to the Crown.

Egrick, or Edrick (for by both Namers Authos make mention of this King) began
his Reign Anno Dom. 638. He continued the War against the Mercians, and gave
them diverse Foiles; but coming to a pitched Battle, endeavoring to break in
upon Penda's Standard, he was Slain; upon which his Army was so disheartened,
that many of them throwing down their Weapons, a general Rout and Flight
ensued; whereupon the Mercians following with great fury, about Seven Thousand
were Slain, and not less than Three Thousand of the Mercians. He began his
Reign Anno Dom. 638, and Reigned Four Years.

Anna, the Seventh King of the East Angles, began his Reign Anno Dom. 642, and
although he Reigned Twelve Years, yet few of his Actions are Recorded, more
than that he endeavored to settle his Kingdom, and labored for Peace with his
Neighbors, which at last was accorded, though on very hard conditions.

Ethelbert, the Eighth King of the East Angles, finding he was too weak to
oppose the Northumbrians, who had got strong footing in the Northern Frontier
Towns, he made a League with Penda King of Mercia, at which Oswye King of
Northumberland, being much disgusted, raised a great Army; and War being
denounced, the East Angles and Mercians thinking it not convenient to stay his
coming, resolved to place the seat of War in his Country; but in their March, a
fatal Omen seemed to forbid it, viz. Two Flights of Birds, (one from the North,
and the other from the South) met, and Encountered over their Host with such
Fury, that many drops of Blood, as it had been small sprinklings of Rain, fell
from the Wounds made on each other with their Bills and Talons, till at last
the Southern Flight turned Tail, with a strange Noise, or Cries, and were
Pursued till out of sight. Soon after this, Penda, Ethelbert, and their
Confederates, joined Battle with Oswye near Leeds in Yorkshire; and in a great
Overthrow of their Armies, the two Kings were Slain with 18000 of their Men, and
among them 30 Dukes and chief Leaders. This Ethelbert Reigned two Years.

Edelwald, the Ninth King of the East Angles, began his Reign Anno Dom. 656. He
purchased his Peace with a great Sum, when he found he was too feeble to oppose
his Enemies; and gave up Cantionary Towns to the Northumbers, for the security
of payment: This caused a Murmuring among his Subjects, which broke into
Tumults; so that much grieved at his misfortunes Abroad and at Home, he Dyed,
when he had Reigned Eight Years.

Aldulfe, the Tenth King of the East Angles, was advanced to the Crown Anno
Dom. 664, in a very troublesome time; however with some difficulties, he
brought the Kingdom to a settlement, and continued his Reign Ninteen Years. In
his time a terrible Earthquake happened, giving three violent shocks, which
shattered and overturned diverse massy Buildings; but the greatest damage fell
upon the City of London, many People being destroyed by the fall of Chimneys,
Houses, etc. And soon after so great a Frost happened, That loaded Carts went
over the principal Rivers, as securely as if it had been on dry Land.

Elfwold, the Eleventh King of the East Angles, began to Reign Anno Dom. 683.
The Danes in his time began to be troublesome, and Invaded the Scots and
Callidonians, commiting terrible Outrages in Argyleshire, and other parts,
subduing all the Islands belonging to Scotland, advancing after many Battles,
upon the Picts, and as far as the Tweed; whereupon those Nations craved Aid of
this, and other Saxon Kings, to Expel them; urging, as a main reason, the
Mutual Danger they were in, by the Invasion of so powerful an Enemy; which
(though it proved fatally true) was at that time little minded. This King
Reigned Seven Years.

Beorne, the Twelfth King of the East Angles, began his Reign Anno Dom. 690:
And though he continued it Twenty Four Years, yet there is nothing Memorable
Recorded of him, as to certainty of History, but his Building some Monasteries,
and making diverse good Laws for the well Governing of his Subjects.

Ethelred, the Thirteenth King of the East Angles, began his Reign Anno Dom.
714. In his Second Year, on Midsummer-Day at Sunseting, dark Clouds overspread
the Skies, and then withdrawing, the Element seemed on Fire; after that, many
fearful sights appeared in the Air, of Armies and Monsterous Creatures; upon
which followed so great a Storm, that many Ships were broken to pieces in the
Havens, mighty Oaks rent up, and Houses overturned. He Reigned, sometimes in
War and at others in Peace, Thirty Five Years.

Ethelbert, the Second of that Name, and the Fourteenth King of the East
Angles, began his Reign Anno Dom. 749. He, in the last Year of his Reign, sent
Ambassadors to Offa King of Mercia, to treat of Peace, and the restoring some
Towns taken from him and his Predecessors, which Offa seemed enclinable to
hearken to, sending them back with Presents and Rewards, as also a dissembling
Letter to Invite Ethelbert to his Court, under pretense of giving him his
Beauteous Daughter Alfrida in Marriage, that the League between them might be
the stronger; but indeed aiming to add the East Angle Kingdom to his own
Dominions; and having gotten the too credulous Prince in his power, he
consulted with Quindride how he should dispose of him, to accomplish his
designs; who being a Woman Inured to Blood and Mischief, Counseled his Death,
which was performed in the height of Jollitry, by disguised Ruffians; so that
instead of a Bridal Bed, he had an untimely Grave, when he had Reigned Forty
Five Years.

Edmund, the Fifteenth and last King of the East Angles, began his Reign Anno
Dom. 794. He was a great encourager of Religious Persons, allowing large Sums
to Churches and Churchmen; but one of his Nobles whom he had constituted as
Vice Roy, Ravishing the Beauteous Wife of Beorn, a Nobleman, who in his
Progress had sumptuously Feasted him; This Beorn preferring his private Revenge
to the good of his Country, called in the Danes, (who before were much
discouraged) and charge the Guilt on Innocent King Edmund, because he had not
put the Offender to Death, as the Law then directed; which indeed, he durst not
do, the other being grown too powerful for him. And now the King being
Overthrown in diverse Battles, his Country scattered over with his Slain
Subjects, and most of the principal Towns laid in Ruins, he was constrained to
fly for shelter to Framingham Castle, where the Danes Besieged him, and through
Famine and loss of Men constraining the Garrison to Surrender, they stripped
the King of his Royal Robes, beat his Naked Body with Cudgels, scourging him
till the Bones of his Ribs appeared bare, he bearing it patiently all the
while, calling on the Name of Jesus; which so enraged the Pagans, That Tying
him to a Post, they Shot him to Death with Arrows, then cut off his Head, and
threw it into a Wood, which being found by a Shepherd, was Buried, together
with his Body, at a place in Suffolk, bearing from thence the Name of St.
Edmunds-Bury; he being soon after Cannonized a Saint and Martyr; And with him
ceased the East Angle Government; there being no mention made of any more Kings
that Governed it, as a distinct Kingdom. About the number of Years he Reigned,
Authors disagree; and therefore I pass them over as uncertain, and proceed to
the last of the Seven Kingdoms, viz. That of the West Saxons.

7. The West Saxon Kingdom described, with the Succession of its Kings; and
what things worthy of History happened during their respective Reigns. Also by
what means they at last Obtained the Sole Monarchy of England, etc.
The Kingdom of the West Saxons contained the spacious and fertile Counties of
Cornwall, Devonshire, Dorcetshire, Somersetshire, Wiltshire, Hampshire, and
Barkshire: Bounded on the North, with Monmouthshire, Gloucestershire,
Oxfordshire, and Bristol-Channel; on the East, with Sussex, Surry, and part of
Buckinghamshire; on the South, with the British-Ocean, and part of the Channel;
on the West, with the Ocean. These Counties abound in plenty of Corn, Wool,
Tinn, Fruits, Cattle, and profitable Manufactures; having many Excellent
Harbors, opening advantageously to the Sea; so that growing by such means Rich
and Powerful, they failed not at length to bring under the other Kingdoms,
Uniting them in a Sole Monarchy under Egbert their Seventeenth King, as in the
Series of this History will appear.

Cherdick, a Valiant Captain of the Low Country Germans, first labored to form
these Counties into a Kingdom; but before he could do it, he had Six Years Wars
with the Britains; in which he Fought a great Battle with Aurelius Ambrosius
their King, and was put to the Rout; but upon his Death, which happened Two
Years after by Poison, as has been related, Vter-Pendragon, Brother to
Aurelius, being Crowned King of the Britains, he borrowed Forces of Hengist,
who were sent under the Leading of Ebusa and Octa his two Sons; but these
Forces were, as the former, overthrown by Vter-Pendragon, and Hengists Sons
were taken Prisoness; but whilst the Victor neglected the Tents of Mars for the
softer Alcove of Venus, viz. To sport with the fair Igren, Wife to the Duke of
Cornwall, on whom he got the Renouned Prince Arthur, who Succeeded him as King
over the Britains, the Noble Captives Escaped; and again advancing their
Standard in the Field; were Slain with most of their followers. These bad
beginnings so startled Cherdrick, that he found little hopes to keep the
footing he had gained; but more Forces coming unexpectedly to his Aid, he
resolved to try another Battle with the Britains, which was Fought near
Salisbury, wherein Fortune turning her Wheel about, he put the British Army to
the Foil, killing Natauleon, one of their great Captains; and made so great a
slaughter of his Enemies, that for a time he had no Interruption in settling
his Affairs; but after the Death of Vter-Pendragon, (who Died of Poison put
into a Well, whereof he used to Drink every Morning) King Arthur gave great
disturbances to him in the settlement of his new acquired Kingdom, much Blood
being shed between them in diverse Battles; yet beginning his Reign Anno Dom.
501, he continued it Thirty Three Years.

Kenrick, the Second King of the West Saxons, began his Reign Anno Dom. 534. He
was Son to Cherdick, and a Mortal Enemy to the Britains. In his Fathers time he
Commanded a part of the Army, and Fought several Battles, and now coming to the
Crown he raised all his Forces, and gave the Britains two great Overthrows,
viz. One at Shrewsbury, and the other at Banbury in Oxfordshire. He Reigned
Twenty Six Years.

Chewlin, the Third King of the West Saxons, began his Reign Anno Dom. 560. He
Warred upon Ethelbert King of Kent, and defeated his Army at Wimbledon, slaying
two of his chief Commanders; and this is held to be the first Battle, fought
between Saxons and Saxons, in England; a little before which, it remarkably
happened at Feversham in Kent, That a Tame Wolf having brought forth Seven
Male Young-ones, they lived Quietly together, till grown up, and then never
left Fighting till all but one were Destroyed; as it afterward befell the Saxon
Heptarchy. This King gave a great Overthrow to the Britains at Bedford, and
Surprised Four of their Towns, viz. Liganbury, Ailsbury, Bensington, and
Evisham: He Fought another Battle with them at Deorham, and Slew three of their
Dukes, viz. Farmnagill, Coinmagill, and Candigan, Taking the Cities of
Gloucester, Bath, and Cirencester. But not long after, Encountering them at
Wodensbridge, his Army was defeated, and Cuth (his Eldest Son) Slain; for here
a party of Saxons assisted the Britains under the Command of Cearlick, his
Nephew, who had fled to them upon hard usage, and fear of being made away by
his unnatural Uncle. He Reigned Thirty Three Years.

Cearlick, the Fourth King of the West Savons, gained the Kingdom by the
Overthrow of his Uncle Chewlin, which he gave him at Waines-Ditch in Wiltshire,
Anno Dom. 593; after which, he found much trouble ere he could be settled in
the Government; but the Britains standing his Friends, he continued his Reign
Six Years.

Chelwolf began his Reign Anno Dom. 598; but scarce was he settled in the
Throne ere the Britains Invaded his Territories, making great Spoil; but
finding they were too weak to withstand him alone, in process of time they drew
the Scots and Picts to their assistance; so that many bloody Battles were
fought with various success. In which Wars he Dyed, in the 14th Year of his
Reign, leaving his Kingdom in much distress and perplexity. He was the 5th King
of the West Saxons.

Kingills, the Sixth King of the West Saxons, began his Reign Anno Dom. 612. He
had great Wars with the Britains, and in a pitched Battle at Beandune, he put
Cudwan their King to the Rout, Slaying above a Thousand of his Subjects; and
having concluded a Peace with Penda King of the Mercians, he grievously
Oppressed them, so that for a long time they were confined to the Mountains and
Fastnesses in the Country now called Wales: However, after he was Converted to
the Christian Faith by Berinus, he abated much of his Severity, making
Dorchester a Bishops See, and placing that Religious Man in it. He was the
First Christian King of the West Saxons, and Reigned Thirty One Years.

Kenwald, the Seventh King of the West Saxons, made great Wars upon the
Britains, Overthrowing King Cadwallo, at a place called Pennum, with incredible
slaughter; but growing Proud on the success, and Quarreling with Penda King of
Mercia, whose Sister he had Married, and in Contempt of him turned her away, he
was by him driven out of his Kingdom. But upon Submitting, and being Baptized
by Bishop Felix, he was restored to his Kingdom, and thereby obliged by Penda
to receive his Wife into Favor. He began his Reign Anno Dom. 643, and Reigned
Thirty One Years;

Eskwin, the Eighth King of the West Saxons, began his Reign Anno Dom. 674. He
had Wars with Wolfere King of Mercia, and a great Battle was Fought between
them at Bidamheaford which continued so Obstinate, from Morning till Evening,
that both the Kings perceiving the great Loss they had sustained, in the Night
time they raised their Camps, and secretly Retreated; as being mutually
possessed with a fear of the direful consequences they apprehended would attend
the next days Encounter. He afterward Warred on the Britains, but his short
Reign affords us no Memorable Achievement in that Enterprise, it continuing
only Two Years.

Kentwin, the Ninth King of the West Saxons, began his Reign Anno Dom. 677,
continuing the War on the Britains, sorely Oppressing them in all the
Neighboring Counties, in the latter end of the Reign of Cadwallo their King,
which he continued after the Death of that British Prince; so that Cadwallader,
his Son, coming to the Crown, found himself constrained to draw his People into
a lesser compass, having at last little more at liberty than the Mountains and
some Valleys, being perpetually Alarmed on the Frontiers, so that Blood was
daily spilt like Water. This Kentwin Reigned Nine Years. A Blazing Sar of a
Whitish or Flame-Colour, appeared in his time for three Months, with a Tail of
exceeding length, far longer than before had been Recorded in any Age.

Ceadwald, the Tenth King of the West Saxons, began his Reign Anno Dom. 686. He
made War on the South Saxons, and in a set Battle slew Ethelwolf their King;
and continuing to prosecute his Ravages in that Country and Kent, he spilt much
Christian Blood; Encountering Barthun, Successor to Ethelwolf, he likewise slew
him in Battle; after which, repenting what he had done, he went to Rome, and
was there Baptized by Pope Sergius, and Named Peter. His Reign continued Two
Years and odd Days.

Ine, or Ineas, the Eleventh King of the West Saxons, began his Reign Anno Dom.
688. In his time the poor Britains were sorely Oppressed with War, Famine, and
Pestilence; so that the Living were scarce able to Bury the Dead; which great
Calamity, Cadwallader not able to bear, left the Land, and went to Armorica or
Britany, to his Cousin Allan, and from thence in Pilgrimage to Rome, and
received a Religious Habit at the Hands of Pope Sergius; in which Retirement he
Dyed, and with him all the hopes of the Britains, he being accounted the Last
of their Kings; the rest being styled by Authentic Historians only Princes of
Wales. This Ine made the South Saxons to Submit, and annexed that Kingdom to
his own. He likewise Warred with various success on Chelred King of Mercia; and
made many wholesome Laws for the good of his People, Translated by Mr. Lambert
out of the Saxon Language: He Founded the Abbey of Glassenbury, over the Tomb,
or Burying-place, of Joseph of Arimathea, who begged our Saviors Body from the
Cross, and afterward (as several Authors report) came over into this Kingdom,
Preaching the Gospel to the Britains, and Dying, was Buried at Glassenbury.
This King afterward went a Pilgrimage to Rome; and for the good reception he
found there, he made a Law, That every Householder who had Goods to the Value of
Twenty Pence of One Sort, should pay a Penny by way of Gratuity to the Pope,
every Lammas Day; which afterward was Claimed by succeeding Popes by way of
Tribute, and called Peter Pence. He Reigned Thirty Seven Years.

Ethellard, the Twelfth King of the West Saxons, began his Reign Anno Dom. 726,
being in a manner ushered in by two Blazing Stars, both within a quarter of a
Year; one at North-West, and the other at South-East; after which a Famine and
Pestilence grievously Afflicted all parts of this Island, so that Shiping was
sent abroad to fetch in Food in Exchange for Metals and other valuable Goods.
He streightened the Britains in their Mountanous Country, and caused many to be
slain who passed the appointed Boundaries. He Reigned Fourteen Years.

Cuthred, the Thirteenth King of the West Saxons, began his Reign Anno Dom.
740; when finding the Britains had gathered Courage by the coming over of
Recruits from Armorica, or Britany, with which Country, as an ancient Collony
of this, they kept a strict Alliance; after several Battles fought with them in
Worcestershire, Monmouthshire, and other bordering Counties, which they
labored to recover, he at last in many Encounters proving too weak, Leagued
with Ethelbald King of Mercia, and by that means the Britains were beaten out
of most of the places they had gained; and being Overthrown in Battle near
Carnarvan they found themselves unable to make head against the Victors, by
reason half their Army, most of their Nobles, and chief Commanders were slain;
so that they sued for Peace, which after much havoc and desolation in their
Mountainous Country, by the pursuing Saxons, was granted, in consideration of
an Annual Tribute of Three Thousand Marks to be paid to Cuthred; but it was
not long punctually observed, before new Tumults and Disturbances happened; for
Adelm, an Earl of the West Saxons, Rebelling against his King, and drawing a
multitude of the Plebeans to his Party, the Britains took that opportunity to
cast off their Yoke. This Cuthred Reigned Fourteen Years.

Sigesburt, the Fourteenth King of the West Saxons, assumed the Throne Anno
Dom. 754; and being brought up tenderly in his Infancy, and in his Grown Years
addicting himself to the conversation of Parasites, Flatterers, and other
Vicious Persons; it so corrupted his Manners, that by the Advice of such his
wicked Counselors, who chiefly Swayed him, he caused Earl Cumbria to be put
to Death with great Torture, For Daring (as he himself Expressed it) to tell
him of his Failings and Defects in his Kingly Office. But this Earl being a
grave Patriot, and a Man of Unblameable Life, was so generally beloved by the
People, that his Death cost Sigesbert his Crown and Life; for hereupon they
rose up in Arms against him, defeated those that stood by him, and drove him
into a Wood in Dorcetshire, where he absconded till he supposed the heat of the
Pursuit and Popular Fury was abated; but being found by the Earls Swineheard,
Breakfasting on Acorns, under a spreading Oak, he with a Battoon beat out his
Brains, in revenge of his Masters Death, no entreaties or promises of reward
being able to deter him from this bloody Execution. His Reign continued about a
Year.

Kenwolf, the Fifteenth King of the West Saxons, began his Reign Anno Dom. 755,
and had no sooner settled the Government, (which by reason of Intestine
Broils, and the untimely Death of a King, was much disordered) than he
prepared to Invade the Britains, but upon their sending to excuse the non
Payment of the Tribute, on the account of their extreme Poverty, caused by a
Famine that had held two Years in their Country; so that the Poorer sort left
no Unclean thing un-eaten: His preparations were for a time laid aside, but
some straggling Parties of Britains, constrained by Necessity, making Incursions
into the Saxon Counties, War was Proclaimed, and the Britains being Overthrown
in diverse Battles, were forced to fly to the Rocks and the broken craggy Cliffs
on the Seashoare and the Mountainnous parts for shelter; from thence with aching
Hearts, beholding the blazing Fires that consumed their Habitations, and the
miserable Desolation made in their (almost before) ruined Country. But as if
such Cruelty (as no doubt it did) seemed displeasing in the sight of God, The
angry Heavens Warred against him, and did what the feeble Britains were unable
(...) do, viz, he was driven out of the Country by vio^^nt Rains, which
Deluging the Valleys and Plains, ^arryed away Men, Horse, and Baggage; so that
by ^his means he lost a good part of his Army. When ^o put so great a
misfortune out of his mind, going to Merton to sollace with his Paramour, a
worse misfor^une befell him; for having Quarreled with Offa King of Mercia;
Clyto, a Mercian Captain, upon private notice of his Journey, attended but with a
few Servants, laid an Ambush and slew him; which was the next day Revenged by
Osricus one of Kenwolfs Captains, who upon news of what had happened, by a
Shepherd (who from a Hill had beheld the slaughter of the King and his
Followers) crossing the Country by the nearest ways, intercepted Clyto in his
return; and after a sharp dispute slew him, and Eighty Soldiers his
attendants; and caused the Kings Body to be Interred with much State at
Winchester. This King Reigned Twenty Nine Years.

Brithrick, the Sixteenth King of the West Saxans, began bis Reign Anno Dom.
784. He was given up very much to the Love of Women; and though he was Married
to a very Beautiful Queen, yet he kept diverse Concubins; so that his
Recreations of that kind taking up much of his time, gave his Neighbors for
the most part rest, especially to the satisfaction of the Britains, who were in
a low condition, and unable to undergo the Charge and Fatigue of a dangerous
War, as they had lately experienced to their smart and impoverishment; yet in
his time several strange Prodigies appeared, viz. The similitudes of seven
Moons in the Firmament, which by degrees uniting into one, it Shined exceeding
Bright for a time, above what that pale Planet had usually done, and then
became dim and cloudy. A great Glob of Fire appeared over Winchester, and
coming near the earth parted or broke into diverse lesser Globes or Balls, which
Fired some Houses, and killed many People; also a little Blazing-Star appeared
three Nights successively; and a Month before his Death, strange Shrieks and
affrighting Voices were heard in his Palace. The manner of his Death was thus:
The Queen impatient of the Wrongs he did her in keeping Strumpets in his
Palace, and causing her sometimes to wait on them, was at length prompted to
revenge the Affronts put upon her by one of them he best loved, and therefore
having mixed Poison with some rich Wine, she intended to send it to her in the
Kings Name as a Present, but being unluckily called away to see some sights
that were prepared for the diversion of the Court, she left it in her Closet,
and for haste the Door open; when as the King coming thither before her return,
and taking it for a Cordial, Drank largly of it; and so by the strength of the
Poison, he Dyed in three Hours; and the Queen fearing to suffer a cruel Death,
though this had un-witingly happened by her means, hereupon flying into France,
through Grief and Want, she dyed in a miserable condition. This King Reigned
Sixteen Years.

Egbert, the Seventeenth and Last Petty King of the West Saxons, began his
Reign Anno Dom. 800; and whilst he continued in this Station, before he came to
be Crowned Sole Monarch, of the Saxons, Uniting the Heptarchy or Seven
Kingdoms, he had great Wars with the Britains, who were assisted by the
Cornish-men; which from the beginning of his Wars with them, to the time he
brought them to acknowledge him their Superior, lasted about Fourteen Years;
in which time he took Westchester, and made a strict Law, That no Britain or
Welshman should pass Offa 's Ditch, without leave. Then Warring on the
Mercians, he slew Bernulf their King; subdued Kent, and compelled the East
Angles, the South and East Saxons, to submit to him; and in a great measure
having brought the Mercians and Northumbrians under, grasping at the Sole
Monarchy, which he concluded Fortune had, or soon would, chain to his Sword; he
caused himself with great Pomp solemnly to be Crowned Soled Monarch of the
Saxons; that had been, for the most part, till now, distinctly Governed by
their respective Kings; as appears in the foregoing account of the Succession
of them. This was performed at Winchester, (with many of the Ceremonies used at
present in the Coronation of our Kings) when he had Reigned over the West
Saxons Nineteen Years. But because I am obliged to Trace the remainder of his
Reign, viz. Seventeen Years, as Sole Monarch, in the next Chapter; I here omit
to mention any more of his Actions.

And now to clear some difficulties that may arise as far as History gives
light into the Truth,

Note, That although Egbert caused himself to be Crowned Sole Monarch, and
absolutely possessed himself of those Kingdoms whose Succession of Kings ceased
before, or when he Reigned, as that of Kent, the East Saxons and South Saxon
Kingdoms, etc. yet others were of a longer continuance, and can be supposed
only as Tributary to him; for we find Burdred the last of the Mercian Kings,
ended his Reign Anno Dom. 874. viz. Thirty Eight Years after Egberts Death. And
to the same purpose, it is to be considered further, viz. where Authors make
mention of a longer continuance of the Petty Kingdoms than there is any
Succession of Kings Recorded, the Judicious Observers and Comparers of History,
have looked on it as a Mistake in them, by taking the Lieutenants, or
Viceroys, placed by the Sole Monarchs, to Govern under them, for petty Kings;
which Error the Ancient Writers of the Affairs of this Kingdom having been too
liable to, their Incoherence, in respect of Time, has not a little puzzled
those that came after them; which I have, as well as the matter will
conveniently bear, without breaking the thread of History, labored to Reform.

CHAP. VIII. The Succession of the Fifteen Saxon Kings that were Sole Monarchs
of England; with what Memorable Things happened in Peace and War during their
Reigns; as Wonderful Sights, Prodigies, and Remarkable Accidents, etc. Till the
time the Danes wrested the Kingdom (with much struggling) from them Anno Dom.
1017, about 230 Years after they made their first Invasion. Together with a
Description of the Counties of England, one by one, after every Kings Reign;
which will be continued throughout the Work, giving an Account of what is or
has been Rare or Remarkable in each of them, etc.
The Reign of King Egbert, the First Sole Saxon Monarch of England.
WHEN the contending Petty Kings of the Saxons had for many Years Elbowed each
other, and (discontented with a Part) strugled who should become Masters of the
Whole, and Amass the Light Crowns into one more Ponderous, we find Fortune (or
rather Providence) gave this advantage to Egbert, the Seventeenth King of the
West Saxons; though to attain it, he waded (as I may term it) through a Sea of
Blood in his Wars with the Welsh (for so I must henceforth style the poor
remainders of the Ancient British Race, as taking upon them that Epithet, and
calling their Principality Wales, after the Name the Saxons had many Years
before given it) also with the Cornishmen who Rebelled against him, and were
assisted with Supplies from Armorica, or Britany in France; in his Wars against
Bernulf King of Mercia, and his subduing the Kingdom of Kent, and compelling
the East, South, and Angle Saxons to submit to him. In these Enterprises, which
took him up for the most part the Nineteen Years he Reigned as Petty Monarch
over the West Saxons, about one Hundred Thousand are held to be Slain on all
sides; so that the Crown, purchased at so large an expense of Lives, being set
on his Head (as has been said) at Winchester, he commanded the Name of Saxons
to be changed into that of Englishmen; corresponding with the Name given to the
Country they Inhabited, That by this change they by degrees might forget the
Distinctions they before were under, and so firmly Unite as one Kingdom and
People, not tending to different, but one and the same Interest. This Egbert,
gaining, through many difficulties, what he long before aspired to, made diverse
good Laws for the better Establishment of his new acquired Sovereignty; so that
the Welsh (though they put not themselves under his Protection, yet desirous to
be at Peace) sent him many Presents out of their divided Dominions, of North
and South Wales, which Provincees (for no more must I call them Kingdoms) were
Governed by Petty Princes. After this, Egbert made a Progress through the
greatest part of England, appointing Judges and other Magistrates, to see the
Laws put in Execution against Offenders, and to redress the Wrongs and
Grievances of such as were Oppressed, being received every where with great
respect; and then thinking to lead a quiet Life, he found by sad experience the
Inconstancy of Fortune.

The Danes having been formerly worsted and driven out of this part of the
Island, again took Courage to Invade it, Landing from 33. big Ships, and diverse
smaller Transport Vessels, an Army of 23000 of their best Soldiers; and before
Egbert could raise his Forces to oppose them, they Ravaged the Country, Burning
and Destroying all in their way, not sparing the Men from their Swords, nor the
Women from their inordinate Lusts, destroying in a more dreadful manner the
Religious Houses, and those that Inhabited them; Ravishing the Nuns, and
Ripping open some Women with Child for Pastime. This made the grieved King
hasten toward them, with such Forces as he could readily get together, to
prevent the further desolation of his Country; commanding his Lieutenants to
raise what Forces they could, and have to join him; but ere they could do it,
he fought the Danes, and was overthrown by them in a bloody Battle, loosing
5000 common Soldiers, two of his Dukes commanding under him, and two Bishops;
by his Valor hardly winding himself out of the press of his Enemies, and
escaping. However, the Danes finding the Courage of the English to be beyond
what they expected, losing a great many Men, and perceiving the Country in Arms
against them, thought it the safest way to depart with the Rich Booty they had
got in the spoil of the Counties of Suffolk, Norfolk, Essex, Middlesex, etc.
But the second Year after they Landed with greater ^orces at Holy Head in
Wales, and between Fear and BARKSHIRE
map of Barkshire Persuasion, the Welsh were prevailed on to join with them;
but Fortune turning on the English side, Egbert gave their United Forces a
great Overthrow, on the Marches of South Wales; yet having tasted the sweetness
of the Riches and Plenty this Kingdom afforded, They made another Invasion in
the last year of this Kings Reign; Sacking the Isle of Sheppy by Kent, and with
much difficulty were expelled it: This Egbert was the First Sole Monarch of the
English Saxons, he began his Reign as such Anno Dom. 819, and Reigned Seventeen
Years, and was Buried at Winchester.

Having promised to give a (Brief) Description of England and its Rarities,
etc. To make good my Word I conceive no better Method to do it in, than placing
the Counties, and what I find in them worthy of Remark, after the respective
Reign of each Sole Monarch, taking them Alphabetically, and first of

Barkshire Described, etc.
THis County is bounded on the North, with part of Oxfordshire, and part of
Buckinghamshire; on the East, with part of Middlesex, and part of Surry; on the
South, with Hampshire; and partly on the West, with Wiltshire. It is Rich in
Clothworking, Fat Pasture, abundance of Cattle, rare Artificers, Rivers stored
with Fish of diverse sorts, particularly the River Kennet abounds with Trouts.

It Contains 140 Parishes, 20 Hundreds, 12 Market Towns, and 3 Rivers of note;
and to the Parliament, Abingdon sends one Member, New Windsor two, Reading two,
and Wallingford two, besides two Knights of the Shire. The Towns Memorable for
things of Note are these viz.

At Reading was Interred the Body of King Henry the First, in a Collegiate
Church of an Abbey, Founded by himself, as also his Queen, and Daughter, Maud
the Empress. This place is also Memorable for the Birth of William Laud Arch
Bishop of Canterbury, the Son of a Poor Clothier.

At Englesfield the Danes were defeated. Wallingford is the Gallena of Ptolomy,
it was the Ancient station of the Romans, and chief City of the Atrebants.
Windsor was Builded by King Edward the Third, who Instituted the most Noble
Order of the Garter. The Burying Place of Henry the Sixth, Edward the Fourth,
Henry the Eighth, and King Charles the First; Eaton was Founded by King Henry
the Sixth, and Renouned as a Nursery for bringing up of Youth, being one of the
chiefest Free-Schools in England. Sunning was an Episcopal See during the
Residence of Eight Bishops, which afterward was translated to Sherbourn, and so
to Salisbury, where it now is fixed.

At Wantage King Alfred (Sir Named the Scourge of the Danes) was Born. Waltham
in the East of this County, was an Ancient station of the Romans, as also was
Sinodum in the North, as appears by many Roman Coins and Medals of their
Emperors Dug up there.

Newbury is Renowned for the Birth of Thomas Hide, a famous Historian; and
Memorable for the Two great Battles between the King and Parliament in the late
Civil War. As for Castles that of Windsor in this County is accounted the most
Exalted of all others, having not only been the Burying Place, but Palace of
diverse Kings; and much delighted in by King Charles the Second, who made it his
chosen place of Pleasure and Retirement; being, besides its delightful
situation, advanced on a high Hill, arising with a gradual ascent, which
affords the pleasantest Prospect imaginable. On the North side of this County
the River Thames glides, washing its verdant Banks in many Meanderings with its
Silver Streams; and out of it goes many Creeks, which much advantages those
parts of the County by cheap Water-Carriage from London, and other places. It
is likewise Beautified with some Seats of the Nobility, which give a good
Prospect to Travelers, viz. A Noble Seat of the Earl of Craven near Newbery,
the Earl of Clarendon's at Swallowfield, Hurly belonging to John Late Lord
Lovelace Barron of Hurley; with a great many stately Houses belonging to the
Gentry of the County; so that it claims an Equality with most of the English
Counties.

The Reign of Ethelwolf, the Second Sole Monarch of England, etc.
EThelwolf, the Eldest Son of Egbert, upon his Fathers decease declined the
Crown, as being then Bishop of Winchester; rather affecting a Religious
Peaceable Life, than to Incumber himself with the weighty Affairs of
Government. But the Nobles perceiving Troubles would arise, if they altered the
Succession, used many cogent Arguments to persuade him to lay aside his Pall
for a Crown, but their Reasons prevailed not, till they had dealt with his
Clergy in a manner to constrain him to a compliance; whereupon bestowing his
Bishopric on Swithin his Tutor, he was solemnly Crowned at Winchester, and
settling the Civil Affairs as the times allowed, finding part of his Dominions
Oppressed by the Danes, he raised great Forces and Encountered them in diverse
Battles, and in a Bloody one at Ockly in Surry destroyed the greater part of
their Army, killing and taking Prisoners their chief Captains or Leaders, which
made the routed Danes, that survived the Fatal day, retired to the extremities
of Kent; where straightened for Food, and roving to get it, many of them were
slain by the Country People. This King Married Osburga a fair Lady, Daughter to
his Butler, by whom he had Ethelbald, Ethelbert, Ethelbred, and Elfride; who
Succeeded in the Kingdom successively; but she Dying, he took Judith, Daughter
to the King of France, in a second Marriage; by whom I do not find he had any
Children.

In this Kings Reign the Picts were destroyed by Kenneth King of Scotland;
their chiefest City Camelon Stormed, and as well Women and Children as Men, who
retired thither for safety, put to the Sword, in revenge of the Death of Alpine
the King of Scots Father, who being Overthrown by Burdus King of the Picts, was
taken Prisoner, and had his Head struck off on a public Scaffold, and fixed on
the Wall of Camelon, but soon taken thence by some Scots who came thither in
Pictish Habit; and so implacable were the Scots, in the utter extirpating this
Nation (which had long stood a boundary between them and the Southern parts of
the Island, being in a manner placed in the middle of it) that having destroyed
all the People that fell into their hands, they slew their Cattle, and suffered
them to Rot on the Ground; rooted up their Corn, and laid their Towns and
Villages level with the Ground; not sparing Churches, nor any Religious Houses,
pursuing the Flyers to their last Refuge, viz. The strong Castle of Maidens,
now called Edenbourough Castle, straightly Besieging them; so that the Besieged
having endured extreme Famine, and dispairing of relief, desperately Sallying,
broke (in the Night time) through the Leagure; and as many as escaped, fled
into England, craving Aid of Ethelwolfs Lieutenants, or Tributary Regents, in
Northumberland, and other Northern Counties; but little was done at this time,
by reason the King expected an Invasion by the Danes, who were preparing in
Denmark, to succor their distressed Forces that kept but slender footing in
England; and others of the Picts, who before had escaped the miserable
desolation of their Country, fled to Norway, and Denmark; and there, in
consideration of Refuge and present Support, resigned their Interest in
Pictland, in their own, and the Names of the rest of their Nation, that
survived the slaughter: Which giving the Danes a colorable Title to make their
Claim, occasioned great calamities to England and Scotland, to the subduing the
former, after a long continued War, as in the sequel will appear.

Thus fell the Pictish Kingdom, and was Annexed to Scotland, Anno Dom. 839.
After, as some Historians Record, they had continued under a Succession of
Kings 1173 Years. But its setting in Blood happened not without dreadful Omens
and Prodigies; at Camelon, their chief City, the Bishops Crosier Staff, he
Officiating at the Altar, was reduced to Ashes by Lightning: A dreadful Comet
appeared, and two Firey Armies were seen in the Air, running at each other with
Burning Spears; a noise of Clashing of Arms, and Neighing of Horses, was
affirmed to be heard in England and Pictland, without any visibility of either;
which then were little minded, but afterward looked on as the Forerunners of
the dire calamities that ensued.

Upon this destruction of his Neighbors Kingdom, Kenwolf was much perplexed,
because till now they stood as a Barricado to hinder the Incursion of the
Scots; whereupon he sent Ambassadors to Kenneth, peaceably to suffer those of
that Nation that were scattered in his and other Countries, to return and
Rebuild their Ruinated Towns; but he would by no means harken to it, which
constrained him to Fortify the Towns in the Northern Marches, and put strong
Garrisons into them. And having a great love for the Clergy, of whose number he
had been, he freed all Church Lands from Tribute and Regal Services; and being
desirous to see Rome, of whose Magnificence he had heard many wonderful
Relations, settling his Affairs in the best manner he could, with diverse of his
Clergy and Nobility, he Sailed thither, and was Entertained with such
Magnificence, that in recompense of his Reception, he confirmed Peter Pence to
that See; and after his Return gave Annually, during his Life, Three Hundred
Marks to the Bishop of Rome.

This Ethelwolf, Eldest Son to Egbert, Began his Reign Anno Dom. 837, and
Continued it Twenty Years.

Buckinghamshire Described, etc.
BUckinghamshire is bounded with Northamptonshire, Bedfordshire, Oxfordshire,
Hartfordshire, Middlesex, and Barkshire. It abounds in Corn, Pastures, large
Cattle, and numerous Flocks of Sheep feeding on its gradual rising Hills, and
has in it diverse stately Forests and Chaces.

Buckingham, the Shire-Town, is of very Ancient standing, and was Fortified by
Edward the Elder, sole Monarch of England, against the Invading Danes, Anno Dom
913, and still shows the Ruins of a stately Castle, Built on a Hill.
Stoneystratford in this County is Memorable for being the station of the
Romans, by them called Lactorodum; and here Edward Repulsed the Danes; and
since the Conquest a stately Monumentual Cross was raised in Memory BUCKINGHAM
SHIRE By J. Seller
map of Buckingamshire of Elenor Queen to Edward the First, who going with him
to the Holy War, sucked the Poison from a Wound given him by a Sarazen with an
Impoisoned Knife, and by that means, at the Hazard of her own, saved his Life;
when all others failed, as will more largely appear when we come to speak of
his Reign.

Chilton was the Birthplace of the Learned Sr. George Crook, a Famous Lawyer.

Amersham, or Agmondisham, took its Name from the Great Agmond, and gave Birth
to John Surnamed Amersham, and diverse other Learned Men.

Windover gave Birth to Roger Surnamed Windover, Historian to King Henry the
Third. Houton did the like to Roger Goad, a very Learned Man of great Repute.

This Shire is divided into Eight Hundreds, viz. those of Newport, Buckingham,
Cotslow, Ashendon, Ailesbury, Burnham, Disborough, and Stock. It sends Members
to Parliament for Alesbury two, Amersham or Agmondisham two, Buckingham two,
Chipen-Wiccomb two, Marlo two, Wendover two, and two Knights of the Shire.

It Contains One Hundred Eighty Five Parishes, Eleven Market Towns, and is
Watered with Two considerable Rivers, viz. The Thames on its South side, and
the River Ouse, on which the Town of Buckingham is seated, and in a manner is
surrounded with it, unless a little on the North side it lies open; and over
this River are three fair Stone Bridges.

Ailesbury is likewise very pleasantly situated in the midst of most delightful
Meddows, and Pastures, and the Vale bearing its Name, is accounted the most
Fertile in Europe.

As for the Churches in the Principal Towns of this County, they give a goodly
Prospect to Travelers, and are not only well Adorned and Fair without, but
very Beautiful within.

The Noblemens Seats of Note, are Buckingham-House, and Whadon, lately
belonging to George Duke of Buckingham; Cheynes one of the Seats of William
Duke of Bedford; Latimers, one of the Seats of William Duke of Devonshire;
Ashbridge, part in Bucks, and part in Hartfordshire, one of the Seats of John
Earl of Bridgwater; Wing and Ethrop, the Seats of the Earl of Carnarvan;
Laurendon, one of the Seats of the Earl of Lichfield; Overwinchendon-House, one
of the Seats of the Lord Wharton, with diverse stately Houses, many Newly
Erected, belonging to the Gentry; and that which makes it so well Inhabited is
the Wholsomness of the Air, which contributes to, and continues a Healthful
Constitution.

The Reign of Ethelbald the Third Sole Manarch of England.
EThelbald was Eldest Son to Ethelwolf by Osburga his first Queen, and in his
Fathers Lifetime held the Kingdom in a great measure, as if he had been his
Co-Partner. His Valor the Danes experienced in diverse Bloody Battles, in many
of which he Prevailed, killing numbers with a mighty Faulchion he used in
Fight, which few but himself could wield; yet after the toiles of War giving a
little respite to his wearyed Body, Judith his Stepmother came attended with
diverse Lady's to Congratulate his Success, in a very splendid Dress, so that
her Snow-white Breasts appearing half Naked, added to her Beauty, she being
then but very Young, the King was so Charmed or Infatuated, that he became
Enamoured of her; and though upon his Address she strongly urged, she was his
Fathers Widow, and the Daughter of a King, and that it was inconsistent with
the Law of God, and her Reputation, to yield to his desires; her Repulses
served but as Air to make the Fire of his Passion blaze to a greater degree,
till at last, between willing and unwilling, tempted by Ambitious Inclinations
of being a Queen Consort, rather than Dowager, she yielded to be his Wife: And
though the Match was highly opposed by his Nobles, who laid before him the
Scandal it would bring upon his Children, if he had any by her, and perhaps for
his Sins a Punishment upon the Nation, he persisting in his Resolution, was
Married; though with little Ceremony tending to Magnificence, as usual at the
Weddings of the former Kings. And indeed this brought much trouble on the King
and Nation; for whilst he Dallianced with his Incestuous Bride, and pursued his
wanton Pleasures, the weighty Affairs of Government were laid aside, and as it
were altogether neglected; which gave the Danes great advantage to recruit
their Forces, that had been not only weakened by War in the former Reign, but
with Famine, attended on by a grievous Pestilence; and when he had Reigned Two
Years and Three Months, without doing any thing Memorable, he Dyed Suddenly,
supposed by an Appoplexy, though some conclude he was Poisoned: After which,
Queen Judith, fearing some Mischief might befall her, by reason she had upon
this Marriage incurred the hatred of the People, procured leave from Ethelbert,
Brother and Successor to Ethelbald, to be Transported to France; but a Storm
arising, the Ship was driven on the Coast of Flanders, where undertaking to
Travel by Land to her Fathers Court, she was surprised on her Journey by
Baldwin Forrester of Ardenna, who compelled her to be his Wife, and by kind
usage won so much upon her Affections, That Writing in her own and his behalf
many moving and submissive Letters to the King her Father, he not only forgave
what had happened, but created her Husband Earl of Flanders, to hold that
Country as his Tributary; and from this Match Lineally descended Maud Wife to
our William styled the Conquorer, also Baldwin Earl of Flanders, who was King
of Jerusalem, and another of that Name who was by the Latins Invested with the
Imperial Diadem of Greece, upon their taking the famous City of Constantinople
Anno Dom: 1284. This Ethelbald was Third Sole Monarch of England, Ending his
Reign with his Life, Anno Dom. 860.

BEDFORD SHIRE By John Seller
map of Bedfordshire

Remarks on Bedfordshire, etc.
BEdfordshire is a very Pleasant Inland County; it is Bounded with
Northamptonshire, Huntingtonshire, Cambridgshire, Hartfordshire,
Buckinghamshire, etc. It is plentiful in Cattle, Foul, Corn, fat Pastures,
Forests, Parks, replenished with store of Timber and Deer; consisting of
Plains, pleasant Valleys, and gradual rising Hills, and is said to yield the
best Barley in England, especially in the North parts.

It contains One Hundred and Sixteen Parishes, Nine Hundreds, Ten Market
Towns, and One considerable River. It sends Members to Parliament Four, viz.
Bedford two, and two Knights for the County.

Bedford, the Shire Town, has been to its cost the Scene of much Action;
especially in the Wars between King Stephen and the Empress Maud, Mother to
Henry the Second, and in the Wars of the Barons, against King John, and was
razed to the ground by King Henry the Third, but soon Rebuilt, and ever since
flourished in much tranquillity and splendour. In a Chapel not far from the
Town, Offa the great King of the Mercians was Buried, which being demolished by
the overflowing of the Ouse, his Spectrum is said often to have appeared on the
Water of that River.

There is a little Rivolet at Asply near Wobourn in this County, which is
famous for its Petrifying Quality, being said to Turn Wood into Stone; and that
a Wooden Ladder happening to fall into it, was some time after taken up again
all Stone. And that not only the Pivolet or Brook, but the Earth in the Banks
of it has the same Virtue. So that it is justly accounted one of the Wonders of
our Isle.

Dean is a pleasant Town, Eminent for the Birth of Francis Dillingham, a very
Learned Man; as Layton Buzzard for the Birth of William Sclater; Dunstable
called by the Romans Magiovinium, the latter Name being taken from a notable
Thief called Dun, who with his Accomplices Inhabited it, and for that cause
called Dunstable, or Duns Inning Place; it also gave Birth to that Leared
Author, John Surnamed Dunstable.

The River Ouse Waters this County with its pleasant Meanders, passing through
Bedford, and has over it a handsome Stone Bridge, with two Gates upon it. This
County is likewise Beautified with some of the Seats of the Nobility, as those
of Anthony Gray Earl of Kent, at Wrest-House and Harrold; the Earl of
Bullinbrooks at Bletsho and Melchborn; the Earl of Allesbury's at Ampthil and
Clophil; Its Hills produce the best Marl, with abundance of Blue Stone like
Slate: And the whole County is plentiful in all sorts of Provision, and diverse
profitable Manufacturs.

The Reign of Ethelbert, Fourth Sole Monarch of England.
EThelbert, Second Son to Ethelwolf, (a Prince of an Active Spirit) immediately
Succeeded his Brother Ethelbald, being Crowned ten days after his Death, the
imergency of Affairs not allowing longer delay, or much Ceremony in the
performance, by reason the Danes were again become powerful, so that as well as
the time would permit, having settled the Western parts of his Kingdom, and that
he might not leave an Enemy at his Back, made the Welsh his Friends; he
commanded the Nobles and Gentry to Muster as many as could be spared from
Tilling the Ground and Harvest, and were able to bear Arms; and with them so
Accoutered for the War, to repair to his Standard; and being Obeyed in this,
he Marched toward the Enemy, whom he found Ravaging with their usual cruelties
the Inland Counties, as far as the Western Borders of Bedfordshire, sending
Heralds before him to demand the reason, Why they Invaded his Country, and
destroyed so many Innocent People, stripping the Towns and Villages of all that
was valuable, and laying many of them in Ashes. But they with threats
dismissing his Messengers, without any satisfactory answer, Ethelbert gave them
Battle, which continued for a time Bloody and doubtful, as if Victory knew not
to which side to incline; but when the Sun was descending in the West, a Band
of Peasants came to the Kings assistance, with Forks, Sythes, and other Harvest
Instruments, and falling on the Danes with loud cries, they taking this to be a
Reserve, and thinking there might be more sheltered behind the Woods and Hills,
hereupon immediately gave back, and the King taking advantage of their fears,
pressed on so furiously in the head of his Army, that from an orderly Retreat,
they fell into Rout and Confusion in all parts of their Army, so that a
miserable slaughter ensued, which had been much greater, but that Night put an
end to the pursuit, and a mighty Storm of Hail falling compelled the English to
shelter, as many as could, in the neighboring Towns and Villages, and the
Flyers to betake them to Woods and other places of Refuge; though on either
side, before this could be done, many were grievously hurt by the falling of
the Hail Stones, which were of a prodigious bigness, and did much mischief both
to Cattle and People in diverse other places.

This Defeat (as considerable as it was) discouraged not the Danes; for being
recruited, they sent their Ships about to the Southern part of the Island with
some ^orces to amuse the English, by Landing at Southampton, Plymouth, and
other Sea Ports, and with what Plunder they could get, immediately retired to
their Ships, though many came short, as being slain by the Peasants; however
this made them more revengful, for gathering strength from new comers of their
Nation, who Landed from a Fleet on the Southern Coast, they wasted Hampshire,
stormed Winchester, defended by a good Garrison, and laid it in Ashes; but the
King coming suddenly with an Army, a great number of them were slain, and the
rest compelled to retire to their Ships, several of which were Burnt by
Wildfire thrown amongst them before they could get to Sea, and diverse of the
Danes perished in the Flames and involving Waves. In his time two Blazing Stars
appeared, one in the North East and another in the South West, both within half
a Year of each other; the first continued Fourteen Days, and the latter Seven.
He began his Reign Anno Dom. 860, and Dyed Anno Dom. 865, having held a
troublesome Reign for the space of Five Years. He was Buried at Sherburn.

Remarks on Cambridgshire, etc.
CAmbridgshire is for the most part exempted from Hills and Woods, being much
applied to the breeding of Cattle, though it abounds in Cornfieldsd, and is
Watered with many pleasant Streams, and has belonging to it the fertile Isle of
Ely: It is Bounded with Northfolk, Suffolk, Essex, Hartfordshire, Bedfordshire,
Huntingtonshire, and Lincolnshire: It Contains One Hundred and Sixty Three
Parishes, Eight Market Towns, and One River; also the Bishopric of Ely. It
sends Members to Parliament, viz. Six. Cambridge two for the Town, and two for
the University; and two Knights of the Shire. As for the Places Noted in it,
the first in rank is Cambridge, which CAMBRIDGE SHIRE
map of Cambridgeshire though no City, is enobled above many others, for its many
famous Structures dedicated to Learning, as Caius College, Founded by John
Caius Doctor in Physic, Anno 1557. Christ's College, Founded by Queen Margaret
1506, Clare Hall, Founded by Elizabeth Daughter to Gilbert Clare Earl of
Leicester, Anno 1326; Corpus Christi College, by John of Gaunt Duke of
Lancaster, 1344; Emanuel College, by Sir Walter Mildmay, 1588; Jesus College,
by Doctor John Alcock, Bishop of Ely; St. John's College, by the before named
Queen Margaret, 1506; Catharine Hall, by Doctor Woodlack, Provost of Kings
College, 1459; Kings College, by King Henry the sixth, 1441; Magdalen
College, by the Lord Audley 1509; Pembrook Hall, by Mary Countes of Pembrook,
1343; Peter House, by Hugh Balsam Bishop of Ely, 1280; Queens College, by
Margaret Queen to King Henry the Sixth, Anno Dom. 1448; Trinity College, by
Henry the Eighth, Anno Dom. 1546; Trinity Hall, by William Bateman, Anno Dom.
1354. These famous Structures are Renowned for the many Learned Divines and
Statesmen that have been brought up in them, to the Honor and Credit of the
Kingdom, giving it considerable advantages of that kind over others; there is
in this Renowned Town many stately Churches and Ancient Monuments of very
curious Workmanship.

Ely, the Bishops Seat, from whence the Diocese takes its Name, is held to be
Built by Audry Wife to Tombart a Prince in those Parts, and afterward Married
Egbert King of Northumberland, from whom departing, she here betook her self to
a Devout Life, Building a Monastery, of which she became the first Abbess; and
is famous for the Birthplace of diverse Learned and Eminent Persons, as Andrew
Millet, Sr. Thomas Ridley, Doctor of Laws; Richard Parker, etc. The next Places
of Note are Everton, Triplow, Everden, Caxton, Wisbich, Linton, Milton,
Mildred; from which places proceeded many Eminent Men, both in Church and
State. At Caxton was Born William, thence surnamed Caxton, who first set up the
Ingenious Art of Printing in England, It is likewise Beautified by diverse Seats
of the Nobility, viz. Thorney-Abby, the Seat of William Duke of Bedford,
Newmarket, belonging to the Earl of Suffolk, Kertling, alias Catlidg, belonging
to the Lord North and Gray of Rolston, Ely Place and Wisbich Castle, the Seats
of the Lord Bishop of the Diocese. It is Watered with many small branching
Rivers, but the chief of Note is Came, on whose Banks Cambridge is
advantageously seated, and gives the County its Name.

The Reign of Ethelred, Fifth Sole Monarch of England.
EThelred, the Third Son of Ethelwolf, upon his coming to the Crown, Anno Dom.
866, found himself engaged in a dangerous War against the Danes, who with their
main Strength, almost in all parts, Invaded the Kingdom; so getting strong
footing with several Armies in the North, East, and South, he was at a stand
into which quarter he should advance, which gave them opportunity to overrun
many fertile Counties; and being as yet Pagans, they used unheard of Cruelties
under the Leading of Hungar and Hubba, two of their Dukes, who by some are
styled Kings. They took the City of York by Storm, and set it on Fire, upon
which Walketulus, an Earl of the East Angles, gave them Battle, but was
Overthrown, and most of those he commanded slain; and flushed with this
Victory, they destroyed many famous Churches, also the Monasteries of Croyland,
Berdoxey, Midlesham side, or Peterborough, and Ely; and the Abbess of
Coldingham, to prevent Ravishment, cut off her Nose and upper Lip; and by her
Example the Nuns did the like, to preserve their Chastity by their Deformity,
but were nevertheless Defloured, and afterward in despite Immured in their
House, and Fire being put to it, they perished in the Flames. And so terrible
they became in those Parts, That Burthred Vice Roy of Mercia, to save the ruin
of the Country, made Peace with them, as likewise did Offride and Ella, styled
Dukes of the Northumbrians, and were thereupon constrained to join their
Forces with them against Ethelred, which some Authors call a Rebellion, and
that with great reason; for it was taking part with Invaders against their
Lawful Sovereign.

These things happening whilst the King was busied in other Parts of the Land,
he no sooner found a little leisure, but taking courage he Marched Northward,
and in a great Battle Overthrew the Dainish Northern Army, in conjunction with
many of his Subjects, whom they had compelled, as is said, to the Field under
their East Angle and Mercian Leaders, slaying Agner, accounted one of their
Kings, Nine Earls, and a great number of common Soldiers: Yet Fourteen Days
after they put the King to Flight at Basing, after a Battle of Twelve Hours,
and within Thirty Days did the like at Merton, the King receiving a Mortal
Wound as he was in the Pursuit, at Whitingham, of which he Dyed, when he had
Reigned Five Years, viz. Anno Dom. 872, and was Buried in the Monastery of
Wimbourn. He was the Fifth Sole Monarch of England.

Remarks on Cornwall, etc.
Cornwall, the Ancient Cornubij, seems to take its Name from its pushing into
the Sea in the form of a Horn. It abounds with Mines of Tin, which is the best
and finest in all Europe; Stone Quarries, Corn, Fruits, Cattle; and, as some
hold, there might be much Silver Dug in several places: It is the Extremity
of England Westward. On the North, and partly the West, it has the Irish Sea;
on the South, the Channel; and on the East, Devonshire: It is divided into Nine
Hundreds, and contains 161 Parishes, 22 Market Towns, and seven Rivers. It
sends Members to Parliament 44, viz. Bodmin two, Bassiney two, Camelford two,
Dunhived two, Eastlow two, Fowey two, Grampound two, Helston two, St. Germins
two, St. Ives two, Kellington two, Leskerk two, Lostwithiall two, St. Mawes
two, St. Michael two, Newport two, Penryn two, Port-Pigham two, Saltash two,
Tregonye two, Truro two, and two Knights of the Shire.

Camelford, in this County, is very famous for the Battle where Mordred was
Slain, and King Arthur received his Mortal Wound. There has lately been dug
up pieces of Armor in that place.

Tintagal Castle gave King Arthur (that Miracle of British Valor) Birth. At
Castle-Dennis, the Ruins of the Daines Trenches, upon their first Invasion, are
to be seen.

St. Germans is a very stately Place, and was Anciently an Episcopal See, but
removed to Bodmin, and from thence by King Edward the Confessor to Exeter in
Devonshire where it remains.

Cradoc is likewise noted for the Birth of John Travisa, a Learned Writer. This
County is famed for its exceeding high Mount overlooking the Sea, with a
curious Bay on which stands Pensance, commanding the Harbor.

CORNWALL
map of Cornwall

The Seats of the Nobility are Stow, Wolston, Stanbury, Clifton and Lanow,
belonging to the Earl of Bath, Lubydrock and Truro, to the Earl of Radnor,
Boconock to the Lord Mohun of Okehampton, Terrise, to the Lord Arundel Barron
Trerise.

The Cliffs to the Sea Coast produce Samphire, Sea Holley, and the Inland part
abounds with Rosa Solis, wild Hysop, Marjorum, Garlic, growing naturally, as
also Chestnuts.

The Reign of Alfrid, Sixth Sole Monarch of England.
ALfrid, by some called Elfride, Fourth Son of Ethelwolf, being at Rome when
his Brother Dyed, was fetched from thence to succor and support his Bleeding
Country, at the point to be lost to a Merciless Enemy; he had the Crown placed
on his Head Anno Dom. 872, and finding a greater necessity to be in the Field
than the Palace, he caused Forces to be raised in all his Dominions free from
the Danish Subjection; for in stead of befriending the Northumbrian and Mercian
Dukes, that had joined with them against Ethelred, they sorely oppressed those
Countries; making them as it were Slaves to perform all servile offices, not
leaving them any thing they could properly call their own; Billeting Soldiers
in their Houses, as Guards over them, rather than Guests, who constrained the
poor Inhabitants to feed them with what should sustain the wants of themselves,
and their necessitous Children; as also to supply them with Money, or else
their Lives were liable at every distaste taken by their Lord Danes, to pay for
the Defect.

Such treatment as this being the usual Rewards of all those who by their own
Treachery and perfidiousness endeavor to bring in Foreigners to Subdue and
Enslave their Native Country: And yet this is the sole Aim of those Brutes
among us, that glory in the Name of Iacobites, who would bring in the late King
James by the Arms of the French, and thereby subject the Nation to the will of
that insulting Tyrant Lewis the Fourteenth, and so entail Slavery for ever on
themselves, and their Posterity. And if they only were to feel it, might they
have their wishes; But since others must suffer with them, should their
Attempts succeed, I hope that God that has so lately brought to light their
cursed Designs, will still continue to defeat all the enterprises of such
Profligate Villans, and preserve the Sacred Life of His Majesty from all their
Hellish Machinations, and thereby these Nations in that Peace and happiness
which through God's goodness they now enjoy under His Majesty's Auspicious
Reign. I hope the Reader will pardon this Digression, which only Zeal to my
King and Country, and a just indignation against those Miscreants, who are
continually laboring to embroil us in Blood and Confusion, has Extorted from
me. -- But to proceed.

By these their Cruel and Arbitrary proceedings, the King finding no Truce nor
Oaths were binding on their part, resolved to gather his Forces into a Body,
and give them Battle, causing Public Prayers to be put up for his success, but
before it could be effectually done, upon notice of it, they Marched into
Devonshire, taking Exceter, whilst they were parlying with the King for a
Truce; after which he narrowly escaped the Ambush they laid to entrap him and
take his Life; whereupon having gotten as many Forces as he could together, he
pursued them in their March toward Bristol, which City they intended to Sack;
but they facing about and a fierce Fight ensuing, the King was overthrown, his
Army scattered, and he forced to fly into the Woods for shelter, where fiting
his Bow and Arrows in a poor Shepherds Cottage, he was sharply reproved by the
Houswife (she not knowing him) for letting a Cake burn on the Hearth, for want
of turning it, saying, How now, you Lubber, must I give you House-roome for
doing nothing? Why did not you turn the Bread? Yet I warant you would be ready
to Eat it ere it is half Baked.

The King, finding he was in great straights, and much grieved at the misery
his Subjects groaned under, at last bethought him of a Stratagem to Redress it;
viz. He put himself into the Habit of a Bard or Harper, and went into the
Danish Camp, playing on his Harp unsuspected, and by that means taking notice
of their Luxurious manner of living, and sluggish security, he went thence and
collected his scattered Forces, and falling upon them near Abingdon in the
Night time, when they little expected the danger so near, he made an incredible
slaughter of the un-prepared Danes, so that nothing but Cries and clashing of
Swords were heard throughout the Valleys; and here Hubba, one of their great
Captains, was Slain, and their Banner Rafan taken, being the Danes chief
Standard, having on it the figure of a Raven done in Nedlework, Imbrodered by
the Daughters of Lodbroke, Sisters to Hungar and Hubba, which was in high
Estimation, because they had Prophesied Victory should ever attend the Danes
wherever it was Displayed in the Field. And soon after the Battle was over,
Hubba was Buried, and a mighty Hill of Stones cast on him as a Monument, which
gave Name to the place of his Burial, which is called Hubblestow, or Stone, to
this day.

The King pursuing this advantage, and for the Encouragement of his Soldiers
having shared the Spoils taken from the Danes amongst them, followed the
Retreating Enemy, and within a while gave them two other great Defeats, one at
Ethan-Dun, the other at Rhoaf-ceaster, now Rochester, raising the Siege they
had laid before it.

After this, they Recruited and brought another Raven Standard, to the Field,
in hopes of better success. But near Alesford in Kent, they received another
great Overthrow, so that the Waters in the Ditches, Ponds, and Rivers adjacent,
were colored with Blood; and from thence he chaced them into Essex, through
the Thames, in passing which River, pursued by the Enemy, and their own fears,
many (for haste) missing the Fords, were smothered in the Deeps.

This however sufficed not the King, whose main Aim was to drive them out of
the Kingdom, and so give Peace and Rest to his tired and distressed Subjects;
wherefore he Marched to a place then called Beaufleet, where Hastinges a Dane,
who newly arrived with Eighty Ships, had fortified and received his flying
Countrymen; and here likewise Fortune was on his side, he giving them the Rout;
and lastly they were quite discomfited at Boultington by Severn, and at the
Isle of Mesig, or Mersey in Essex, at the River Ligea or Ley, which goes to
Ware, and carried up their Ships, but Alfred Trenching and Drying it, they
could not bring them back; whereupon they fled into Northumberland, and then to
Denmark.

The King, now at leisure, made many good Laws; one for the Banishing of
Theives, insomuch that few Robberies were committed for many Years after. He
divided the Kingdom into Shires, Hundreds, and Tythings, and made them
Responsible to the party that should be Robbed, if they neglected to Guard or
secure the Roads, which was so effectually done, that it is said by some
Historians, That Gold-Bracelets, and other things of THE COUNTYE PALATINE OF
CHESTER
map of Palatine value, were fastened to Posts in Cross Ways, and none were so
adventurous as to take them away. This King is reported to divide the Natural
Day into three parts, Eight Hours he spent in Prayers and Contemplations, Eight
in Public Affairs, and the remainder in Necessaries and Recreations; he is
esteemed as a great lover of Learning, and Founded the first common School in
Oxford, now called University College; he Founded likewise the Monasteries of
Ethelingsey, Shaftsbury, and Winchester; he was very Liberal to the Poor; he
turned the Laws, and diverse other Books into English; and Dying, he left all
his Treasure to Pious Uses: He began his Reign Anno Dom. 872, and Reigned
Twenty Six Years. He was the Sixth Sole Monarch of England.

Remarks on the County Palatine of Chester, etc.
THis County is an Ancient Palatinate, and one of the Pleasantest Counties in
that part of England; famous for producing Kine, of whose Milk is made the best
Cheese in the Nation, from which the County seems to take its Name. Its
Pastures are exceeding Rich, and Corn-Land produces extraordinary Crops; it
abounds with Fish, Fowl, Sheep, and some Goats: It is Bounded with Lancashire,
Yorkshire, Shropshire, Staffordshire, Darbyshire, Flintshire, Denbighshire, and
the Ocean. It Contains Eighty Six Parishes, One City, Seven Hundreds, Thirteen
Market Towns, and Nine Rivers; and gives denomination to a Bishop of its
Diocese. It sends Members to Parliament Four, viz. The City of Chester two, and
two Knights of the Shire.

The City of Chester is famous in many respects, as for its Minster, Castle,
and Stone Bridge; and has particular to it a Chief Justice, for the
Entertainment it gave King Edgar, who was Rowed in a Barge on the River Dee, by
Eight Kings, whilst himself held the Helm, as their Supreme Sovraign.

It was made a Principality upon Hugh Lupus, a Noble Norman, being Invested in
it by William the Conqueror; To be holden as Freely by his Sword, as the King
himself holds England by his Crown; which was the Tenure of all Counts
Palatines; more like Princes than Subjects, as a modern Author has it.

Its stately Minster was Builded by Leofrick an Earl, to the Honor of St.
Werburga; and in it was Buried the Body of Henry the Fourth Emperor of
Germany; and it gave a Title to the Eldest Sons of our Kings who by Birthright
are Earls of Chester.

Calvely is a very Pleasant Town, giving Birth to Hugh Calvely a great General
against the French, in the Reign of Edward the Third, Sr. Robert Knowles and
diverse others of Note.

Eccleston is Memorable for the Birth of Thomas, thence called Eccleston.
Banbury is a pleasant seated Town, as also Wrenbury. The large Rivers Dee and
Mersey, Flow very spaciously on its Western part; Chester being advantageously
situate on the former, and Fordestham on a branch of the latter; on the East
side it has many pleasant Hills, with very fertile Valleys: Northwich is
likewise pleasantly situate on a stream of Mersy, over which is a curious
Bridge, as there is at Dutton, Coxton, etc.

The Seats of the Nobility are Clifton, alias Rock, Savage and Fordsham
belonging to the Earl of Rivers; Gawsworth and Alford belonging to the Earl of
Maclesfield; Dutton belonging to the Lord Gerard Barron of Gerards Bonley;
Dunham Massey the Seat of the Late Lord Delamer, Earl of Warrington. Besides
many stately Houses of the Gentry.

The Reign of Edward the Elder, Seventh Sole Monarch of England, etc.
EDward, Surnamed the Elder, Eldest Son to Alfred or Elfride, began his Reign
Anno Dom. 901. But not long had he been in the Throne, ere his Brother
Adelwold, envying his advancement to the Regal Dignity, conspired to supplant
him; and in order to it, raised a Rebellion: But finding he was too weak to
maintain his Pretensions, he fled with part of his Forces to the Danes, who
were by this time returned, and had gotten some strong holds in the North; and
they for to color their design made him King in Title, though not in Effect; and
with them joined the Welsh, Northumbers, and those Scots that bordered on the
River Tweed: Against these joint Forces the King Marched, and at St. Edmund's
Ditch, he gave them Battle, but lost the day, though the Danes gained a bloody
Victory; for in the Fight two of their Kings were slain, viz. Chrochrichus and
Ethelwald: However, to put a stop to their further advancing, he built the
Castle of Hartford, and many other strong places, and then having recruited his
broken Troops with the whole power of the Western and Southern Counties, that
remained entirly under his obedience, he again advanced his Standard, and gave
the Danes and their Confederates Battle at Wodens-field, near Wolverhampton in
Staffordshire; where the chance of War turning on his side, brought him a great
Victory: There his Rebellious Brother Adelwold, with two Kings or chief Leaders
of the Danes, viz. Covilfus and Healden, were slain. This Battle was Fought
Anno 910.

Upon this Edward settled his Northern Territories, as far as Northumberland;
and upon the Death of Eldred, who had Married Elfleada his Sister, he Establi^^
her in those Counties that were formerly in the possession of the Mercian Kings
before spoken of, and Anno Dom. 915, he gave the Danes and their Confederates
another great Overthrow, killing Turktilus, a reputed King, with two Earls
Virutes and Scurfa, the Dukes of Bedford, Buckingham, etc. also Duke Edrick,
whom the Danes had made King of the East Angles, being Vanquished, was Slain by
his Subjects. And then appointing his Sister, a true English Heroin, (who
having endured the sharp pangs of Childbirth, had forsook her Husbands Bed,
saying The Pleasure was not worth the Pain she suffered, resolving never more
to run the like hazard) as it were in some degree his Partner in the Kingdom,
she soon made it known that her delight was more in the rough Fields of Battle,
than in the downey Bed of Love; for attired like an Amazonian Queen, she
accompanied her Brother in his Wars, and mainly assisted him by her Prowess and
Counsels, being a Lady of great Politics in Martial Affairs. In a Battle
against the Welsh, she took their Standard, slew their General, and took his
Lady Prisoner, whom she used very courteously: She diverse times chased the
Danes, and in Person Stormed the Town of Derby, (Garrisoned strongly by the
Enemy) she also beat them out of Tamworth, Litchfield, Watersbury, Elderbury,
and Leicester, which she Repaired and Fortified; also the Town and Castle of
Rincorne: She Builded Brimsbury, and laid a Bridge over the Severn; and in a
set Battle Overthrew the Yorkshire Forces that were in Rebellion against the
King; and so having manifested her self to the World as the Wonder of her Sex
for Heroic Virtues, and set an Illustrious Pattern for their Imitation, She
Dyed, when she may be said to have Reigned Eight Years, as Co-Partner with the
King her Brother, in the one and Fortieth Year of her Age, and was Buried at
Gloucester, in a Church which she and her Husband had Founded; where a stately
Monument was erected to her Memory. And Henry of Huntington in his Works makes
the following Encomium upon her.

Victorious Elfled, ever famous Maid,
Whom weaker Men, and Nature's self obeyed:
Nature your softer Limbs for Ease designed,
But Heaven inspired you with a Manly Mind;
You only, Madam, latest Times shall sing,
A glorious Queen, and a triumphant King:
Farewell, brave Soul! Let Caesar now look down,
And yield thy Triumphs greater than his own.
The King upon the Death of his Heroic Sister, ^reatly lamented her loss, and
retired for a time from ^^l Business, but finding his Country yet Called for
his ^id, he shook off his Melancholy, and took a Progress (...) those parts of
his Kingdom he had not as yet well ^uieted, appointing Governors, and making
such ^aws as might restrain the Oppression of his People, and settling his
Dominions to the borders of Scotland, ^^e Welsh also submitted.

In this Kings Reign John Patrick Erigena, a Britain, ^rote a Book about the
Lords Supper, showing therein ^^me Abuses the Roman Church had put upon that
^^crament, and how it ought to be worthily Received, ^^cording to our Blessed
Saviors Institution, and sent ^^to Rome; which so offended the Pope, (whose
Leaden lord by this time had so got the Ascendant over the ^eel Ones of
Princes) that he wrote to the Clergy to ^evail with the King that the Author
might be deli^^red into their hands, to be Censured as they should ^^e fit;
which with some reluctance being granted, ^^ough the Author proposed to prove
it true by Scripture, and gave many reasons for what he had done, the Clergy in
the Popes Name Condemned both him and his Book; him as a Heretic, and his Book
as Erroneous and Heretical; when being degraded and delivered over to the
Secular Power, he suffered Death in the Flames, and is worthily accounted
amongst the Martyrs.

This Edward was the Seventh Sole Monarch of England. He Reigned Twenty Four
Years, and was Buried at Winchester amongst his Royal Ancestors.

Remarks on Cumberland, etc.
CUmberland extends to the extremity of England Northward, as being Bounded
that way by Scotland; on the East, with Northumberland and Westmoreland; on the
West, by the Irish Sea, and part of Scotland; on the South, with Lancashire: It
abounds in Hills, but of no extraordinary height; and produces great store of
Cattle, and a good sprinkling of Corn, but not many Fruit Trees. At Newlands
are Copper-Mines, at Refwick Black-Lead and Lapis Calaminaris: It Contains one
City, viz. Carlisle (which gives Title to a Bishop) Fifty Eight Parishes, Nine
Market Towns, and two remarkable Rivers: It sends Members to Parliament six,
viz. Carlisle two, Cockermouth two, and two Knights of the Shire.

Carlisle, the Metropolis of the County, is very Ancient, held to be Built by
Leil a British King, long before the coming of Caesar, and is by Ptolomy called
Lugovallum, it was a flourishing City under the Romans, and upon their
departure Demolished by the Picts, and utterly ruined by the Danes; but again
Rebuilded by King William Rufus, who Built there a strong Castle to prevent the
Scots Incursions; and by King Henry the first it was made a Bishops See; it has
been often taken by the Scots, but wrested from them again: It was Besieged in
the late Civil War, and made a CUMBERLAND
map of Cumberland strenuous Defense. The other Places of Note are Cockermouth,
Werkinton, Egremond, Penroth, Keswick, and Bampton, near which is to be seen
part of the Ruins of the Picts Wall, which reached from Sea to Sea, at East and
West: At Salkeld in this County, upon the River Eden, is a Monumental Trophy of
Victory, consisting of 77 Stones, called by the Inhabitants Long Megg and her
Daughters, one of which to wit, that called Long Megg, is 15 Foot high from the
Ground, and the rest 10; supposed to be placed in Remembrance of some Roman
Victory. The Nobilities Seats are Gray-stock Castle, Grumb Castle belonging to
the Duke of Norfolk; Naywoth alias Noword Castle belonging to the Earl of
Carlisle; Kirkosward and de Acre Castles belonging to the Earl of Sussex.
Cockermouth Castle belonging to the Duke of Somerset; Rose Castle the Bishops
Seat.

The Reign of Ethelstan, Eighth Sole Monarch of England.
EThelstan, Eldest Son to Edward, and Eighth Sole Monarch of England, began his
Reign Anno 925, and was Crowned at Kingston upon Thames, by Adelme Arch Bishop
of Canterbury, and is held by some to be the first Anointed King of England;
but I suppose they mean the first Saxon King, for it is held by Ancient Writers
to be used in the Coronation Ceremonies of diverse British Kings a great while
before. Long he had not been Established in his Throne, ere Elfried a Norman
and one he trusted in weighty Affairs, raised a Rebellion against him, causing
great commotions in the Kingdom; but in the end he was taken, and his Party
dispersed; upon which he utterly denied he was the occasion of it, and labored
to lay it on others; whereupon the King, unwilling to search deep into the
matter, least he should create himself powerful Enemies among the Nobility, was
at that time contented that Elfred should go to Rome and purge himself of the
fact, upon Oath before the Pope. But hereupon not freed from a Jealousy he
conceived of Edwin his Brother, whom Elfred had accused as a Person aspiring to
the Throne, he was made away privately with the Kings consent; yet, though too
late, being better informed he was so grieved, that to atone (as he conceived)
for guiltless Blood, he caused the Assassines to be put to Death with exquisit
Torments, and Founded diverse places, dedicating them to Pious uses; as St.
Germans in Cornwall, St. Petrocus at Bodmyn, Plympton Priory, Middleton and
Michelney, etc. He Fortified Exeter, and quelled the Cornishmen that Rebelled
against him; and upon Disorders committed by the Scots in the Northern Borders,
he Marched into that Kingdom, gave them a great Overthrow, and made the whole
Nation submit their Crown to him, which he placed on the Head of Constantine
upon his Submission, saying, It was more Honor to make a King than to be a
King. However, he imposed a Tribute on the Kingdom, and to show the mightiness
of his Strength, made a vast dint in a Stone with his Sword at Dunbar, causing
it to be Recorded as a Mark of his Title to the Kingdom of Scotland; but soon
after, Constantine repenting his Submission, Leavyed Forces and Invaded
England, joining with Anlafe the Dane; but at a place called Bromingfield he
was Overthrown; for the English seeming to retire, (and the others supposing
they had really done it) Rallyed on the loose Troops of their Enemies and beat
them down in great numbers, obtaining a great Victory, and Killing 20000 of
their Enemies, among which Willfert Prince of the Guentes, and Howel Prince of
North Wales, and Seven Dukes who came to the assistance of the Scots, Malcolm
Heir apparent to Scotland was much Wounded; whereupon King Ethelstan settled the
English Borders beyond the Tweed, taking in the three Southern Counties,
strongly Garrisoning Edenburg Castle and other Fortresses; so that Constantine
finding that he was unable to make further opposition, betook himself to a
Contemplative Life, in the Abbey of St. Andrews, where in a short time after, he
Dyed: Hereupon Ethelstane caused the Scots Nobles to Swear Fealty to him, and
enjoined them to pay him Yearly twenty Pounds in Gold, three Hundred Pounds in
Silver, and 2500 Head of Cattle, Hounds, Hawks, etc. So that the Scots mourned
many Years for their joining with the Danes to Invade England: And indeed a
little before the fatal Battle, a Fountain of Blood-Coloured Water issued out
of the side of a Mountain in Galloway, and Colored diverse Streams into which
it run for many Miles; and a Monster was Born with the Members of both Sexes,
and a Head like a Swine, the Back of it full of Bristles, and the Nails like
Claws; another in Northumberland of the Male Sex, having one Belly and two
Thighs and Legs, but divided upwards into two entire Bodies, with two Heads and
four Arms; and when one Head Slept, the other Waked; when one Eat, the other
refused sustenance, and always Quarelled the one with the other; till one
Dying, its Stench Killed the other.

Anlafe, the Danish General, having lost the greater part of his Forces, hoped
by a Treacherous Policy to gain his end; whereupon disguising himself, he
entered the Kings Tent by Night, with forty of his Followers, in hopes to have
found him there, and Slain him; but Providence so ordered it, that he was
absent; yet a Bishop newly arived at the Camp had taken up his Quarters there,
who starting up and perceiving their Murderous intentions, so Manfully laid
about him with a Battel-Ax, that he slew five Petty Princes of the Danes, 12
Dukes, and diverse Soldiers; but none coming timely to his Rescue, he was
beaten down with a weighty Stone thrown at him, and slain; and though the Danes
here missed their main aim, yet they were not so much discouraged, but sending
to Denmark, more Forces came to their assistance, and among the rest a mighty
Giant, named Colbron, who with a Bar of Iron he used in Fight, had (as the
Danes report) dashed many Hundreds in Pieces; with these Recruits they entered
England, ravaging the Country as far as Winchester, to which they laid Siege,
offering at the same time to raise it and depart, so the King could provide a
Champion that should dare to combat Colbron, so as to overcome him; but on the
contrary, to have the City delivered to them; whereupon it is said that the
famous Guy Earl of Warwick being returned from Foreign Lands in the Habit of a
poor Pilgrim, like another David, offered the King his service; when all his
Nobles and Men at Arms declined it, as being scared at the mighty Stature and
Bulk of this second Pagan Goliath, which the King at first refused, supposing
him to be a Madman; yet in a Vision being admonished to it, he consented; and
the combat was Fought between them in Hide Mead, wherein, after a fierce
Encounter of two Hours, Guy became Victor; whereupon the Danes raised their
Siege and fled, but in the pursuit many of them were destroyed, and soon after
chased out of the Country, so that he settled the Realm in Peace, and diverse
Princes sent to congratulate his Success, with many Rich Presents; Hugh King of
France sent him a Sword said to be that of Constantines the Great, and reported
to have in the pummel one of the Nails that fastened our Savior to the Cross,
as also his Spear, being that where with Longinus pierced his side, The County
of DARBY By John Seller
map of Darby Otho the Emperor sent him a Landscape richly set with Precious
Stones; and the King of Norway a larg Ship with rich Gilded Decks and Purple
Sails.

This Ethelstane caused the Bible to be Translated into English; which is
accounted the first time it ever was in our Language: And when he had Reigned
Fifteen Years, he Dyed, and was Buried with much solemnity at Malmsbury, where
his Tomb remained some Hundreds of Years with an Epitaph in his praise, as a
good Prince, and a great lover of Justice.

Remarks on Derbyshire, etc.
THE County of Derby, though somewhat Hilly in diverse parts, yet it is a very
pleasant County, watered with the River Derwent, and other Rivers abounding
with Fish: It has in it a great number of Forests and Parks stored with Deer;
It breeds an excellent sort of Large Cattle and abundance of Sheep: It abounds
also with various sorts of Stones, as Freestone, or durable Greet-Stone; and
in some places Limestone, which is useful both in Building and Husbandry, for
the Manuring of the Land. Here is also Alabaster, Crystal, Black and Gray
Marble, which is not only very durable, but Polishes well. And for Millstones
and Whet-Stones, here are several Quarries of them, in the working whereof many
Persons are Employed. But the chiefest Commodity of this County is Lead; which
for the Goodness and Plenty thereof, yields to no Place in the World: And
famous for this, is the Peak of Derby-shire, commonly called the Devil's Arse;
which is indeed the most remarkable thing in this County. This Peak or Cave
called the Devil's Arse, is a great Rock or Castle upon an high Hill, under
which there is a Cave in the ground of a vast bigness; the Name seems to be
taken from its having two Buttocks sticking out in form like a Man's, bending to
the Ground: The Arch of the Rock is extreme high, and through it Drops of Water
are continually falling: Those that are minded to enter into it must have good
store of Lights, for going between two Rocks near together, they loose the
sight of Day; which makes the place look dreadful and affrighting; and perhaps
gave rise to all those fabulous stories of Spirits and Phantoms, which are
reported of it; the recital whereof, is neither worth my Pains, nor the Readers.

Eldenhole is another remarkabls place, and one of the Wonders of the Peak; It
is distant two miles from Castleton, a Town in the High-Peak. The hole of this
Cave is about 30 Yards long, and 15 Yards broad on the Top; descending directly
down into the Earth, which is much straightened when it comes 40 Yards deep: The
Waters which trickle down from the Top thereof do congeal into Stone, and hang
like Isicles in the root of it: Some are hollow within, and grow Taper-wise,
very white, and not unlike to Crystal.

But the greatest Wonder of the Peak is that of Buxton-Wells, where nine
Springs arise out of a Rock, within the compass of eight or nine Yards, eight
of which are Warm, and the ninth very Cold: These Springs run from under a
Square Building of Freestone; and about 60 paces off, receive another hot
Spring, from a Well enclosed with four flat Stones, called St. Ann; near unto
which another cold Spring bubleth up. These Springs have been found by daily
Experience very good for the Stomach and Sinnews; and very pleasant to bathe
the Body in. The wondrous Virtues whereof, are thus described, Unto St. Ann
the Fountain sacred is,
With Waters Hot and Cold its Springs do rise,
And in its Sulphur Veins there is Medicine lies:
Old Men's numbed Joints new Vigor here acquire,
In frozen Nerves this Water kindles Fire;
Hither the Cripples halt, some help to find,
Run hence, and leave their Crutches here behind
The Barren hither to be Fruitful come;
And without help of Spouse go Mothers home.


This County contains 106 Parishes, and is divided into six Hundreds. It has
eight Market Towns, and 13 Rivers. It is Rich in Pasture, and Memorable for
many great Actions that have happened in it. It sends Members to Parliament
four, viz. Derby two, and two Knights of the Shire. It is Bounded with
Yorkshire, Notinghamshire, Cheshire, Staffordshire, and Leicestershire.

Derby, the chief Town, is commodiously situate on the Western Bank of the
River Derwent, and in the North-East end of it stands a Bridge of Freestone,
and upon the Bridge a fair Chapel, called St. Mary's Chapel. But besides
Derwent, which empties it self six Miles lower into the Trent, this Town has
the convenience of a Brook rising Westward, and running through it under nine
several Bridges. The Town is large and populous, containing five Parish
Churches, of which that of All Saints is the fairest, whose Tower-Steeple, (in
which are eight Tuneable Bells) was built at the only charge of the Young Men
and Maids, about the Reign of Queen Mary the First; and is equaled for Height
and Beauty, by few in the Nation. In short, it is a Town of good Trade; and very
famous for its Ale, which is accounted the best and strongest in the Kingdom.

Ripton (the Ancient Ripandunum) is a pleasant place; here Ethelbald, the ninth
King of the Mercians, slain at Egelwald, was by his Subjects Interred; and from
hence Burdred the last King of Mercia was expelled by the Danes, together with
his Queen Ethelwith. At Melburn, John D' Bourbon, taken at the Battle of
Agincourt in France by our Henry the 5th, was kept Prisoner: Little Derby was
an Ancient Collony of the Romans, as appears by their Coins and Medals dug
up there at sundry times. The Seats of the Noblemen are Palsover Castle, the
Ancient seat of the Duke of Newcastle; Haddon, the seat of the Earl of Rutland;
Hadwick and Chatsworth, the seats of the Duke of Devonshire; Berthy, the seat
of the Earl of Chesterfield; Sherley, the seat of the Lord Ferrers Sutton, etc.

The Reign of Edmund, Ninth Sole Monarch of England.
EDmund, Brother to Ethelstan, began his Reign Anno. Dom. 940. He was Crowned
at Kingston upon Thames, but scarce settled in the Throne before the Danes,
persuading the People of Northumberland and other Northern Counties to join
with them, advanced against him with a puissant Army; to whom he gave a great
Overthrow near Northampton, and had various success against them in diverse
other Battles. He caused the Eyes of the two Sons of Dunmail to be put out, for
theirs and their Fathers Rebellion against him; and then to quiet his People,
made many good Laws to restrain Rapin and other Injuries, that for want of such
boundaries between Princes and Subjects they had sustained in many of the
former Reigns; and upon these Laws, Magna Charta, or the Great Charter of
England, seems very much to be grounded.

Anlafe the Dane retaining some footing in the Northern parts of England, and
Southern Sheirs of Scotland, Labored to persuade Indulph King of Scots to
break the League he had made with Ethelstan, urging that Edmund who now
Reigned, was a supine Person, no ways fit to bear the weight of Government, and
therefore they might easily gain their designs in subduing the Kingdom; but
Indulph would by no means be tempted to break his Oath: Whereupon the Dane
thinking to do it without his Aid, sent for more Forces, who Landing in the
Humber, Elgarine, Governor of Northumberland, either through fear, or hopes of
Advancement, declared he was descended of Danish Blood; and breaking the Trust
King Edmund had reposed in him, he Joined such Forces as he could raise with
Anlafe; whereupon the King sent to Indulph for Aid, according to the Articles
of Treaty to assist each other in case of Invasion; and with all expedition he
sent him 10000 well appointed Soldiers; with which, and his own Forces, he fell
upon the Danes, and Routed them at the first onset, making a terrible slaughter
in the pursuit. In this Battle, as the King had commanded, the Treacherous Earl
Elgarine was taken alive, though he would willingly have dyed on the Swords of
those that secured him; when being adjuged a Traitor to his Country, he was
drawn in pieces by the strength of Horses: And after this great Victory, he
settled the Northern Counties that had been much harrassed and weakened by the
Enemy, and upon his return granted large Privileges to St. Edmunds-Bury in
Suffolk, rebuilding many ruined places. And now the Irish Invading the Western
Coasts with many small Vessels, were beaten off, diverse of them slaughtered,
and most of their Ships Burnt. Greater things were in projection to be done by
this King, had not an untimely Death prevented him; for one day seeing a
Gentleman that served him (and for whom, by reason of his Faithfullness, he had
a singular esteem) hard pressed by a Ruffiain in single Combat, and at the
point to be slain, he unadvisedly rushed in to his Rescue; and receiving the
points of their Swords in his Body, whilst he thought to seize them with his
Hands, he dyed of the Wounds, when he had Reigned Six Years, and was Interred
at Glastenbury, being the Ninth sole Monarch of England, Anno Dom. 946. He was
fifth son to King Edward: At his death he left his Brother Edred or Eldred,
Protector of the Realm, commiting to his care Edwye and Edgar his two Sons, who
were in their Minority.

Remarks on Devonshire, etc.
DEvonshire, by reason of the advantage of the Sea, and its many spacious
Havens, is not only of great account in it self, but to its Neighboring
Counties. It produces many rich Manufactories, and contains diverse stately
Towns: It has in it rich veins of Tin, store of Cattle, Corn, fat Pastures:
Containing the City of Exon, a Bishops See, 394 Parishes, 33 Hundreds, 37
Market Towns, and 23 Rivers, small and great. It sends Members to Parliament
26, viz. Exeter, Plymouth, Plimpton, Totness, Oakhampton, Honiton, Barnstaple,
Tavistock, Ashburton, Tiverton, Beralston, 2 Each; and 2 more out of these
three Towns, Clifton, Dartmouth, and Hardness, and 2 Knights of the Shire; in
all 26. It is Bounded with Somersetshire, Cornwall, the Irish Sea, and Channel.

Exeter, the only City of this County, is of great Antiquity, for the Castle
called Rugemont was once the Palace of the West Saxon Kings, and afterward of
the Earls of Cornwall, and the Walls and Cathedral were Builded by King
Ethelstane, and is situate on the River Ex.

Torbay in this County, some few Miles from the North East of Dartmouth, is
singularly remarkable for the Descent made here on the 5th of November 1688, by
the then Prince of Orange, but his now present Majesty King William the Third
(whom God long preserve) with his Forces from Holland, to save this Nation from
Popery and Slavery, which had then bid fair for it; but upon his Landing
vanished like Mists before the Morning Sun.

Plymouth, seated on the River Plym, is renowned by being the birthplace of
that great Sea Captain, Sr. Francis DEVON SHIRE
map of Devonshire Drake; Tinmouth was the place where the Danes Landed when
they first Invaded the Western Parts, and suffered much by the French in the
Year 1690; Crediton was a Bishops See till it was removed to Exeter by Edward
the Confessor; Hubblestone was the burying-place of Hubba the Dane, Brother to
Hungar, slain in Battle not far from thence. In the Parish of Comb-Martin it is
Recorded, That William Wimondham Refined out of Oar dug there 270 Pound
weight of Silver, afterward Coined for Elinor Duchess of Bar. The Seats of the
Nobility are pleasantly situate in this County, viz. Potheridge and Wenbury,
seats of the Late Duke of Albemarle; Chudleigh the seat of the Lord Clifford
Baron of Chudleigh; and the Lord Bishop of the Diocese his Palace at Exeter.

The Reign of Edred, etc. Tenth Sole Monarch of England.
EDred or Eldred, as is said, being left Protector of the Realms and Persons of
Edwye and Edgar, he continued for a time in that station; but using many Arts
to win upon the Affections of the People, finding he should meet with no great
opposition in making him self King, contrary to the Trust reposed in him, he
got to be Crowned at Kingston upon Thames in Surry: But Wolstan, Arch Bishop of
York, having labored to oppose it, and not being able to do it, became his
Enemy; practicing many underhand Treacheries against him, siding with Anlafe
the Dane, who lurked with a few Forces in the Northern parts, till Recruits
came to him, and then by the Bishops means, the People of Northumberland
Received him as their King.

This Rouzed Edred, and made him advance Northward with a great Army, and
sundry Battles were fought, in which Edred for the most part was Victorious,
slaying a great number of his Enemies; so that the Dane opressing the People by
grievous Taxes, and Extorting Money from them to send into Denmark, and other
parts, for the raising and bringing over more Forces, they grew weary of his
Government, and Mutinying in Tumultuous manner, constrained him (for fear of
his Life) to quit all Claim and Title of a King over them; however they set up
Ericus in his stead but King Edred seizing their strong holds, and punishing
with Death and other penalties such of the Ringleaders of the Faction as fell
into his hands, he very much put a stop to his Enemies proceedings, many of
them submitting to Mercy, and others fled: Yet being too secure, Arch Bishop
Wolstan took the advantage of it, giving notice to the Danes and their Faction,
who gathering their scattered Forces laid an Ambush for him in his return, and
in a narrow way enclosed by Woods, rushing out on the Rear of his Army, slew a
great many of them before the Front could face about, by fetching a compass to
succor them; however, after a sharp Fight they were repulsed, and many of them
destroyed. For in Revenge of Wolstans Treachery he Burnt the Abbey of Rippon,
and other places, where the Clergy had sided with his Enemies; but gave sums of
Money to be distributed among the Poor who suffered by the War, which gained
him Envy by some, and Praise by others; so that the Northern Nobles endeavored
to gain Edwye his Eldest Nephew to their Party that they might the more
colourably rise in Arms, under a pretense of the Young Princes Right to the
Crown; but he, given up wholly to Pleasure, rather consulting his Ease, and
what might best gratify his Appetite, than the Toiles and Hazzards of War,
gave little or no heed to the Overtures made him for immediate rising to a
Throne; and indeed his Uncles A Mapp of DORSETSHIRE

By John Seller Hydrog: reg: at the west end of ye Exchang London

tender care of him was such, that he may truly be said to live happier under
his Tutelage, than when he came to sway the Scepter, as will more plainly
appear in the succeeding Reign.

This King made St. Germans in Cornwall a Bishop See, which was afterward
translated to Cridington by Canute King of the Danes, Reigning Sole Monarch in
England; and at last it was settled at Exeter by Edward the Confessor, where it
now remains. He began his Reign Anno Dom. 946, and continued it Nine Years,
and was Buried at Winchester, and is accounted the Tenth Sole Monarch of
England. In his time a violent Earthquake happened, throwing down many stately
Buildings, especially in the Northern parts.

Remarks on Dorsetshire, etc.
DOrsetshire is very spacious and fertile, breeding great numbers of Cattle in
its rich Pastures, and is much renowned for its Linen and Woollen
Manufactures: It produces abundance of Corn, and the Isle of Portland joining
(as it were) to it, furnishes us with plenty of Freestone, used in building
Churches and other stately Fabrics in London, etc. It is Bounded with
Wiltshire, Somersetshire, Hampshire, Devonshire, and the Channel. It Contains
248 Parishes, divided into 29 Hundreds, 19 Market Towns, and four Rivers. It
sends Members to Parliament 20, viz. Bridport 2, Croft-Castle 2, Dorchester 2,
Lyme Regis 2, Melcom Regis 2, Pool 2, Shaston 2, Weymouth 2, Wareham 2, and 2
Knights of the Shire. It has in it a great many Parks stored with Venison.

Dorchester, the chief Town in this Shire, is of great Antiquity, and was
called by the Romans Durnovaria, being of pleasant situation, and its Buildings
Rich and Populous.

Banbury was Anciently the Court of many West Saxon Kings; at Cern, Austin the
Monk Preached up Christianity on his first Arrival in this shire; and by the
consent of the People destroyed their Idols, and among the rest one called Hell.

Shaftsbury is famed for the History of the Prophesying Eagle (probably a Man
whose Name was Aquila) in this place was Buried the Body of Edward the Son of
Edgar, Murdered at the command of his Stepmother, in Corfe-Castle. At
Winbourn Minster, Builded by Cuthburga Queen of Northumberland, was Intered the
Body of Ethelred.

Nor must we forget Lime in this County, which is Memorable for the Landing of
James late Duke of Monmouth there, with about fourscore Gentlemen from Holland;
in the Year 1685, being the first Year of the late King James's Reign. And though
he brought so few along with him, yet in a few Days after his Landing, he was
several Thousands strong; and gave the Kings Forces a considerable Repulse at
Philips-Norton; and had he gained the Day at Sedgemore (which in all
probability he had done, had he not been betrayed) It is verily believed the
greatest part of England had Declared for him; so great an Aversion, even at
that time, the Nation had against King James and Popery; and I am sure they
have no reason to be fonder of him since. But Heaven had decreed our
Deliverance to be the Work of another hand: And therefore the unhappy Duke
after his Defeat at Sedgmore, was taken at Ringwood in Hampshire, and from
thence brought up to London, and two days after Beheaded upon Tower Hill; whose
Death was followed by abundance of barbarous Executions in this County; so that
there is hardly a Town in it, but what can show some Bloody Tokens of King
James his Cruelty; The Quarters of the poor Macerated Wretches having been
placed upon Poles set up in the Highways, for many Miles together: As we shall
show more at large, when we come to King James's Reign.

Sherburn was Anciently an Episcopal See, and so continued a long time, in
whose Cathedral were Interred the Body of the Kings Ethelbert and Ethelbald.
Maiden Castle, about a Mile West of Dorchester and Badbury Castle, appear by
Coin, and other Marks dug up and found about them, to have been Garrisons of
the Romans, if not builded by them. The River Stowr in this County abounds with
Tench of an extraordinary bigness: In the Isle of Purbeck are veins of Marble,
though not continued, but scattering here and there, as Cambden observes, yet run
a great way under Ground: Great store of the best Hemp growing in England, is
found between Bemister and Bridport; and near Sturpain, on the side of the
River, there is a plentiful production of Madder. The Hills in Dorsetshire are
few, and those for the most part gradually rising, some Crowned with pleasant
Woods, and others with Corn in its season, and flocks of Sheep: It is
Beautified with several Seats of the Nobility, viz. Hook Castle, the Duke of
Boltons; Cranbourn-House, the Earl of Salisburys; Wimbourn St. Giles, the Earl
of Shaftsburys. The Houses of the Gentry are likewise very stately, as well in
the Towns, as separate; so that it may be ranked among the most delightful
Counties of England.

The Reign of Edwye, the Eleventh Sole Monarch of England.
EDwye, Eldest Son to Edmund, and Nephew to Edrid, began his Reign Anno Dom.
955, finding Affairs in a forward settlement (the Danes being for the most part
expelled the Land, or had turned their Forces on the Scots, as knowing they had
been foiled on this side, and had but little hopes of fixing in the Southern
parts of the Island) He was Crowned at Kingston upon Thames, and there is
reported to have drawn a Lady (near a kin to him, and Married to a Nobleman)
aside, after a Ball or Dancing bout, as if he had some matter of importance to
relate to her, and behind the Cloth of Arras forced her to his Lust, which
being much complained of by the Nobility, he proposed for the reparation of her
Honor to take her to be his Wife, but her Husband opposing it, and willing to
pass over the high Injury his Prince had done him, rather than his Country
should suffer by any public Mischief that might ensue thereon from Popular
Fury or Factions at Court, the matter seemed hushed for a time; but whether the
King feared the private Revenge of an abused Husband, or having an inclination
to a free Enjoyment of the Lady, I determine not, but so it was ordered, that
he in conclusion caused the Husband to be Murdered, and took his Lady, now
free from the bonds of Marriage by the untimely Death of her Husband, not for a
Wife, (as he had before proposed) but for his Concubine; which makes some
Authors believe her Ambition, to glitter so near a Throne, though in a Tinsel
splendour of ignominy, made her consenting to the latter crime, however she
inclined to the former; yet this unprincely action created him such a hatred in
the minds of his Subjects, That all, except his Flatterers, extremely murmured
against him; and Bishop Dunstan sharply reproving him for his Vices, he
Proscribed him as an Enemy or Traitor; so that, to save his Life, he absconded
in England a while, and then fled into Flanders.

Of these disorders in Government, and Disaffections of the People, the Danes
taking advantage, joined with the Welsh, and Invaded the Northern Borders,
having many Irish, and some Scots, as Auxiliaries joined with them; so that
most of those Counties being violently Oppressed, and finding the King slow to
relieve them, THE BISHOPRIC of DURHAM By John Seller.
map of Durham having united their Forces and expelled the Enemy, renounced
their Allegiance to him, and chose his Brother Edgar King, a young Prince of an
active Spirit, who had assisted them in the War; to which with little
opposition the whole Nation consented, and hereupon Edwye being Deposed, Dyed
of Grief, and was Buried at Winchester. In his time there was a great
contention between the Monks and Married Priests; the former opposing the
latter, as not capable of Officiating in holy Orders, according to the Cannons
of the Church of Rome; and they again alleging those Cannons were
contradictory to the Holy Scriptures; so the Controversy was put to the King to
determine, and in this indeed he gave a right Judgment, declaring for the
Married Priests; which is the only commendable thing noted in his Reign. He
Reigned four Years, and was the Eleventh Sole Monarch of England.

Remarks on the Bishopric of Durham, etc.
THE Bishopric of Durham, though small in circumference, abounds in plenty of
all things, as Cattle, Corn, Pastures, Fruit Trees, Woods, Forests and Parks;
and is Watered with diverse pleastant Streams stored with Fish. It has to the
North and West many pleasant Hills, and is Bounded with Northumberland,
Westmorland, Yorkshire, and the German Ocean. It has in it the City of Durham,
which is a Bishops See, and is a Palatine, having diverse Privileges above many
Counties. It Contains 118 Parishes, 6 Market Towns, and 11 Rivers: It sends
Members to Parliament 4, viz. Durham 2, and 2 Knights of the Shire.

It gained the Title and Privilege by the great Fame and Renown of St.
Cuthberd, for the Interment of whom, the Cathedral was first Bulded by Bishop
Aldwin, and much enlarged by Bishop Careleph: His Tomb was with much Devotion
Visited by Edward, Ethelstane, and diverse other Saxon Kings; and by William the
Conqueror this Bishopric was made a County Palatine: There is a place called
Gallile in the West End of the Church, where is to be seen the Tomb of
venerable Beda. Binchester (the Benovium of the Romans) was famed for their
chief station in the North, and many of their Coins have been found in Earthen
Vrns, upon Digging up old foundations.

Chester in the Street (the Condercum of the Romans) is a Place of great
Antiquity, pleasantly situate, and well Inhabited.

At Nevil's Cross near Durham, the Scots were defeated, and David their King
made Prisoner by one Copeland, and carried Prisoner to the Tower; for which
service Copeland received of the King five Hundred Pounds per Annum. In this
Bishopric, near Darlington, are three wonderful deep Pits, called Hell
Kettles, supposed to be sunk by an Earthquake. In this Palatine also stands
Bernard Castle, famous for the many Sieges it has held out against the Scots:
Over the River Weer, with which the City of Durham is almost encompassed, are
two well built Stone Bridges, one from the South, the other from the North
Road, leading into the Town.

This Palatine has a Jurisdiction within it self to Try Criminals, and other
Matters, from which in many cases there lies no Appeal. The Seats though few, are
very Ancient, and yet Magnificent Structures, viz. Durham Place and Aukland
Castle, the Bishop Seats being the principal.

The Reign of King Edgar, Twelfth Sole Monarch of England.
EDgar, the Second Son of Edmund, began his Reign Anno Dom. 959, at which time
the Danes (weary^d out with War) began to think of settling a Peace ^ith the
English, upon consideration they might rest at ^uiet in some Northern Counties,
and have other Ad^antages which (considering the uncertainty of the ^en state
of Affairs) was not thought amiss to be ^lowed them, they owning the King their
Superior, and to continue as it were his Subjects: And so King ^dgar having
received the Crown at Bath, from the ^ands of Odo Arch Bishop of Canterbury,
applied himself to the Government of his Kingdom, and recalled Dunstan from
Banishment; yet by this means some Divines of Oxford University were Branded in
the Cheek, and Banished; for Affirming The Church of Rome ^o be the Whore of
Babylon, Monkery an Offensive Contagion; Their Vows of Celibacy an
encouragement to Sodomy, and other Vncleaneness. He made very strict Laws
against Drunkenness, which was very rife in his time, causing Cups to be made
with certain Pins or Marks, and a penalty to such as should exceed the allowed
Draught: And England being then pestered with Wolves, who destroyed much small
Cattle, and some People, he made a Law, That those who held Lands of the Crown
should Yearly bring in a cerrain number of Wolves Heads, under a Penalty of
forfeiting their Tenures; And Ludwal, the Prince of Wales, was alloted to bring
in three Hundred Wolves Heads Yearly in consideration of the Lands he held in
subjection to the Crown of England: Whereupon upon such dilligent search was
every where made, that ^n a few years there was not one to be found in England,
except such as were kept tame, nor ever since has there been otherways any of
the breed in this Country, though Neighboring Ireland not long since abounded
with them.

This Edgar Yearly rid the Circuit, to take notice of the abuses and
corruptions of his Judges, and severely Punished their remisness in the
Administration of the Laws: But notwithstanding all these good Qualities, he
was very much blemished with Incontinency, not sparing Wives or Daughters,
where his desires lead him to pursue the enjoyment of his unlawful Pleasures:
He begat a Daughter, whom he named Edith, on Wolfe-child a veiled Nun, who was
afterward for a considerable sum of Money Cannonized by the Pope, and
attempting to gain the possession of Odwina, a Western Dukes Daughter, her
Mother whom he solicited to give her into his Arms, preferring the preservation
of her Chastity to the Kings Anger, and all his Golden Promises, contrived a
Stratagem to defeat him, which she effected, by laying her waiting Maid in her
Daughters Bed, with whose wanton toying in the Dark he was so pleased, that
though he discovered the Fraud the next Morning, he not only commended the
Duchess, but gave his Bedfellow the Reward he had promised the Young Lady, and
kept her as his Concubine.

Soon after this, hearing by Fame of the great Beauty of Duke Orgarius's
Daughter, that she was even a Phoenix in nature, for incomparable Features,
being by this time a Widower, he resolved if what was reported proved true, to
take her to Wife; and in order to be better certified, he sent Earl Ethelwold,
one of his Courtiers, to view her, who falling in Love with the Lady, wooed her
for himself, and Married her, excusing it to the King, by telling him, That she
had Beauty enough for a Subject, but not for so great a Prince: However this
did not so well satisfy him, but he resolved to see her, and so Invited himself
to the Earls House.

Ethelwold, mistrusting to what intent he had done it, being conscious his
Wives Beauty would inflame him, labored to excuse his unpreparedness, but in
vain; whereupon he acquainted his Wife with it, and entreated her to deforme
herself, by appearing in a homely Dress, and by discoloring her Face, if she
had any regard to his Life, or her own Chastity; telling her how her prevailing
Charms had made him betray his Trust.

But this Ambitious Woman (proud of her Beauty) gathering from his discourse
she might have been a Queen, and not now altogether out of hopes to be so,
promised the Earl (for the better hiding her Anger) to obey him; but on the
contrary, when the King was set at Dinner, she came before him Adorned with
Jewels, and all her costly Ornaments, having much added by Art to her Natural
Beauties, so that she appeared in his Eyes like a glittering Angel; yet he
dissembled his Anger with Ethelwold for the present, till that Afternoon going
a Hunting with the Earl in his Forest, he singled him out, and after many
reproaches, struck him through with his Javelin, as he was about to fall on his
Knees and beg Pardon; and in a little time after took the Lady to Wife, by
whom he had Ethelred afterward King of England. For this and his other wicked
practices, Dunstan whom he had made a Bishop, and his great Favorite, Enjoined
him as a Penance, Not to wear his Crown for seven Years, which Injunction he
submitted to, but left not his Lascivious courses.

This Edgar brought the Kingdom to a Flourishing condition, and is accounted
the greatest of the Saxon Monarchs, being once at Westchester he had eight
Kings and Princes to Row his Barge on the River Dee, as we have already noted,
in our Remarks on Cheshire. He is said to compass the Island with almost an
incredible Navy of Ships, viz. 3600, settling and strengthening the Seaports,
leaving Guard-Ships to defend them against the Landing of Pirates or other
Enemies; by which Undertaking he brought such a Terror on Scotland, that their
King sued for Peace, and paid an Annual Tribute to have it confirmed.

He Restored and Founded 47 Monasteries: And in the presence of his Nobility,
on Christmas Day, Anno Dom. 974, he Confirmed the Abbey of Ramsey, which his
Cousin Alwin had Founded, and made the Abbey which Bishop Oswald had Builded, a
Cathedral Church; He brought the Welsh under an entire Subjection to England,
aloting their Princes Pensions, as his Servants, clearing the Seas of Rovers,
and intended to War on France, to compol that King to a reparation of the
Damages his Merchants had sustained on the French Coasts, by Embargoes and
Seisures of their Goods. But whilst great things were in his mind, his
Debaucheries having much wasted his Natural Strength, he Dyed when he had
Reigned Sixteen Years, and was honorably Entombed at Glastenbury; which as yet
boasts some remains of his Monument.

In the sixth Year of his Reign, the Heavens seemed as on Fire, the Stars to
appearance darted Beams at each other, as if Creation had been about to
dissolve. A Monsterous Fish was taken on the Coast of Sussex, with a Face and
Hair like a Man, and a Scaly Circlet like a Coronet on its Head, and upon its
being drawn up, sent forth a mighty noise like the roaring of a Lion.

ESSEX By J: Seller.
map of Essex

Remarks on the County of Essex, etc.
ESSEX is not only considerably Large, but is every where sprinkled with Towns
and Villages of note, and is abundantly stored with Cattle, by reason its
advantageous Meadows, Marshes, and other Pastures, which lying low produce
store of Grass in the driest seasons; as for Cheese and Butter, it produces
very great quantities, as also very good Corn, and store of Saffron, Hops, etc.

It is Bounded on the South with the River Thames, and Kent, the River washing
its verdant Banks as far as the Hope; on the West with Hartfordshire, and
Middlesex; on the North with Cambridgshire and Suffolk, and on the East with
the Ocean; It is divided into 20 Hundreds, which contain 415 Parishes; It has
27 Market Towns, and seven Rivers; It sends Members to Parliament eight, viz.
Colchester 2, Harwich 2, Maldon 2, and two Knights of the Shire.

Colchester in this County is of great Antiquity, held to be Built by the
Ancient British King Coilus, from whom it seems to derive its Name; and in it
was Born King Lucius the first known Christian King in the World: Constantine
the first Christian Roman Emperor, as also Helena his Mother, Empress to
Constantius and Daughter to King Coilus; It is also Memorable for its Long
Siege in the late Civil War.

Malden is very Ancient, having been the Royal Seat of the Trinobantes, of
which Cunobeline was King, when our Savior was Born. It was taken by the
Emperor Claudius and Named Camalodunum, wherein he placed a Roman Garrison, but
Rased to the Ground by Queen Bonduca or Boadicia, after a mighey Defeat given
the Romans in Revenge of their breach of Trust, and the Rape of her Daughters;
which we formerly mentioned.

Walden famous for Saffron growing about it, from which it takes the Name of
Saffron Walden, and for giving Birth to that Learned Statesman Sr. Thomas
Smith, Secretary of State to Queen Elizabeth: At Tilbury the said Queen
rendezvouzed her Forces to oppose the Spanish Invasion 1588; and there is now a
strong Fort, commanding the Mouth of the Thames.

Chelmsford, accounted the Shire Town, is of very commodious Building and
situation, the Assizes being usually held there. Braintry, Cogshal, Harwich,
and other Towns, adorn this County. There is a Proverb peculiar to this County,
which is, He may fetch a Flitch of Bacon from Dunmow, This Proverb took its
rise from a Custom formerly practiced in the Priory of Dunmow, first founded by
Juga, a Noble Lady, for Black Nuns, Anno 1111. but afterward converted into a
Priory for Friars, who ordained, That if any Person from any part of England
would come thither, and humbly kneel on two stones, yet to be seen at the
Church Door before the Convent, and solemnly take the following Oath, he might
demand a Gammon or Flitch of Bacon, which should be freely given him: You shall
Swear by the Custom of our Confession,
That you never made any Nuptial Transgression,
Since you were married Man and Wife,
By Household Brawls, or contentious strife:
Or otherwise in Bed, or at Board,
Offended each other in Deed or Word:
Or since the Parish Clark said Amen,
Wished your selves unmarried again;
Or in a Twelvemonth and a Day,
Repented not in thought any way;
But continued true, and in Desire,
As when you joined hands in holy Quire.
If to these Conditions without all fear,
Of your own accord you will freely Swear,
A Gammon of Bacon you shall receive,
And carry it hence with love and free leave.
For this is our Custom at Dunmow well known;
Though the sport be ours, the Bacon's your own.


And pursuant hereunto, it appears upon Record, That ^ichard Wright, of
Badsworth in Norfolk, in the 23d. ^f Hen. 6. and Stephen Samuel of Little
Easton in Essex, ^n the 7th. of Edward the 4th, and Thomas Lee of Coxhall in
Essex, in the 2d. of Hen. 8. Took the aforesaid ^ath, and demanded and received
their Bacon.

Amongst the many Noble Seats in this County, That ^oyal House called
Audley-End, (not far from Saffron-Walden) justly claims the first place, Built
by Thomas ^oward Earl of Suffolk, Treasurer to King James the first. ^hen there
is New-Hall, a very Noble Seat of the late Duke of Albemarles, and Bently
belonging to the Earl of Oxford; Copt-Hall a seat of the Earl of Dorcets; Leez
^riory, a seat of the Earl of Manchester; St. Osith, a ^at of the Earl Rivers;
Havering, a seat of the Earl of ^indseys; Park-Hall, a seat of the Earl of
Angleseys; ^oulsham-Hall, Moulsham Friery, and Bishops-Hall, ^ats of the Lord
Fitz Walter; Gosfield-Hall, and Spring-^lace, seats of the Lord Gray of Wark:
Easton-Lodg and Achdon-Place, seats of the Lord Maynard; Tols^ury, a seat of
the Lord Howard of Escrick; Lawfield-Hall, the Lord Carews Seat: It contains
likewise many ^urious Parks, Chases, Warrens, and is stored with Fish, ^owl,
and all other Necessaries.

The Reign of Edward, Thirteenth Sole Monarch of England, and by some Surnamed
the Martyr.
EDward, Eldest Son to Edgar, began his Reign upon the Death of his Father, Ann
Dom. 975; he was Crowned at Kingston on Thames by Dunstan, who had been
promoted to the Bishopric of Canterbury by his Father. At his Accession to the
Throne, a terrible Blazing Star appeared, which rising East by South, continued
visible twenty Nights; ushering in a grievous Famine; so that the poorer sort
were compelled to Eat Grass, Leaves, and Bark of Trees, whereupon many
Thousands dyed; yet it continued but a Year, and then another mischief
succeeded, which had like to have put the Nation in confusion, viz.

Several Years past, though the Popes Cannons prohibited it, the Clergy had
privilege to Marry, without any hinderance to them in performing their
Functions, and keeping their Spiritualities: But Arch Bishop Dunstan, who aimed
at the Popedom, or at least aspired to a Cardinals-Cap, finding it was
displeasing to the Roman See, because the charge of Wives and Children must of
necessity debar the Clergy from sending to Rome such liberal Contributions as
otherways they might have done, and so hinder Grist from coming to the Popes
Mill, he to ingratiate himself with that See, stired up the Monks and Unmarried
Priests, against those that had taken Wives, and they dealing underhand with
diverse unthinking People, Tumults arose thereon, and much mischief was done:
For Duke Alfarus encouraging the Married Priests and their party, the King with
all his Authority had much ado to prevent a General Insurrection. At last it
was agreed, That an Assembly of both Parties should meet, and dispute the
matter, according to Scripture and Cannons; and a place for that purpose was
prepared in a large upper Room where Dunstan (as chief Orator for the Monks)
had cunningly placed his Chair on a Post or Beam strongly fixed; and as some
Authors believe had contrived a Device, by taking out some Pins, to let the
Floor fall, upon a signal given; so the press being very great, after a hot
Debate had been held for a while, and nothing Agreed on, Dunstan stamping, and
saying, They shall fall before us, etc. The Floor first trembled, as with the
motion of an Earthquake, and then fell down, leaving nothing but Dunstan's
Chair that had been surely seated aloft, which being looked upon as, and cried
up for a Miracle, in the behalf of the Monks, they thereupon carried the day:
And the Married Priests were left at liberty to Enjoy their Wives, but outed of
their Benefices.

This is that Dustan of whom a story goes, That to prevent Idleness, he was
working at the Goldsmiths Trade in a Cell near Glassenbury, and whilst he was
framing a Chalice of Gold, the Devil in the shape of a Beautiful Woman appeared
to him, endeavoring to Tempt him to Lewdness; but he by Inspiration knowing it
to be a Fiend Transformed, on a sudden, as it was peeping over his Shoulder,
he catched it by the Nose with red hot Tongs, and made the Devil rore so loud,
that all the People in the Village were Affrighted at the horrid Noise, and
thereupon the seeming Lady Vanished.

And now the Danes, hoping for great advantages from these disturbances,
prepared a considerable Fleet; but a Storm arising, they were driven on the
Coast of Scotland, and many of them broken among the Rocks, about 6000 Men
perishing: However, being recruited, they gave some disturbances on the
Northern Borders, many of the Scots joining with them but they made no great
Advance, for the Marches were strongly Guarded; yet many Disorders happened at
Court, by reason of the Kings Youth, not having experience in the Politic
Intreagues of State: His Mother-in-law, who aimed to set her Son Ethelred (whom
she had by Edgar, after Ethelwold her Husband was slain) upon the Throne,
maintained a secret Faction to Depose or Murder him; the latter whereof was in
a little time effected: For the King being persuaded to go a Hunting in a
Forest near Croft-Castle, the place where she and her Son Resided, his Train
(as it is thought purposely) left him in the Chase of a Stag; whereupon he not
caring to stay in an unfrequented place, made to the Castle to pay his
Stepmother and Brother-in-law a visit, as also to get some Refreshment, the
weather being exceeding hot, when knocking at the Gate, she (who had seen him
out of the Window) came down and welcomed him in, with all the Blandishments
and Flatteries immaginable, Entreating his Highness to alight and accept of
whatever her mean Habitation would afford: But he Replied, He came not to pay a
set Visit, but came that way after his Game, and had lost his Company, and
therefore at this time would sit on Horseback, and take a glass of Wine till
some of them might chance to come up with him. Hereupon she hasting to fetch
some Wine, gave the Sign to a desperate Ruffian, who was her Servant, that when
the Glass was at his Mouth he should strike him in with a Dagger, which he
performed; at which unexpected Wound, the Young King perceiving the Treachery,
set Spurs to his Horse; but through loss of Blood, fell from his Sadle in a
little way Riding, and his Foot hanging in the Stirup he was dragged about the
Field, till a Shepherd took him up, in whose Arms, giving a groan or two, he
Dyed. This was no sooner GLOUCESTER SHIRE
map of Glocestershire noised abroad, but the common sort were immediately for
Revenging it on the Queen and all her Adherents, that should be found any ways
concerned in it; but finding the Nobles, who for the most part were of her
Faction, cold in the matter; and she protesting not to be consenting to the
Murder, but that her wicked Servant had done it surprisingly and unexpected to
her, in revenge of his Kinsman whom the King had caused to be Hanged some time
before, for reproaching him in giving his consent to the turning out of the
Married Priests, and had upon perpetrating so horrid a wickedness fled beyond
the Seas, the business by degrees was hushed up, and she labored to have her
Son Ethelred Crowned: But Arch Bishop Dunstan strongly opposed it, saying, That
at his Baptism having befouled the Font, it was Ominous to the Church; that he
would be a Contemner, if not an Abolisher of its Religion; and a long while it
was contested, till Dunstan found the Queens Faction so strong that he durst no
longer refuse it.

King Edward being thus made away, was in a manner privately Buried at Waltham,
and afterward his Body removed into the Monastery at Shaftsbury. He Reigned 4
Years, and was the 13th Sole Monarch of England.

Remarks on Gloucestershire, etc.
GLoucestershire is made Fruitful by the River Severn, Branching almost unto
all parts of it; it contains much Woodland and Gradual Hills, Feeding great
store of Tame Cattle, and Venison. It abounds in Corn, Wool, Cheese, and
Butter: On the North it is bounded with Worcestershire, and Warwickshire; on
the East, with Oxfordshire, and Wiltshire; on the South, with Somersetshire,
and part of the Severn; on the West, with Herefordshire, and Monmouthshire. It
Contains one City, a Bishops See, viz Gloucester, 30 Hundreds, divided into 280
Parishes, 27 Market Towns and 12 Rivers. It sends members to Parliament 8, viz
Cirencester 2, Gloucester 2, Teuksbury 2, and 2 Knights of the Shire.

Gloucester City is the ancient Gelenum of the Romans; In it Robert Brother to
the Empress Maud, was kept Prisoner, being taken in the War against King
Stephen; its Cathedral is of Excellent Architecture and much noted for its
Whispering Place, wherein the least sound may be distinctly heard at a
considerable distance: It was won from the Britains by Chewlin King of the West
Saxons Anno Dom. 570 and in this City a Monastery of Nuns was Founded by Osrick
a Saxon, wherein 3 Queens of the Mercians were successively Prioresses.

In Alny-Isle, a place near Gloucester, was fought the Combat between Edmund
Ironside the Saxon King, and Canute the Dane, and the division of the Kingdom
thereupon made, as in his Reign will further apear. Cirencester or Circester was
an ancient Station of the Romans; in it was born the Learned Thomas Rutham,
some time Bishop of Durham. The next places of note are Dursly, Came, Todington,
Yate, Westbury, Sudly Castle, Tewksbury, in whose field the Fatal Battle was
fought which ruined at that time the House of Lancaster Anno 1471, in which
Prince Edward was slain, Queen Margaret taken Prisoner, and the Duke of
Somerset Earl of Devonshire etc. Were Beheaded. At Aderly on the top of certain
Hills are found Stones in the form of Oyters, Cockles etc. and near Puckle
Church is a Vein of blue Stone. At Lessington are Stones that represent Stars,
of the circumferance of a single Penny, and the thickness of half a Crown, they
grow together in Columns about 3 or 4 Inches long, and being singly put into
Vinegar, they naturaly move, and tend toward union. The Seats of the Nobility
are Badminton and Wallastons Grange, seats of the Duke of Beaufort; Stowel, a
seat of the Earl of Strafford; Berkely-Castle, a seat of the Earl of Berkley's;
Campden-House in Campden, a seat of the Earl of Gainsboroughs; Overnorton, a
seat of the Lord Viscount Say and Seal's; Corfe-Court and Cockbury, seats of
the Lord Coventry; Gloucester Palace, the Bishops seat: It has in it also a
great many Parks, Forests, and all accommodations for Recreation, etc.

The Reign of Ethelred, Fourteenth Sole Monarch of England.
EThelred began his Reign Anno Dom. 979; he was the third Son of Edgar, and
came very Young to the Crown, for I find that being informed of the manner of
his Brother Edwards Death to make way for him to the Crown, when he was but ten
Years old, he not only detested the crime, and refused to be made King, but
wept and complained so abundantly for the deceased, that the Queen in a great
passion snatched a Wax Taper from the Alter (nothing else being at hand) and
beat him so sorely with it, that it gave him an Antipathy against Wax Tapers
all his life time, he never enduring any to be in his sight; so that he may be
reputed to be between Ten and Eleven Years Old when he came to the Throne; so
that the Danes promising themselves great advantages by reason of his Minority,
Landed in great numbers.

This King Ethelred, by some called Eldred, was Crowned at Kingston upon Thames
by Arch Bishop Dunstan, not (as is said) by his good will, but he was compelled
to perform that Office; yet instead of a Benediction, he Bann'd him as one that
Swam to the Throne in the Stream of his Brothers Blood (as he Phrased it)
speaking also as it were Prophetically, of the great losses England would
sustain in this Kings Reign; and indeed Queen Alfreda being soon sensible of
the Blood-guiltiness that cried against her, and fearing the fury of the
People, built two Monasteries of Nuns at Amesbury, where she lived a solitary
Life till she Dyed.

The King being but slow in his preparations, by which means he got himself the
nickname of the Unready, Swane, King or chief Leader of the Danes, and Olaf
King of Norway, who assisted him, got strong possession of diverse of the most
fertile Counties, (being secretly encouraged by Duke Edrick, a Treacherous
Courtier, who discovered to them all the Kings Counsels) and Fortified the
Towns and Castles, casting up works to secure what they gained, as they made
their Encroachments. However, at length the King gave them Battle, and though he
cannot be said to lose it, the parting being somewhat doubtful on either side,
yet he lost so many of his People that he could not get together a sufficient
Army to oppose them; so that to save the rest of his Country from Spoil, he was
constrained to comply with the Enemies exorbitant demands, compounding for his
Quiet at 10000 l. Then they raised him to 16, 20, 30, and 40000 Pounds;
compelling the People to find them Provisions in their Houses where they were
Quartered, and to see in many places their Wives and Daughters Ravished before
their Faces, not daring on pain of their Lives to gainsay it; The People
calling them Lord Danes, corruptly now Lurdane, a byword for a Lazy Fellow.

But Elfrick Earl of Mercia, and Algarius his Son, being found contributes and
abettors to the Misery of their Country, the King caused their Eyes to be put
out, and they confined to certain Limits during Life.

And now the King plainly perceiving what a miserable condition the Kingdom was
in, between private Traitors and professed Enemies, he resolved to take a
violent and speedy course (as he thought, to end the War at once) and thereupon
sent secret Messages throughout the Kingdom, That upon the Ringing the
Allarm-Bell, on St. Brices Day, the 13th of November, Anno Dom. 1002, the
People in all Cities and Towns should fall on the Danes as they lay scattered,
and had no time to get to their Arms, or in any great Body, and Massacre them;
and accordingly it was put in execution; so that many places flowed with Danes
Blood, the injured and imaged People not sparing either Sex of that Nation; so
that Guni-Child, King Swane's Sister, was slain at Dorchester. This Honor (if
I may rightly term it one) the Women, by I know not what Tradition, totally
ascribe to their Sex, though no doubt both Sexes were Actors in the Danish
Tragedy; which had been more Bloody, had not Duke Edrick given Swane notice,
though somewhat too late in the main, of the Design; by which means he saved
himself, and a great many of his followers: and storming at his Loss, Repaired
it with all speed, sending for Recruits from Norway and Denmark: It was
supposed in this Slaughter about 24000 fell; but to Revenge it, being
Recruited, the Danes grievously oppressed the Country, Burning and Destroying
in all places where they came; so that although the King to the Impoverishing
himself, gave them 30000 Pounds for Peace, they observed it but a few Days; for
having wrested a great Sum of Money from Alphegus, who Succeeded Dunstan in the
Arch Bishopric of Canterbury, and slain 900 Monks and Men in Religious Orders,
They Stoned the good Bishop to Death at Greenwich in Kent.

The King seeing these proceedings, sent Emma his Queen with his two Sons, to
her Brother Richard Duke of Normandy, and shortly after, not able to endure the
Destruction the Enemy made, followed them. But at length Swane was Murdered by
his own Men, for denying them their share of Plunder, or restraining them from
their Insolences over the English: However they chose Canute his Son King. Of
which change, Ethelred thinking to make advantage, at the solicitation of his
Friends returned; but perceiving several Treasons hatching against him; That
his Counsels were betrayed by some he confided in, and that he was too weak to
withstand the Enemies fury, he fell into a Melancholy and Dyed, as is supposed
of Grief, and he was Buried in St. Paul's London. He Reigned 37 Years, unless
we exclude the time he was absent in Normandy, which by some is accounted
between two and three Years. He was the Fourteenth Sole Monarch of England.

Remarks on Hampshire, or Hantshire.
HAmpshire is not only considerable for its Fertility in Corn, Cattle, Foul,
Fish, and its producing store of singular good Honey, but for its commodious
Seaports, opening to the South, for the convenience of Shipping outward or
inward bound, especially Southampton, Anciently Hamo's Haven; It is Bounded on
the North with Barkshire, on the East with Surry and Sussex, on the South with
the Channel, and on the West with Wiltshire and Dorsetshire; It Contains one
City, viz. Winchester which is a Bishops See; and is divided into 39 Hundreds,
253 Parishes, 20 Market Towns, and 4 Rivers; It sends Members to Parliament 26,
viz. Knights of the Shire two, Winchester, Southampton, Portsmouth, Yarmouth,
Petersfield, Newport, Stockbridge, Newton, Christchurch, Whitchurch, HANT ^HIRE
map of Hampshire Limington, and Andover two each: Note, That to this County
belongs the Isle of Wight.

As for Winchester, the only City, it was the Ancient Venta-Belgarum of the
Romans, it is held to have been Founded by Rudhuidibras an Ancient British
King, and was the Royal Seat and Place of Crowning the West Saxon Kings for
many Reigns. The Cathedral was Built by King Kenwolfe, and made the
Burying-Place of the Kings. Henry the Third was Born in this City, and many Men
of great fame.

Southampton was Built out of the Ruins of the Ancient Clausentium, and after
many Devastations Re-Edified in King Richard the Seconds time. It Is said to
take this latter Name from Hamo a Roman slain there, viz. Hamo's Haven, or
Southampton.

At Basingstoke was Born John of Basingstoke, the first English Author of a
Greek Grammar; and at Odiam, William Lilly, first Master of St. Paul's School:
Other Places in this County are Famous for the Birth of worthy Persons and
memorable Transactions; as Andover, Warblington, Hide, Illchester, Wickham,
Okely, etc. Besides the strength of Portsmouth and the Citadel to secure the
Coast, here are Hurt-Castle and Calshot-Castle standing as it were in the Sea;
and many other advantages for the protection of Shipping. The Rocks afford
Samphire and the White Cliffs abundance of Wild Thyme, Marjorum, and Rosemary.

The Seats of the Nobility are Basing-House, Abbstone and Hackwood, seats of
the Duke of Boulton; Farnborough Place, a seat of the Earl of Anglesey;
Rockborn, a seat of the Earl of Shaftsburys; Wharlwell, a seat of the Lord La
Wars; Mottessant, a seat of the Lord Sandys; Breamore, a seat of the Lord
Brooks; Wolvesey-House, the seat of the Lord Bishop of the Diocese.

The Reign of Edmund, who from his Valor and Hardiness was Surnamed Ironside,
Fifteenth Sole Monarch of England.
EDmund Ironside began his Reign in a very troublesome time, Anno Dom. 1016,
when the Danes had possessed the greater part of the Kingdom; taking on him the
Crown rather out of pity to his bleeding Country, than desire of Sovereignty;
and indeed did more than could be reasonably expected from him, with such
slender Forces and little Treasure; for immediately seting up his Standard to
recover a great part of the Kingdom at a point to be lost, he gave Canute
Battle at Penham near Gillingham, where he Overthrew him with much slaughter on
both sides; then he Fought him again with the like success at Sherestane in
Worcestershire; and likewise in a third Battle near that place, notwithstanding
Ederick the Traitorous Duke, though seemingly siding with the King, gave out in
the midest of the Battle that the King was Slain; upon which Defeat, the Danes
fled to London, and were pursued by Edmund who drove them thence. He
discomfited them at Oteford in Kent, and had cleared the Kingdom of them but
for Edrick's Treachery, who in a sixth Battle the King Fought at Assendune near
Roachfor in Essex, commanding a part of the Kings Army, he purposely fled, upon
which the Soldiers fell into Rout and Disorder, so that the King was compelled
for his safety to Retreat toward Gloucester, whither his scattered Forces
resorted to him; and after a little Refreshment he caused other Troops to be
raised, and again displayed his Standard in the Field, often Skirmishing with
the Danes, and slaying great numbers of them, sending likewise a Challenge to
Canute their King, to end the War by single Combat; who accepting it, the two
Kings in the sight of both Armies prepared on the day appointed, viz. the 15th
of July, in a little Island called Olway, made so by the winding of the Severn;
and about ten in the Morning the Combat began, both of them having strong and
large Swords: They had not long continued it, and given to each other mighty
Blows, but the Blood flowed plentifully from their Wounds, and Edmund being a
Prince of exceeding strength, pressed so hard upon Canute, that driving him to
the Brink of the River, he cried out (tho almost Breathless and Faint, by
effusion of Blood) What need is there for us, Noble King, thus to endanger our
Lives? The Kingdom is large enough for us both: If you will then consent to
divide it between us, our hands will be strengthened against our Enemies, and
we shall Live together in Peace and Unity, as Brothers.

King Edmund pausing hereupon a while, considered That if he slew Canute, the
Danes might not stand to the Award of leaving the Land, as having experienced
their breach of Truce, and that being mostly Pagans, they held it but a small
matter to break their Word or Oaths with Christians, and that other Commanders
might come over with fresh Forces to work new Troubles, the Country being
already very much wasted; he at last concluded (upon Canute's dropping his
Sword, in token he Submitted) to shake Hands with him, and embrace the offer:
Whereupon King Edmund having the first Lot, chose the Southern, Eastern, and
Western Counties, as far as the Borders of Yorkshire; and Canute then seemed to
be contented with the Northern Counties, as far as the Borders of Scotland;
Mutually Swearing to assist each other against all Invaders; and for a time
they lived Peaceably in Co-Partnership. But Ederick, the Traytorous Duke,
perceiving the Danes by reason of the swarms that came frequently from Denmark
to be the stronger, labored to ingratiate himself with Canute, (though he held
fair with Edmund, who would not be persuaded by his faithful Counselors to
take him out of the way, though his Treasons were apparent:) And thinking he
should merit much of the Dane by destroying King Edmund; at least, That he
should have some part of the Kingdom assigned him; he one day, as the King was
disburdening Nature at the lower end of his Garden, conveyed himself by a back
way under the Vault, and with Impious Hands Thrust a short Spear in at his
Fundament and up his Body till it peirced his Heart; so that giving an
extraordinary Groan, he instantly Dyed.

The Traitor not satisfied with this, but desirous to carry some Testimonial of
the Regicide with him, crept up at the hole, and with his Sword cut off the
Kings Head, and so privately made his Escape to Canute; and at his approaching
him, cried out, Hail, Sole Monarch of England! Behold the Head of thy
Go-Partner: Canute inwardly detesting so base a Treachery, yet outwardly
dessembling his Resentment, received it as a Grateful Present, promising the
Bringer to Advance him above all the Nobles of the English Nation; and indeed
in one sense he did it, as he deserved; for whilst he was expecting high
Promotion, he caused him to be Arrested, and his Head being stricken off, was
placed on the highest part of the Tower; for by this time he was advanced with
an Army to London, and the English (upon the consternation they were in at the
surprising News of the Kings Death) not opposing him, in a short time the whole
Kingdom submitted to him; so that being Crowned Sole Monarch, he put a Period
to the Saxon Reign, about 566 Years from the Establishment of the Heptarchy.

HARTFORD SHIRE By John Seller
map of Hartfordshire

This Edmund was the Fifteenth Sole Monarch of England: He began his Reign Anno
Dom. 1016, and continued it about one Year. He was a Prince abounding with
Courage, Courtesy, and Strength; a lover of Humanity, and very Merciful to
those that Submitted to him; and so Good-natured, That he hardly could be
induced to believe any Treachery against him.

Remarks on Hartfordshire, etc.
HArtfordshire is a very pleasant Inland County producing large crops of Corn,
especially Barley, of which the best Malt is held to be made: It abounds with
pleastant Orchards and Gardens, has in it diverse Parks stored with Deer; It
produces large and small Cattle in great abundance, and is sprinkled with
Woods, and adorned with pleasant Hills, Meadows, and Inclosiures; and is
particularly noted for the great quantities of Black Cherries, that are at the
proper season sent from thence to London; many of the Trees that produce them
growing in the Hedg-rows, in Fields, and along the Roads, casting a pleasant
shade in Summer time, to refresh the weary Traveller.

It is Bounded with Cambridgshire, Essex, Middlesex, Bedfordshire and
Buckinghamshire; and divided into Eight Hundreds, viz. Odsey, Edwinstree,
Hitching, Broadwater, Broughing, Hartford, Dacor, and Caisho Hundreds; and
these again into 120 Parishes: It has 18 Market Towns and one River of note,
viz. Ware River; though it is Watered with many small Streams.

It sends Members to Parliament Six, viz. St Albans two, Hartford, the Shire
Town, two; and two Knights of the Shire. In this County are diverse Places
worthy of note, as

St. Albans, raised out of the Ruins of old Verulam, an Ancient Roman station:
It is Memorable for the Death of St* Alban, the British Proto Martyr, who
suffered there in the Tenth Persecution, raised by Dioclesian the Roman
Emperor, who being Buried here, and a stately Monument raised on his Grave by
Offa the great King of the Mercians, seems to have given it its Name. This
Place is also famous for two Battles fought here; The first between Richard
Duke of York and King Henry the sixth, the 23d of May Anno Don. 1455. In which
the King was defeated with the slaughter of the Duke of Summerset, Earl of
Northumberland, Lord Clifford, and 5000 of lesser note: The second on the 17th
of February Anno Dom. 1460, where King Henry the sixth and his Queen Margaret
gained the Victory over the Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk, and the Earls of
Arundel and Warwick.

Barnet is famed for its Market and Medicinal Waters, and for the great Victory
gained by Edw. the 4th on the 14th of April Anno Dom. 1471 against the Earls of
Warwick and Oxford, in whose Field that great Earl was slain, since called The
Battle of Barnet-Field. Here was Born John Barnet Bishop of Worcester, then of
Bath and Wells, lastly of Ely, Lord Treasurer in the Reign of Edward the Third.

Ware, Hatfield, and Hodsdon, are all three seated on the River Lea; and near
unto Ware is Amwel-Spring, famous for being the Head of the New-River, which so
plentifully furnishes the City of London with Water.

Langly, commonly called Kings Langly, gave Birth to Edmond of Langly, fifth
Son to Edward the Third, and the first Burial-place of Richard the Second,
afterward removed to Westminster. Abbots Langly was the Birthplace of Nicholas
Break-spear, advanced to Pope of Rome, by the Name of Pope Adrian the Fourth;
who made the Emperor Frederick of Germany hold his Stirrup.

Oister supposed by Cambden to have been the Camp of the Roman Lieutenant
Ostorius, the next of note are Weathamsted, Baldock, Redburn, Helmsteadsbury,
Gatesden, Hemsted, Cottered, Grohambury, which produced many famous Men. The
Seats of the Nobility curiously adorn it, and are these: More Park, once the
delightful seat of the Late Unfortunate Duke of Monmouth; Caishobury and
Hadam-Hall, the seats of the Earl of Essex; Totteridg, the seat of the Earl of
Angleseys; Hatfield, Hartford-Castle, Bigrave, Chesunt, and Quickwood, seats of
the Earl of Salisburys: With diverse seats of the Gentry rendering a pleasant
Prospect in all Parts.

CHAP. IX. The Reigns of the Three Danish Kings, who were Sole Monarchs of
England, viz. Canute, Harrold, and Hardicanute; with the Memorable Things that
happened in their several Reigns.
Some Observations on the Original of the Danes. A Brief Description of the
Country from whence they came: Their manner of War, Religion, Customs, etc.
BEing come to speak of a Succession of Kings different in Nation from the
former, it will not be improper to give an account briefly of the Original of
the Nation that gave birth to the first of them, etc.

The Original of the Danes is concluded (by some Authors) to have been from
Scythia; That a Famine extremely raging in that Country, diverse Colonies had
left it, and ranging to seek Food, found out an Island called Scandia situate
Northward, not far from the continent of Denmark; and in time growing too
numerous for that scanty place, they Warred on the Danij, and so long continued
it, that they grasped the Kingdom with so hard a hand, as to this day it is not
wrested from the Race of them; and from thence they called the Country
Danes-Mark, or portion of Land, now corruptly Denmark.

This Peninsule, so called by reason it is almost an Island, as it is now held
by the Danish King, that is properly called Denmark, is in Length Eighty Miles,
and Twenty in Breadth; having but little firm Land; being divided into many
Islands; whereof Jutland, for its bigness, is the chief: It borders upon
Germany and is a near Neighbor to the lower Frisia; it is difficult to
determine whether it receives greater Benefit than Damage from the Sea; for
often by the violent Tempests the Banks and Fences being forced by the Waves,
the Water not only covers the Fields for a long time, but by the suddainness of
the Deluge destroys many Cattle and People, and as well Stately Buildings as
Lowly Cottages: And the Country is full of Woods containing store of Deer. The
Island of Frunen is separated from the main Land by a narrow Arm of the Sea: To
the Westward of it lies Juta, to the East Slayland, which, for the Beauty and
Fertility of it, is to be preferred before all the other Islands belonging to
the Danish King. In it is situate Copenhagen the principal residence of the
King, also Roschilt the place of their Burial; near unto which is the Island of
Scandia, the first Habitation of the Danes in those parts, as most conclude.
But now to the King of Denmark belongs Norway, formerly a distinct Kingdom, and
some other Countries, which render his Territories much larger than when the
Danes first possessed it.

As for their Religion, when they first Invaded England, and long after, it was
Paganism. Their Idols were many, out-numbering those of the Pagan Saxons; to
some they Offered Horses, to others Humane Sacrifice, Fruits, Flowers, Water,
Bread, Wine, Fish, etc. They were a People very Bloody and Cruel to those they
prevailed over, and extremely Lustful and Treacherous. Their Habit was close
girted Coats, their Arms Spears of a moderate length, Battel-Axes, and
Faulchions, their Diet many times the Flesh of their slain Enemies, Roast or
Sodden; it was about 230 years from their first Invading England, before Canute
got the Sole Monarchy, of whose Reign I am next to treat.

The Reign of Canute, Sixteenth Sole Monarch of England, and first of the
Danes, that Reigned here.
CAnute, Son to Swane (who as you have heard was Murdered by his Soldiers)
began his Reign as Sole Monarch Anno Dom. 1017. He was Crowned at London by
Livingus, Arch Bishop of Canterbury; and at his first coming to the Crown kept
the English under with a very strict Hand, every where disarming them, and
making it a capital Crime for above a certain number of them to meet together,
unless called by his Authority; so that Faires and Marts were in a manner laid
aside: He Deposed and Banished the Popular Nobles, conferring their Titles of
Honor and Estates on his Danes, and yet not thinking he was sufficiently
secured whilst Edward and Edmund, the Sons of Edmund Ironside, remained in the
Kingdom; and yet thought that if he should dip his Hands in their Innocent
Blood, he must of necessity incur the perpetual hatred of the English, he
concluded to take away their Lives privately, so that he might excuse it, and
lay the blame on others; whereupon he sent the Young Princes to his Brother,
King of Sweden, with private Instructions to make them away; but he detesting
so base a crime, Transferred them to the King of Hungary, where Edmond Dyed;
but Edward getting favor at Court and being a Prince endowed with much manly
Beauty, and excellent Parts, Agatha Sister to the Empress of Germany fell in
Love with him, to whom he was Married, and by her had Edgar Surnamed Etheling,
who Dyed without Issue; Margaret, who Married Malcolm King of Scots; she had
Issue Christian a Veiled Nun, Edgar, David, and Alexander, all three Kings of
Scotland proceeded from this Line, as also Maud wife to King Henry the first
King of England, who had Issue Maud the Empress, Mother to King Henry the
Second; so that the design of making away these Princes abroad, by a wonderful
Providence turned in the end to the Advantage of both Kingdoms, in restoring
the Saxon Line after the Norman Conquest to England, in the person of Henry the
Second, and producing many worthy Kings in Scotland

Canute, to strengthen his Interest, Married Emma Sister to Richard Duke of
Normandy, and widow to King Ethelred, and soon got possession of the Kingdom of
Norway, which has ever since been annexed to the Crown of Denmark; then Warring
on the Scots, he made them Tributaries, so that some reckon him to be the
possessor of Four Kingdoms; he made a strict League with the Normans, and set
out a huge Navy to Sea, bringing thereby a Terror on all the Neighboring Sea
Coasts, laying a Tax of 82000 Pounds on his English Subjects; with which Money,
at the persuasion of Queen Emma, he paid off and sent away the greater part of
the Lazy Danes to their Native Country, which won him much favor with the
English; Then he set himself to the contriving and establishing wholesome Laws
for the better settlement of his Kingdom; and for the more firmly founding
them, he called a Parliament at Oxford.

He is commended for his aversion to Dissemblers, Traitors, and Flatterers, for
one of the latter having told him He was Sovereign King not only of the Land
but the Sea, and not only his People but the Winds and Waves were subject to
his Command; to disprove and upbraid the Parasite, being at Southampton he
caused his Chair to be placed on the Sand, and Commanded the Sea that it should
not swell to wet his Royal Robes; but the Waves Rolling toward the Shore, in
their wonted Flowings, Dashed him up to the Thighs, whereupon rising hastily,
he said to his Attendants, Now you see all the Might and Power of Kings is but
Vanity, for none is worthy to have the Name of King, but he that has all
things subject to his Laws; and from that time, as several Authors affirm, he
not only Banished all Flatterers from the Court, but refused to wear his Crown.

In the Third Year of his Reign with a great Navy he Sailed to Denmark, that
Country being then Invaded by the Vandalls, who had overrun the larger part of
Germany, and overthrowing them in a bloody Battle, Slaying their chief Leaders,
he chased the rest out of his Kingdom, and causes Castles and Forts to be
Builded on the Frontiers, to secure it against their Incursions. And so
returning with Victory, he was received at London in Triumph, and having
settled his Affairs in a flourishing condition, the Kingdom thereby much
recovered its Ancient Renown, and he having received the Christian Faith, a
considerable time before, hearing of the Magnificence of Rome, and desirous to
see its stately Structures, the manner of their Living, etc. went thither, not
Royally Attended, but as a Pilgrim; where nevertheless being known, he was
received with great respect, and having given liberally to that See, after he
had visited all the places of note in that Superb City, once Mistress of the
World, he returned highly satisfied with the Undertaking; causing the Ruined
Churches to be Repaired, and Founded diverse Religious Houses, giving great
Privileges to the Monastery of St. Edmunds-Bury in Suffolk, which he had
re-Edified, and then taking a Progress to restore the Face of Justice in the
several Counties, punishing the corrupt Ministers and Oppressors, worn out with
the Toiles of War and Indefatigable Study, in settling his new acquired
Kingdom, he fell Sick on the Road some Miles from Shaftsbury, and being
conveyed to that Town, in a short time he paid the debt by Nature due from all
that are clothed with Mortality, Dying Anno Dom. 1036, when he had Reigned 18
Years; and though the First of the Danish, yet is accounted the 16th Sole Monarch
of England.

Remarks on Huntingtonshire, etc.
HUntingtonshire, is as the former, an Inland County, Bounded by
Northamptonshire, Bedfordshire, and Cambridgshire; It produces store of Wool,
Cattle, Corn, and many fertile Pastures; it is somewhat Woody, though incumbered
with few Hills of any considerable height, it has many small Streams abounding
with Roach, Dace, Chub, Trouts, Carp and Pike, and abundance of Wild Foul
resorts to its Meers and Marshy Places; it contains diverse Parks of Deer, and
some Warrens, also Quarries of Stone. It is divided into 4 Hundreds, containing
79 Parishes, 6 Market Towns, and 2 Rivers. It sends Members to Parliament 4,
viz. Huntington 2, and 2 Knights of the Shire.

Huntington is a very pleasant Town, giving denomination to the Shire, standing
on the Ouse, over which Liver HUNTINGTON SHIRE
map of Huntingtonshire it has a commodious Bridge. It gives a fair Prospect
into the Country, and has a great trading Market, and is adorned with Buildings
of Antiquity: And of this Place Robin Hood, the famous Outlaw, is said to be
Earl, in the Reign of King Richard the First.

St. Ives is situate on the same stream, with many other pleasant Towns, and
Villages. Here was Born Roger, thence Surnamed St. Ives; at Cunington the
learned Antiquary Sr. Robert Cotton was Born. And indeed this Shire has
produced diverse famous Men, as Gregory of Huntington, who Dyed 1610; Henry of
Huntington, Renowned for his History of England; William Whittleseay, Arch
Deacon of Huntington; William Ramsey, a famous Poet, and others.

In this County a Lake called Wittlesmeer, in the Fairest Weather grows
Tempestuous, and Rages with Surges like the Sea; but in a Storm is much Calmer.
The whole County is well Watered, and boasts of many pleasant Vilages.

The Seats of the Nobility are Kimbolton-Castle, a seat of the Earl of
Manchester; Hinchingbrook, now a seat of the Earl of Sandwich, but formerly the
seat of Sir Oliver Cromwell, Uncle to the late Oliver Cromwell, called Protector
of England, who was a Native of this County- Great Gidding, a seat of the Lord
Rockingham; Leyghton, a seat of the Earl of Arran. There are likewise to be
seen the Ruins of many stately Buildings, as Castles, Monasteries, and the
like. It produces a sort of soft Stone, much used in Building in those Parts,
and in diging for it, rusty Armor, Arms, and Coin, have been found, denoting
some great Battle Fought there in former times.

The Reign of Harrold, Seventeenth Sole Monarch of England, etc.
HArrold, Surnamed Harefoot, (from his Swiftness in Running, Leaping and
Vaulting) Succeeded his Father, Crowned Anno Dom. 1036; He was Second Son to
Canute, and upon his coming to the Crown was much opposed by Goodwin Earl of
Kent a Person very Powerful, and a Politic Intreaguer of those times, to make
Factions, etc. But by his liberal Promises, and present Renuntiation of Taxes,
he won the Londoners, and Lords on the North side the Thames to his Party; and
having thus far prevailed, he strengthened his Hand by liberally disposing of
Gratuities to such as had done him any good offices; he promoted the English to
Places of Trust and Honor, sending away more of the Danes; than in doing
which, he could lay no greater obligation upon them: For Time, as yet, had not
worn out the Mortal Hatred between the two Nations. He took off likewise a good
part of the oppressing Tax called Dane-Gelt, which the People not without much
discontent had labored under, especially in the Northern Counties, many Years.

And now Goodwin Earl of Kent, perceiving his Clandestine Practices too weak to
enfeeble the Kings Interest in his Subjects affections, like cunning Statesman
resolves to struggle no longer against this Tide of Fortune and Success; and
thereupon, to make fair with him, entered upon an Inhumane Project, viz. To
betray into his Hands Edward and Alfride, Sons to Ethelred and Emma, Born at
Islip by Oxford, but brought up the greater part of their time in Normandy; and
so cunningly this Traitor to his Country worked the design, as knowing Harrold
by any means was desirous to destroy them, as being the rightful Heirs of the
Saxon Line, that by specious pretenses of Advancement and Honor, and how also
herself might much profit by it, and always stand high in the Kings favor, he
so dealt with Queen Emma, that won by gilded Flatteries, and not perceiving
the Mortal Hook covered with the Tempting Bait, she was easily persuaded to
Write to them on this occasion; which being seconded by Goodwin and the King,
the Innocent Princes were decoyed over, and brought as Lambs to the Slaughter;
for no sooner had the Dane got them in his power, but contrary to his Promise,
he caused Alfride's Eyes to be put out, and yet not so contented, his Belly was
opened with a Razor, and one end of his Bowels being fastened to a Post, he
was forced about it by the pricking of sharp Ponyards, till he had twisted them
out, and so dyed a miserable death; which is held to have struck Goodwin, the
Author of this Mischief, with so great a Remorse, that he could neither Rest in
the Day, nor Sleep in the Night, without hideous and fearful Dreams, till he
contributed to the Escape of Edward the other Brother, who luckily got away a
small time before he was to be Murdered by the like, or other as cruel
Torments, by which his Brother fell a Sacrifice to Policy of State.

Harrold supposing he had been defeated of the second Game by the contrivance
of Queen Emma (for Goodwin Swore himself unknowing of any thing relating to it)
determined to put her to death; but cooling a little on his rash Decree, and
considering she was near Allied to a Powerful Prince, his Neighbor, and had
been Wife to two Kings, the last of them being his Father, he changed the
Sentence into one somewhat less severe: For first he seized on all her Treasure
and Possessions, which were very considerable; and that not being thought a
sufficient Punishment, he Banished her in a manner Naked; so that under such a
disgrace, and in that poor condition, being ashamed to go into Normandy, her
own Country, she got leave to pass the Seas for Flanders, where she was
received Honorably by the Earl of that Province, and there she continued, for
the most part, till the Danish Succession failed, and her Son Edward, afterward
called the Confessor, was Invited over to take upon him the Crown.

Soon after this Harrold fell Sick at Oxford, and there Dyed, when he had
Reigned Four Years: He was the Seventeenth Sole Monarch of England, and Second
of the Danish Line, and Reigned Four Years, being first Buried at Westminster,
and after held to be removed to St. Clements Danes, without Temple-Barr.

Remarks on Herefordshire, etc.
HErefordshire is famed for abundance of Fruit Trees, producing great
quantities of Cider, and other wholesome Liquors; Its Wool is held to be the
finest in England, especially from those numerous flocks of Sheep that feed on
the pleasant Hills about Lempster. It also yields abundance of Cheese, Butter,
Swine, and all necessary Provisions for the support of Man's Life; and has some
considerable Forests and Woods. It is Bounded with Shropshire, Worcestershire,
Glocestershire, Monmouthshire, Radnorshire and Brecknockshire; It gives
denomination to a Bishopric, the Diocese containing this County and part of
Shropshire; It is divided into 11 Hundreds, containing 176 Parishes, 8
Market Towns, and 13 Rivers; and sends 8 Members to Parliament, viz. Knights of
the Shire 2, Hereford 2, Lempster 2, and Weobley 2.

The City of Hereford is noted for its Cathedral, of Anti^^ but Curious
Building; it gave Birth to Ada^^ D' HEREFORD SHIRE
map of Herefordshire Orleton Bishop of Hereford, and Roger of Hereford, a
learned Astrologian; Bradwarden-Castle gave Birth to Thomas D' Bradwardine Arch
Bishop of Canterbury; also to John Guillim, a famous Herald, whose Systeme of
Heraldry is accounted the best on that subject. This County gave Birth to the
Renowned Robert Devereux Earl of Essex, who lost his Head in Queen Elizabeth's
Reign. The next Towns of note are Stanton, Lempster, Weobly, Ludbury, Rosse,
Orleton, Pembridg and Wormbridg.

Marsley-Hill in this County is Celebrated by all Writers for its wonderful
Travel, on Saturday the 7th of February, 1571. which was indeed exceeding
strange and surprising, and must not be here omitted: It happened thus, About
six of the Clock in the Evening the Earth began to move, with a mighty rooring
and bellowing Noise, which was heard several Miles off, and then it lifted it
self up a great height, and began to Travel; carrying along with it the Trees
that grew upon it, the Sheepfolds and Flocks of Sheep continuing still thereon,
and from the place whereon it first stood, by seven a Clock the next Morning,
had gone about 200 Foot, and so continued its Travel three Days together, and
then stood still; in its passage it overthrew Kinnaston-Chappel. and removed an
Yew-Tree growing in the Churchyard from West to East; throwing down also
several Houses, Trees and Hedges: But that which adds more to the wonder is,
That two Highways were turned about 300 Foot from their former Paths, the
East part to the West, and the West to the East, Pasturage being left in the
place of Tillage, and likewise Tillage in the place of Pasturage.

As for the Seats of the Nobility, though not many, they are mostly of curious
Ancient Building, viz. Goodrick-Castle, Penyard-Castle, and Eccleswald-Castle,
belonging to the Earl of Kent; Wilton, Aconsbury, and Dewswell, belonging to
the Lord Chandois; and Hereford Palace, belonging to the Bishop of the Diocese.
There are diverse Quarries of Stone found in this County, which stand the People
in great stead; also some Minerals; much Fuel is likewise got out of the Ground.

The Reign of Hardicanute, the Third Danish King, and Eighteenth Sole Monarch
of England.
HArdicanute, the Third Son of Canute, by a different Mother, viz. Emma,
Succeeded Harrold, Anno Dom. 1040: He was Crowned at London by Elnoch Arch
Bishop of Canterbury; upon which he labored to settle his Affairs at home and
abroad, kept the Seas free from Pirates, that for some time before had infested
the Coast, causing the Danes and Norwegians to build diverse Ships for his
Service; but being of a rough and uneasy temper, he was not very pleasing to
his Subjects: He bore a Mortal Hatred to Harrold his Brother-in-Law, and not
being capable of expressing it to any effect during his Life, he showed it
openly after his Death; causing his dead Body to be taken out of the Sepulcher
in which it had lain a considerable time, and the Head to be cut off, and then
thrown into the Thames, sunk with a great weight of Lead; but some Fishermen
draging it up with their Nets a while after, decently Buried it in St. Clements
Church in the Strand; for which reason some will have it to take the additinal
word Danes, as it is now called.

This Hardicanute is accounted among the Voluptuous Kings, taking great
pleasure in Banqueting, and often gloried he could Eat more at a Meal, than any
of his Subjects; his Table was four times a Day spread with all manner of
Delicates that Sea or Land afforded; by which riotous manner of living he
greatly wasted his Treasure, and set an example to his Nobles to do the like;
so that the Court being Impoverished, consults were held to raise an exacting
Tax on the Commons, which was chiefly counseled by Goodwin Earl of Kent,
whereby he fell into the hatred of the People, and went Guarded a long time
after, to prevent their fury: The Sum raised was 3^147 Pounds, a great Tax in
those days, and grievously exasperated the People, because it was exacted with
rigor; insomuch that at Worcester they made an Insurrection, and slew two of
the Collectors; which so highly offended the King, that he not only caused
diverse of the Mutineers to be Executed, but laid the City in a heap of Rubbish
by Fire, so that the Innocent suffered among the Guilty; which caused other
Insurrections, but they were presently quieted, and many slain.

With part of this Money the clamouring Seamen were paid off, and thereupon a
great part of the Fleet laid up, and then the King pursued his former
pleasures; whereupon the Scots much wasted the Northern Borders; but being
overthrown in a great Battle on the bank of the Tweed, near to Barwick, they
were compelled to sue for Peace; which they could not obtain, till they had
made considerable restitution for the damage they had done in the English
Counties. About the latter end of this Kings Reign a terrible Blazing Star
appeared for Three Weeks; The Sun at noon day seemed of the color of Blood,
strange and amazing Voices were heard, supposed to proceed out of the Air, and
many other Prodigies are said to have happened.

When he had Reigned about two Years, being Invited to a Noblemans Wedding,
held at Lambeth in Surry, situate on the South side the Thames, he there Eat
and Drank so unmeasurably, that he immediately Sickned, and being carried from
the Table, fell into a grievous Surfeit, and not admiting his Physicians to
Bleed him, which they advised as the only Remedy for his Recovery, he soon
after Dyed; and leaving no Issue behind him, with him dyed the Danish Monarchy
in England; and it devolved again on the Saxons: For Edward, the Seventh Son of
Ethelred by Queen Emma, having escaped many dangers, was sent for upon the
Death of Hardicanute from Normandy, (whither he had retired to save his Life
upon the Death of his Brother Alfride) and Proclaimed King.

Remarks on the County of Kent, etc.
KEnt is a very large and spacious County, and advantagiously seated, being
almost wholly environed with the Sea, except its Western parts, which borders
upon Surry and Sussex: Besides the Thames, which parts it Northward from Essex,
its principal Rivers are Medway, the Rother, and the Stowr. It abounds in
Fruits, Corn, fat Pastures, and exceeding profitable Marshes, for the feeding
of Cattle, which are bought up Lean from other Counties, and sent thither to be
made Fat: It produces particularly the greatest quantity of Cherries of any
County in England, etc. It is divided into 67 Hundreds containing 408 Parishes,
2 Cities, viz. Canterbury and Rochester, the former being an Archiepiscopal
See, having the Primacy of all England; the latter is likewise a Bishops See:
It has likewise 31 Market Towns, and 4 Rivers more than before mentioned, among
which Lewisham River is famous for the large store of Fish found in it, its
Stream carrying about several Mills. It sends Members to Parliament 10, viz.
Canterbury 2, Maidston 2, Queenbourough 2, Rochester 2, and 2 Knights of the
Shire. Besides which, 3 of the Cinque Ports being in this County, viz. Dover,
Rumney and Sandwich, do each of them send two Barons up to the Parliament,
called Barons of the Cinque Ports.

KENT By J. Seller
map of Kent

Canterbury is by some Authors said to have been Built 900 Years before the
birth of our Savior; it was given by Ethelbert the Saxon King of Kent to
Austin the Monk and his Companions, and in their time the Cathedral was
Founded, in which Eight Kings of Kent lie Buried. It suffered greatly by the
Fury of the Danes, especially in the Reign of Ethelred, when 4200 of its
Inhabitants were slain. Here King John and his Queen Isabela were Crowned; King
Henry the Third and King Edward the First Married: Edward the Black Prince,
Henry the Fourth, and Queen Joan, were Interred here; and the Cathedral was
long famous in Superstitious times for Pilgrimages made to visit the Shrine of
St. Thomas of Becket (a Popish Saint and Martyr) slain at the Altar in the
Reign of Henry the Second.

Rochester, formerly called Roffchester, as Builded by one Roff, Lord thereof,
is a very pleasant City; it was destroyed by the Danes, and suffered much after
Rebuilding by two dreadful Fires in the Reigns of King Henry the First and King
Henry the Second; it has in it many fair Churches, and leading to it a curious
Arched Bridge of Stone.

Maidstone a flourishing Town, situate on the Medway, for a mere Town, is
reputed the handsomest, and best of Trade, in all the County.

Feversham is of great Antiquity, very pleasant and commodious in its
situation; in it King Stephen and Queen Maud were Buried.

Dover is renowned for its Castle, said to be Built by Julius Caesar at his
second Landing: Queenborough Castle was Built by Edward the Third. At Wye J.
Kemp the learned Arch Bishop of Canterbury was Born. Greenwich is famous for
its Park, and stately Palace; and near it is the New Hospital founded for
Decayed Merchants: Horstead took its Name from Horsus one of the first Saxon
Invaders.

Tunbridge is famous for its Medicinal Waters, and the great resort to its
Wells. The Seats of the Nobility are Knobl, belonging to the Earl of Dorset;
Penhurst, to the Earl of Leicester; Bocton-Malberb, to the Earl of
Chesterfield; Hoathfield and Sylom, to the Earl of Thanet; Chenvening, to the
Earl of Sussex; Lingstead Lodge, to the Lord Tenham; Leeds-Castle and
Grenway-Court, to the Lord Culpeper; Alington-Castle and Maidstone Place, to
the Lord Astly; Bromly-House, the Bishop of Rochesters seat.

CHAP. X. The Saxons Re-Entry upon the failure of Succession in the Danes; and
what happened during the Reign of those Kings, till the Conquest made of
England by William the Norman Conqueror.
The Reign of Edward, called the Confessor, Nineteenth Sole Monarch of England.
EDward, commonly styled the Confessor, being arrived in England, was received
by the People with great demonstrations of Joy; and that Flattering Earl of
Kent possessed him that he was the chief Instrument of his Restoration; though
indeed, like a stanch Courtier, he Sailed with all Winds, usually adhering to
him who was most powerful; for certain it is that Leofrick the Earl of Chester
moved the Estates on Edwards behalf, urging his Right to the Crown, as being
the true Heir descended from the Ancient Saxon Kings, under whom the Nation had
enjoyed its Rights and Privileges, without Infringments or Invasion: He urged
his Fathers Merits, and the Battles he had Fought against the Danes, in the
defense of the English Nation; and many other things. So that they generally
concuring with him, Edward was Accepted and Crowned at Winchestor, by Edsine
Arch Bishop of Canterbury; yet Goodwin so far insinuated into his favor, that
he took Edith his Daughter to Wife, a very virtuous Lady, much affecting a
Religious Life, so that Ingultus Abbot of Crowland, who flourished in her time,
makes a large Encomium on her Learning, Wisdom, Humility, Modesty, and
Behavior.

In the beginning of this Kings Reign new Troubles arose, the Danes, Irish and
Welsh, in a manner all at once, Invading the Kingdom, doing great Mischief, and
destroying all before them with Fire and Sword; but being met by Alfred, the
Martial Bishop of Worcester, he gave them a great Overthrow. In the fifth Year
of his Reign there fell so great a Snow in January, that covering the Ground,
and being of a prodigious deepness, and continuing so till the middle of March,
much Cattle and Fowl perished for want of Food. And the January following, a
terrible Earthquake happened, causing the Ground to Open in diverse places,
overthrowing many stately Buildings, destroying much People, and Cattle; also
at the same time such fearful Lightnings happened, That the new sprung Corn was
Burnt up, whereupon a Dearth ensued, and many dyed of Hunger.

Malcolm, the true Heir to the Crown of Scotland, flying into England to avoid
the Fury of Mackbeth, (a Bloody Tyrant, who had slain the King, and Usurped the
Kingdom) Edward aided him with 10000 Men under the Leading of Syward Earl of
Northumberland, who by the Mothers side was Grandfather to the Young Prince,
who Besieging Mackbeth in his Castle of Dunsinane, and he attempting to Escape,
was slain by Maskduff, Sheriff of Fife, whose Wife and Children Mackbeth had
cruelly Murdered; and soon after, by the Valor of the English, Malcolme
(Surnamed Conmer) was placed in the Scots Throne, making a strict League with
King Edward, and paying him 10000 Marks for the charge of the War.

After this he Banished Goodwin and his five Sons, for being Turbulent in the
Government, and endeavoring to raise Commotions; but about two Years after,
they were Recalled, and received into Favor; and Goodwin being one day at
Dinner with the King, the Cupbearer coming in, got a slip, and had like to have
spilt the Wine; but as one Leg failed, he recovered with the other, and saved
both the Wine and his Credit; whereupon the Earl of Kent Jestingly said, I see
one Brother has helped the other: This suddenly putting the King in mind how
by his Treachery his Brother Alfride was slain by Harrold the Dane, In a heat
replied, And so would my Brother Alfride have helped me, if Goodwin had not
been: The Earl perceiving the Kings anger, which he little expected at that
time, thinking to excuse himself of so notorious a crime, took a piece of
Bread, and wished it might Choke him, if he were any ways concerned in
Betraying the Prince into the hands of Harrold; and accordingly his Wish was
answered, for putting it into his Mouth it stuck in his Throat so that it could
not be got upwards nor downwards, by which means he was Suffocated and Dyed
before he could be well removed from the Table; which I the rather remark, That
it may stand as a dreadful warning to all the Rash Imprecators or Evil Wishers
of our Age, being a Sin too often practiced on trivial occasions, and I am apt
to fear frequently as false in many matters as this of the Earl of Kents, which
pulled down Gods immediate Judgment upon him, and hastily snatched him out of
the World. The King soon after this falling into displeasure with Queen Emma
his Mother, abridged her of her Dowry, and got her accused of Adultery; when by
the Law then called Ordealium she was Tried in the following manner:

Her Eyes were blinded with a thick Veil, and nine Plowshares newly taken out
of the Fire, laid a Yard distance from each other, in an even row, over which
she was to pass for her Purgation; and if she did it without touching any of
them, she was to be adjudged Guiltless; so being led by a Priest, her Feet
being bare, she passed over, missing every one of them; which being done, and
she not knowing it, Cried out, O Lord when shall I come to the place of my
Purgation? she having her Eyes uncovered, and perceiving she had passed the
danger, she fell on her Knees, and gave thanks to God for her deliverance. This
King is likewise accounted to be over severe to his Virtuous Wife Edith, who
being wrongfully accused of Incontinency, was Imprisoned, and at last confined
to a Religious Life, in the Monastery of Wilton. In this Kings Reign a Blazing
Star appeared, and was seen for seven Nights all over Europe. The Abbey of St.
Peter's Westminster, founded in a place formerly called the Isle of Thorns, was
Beautified and much Enlarged by him; he removed the Bishops See from Credington
in Devonshire to Exeter in the same County; and was the first of our English
Kings that is said to have The Gift conferred upon him of Curing the Disease
called Struma, now the King's Evil: And the first also that sealed his Patents
with that stately Seal now called The Kings Great Seal. He remitted the
remainder of the Tax called Dane Gelt; moved to it, as some say, upon seeing a
fearful Apparition dancing about a heap of Money in his Closet, that had been
exacted from the People under that denomination; and toward the close of his
Reign he collected all the useful Laws made by his Predecessors, into one Body,
and out of them compiled a select Body of Law, held at this day to be the
Ground of our Common Law.

This Edward, Seventh Son to Ethelred by Emma his Second Wife, was Born at
Islip in Oxfordshire, and brought up to a great degree of Learning, which he
improved in his Banishment. He began his Reign Anno Dom. 1042, and Reigned
Twenty Years, Six Months, and Twenty Seven Days, Dying the Fourth of January of
a lingering Fever, and was Buried in Westminster Abbey, where in the second Year
of the Reign of the Late King James, one of the Choristers searching his Tomb,
found a plain Golden Crucifix, Inscribed to be this Kings, and delivered it
into the Hands of the said King James; who esteemed it as an extraordinary
Relick, by reason this Edward (after his Death) was Canonized a Saint at Rome,
though for what Extraordinary Virtues I know not.

Remarks on the County Palatine of Lancaster, etc.
LAncashire was settled as a Palatinate or Duchy upon John of Gaunt Duke of
Lancaster, by King Edward the Third, and continues in many particulars
unaltered to this day (though it is annexed to the Crown) keeping a Duchy Court,
and Trying most Causes within it self. It abounds in Corn, pleasant Woods,
Parks, and Forests; and produces great store of large Cattle and Wool. It is
Bounded with Westmorland, the Irish Sea, Cheshire, and Yorkshire; LANCASHIRE by
John Seller
map of Lancashire having many commodious Ports and Havens: And is divided into
Six Hundreds, containing 62 Parishes, 27 Market Towns and 6 Rivers: It sends
Members to Parliament 14, viz Clithero 2, Lancaster 2, Liverpool 2, Newton 2,
Preston 2, Wigan 2, and two Knights of the Shire.

Lancaster, the Shire Town, is Commodiously Situate on the South Banks of the
River Lon, from whence it might probably take the Name of Loncaster, and now by
corruption Lancaster: It has a Curious Bridge Leading to it, and in it a famous
Church. It gave Title (from John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster) to four Henry's,
Kings of England, viz 4th 5th 6th and 7th: It is a place of great Antiquity,
Considerable Trade, Pleasant Building, and has a stately Castle.

Manchester, the Ancient Mancunium of the Romans, was highly prized by them,
where the Ruins of their Forts and Works are found in the digging of
Foundacions. Ribchester taks it is Name from Rible a little Brook near Clithero;
it is a Town of great Antiquity, and was a station of the Romans, as appears by
their Coins and Statues that have been dug up there, and Tradition Reports
it to have been once the Richest Town in Christendom: Near Duglas, a small
Brook, not far from the Town of Wiggan, King Arthur put the Saxons to the Rout
with great Slaughter; at Belango the Saxons Fought a mortal Battle with each
other.

Near Furness-Fells in this County, is a standing Water, accounted the greatest
in England, called Minander-Meer; being 10 Miles in Length, and all along paved
at the bottom with flat Stone; and it is said a Fish called a Chare is found
here and in no other Waters. Also the the River Lune near Cockerfand-Abby,
abounds with Trout, Pike, and some Salmon. In this County is the Anciently
Famous Castle called Hornby Castle, Enduring many Sieges. There are scatered up
and down in Lancashire diverse Quarries of useful Stone for Building, and some
Mineralls; upon its Hills are many pleasant Springs and Rivers, and some places
naturally abound with Wi^^ Thime, Marjorum and Cardus, and many other Physical
Herbs.

The Seats of the Nobility give a gratful Prospect to the Travelers, and are
Clithero Castle, belonging to the late Duke of Albemarle; Alburn Tower, to the
Earl of Derby; Halfal to the Earl of Macclesfield; Hornby Castle, to the Lord
Morley and Mount-Eagle; Wood-acre Hall, Ashton Hall, and Short^n Hall, to the
Lord Gerard of Gerards Bromley, Wigan the Bishop of Chesters Place; besides
diverse Seats of the Gentry, as famous in Pr^spect, for most part, as those
mentioned; and to conclude, it has produced many famous Men, serviceable in
Church and State.

The Reign of Harrold, Twentieth Sole Monarch of England.
KIng Edward Dying Issueless, though Edgar Etheling was the next Heir to the
Crown, yet Harrold (Son to Goodwin Earl of Kent, by his Wife Sitha, Sister to
Swain the Younger, King of Denmark) having Ingratiated himself into the Favor
of the leading Nobility, and promised great advantages to the Commons, he so
firmly bound them to him, that he procured himself to be Proclaimed King,
beginning his Reign Anno Dom. 1065; and according to his promise he remitted to
the People many grievous Taxes, making them everywhere ^asie in their stations,
and then was Crowned by Aldred Arch Bishop of York, confirming the Laws of
Edward the Confessor, and adding some of his own, and labored to make his bad
Title appear more fair in the Eyes of his Subjects by heaping on them what
favors they desired, as fearing a storm from the Norman Coast, which soon
after happened, to his destruction; the cause of it being reported by
Historians three several ways,

1. That Edward had consigned his Crown to William the Seventh Duke of
Normandy, to be holden by him after his Death.

2. That Young Edgar, the true Heir, to whom he was great Uncle, had resigned
his Right to him, as being too weak to contend for the possession.

3. That Harrold in King Edwards lifetime Hawking on the Coast of Sussex, the
Hawk when he was cast off flew into the Sea; whereupon getting into a Skiff in
hopes to recover him, a Storm arose, and he was driven on the Coast of
Normandy; where Landing, and being taken Prisoner, he was known and presented
to the Duke, who caused him to be kept with a strict Guard, till such time as
he Swore, That if King Edward Dyed Issueless, he would do his utmost endeavor
to secure the Kingdom to the use and behoof of him the before named Duke; and
thereupon he procuring his Liberty, returned to England.

However having got the Crown on his Head, he held it too precious a Jewel so
lightly to part withal; so that when the Duke of Normandy sent to demand it,
putting him in mind of his Oaths and Promises, he Replied, That what was
extorted from him in his extremity was not Binding; besides, the Nobility and
Commonalty of his Realm would not consent to his delivering it up to a
Stranger, as having had sad Experience of the great Mischiefs that had and must
consequently again ensue; and finally what he demanded of him was not in his
power to grant, and therefore prayed him to rest satisfied with his own
Territories, which were sufficiently large enough for any Prince.

This Answer made the Duke storm, and resolve to hazard all, rather than miss
of his aim; whereupon selling his Jewels and Plate, he Levied Men in France,
Switzerland, Germany, etc. And though the Pope strictly forbid him to molest
England, under pain of Excommunication, he took no regard of his Menaces, but
increased his Shipping, and sent to Norway and those parts from whence the
Normans originally descended, to stir them up by Landing in the North, in
savor of his Invasion on the South parts of England; and so in order to it
continued his Levys, making a League with the French King, That he should not
Invade his Country in his Absence. However Harrold, having notice of his
proceedings, raises a great Army, which was not long Idle: For Tosto, Brother
to Harrold, upon some displeasure flying to Denmark, forwarded the Norman Dukes
Negotiation, so that with a considerable Army they Landed at Richall upon Ouse
in Yorkshire, and fell to Burning and Plundering; whereupon the King Marched
his Army toward them, who were Advanced to Stanford Bridge, built over the
River D^rwent; upon which Bridge he was stopped with his whole Army by a Single
Dane of Monstrous Size, who slew Forty of his Men who adventured to remove him,
and had in all likelihood prevented his passing at that time over the Bridge,
had not a Soldier Rowed with a Boat under it, and run up his Spear through a
crevise into the Danes Body, whereupon he fell down Dead, and the King hasted
with his Army over the Bodies of the slain and falling upon the Danes and
Norwegians made of them an incredible slaughter, slaying Tosto his Brother, and
Harfager King of Denmark and Norway; Olave the Son of Harfager, and Paul Earl
of Orkney were taken Prisoners, who begging their Lives, were suffered to
depart with the rest of the Prisoners, having only 20 of their 300 Ships left,
to carry them (with the woeful News) into Denmark, the rest being broken on the
Rocks by a mighty Storm the day before the Battle happened.

These Troubles were no sooner over, and the Northern parts a little settled,
but News came posting to the King that Duke William of Normandy was Landed at
Pevensey in Sussex, on the Eighth of September, Anno Dom. 1066, who thereupon
caused his Ships to be set on Fire, that his Soldiers might take Courage to
Fight the more desperately, as having no hopes of returning home unless they
Conquered; and when he first came on Shore, his Foot stuck fast in the Sand, so
that he fell on his Hands, and being perceived by a Knight to bring up a
handful of Earth when he rise, he said Now Sir Duke, England sticks fast to
you, and is your own, since you have taken Livery and Seizen, doubt not but
presently to be King thereof.

By this Time King Harrold was hastily returned to London, whither the Norman
Duke sent a Message to him, to demand a peaceable surrender of the Kingdom, for
sparing the lives of the People: But this Messenger was dismissed with Threats,
and both Armies advanced toward each other; and on a fair Plain in Sussex,
called (from the ensuing Fight) Battel-Field, the Normans pitched their Tents,
to expect the King, who was about seven Miles from them; and some of the Spies
he sent, being taken, Duke William caused them to be carried from Tent to Tent,
and plentifully Feasted; after which, he dismissed them: So the next Morning
both Armies came in sight of each other, and drew up in Battle Array, where a
second time the Duke sent a Monk to the King, to demand a peaceable surrender
of the Kingdom, or otherwise (for avoiding the effusion of much Blood) to try
it by single Combat; or else to hold the Kingdom as his Tributary. But Harrold
would agree to neither of these; returning for Answer, That more Swords than
one should decide the Controversy: So that the next day being the 14th of
October Anno Dom. 1066, no agreement being in likelihood to be made between
them, it was resolved it should be tried by the Sword, and so both Armies being
Marshalled for the Battle, the Trumpet sounded the Bloody Blast, and the
Kentish-men (who claimed it as their Right to Lead the Vanguard) fell on
furiously, beating down the Normans, and putting their Advanced Parties to the
Rout, keeping close together in thick Ranks, and wedging into the Enemies
Squadrons and Battallions, so that a miserable slaughter ensued; though on our
part, The Normans slew many by shooting their Arrows at random in the Air,
which violently falling on the Heads of such as were unarmed, entered their
Sculls, so that many fell Dead, who never struck stroke in the Battle; however
the Duke (who passed through every part of the Army to give necessary orders)
knowing if he lost the day, his Life and Interest went with it, perceiving his
Men could not break the thick Phalanxes of the English, he commanded they
should seem to faint, and make an orderly Retreat, as if they Fled; which
succeeded to his wish, for hereupon the English supposing it had been a real
Flight, disranked in pursuit of them; whereupon the Normans speedily facing
about, broke with great fury into their loose Array, beating down all before
them with their mighty Swords and Battel-Axes, pouring perpetual showers of
Arrows on them; so that although the English kept together, and ^ought
Valliantly about the Kings Standard, yet he being Shot into the Brain with an
Arrow, and falling dead, they were so disheartened, that the Standard was taken,
the Kings two Brothers, Girth and Leofine, in defense of it slain, with most of
the Nobles; and, as credible Authors affirm, 97974 of the Common sort.

LEICESTER SHIRE
map of Leicestershire

The Duke in this Battle had three Horses slain under him, and yet escaped
without any hurt; in the place where this Battle was Fought, he afterward
Founded an Abbey, which to this day is called Battel-Abby.

After this the small remainder of the Nobles and Clergy consulted what was to
be done, but finding their weakness, they concluded to submit to the Conqueror;
having Buried the Body of Harrold at Wadham in Essex, when he had Reigned about
Nine Months and Nine Days, and is accounted the Twentieth Sole Monarch of
England; whereupon Duke William took possession of the Kingdom.

Remarks on Leicestershire, etc.
LEicestershire is a very fine Inland County, and produces store of large
Cattle much Corn plenty of Fowl, Fruits, Fish, wholesome Pastures, etc. It is
Bounded by Darbyshire, Notinghamshire, Lincolnshire, Rutlandshire,
Northamptonshire, and Warwickshire: It is divided into 6 Hundreds, containing
192 Parishes, 11 Market Towns, and one noted River. It sends Members to
Parliament 4, viz. Leicester 2, and 2 Knights of the Shire.

Leicester is pleasantly seated on the River Stower, and well compacted, being
the County Town, and a place of considerable Trade; it is of great Antiquity,
as held to have been Builded by King Leir, a famous British King, for which
cause it was anciently called Leir-Cester.

Lutterworth gave Birth to the famous John Wickliff, who was Parson of it, and
the first English Reformer, or Detector of the Errors in the Church of Rome,
frequently Writing and Disputing against them, in the Reign of Edward the
Third; for which many snares were laid to take his Life, by the Romish Clergy;
but he escaped them and Dyed a natural Death, leaving the Candle of Truth
Lighted, by which John Huss, Jerome of Prague, Luther, and others, took their
prospect of a happy Reformation that soon after ensued.

Bosworth is Memorable for the Battle fought near it on Redmore August 22, Anno
Dom 1485, wherein Richard the Third was slain by the forces of Henry Earl of
Richmond, and his Crown found in a Hawthorn Bush, which was placed on the
Earls Head, and he Proclaimed King; which put an End to the fatal Feuds
between the Houses of York and Lancaster. In the West of this County once stood
Clycester, a famous City in the time of the Romans, called by them Bennone,
though now nothing but a few Ruins of it remain. The other Towns of note are
Mountsorell, Loughborough, Waltham on the Woald, Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Bildsdon,
Lutterworth, Harborough etc.

At Cole-Overton in the Hundred of West Goscot, and other parts of this County,
great store of Pitcole is dug of a Bitumencus Nature, very hard and fast;
about Luterworth are Allomey Veins and Wel^s, whose Waters strained through
them are Medicinal and Petrefying, so that it is said they turn Straw and
Sticks into Stone, by reason of their Exceeding Coldness; near Belvoir-Castle
on a R ck are found Snake Stones, Cockle Stones, and Star Stones.

The Seats of the Nobility are Pleasantly Situate, viz Garerton, one of the
seats belonging to the Late Duke of Albemarle; Burbage, to the Earl of Kent;
Belvoir-Castle, partly in Lincolnshire, to the Earl of Rutland;
Ashby-de-in-Zouch, Donington-Park, to the Earl of Huntington, Broadgate and
Grooby to the Earl of Stamford, Stanton-Bru^nell, to the Earl of Cardigan;
Ashby-Folville, to the Lord Carrington. Besides these, there are i^ great many
fine Houses of the Gentry standing sightly to the Fields, and Roads; some
Parks, and store of Ganie, at all proper Seasons.

CHAP. XI. An Account of the Norman Original, How they came to be called
Normans; With a Description of the Dutchey of Normandy, etc.
BEfore I enter upon the particulars of the Reign of William the First, styled
the Conqueror; I shall take the Method observed upon other Turns and Changes of
Government, viz. To give some Account of these New Invaders, who at last laid
claim to England by Conquest.

These Normans, so called from the Northern Climes which first produced them,
were composed of Norwegians, Swedes, and Danes; who finding their Country too
straight for them, betook them to the Seas to seek their Fortunes, and
practiced Piracies upon the Coasts of Belgia, Frizia, and England; on the
latter of which they Landed under the Leading of Rollo their Duke, and became
very troublesome to the English Saxons, between whom there was great Wars: Till
at last Rollo Dreaming He sat on the highest Hill in France, and a pleasant
Spring Issued out of a Rock on which he laid his Head, running down in many
Streams, to which flocked a number of Birds with Red Breasts, to Drink the
Water, and then flew to fragrant Groves, where they Sung so Melodiously that he
was Ravished with their Notes, and beneath this Hill he fancied there lay so
pleasant a Country, that the like he had never beheld in his Life. When Waking
much pleased with his Dream, he sent for a Monk of Crowland, accounted a great
Diviner, telling him his Dream, and demanding the Interpretation of it; who
willing (for his Countries sake) to be rid of such troublesome Guests, told him
at an adventure, as is supposed, That the Fates had Decreed him to settle his
Dominions in one of the most pleasant Countries of France. Which he gave
creadit to, and perceiving England much wasted and impoverished by a tedious
War and a Famine that then raged, having exacted some Aides and Supplies of
Money, he Transported his Forces over the Narrow Sea, and Warred five Years
with such Fury on the French, that fearing to lose all, Charles their King
(Surnamed the Simple) gave him his Daughter Gilla in Marriage; and as her Dowry
the Peaceable Possession of what they had already gained by the Sword, which
being modeled into a Duchy, they called Normandy, which Name (through all the
changes of that Kingdom) it bears to this day. This Rollo was great Grandfather
to Richard the Fifth Duke of Normandy, Elder Brother to Robert, Father to
William the Conqueror.

As for a Brief Description of the Dukedom of Normandy, once a Patrimonial
Inheritance of the Kings of England, and to which they now have a Right. It is
Bounded on the East with the Isles of France, at the River Epta, which passes
by the City of Gisors; on the West, with Britany, the Ancient Armorica, and a
Collony of the Britains, from which it is separated by the River Crenon;
Northward by the Sea; on the South, with the Country of Main; and is divided
by the River Seine: Abundantly Rich in Merchandise through the commodiousness
of its Havens and Rivers.

The People are the most Subtle, Apt, and Ingenious, of all the French
Provinces; yet Affable, Courteous and greatly inclined to Learning: Their
Manufacture consisting most in Wool and Linen Cloth, the Country producing no
Vines capable of making good Wine, unless about Caen, a very pleasant City. The
chief City is Roan, very famous for many Sieges, as in the Series of History
will appear; having an Arch Bishop, whose Jurisdiction extends to the River
Oyse; and a Parliament (till of late, that the French King has assumed such a
Despotick Power, and much lessened its Authority) was usually held here for the
consulting the good of the Province.

The other Cities of note are Auranche, Argences, Alancon, Falaise, Fecham,
Newhaven, or Haver-de-Grace, St. Valery, Sileaux, Constance, Manta, St.
Michale, and diverse Walled Towns, to the number of Eighty. So that when the
French (by reason of our Civil Dissentions) wrested it from us, they plucked
one of the fairest Jewels out of the English Diadem; which in time we may yet
hope to regain; especially under the Auspicious Reign of WILLIAM the Third, our
present Heroic and Victorious King.

The Reign of WILLIAM the First, Surnamed the Conqueror.
AFter the Victory obtained at Battel-Field by the Normans over the English,
and King Harrold Slain, as has been mentioned in the former Chapter, Duke
William designed for London, yet taking a great compass, wasting as he Marched
the Counties of Sussex, Kent, Surry, Hampshire, and Barkshire; by whose Spoils
he Enriched his Normans. Then crossing the Thames at Wallingford, and so in the
like manner the Counties of Oxford, Buckingham, etc. At Burhamsted he made a
stop; as being assured by this time, the English Forces were dispersed, and in
no condition to oppose him; and hither repaired Aldred Arch Bishop of York,
Wolstan Bishop of Winchester, Walter Bishop of Hereford, The Earls Edwin and
Morcar, with Edgar Etheling the True Heir to the Crown, paying Homage and
Allegiance to him, and entreating him (seeing it was not in their power to
prevent it) That he would take upon him the Administration of the Government,
and be Gracious in his Clemency to the People of England. And so passing to
London, he was on Christmas Day, Anno Dom. 1066 Crowned at Westminster by
Aldred Archbishop of York.

Being thus settled in the Throne by the Fortune of a Battle, he studied how to
secure the Realm more firmly to him, as knowing the English submitted not out
of any hearty good will; whereupon he Fortified the Cinque Ports, laying his
claim to the Kingdom by Right of Conquest, as having indeed no other reasonable
one to Pretend to. And to secure it, he used the following Policy.

1. He seized the chief Offices both of Honor and Profit, and conferred them
on his Normans; and as a Recompense to such others as had Aided him in the War.

2. He made the Natives give Hostages of the best and dearest esteem, to secure
their Fidelities, especially such as were either Honorable or Potent.

3. To lessen the Authority of the Clergy among the People, he barred them of
all Temporal Command or Jurisdiction.

4. He caused the Natives to be Disarmed to prevent Insurrections.

5. He debared them from frequent and common Meetings, especially in the Night,
to prevent their confering and Conspiring against him for the Recovery of their
common Liberty, causing a Bell to be Rung in every City, Town, and Village, at
Eight in the Evening, whereupon all Englishmen were enjoined to put out their
Fire and Candle, and keep within their Houses, under great Penalties; and this
was and is yet called Cover le Feu, the raking up or out of the Fire.

6. To lessen the Nobility, he sent them to his Wars beyond the Seas, not to
return without orders; and little or no Praise or Reward was given them, though
they Valiantly behaved themselves. The like he did with the Meaner Sort whom he
found any ways Active, compelling them from their Wives and Children to Fight
Abroad, whilst they Languished at Home for Food, and found little support.

7. As a strong curb, he erected Forts and Castles in sundry places, putting
Normans as Commanders into them; who grievously Oppressed the People; yet they
durst not openly repine against it, because they found there was no Redress to
be had from the King, but their Complaints were charged upon them as Mutinies,
and many Punished who privately Murmured at their hard Usage; and finding the
Clergy were the Richest, he fell upon them first, taking away the Plate and
Ornaments that had been Consecrated to Holy Uses; Alleging That Thieves,
Traitors, and Rebels had Lodged them under their Protection, to defraud him of
his Forfeitures, and secretly to support themselves, to raise a Rebellion when
they saw fit opportunity.

8. He caused Laws to be made in the Norman Language, whereupon (though
Ignorant of them) many Transgressed, who were for the smallest Offense
Imprisoned, and forced to redeem themselves to their undoing; Disallowing the
Patents and Grants of former Kings, and publishing them to be merely void; so
that by this he raised great sums for Renewing them; and those that could not
raise Money, the Normans and other Strangers had their Honors, Trusts, and
Estates, (held in Fee of the Crown) bestowed on them.

9. He caused all the Lands to be viewed, Measured, and Taxed at an unusual
value; by which means he got great Wealth; but Impoverished the People, as was
chiefly intended by it.

10. He Erected many Courts of Judicature for putting in execution his New Laws,
and ordered his Judges to follow his Court upon his Removes; by which means he
tired out the English Nation with Extraordinary Troubles and Excessive Charges
in the prosecution of their Suits. And to make an easy way for more French and
Normans to come over, if the English should happen to Rebel, he laid the
Churches, Towns, nnd Villages next to the Sea Coast in Hampshire waste, for
Sixty Miles in circumferance, under pretense of making a New Forest for his
Pleasure in Hunting, where (as a Judgment for those Dilapidations, and ruining
so many Families) William Rufus, his Son and Successor, was slain, as in his
Reign will more at large appear. He Seized likewise all the Forests and Chaces
of England into his hands, and made severe Laws against those that should kill
or disturb his Game. Punishing them with the loss of Eyes, Limbs, and the like.

11. He gave Territories and spacious Field to his Favorites, who divided them
into Farms, for their particular use, and the residue they Leased at Yearly
Rents to their Servants, thereby creating Manors and entituling themselves the
Lords of them. He divided the Lands into Hydes, every Hyde containing 20 Acres,
Eight of which was a Knights Fee, the Tenures which he reserved were Knights
Service in Capite; and those that so held, were enjoined to do him Service in
his Wars; or to his Person, when required, for the performance of which, he
took Oaths of them in Public Courts; and by reason hereof, he disposed of the
Bodies of the Heirs in Marriage, as he listed, retained in his Custody and
Wardship, and converted to his own use their whole Inheritance, till they
accomplished the Age of 21 Years; and by his Example others of great
Possessions did the like; which has in some cases given a bad Example to this
day.

Thus have I showed you (as in a Map) the Model or Description of a rigorous
and sharp Government under a Conquering Power; to which low Ebb of Misfortunes,
it ought to be every Good Man's Wish and Prayer, this flourishing Kingdom may
never sink again. -- But to proceed

The Conqueror thinking now he had shackled all secure, undertook a Progress to
view Dover, to give orders for Repairing the Castle, and Strengthen more than
ever the Sea Coast, to prevent Invasions from the Low Countries, whither many
of the English Nobility were fled; and having but a small number with him for
his Guard, coming near Canterbury, he was all on a sudden Surprised by (as he
thought) a Walking Wood: For the Kentishmen having notice of his coming, at the
persuasion of Stigand Arch Bishop of Canterbury, (a second Judas Maccabeus for
his Countries welfare) and Eglesine Abbot of St, Austines, had as secretly as
they could, made them Weapons, and lay in Ambush for him; which he no sooner
entered, but every one cut down a Bough to shelter him from present discovery,
burst out of the Woods on either side the straight he was passing, and
surrounded his small Train; but whilst the King was in suspense what this
unusual thing might signify, they all at once threw down their Boughs and
stood ready prepared with their Bows, Arrows, and such other Weapons as they
had for the Encounter; whereupon the Arch Bishop advancing toward the
Conqueror said, Behold, most noble King, the Commons of Kent Assembled to
demand a Confirmation of their Ancient Rights, Laws, and Liberties; the which
if you will Grant them, they are willing to Submit, and become your Obedient
Subjects; otherwise, in defense of them, they are resolved to venture their
dearest Blood, and presently to give you Battle.

This unexpected Adventure startled the King, that notwithstanding his great
Courage, a surprising fear seemed visible in his Countenance; so that pausing a
while, he thought it more prudent to yield to Necessity than hazard (after so
much expense of Blood and Treasure) his Life and Kingdom on an uncertain Chance
and Nicety: Whereupon he signed their demands presented in Writing, and gave
them a Solemn Promise to Confirm it to them in a Legal manner; whereupon they
threw down their Arms, and Shouted for Joy; so that from his Reign to this day,
that County Enjoys the Privileges they held in Edward the Confessors time,
exempted from other Counties, as also those in preceding Reigns.

After this, perceiving the Spirits of the English were not so easily brought
under as he supposed, and hearing that Swain King of Denmark was preparing for
an Invasion at the Instigation of Goodwin and Edmund, two of King Harrolds
Sons, he began to relax in his severity; and to make fair with the City of
London, Granted them this short Charter, viz. I William King, Greet William
Bishop, and Godfrey Porters and all the Burgesses within London, French and
English, and I Grant you that I Will that you Maintain and Enjoy all your Laws
as you did in the days of King Edward (meaning the Confessor) and I will that
each Child be his Fathers Heir; and further I will that no Man Wrong you, and
so God keep you.

However the Danes Landed a strong Army in the North, where they were Joined by
many English, in hopes thereby to regain their Liberties; but the King hasting
thither, drove them to their Ships with great slaughter; and to revenge him on
those that had joined with them, he wasted the Country from York to Durham; so
that for Nine Years the Ground lay waste, which occasioning a Famine, numbers
of People Dyed.

After this he Summoned a Convocation of the Clergy, charging them with many
faults and failures in their Functions, and Duty toward him, for which he
Deposed and Deprived diverse Learned and Godly Men of their Dignities, Living
and Substance: The two former he bestowed on such as bid most for them, and the
latter he kept to Maintain his Wars in Normandy, where Troubles were arisen in
his Absence; the French laboring to recover it, as part of their Ancient
Territories. But scarce had he Expelled them ere hasty News recalled him, viz.
The Earls Edwin and Morcar had set up Edgar Etheling, and raised great Forces;
which were so Formidable to the Conqueror, by reason the English were generally
inclined to favor the Young Prince, than he found himself constrained to end
the Difference by fair means; and to make the common sort more ready to embrace
it, he Swore to keep Inviolable the Ancient Laws of the Land, particularly
those of Edward the Confessor; but not long after he took from the Abbey of St.
Albans all the Lands between Barnet and London-Stone.

And to Strengthen himself he made a League with Malcolm King of Scots, who had
often publicly, or underhand, made Incursions, or raised Commotions in the
Northern parts of the Kingdom. And the Bounds of the Country were ascertained
by rearing a Stone Cross, called by the Scots Stain Moor, in Westmorland; but
by the English Roy Cross, or Kings Cross, and soon after the King Sailed again
for Normandy; and quelled the Rebellious Normans that were joined with the
French against him, and so returned with Victory (but his Treasure being
Exhausted) he to recruit it, Sold to Walcher Bishop of Durham the Earldom of
Northumberland; but he Enjoyed it not long, for Oppressing the People to raise
the Money he had disbursed, they rose in a Tumultuous manner and slew him, Anno
1075; and the ensuing Year a Frost continued without Intermission, from the
12th of November to the 15th of April, so that the Wild Fowl were most
destroyed, and many Cattle perished for want of Food: A Blazing Star soon after
appeared, whereupon great contentions ensued in Normandy; for Robert the Kings
Son, having Ingratiated himself into the Favor of the People, raised great
Forces and in a set Battle Wounded his Father in the Arm, threw him from his
Horse, and took it as his Prize, gaining an entire Victory, in which many of
the English Nobles lost their Lives: Whereupon the King finding his Army much
weakened, was constrained to return for England, and finding the City of London
did not much favor him after this Defeat, to lay a curb and awe on them, he
rebuilt the Tower of London, drawing a Ditch about it to the largness as it
continues to this day, it being before but of inconsiderable Strength, viz.
Anno Dom. 1078; and so a Peace in a short time being concluded between him and
his Son Robert, the latter being allowed the nominal Title of Duke of Normandy,
and entirely to possess it as a Sovereign Prince after his Fathers Death, he
came into England, and was made General against the Scots, who breaking the
League wasted the Northern Countries as far as the place then called
Moonkchester to whom he gave an entire Defeat, and in memory of the Victory
erected a strong Castle of Stone, Naming it New Castle, from which the Town, so
called, on Tine, took its Name.

Not long after this such mighty Rains happened, and continued for so long a
time, that diverse Hills were so softened into a Quagmire, that they sunk down
and overthrew many Cots and some Villages, making as it were a Level. St.
Paul's Church was likewise set on Fire in June following; supposed to be done
by Lightning, and a great part of it consumed, but soon Rebuilded by the
Liberal Contributions of the Clergy and Laity.

He held a Synod in London, where some Bishoprics were Translated from one
place to another; as Selwy to Chichester, Credington to Exeter, Shirbourn to
Salisbury, Dorchester unto Lincoln; and there being a Contention between the
two Arch Bishops of Canterbury and York for Primacy, he undertook to determine
the difference, appointing Lanfrank Arch Bishop of Canterbury, Primate of all
England; and Thomas Arch Bishop of York, only Primate of England; so that he
and his Successors became subordinate to the Archiepiscopal See of Canterbury.

Philip King of France, taking advantage of the Kings Absence from Normandy,
encouraged Robert to make himself Absolute Duke, assisting him with Men and
Money; whereupon the King was again constrained to pass the Seas with a
puissant Army, being over-eager in laying waste the Country; and harassing
himself in War, being overheated, he fell Sick, and hearing that the French
King should say in a Scoffing manner, He lay a long time in Childbed; he
Replied in a rage, That at his Vprising or Churching, he would Light so many
Candles in France, as should Inflame the whole Country: And indeed he made his
words good, for upon his recovery, enraged that his Enemies had in his Sickness
taken the advantage to waste his Territories, he spoiled all the West parts of
France, Firing the City of Nantz, Meux, and a great number of Towns and
Villages, Enriching with part of the Spoil the Church of St. Stephen's in
Normandy, which was of his own Founding; moreover bequeathing in his last Will
his Crown and Regal Ornaments to it, appointing his Body (when he Dyed) to be
Buried therein. And for the Service done in this War, he requited many of his
Commanders, who had signalized their Valor, with possessions in England, to
hold them of the Crown; one of which Grants for the Antiquity and plain manner
of Conveyance, exempted from the tediousness now in use, I think not amiss to
recite, viz.

I William give to thee Norman Hunter here,
Who art to me both Leef and Dear,
The Hop and the Hoptown,
And all the Bounds up and down
Under the Earth to Hell, and even
Above the Earth to Heaven;
From me and mine,
To thee and thine,
As good and fair
As ever they were,
To Witness that this is Sooth
I bite the White Wax with my Tooth.
Before Jug, Maud, and Margery,
And my Young Son Henry.
For a Bow and a broad Arrow,
When I come to Hunt upon Yarrow.
In the last Year of this Kings Reign, there was found in the Province called
Rose in Wales, a Sepulcher of 14 Foot Long, in which was Buried, with much
Treasure, as the Custom of the Times then were, Gawen one of King Arthurs
Knights of his Round Table, and Bones therein of an exceeding bigness.

And now, as all Kings must come at last to the Grave, the Life of this
Restless Conqueror grew to a Period; for going over to Quiet new Troubles in
Normandy, he had scarcely Accomplished it before he fell Sick of a Malignant
Fever at Caen in Normandy, and after some Languishings Dyed; and being a
corpulent Man, his Belly in a little time Burst, and the Stench being great,
none but a few poor Monks would come near him; nor was this all; one Ascalinus
Fitz Arthur, a Norman Gentleman, denied him Burial in St. Stephen's Church,
saying, He had Founded it on his Inheritance violently taken away, that it
stood upon the Floor of his Fathers House, and the Body of no Despoiler should
be covered in his Earth; however Henry his Fourth Son, giving a Hundred Pound
Weight in Silver as a recompense, he was there Interred, but with little or no
Ceremony; so that he who in his Life time made Nations Tremble, being Dead, was
little or nothing regarded.

This William the First, was Son to Robert the Sixth Duke of Normandy, begotten
as is said, on a Beautiful Damsel named Arlet, the Daughter of a Tanner, in
Honor of whom a Town is called by her Name. He began his Reign over England
Anno Dom. 1066, on Saturday the Fourteenth of October, and Reigned Twenty
Years, Ten Months and Twenty Six Days, being the 21 Sole Monarch of England.

Remarks on Lincolnshire, etc.
LIncolnshire, by reason of its Fens, and other Advantageous Pastures, produces
great numbers of small and large Cattle, a good sprinkling of Corn, abundance
of Fish and Wild-Fowl, much Wool and Leather. It is commodiously on the East
Bounded with the German Ocean and part of Norfolk, so that by reason of its
Havens it has a great Trade, and very much helped on the North by being Bounded
with the River Humber, and part of Yorkshire; on the West with Yorkshire,
Notinghamshire, and Leicestershire; on the South, with Northamptonshire and
Cambridgshire. It is divided into 30 Hundreds containing one City, a Bishops
See, 630 Parishes, 33 Market Towns, and 9 Rivers: It sends Members to
Parliament 12, viz. Boston 2, Grantham 2, Grimesby 2, Lincoln City 2, Stamford
2, and 2 Knights of the Shire.

Lincoln was Anciently held to be one of the finest Cities of England, being of
great Antiquity, and made by King Edward the Third the chief Mart for Lead,
Wool, and Leather; here was also a great Battle Fought between Randolph Earl
of Chester, Robert Earl of Gloucester, and King Stephen; the latter being
Overthrown and taken Prisoner. It was Besieged by King Henry the Third, and
taken from the Barrons.

Wainfleet was the Birth Place of William Surnamed thence Wainfleet, who
Flourished in the Reign of Henry the Sixth, being Bishop of Winchester; He
Founded here a Free School, and Magdalen College in Oxford.

Grimsby, an Ancient Market Town, is famed as the Birth Place of Doctor
Whitgift Arch Bishop of Canterbury, in the Reign of King James the First;
Bullingbrook is enobled by the Birth of two Kings, viz. Edward the First and
Henry the Fourth. Swinstead, at an Abbey there King LINCOLN SHIRE.
map of Lincolnshire John was Poisoned by a Villainous Monk: At Harlestil Dyed
that Miracle of Conjugal Love, Elenor Queen to Edward the First; Bourn is a
famous Market Town; Grantham is noted for its vast high Steeple, which seems to
stand awry as if it were falling, the tradition going, That the Devil as he
flew over it struck it into that warped posture with one of his Wings; though
many believe the height deceiving the Eye, makes it only appear so. Stamford is
a very fine Town, on its Bridge a single Dane stopped King Harrold and his
Army, slaying 40 Men; nor could be removed till such time as a Soldier, rowing
under the Bridge, thrust up a Spear and Cowardly slew him. Crowland was once
famous for its Rich and Stately Abbey; all its Sea Coast is sprinkled with
commodious Towns, as Grimsby, Saltfleet, Boston, etc.

In the Fens are found the Ategen or Godwitt, also a foolish Bird called a
Dottrell, which Cambden says being Hunted thrusts its Head into a Bush, and
then thinks all is secure, though the whole Body is seen, and so in Moulting time
he is easily taken.

The Reign of WILLIAM the Second, Surnamed Rufus.
WHen William the First Dyed, his Eldest Son Robert was in Germany, Negotiating
his Fathers Affairs, to draw in those Princes to assist him in making a
Vigorous War on the French, who were now become somewhat Formidable to their
Neighbors; so that by the favor of his Absence, the Conquerers Last Will, the
furtherance of Lanfrank and Wolstane, two Learned Prelates who had great
Influence over the Commons, and diverse of the Nobles, William Surnamed Rufus,
from the Redness of his Hair or Face, was after many hot debates among the
Nobles, Crowned King at Westminster, by Lanfrank Arch Bishop of Canterbury, on
Sunday the 26th of September Anno Dom. 1087.

This William was Younger Brother to Robert, but being of a milder Temper, and
better affected to the English, by reason he had in a manner been bred up
amongst them, and approved by them, Robert found himself greatly Agreived that
he had been put beside his Right in England, though the Duchy of Normandy was
left entirely to him; but the Title of Duke not agreeing with his great Spirit,
when he perceived he might have been a King had not loss of opportunity barred
it, he resolved nevertheless to tempt Fortune in a trial for the regaining what
was overslipt; whereupon he raised a gallant Army, composed of his own Subjects
and Strangers, Landing them in England, with little or no Resistance, not doing
any damage to the English; but being Encamped Commissioners were sent by King
William to treat with him about an Accommodation for the preventing the
effusion of Blood, and the Miseries such a War was likely to bring on both
Nations, for being thereby weakened, they might easily become a Prey to
Foreign Enemies, who watched for such an opportunity to work their ends, both
on Normandy and England, especially the Danes and French.

To these and other Reasons for an amicable conclusion of the Difference, the
Norman Duke harkened with much mildness, so that in a short time it was agreed
that Robert after Williams Death should possess the Kingdom; and to the end his
Heirs might not disturb it, he was debarred from Marriage, as I find it in some
Historians; however, certain it is, he left no Legitimate Issue behind him:
And in the mean time he was Yearly to pay the sum of 3000 Marks. And the
Articles being Signed, the Brothers took a Friendly leave of each other, so
that through Providence this threatening Storm which filled England with many
doubts and fears at its approach, blew over without doing any harm.

After the Duke of Normandy had repassed the Seas with his Army, the King
fearing he might repent him of what he had Agreed to, strengthened the Sea
Ports, and Built some Castles advantagiously on the Havens to prevent Landing
by surprise; but knowing his prime Strength and Assurance was in the Love of
his Subjects, he began to caress the Nobles more than he had done, and remitted
to the Commons several grievous Taxes; for upon his coming to the Crown, he
thought treading in his Fathers steps was the best Measures; but now he found
that Mildness rather than Rigor was the surest Policy, to keep the Natives of
this Island firm to his Interest; whereupon he restored much that had been
Extorted by his Rigorous Ministers; and the better to curry favor with the
People, caused some of them to be punished for the offenses he had enjoined
them to commit.

About this time Odo Bishop of Bayon, the Kings Uncle, who had been Banished by
the Conqueror, came over and was kindly received by his Nephew, who Created him
Earl of Kent, and conferred on him many other Honors and Trusts, which made
the old Clergyman presume so much on the Kings Favor, That he took upon him
more Authority to Rule than came to his share by many degrees; whereupon the
Nobles made grievous complaints, That a Stranger should presume to Domineer
over them in their Native Country; so that the King being sensible of his
Arogancy, changed his Smiles into Frowns, which caused him to make a party
among the English Normans, and to fall into open Rebellion; Declaring for Duke
Robert and his Right, who underhand had promised to Land some Forces, but did
not. This Treachery of the Normans, made the King almost totally throw himself
on the English for Safeguard and Protection.

These Fractions and Disorders in the State, begat new conceits in Malcolm King
of Scots, who resolving to take the advantage of them, hastily raised an Army
and Invaded the Northern Marches, wasting all in his way with Fire and Sword:
whereupon the King Summoning all his Courage, not to leave an Enemy at his
Back, first fell upon the Bishop, and gave him and his Rebellious Associates a
terrible Overthrow; and in the Battle the Bishop being taken Prisoner, he was
compelled to Abjure the Land. This happening the latter-end of the Second Year
of the Kings Reign, the Third no sooner began but he resolved to be Revenged on
the Scots, who had broke their League with him in order to lay hold on the
Advantages Clandestine Commotions seemed to offer them, and finding them
Plundering and Spoiling his Subjects, he scarce gave them time to Embattel, ere
like a Tempest he broke in amongst them, destroying the greater part of their
numerous Army, in which fell Twenty of their Nobles, and their King was
constrained to Acknowledge Subjection to England, renew his League upon Oath,
and in further confirmation of his Subjection he became a Pentioner to King
William; and to make it more apparent he was Tributary to England, paid Twelve
Mark Yearly for the Twelve Villages the King restored him (after he had taken
them from him in this War) which he had held in the Reign of William the
Conqueror; and to Fortify against the Scots Incursions he Rebuilded and
Garisoned the City of Carlisle in Cumberland, it having been demolished by the
Danes about 200 Years before; and Lanfrank Dying at a great Age, the King kept
the profits of the Arch Bishopric in his hands Four Years, and then made
Anselm, a Norman Abbot, Arch Bishop, which much displeased the English Clergy.

Not long after this, Malcolm King of Scots coming to Gloucester where King
William held his Court, being denied Access, and unhandsomly treated by some
Carpet-Courtiers who had been raised from a low degree, he (without acquainting
the King with it, or demanding satisfaction for the Indignity put upon him)
flung away in a great rage; and arriving in Scotland, Assembled the Nobles, and
incited them to bring all the Forces they could raise to his Standard, which
they punctually obeyed, and entering England with a huge Army, he wasted all
before him as far as Alnewick, which he Besieged, and Took it; but the strong
Castle held out against him, which with his numbers he so straightly begirt,
that Famine got in and much dismayed the Besieged; whereupon an adventurous
Knight, with a Flag of Truce in his Hand, and the Keys of the Castle on his
Spear, came out at the Gate Mounted on a swift Racer, and making low obeysence,
as if he submitted them to the King of Scots, being come pretty near, setting
Spurs to his Horse he run at the King with his Spear, and piercing him into the
Eye and Brain, he fell Dead to the Ground, and the Knight by the swiftness of
his Horse escaped through the Scottish Camp; at which the Scots were so
dismayed, That they raised the Siege, and departed with the Body of their King
Mournfully into Scotland.

For this daring piece of Service, which turned so much to the advantage of
William, The Knight had his Name by him changed from Mabrey to Piercey, and was
created Earl of Northumberland, whose Race as Earls continued till of very late
days, as will appear in the succeeding Reigns. But this Success prevented not a
Conspiracy against the King, for Robert Mowbrey and William of Ancho Plotted to
take away his Life by Treachery, and Crown Stephen D' Albemarle his Second
Sisters Son; but the Design being Discovered a little before it was to be put
in practice by one of the Accomplices in the Conspiracy, some were taken and
Executed, others Fled.

And now the Welsh Rebelling under the Leading of Rees their Prince, the King
with a gallant Army entered Wales, but the Rebels shifting from one steep
Mountain to another, as well knowing the ways in those Fastnesses, and climbing
the craggy Clifts, like Goats, many of the English were wasted in pursuing
them; but at length Starving them out, they were constrained to come to a
Battle, wherein Rees was Slain with most of his Army; whereupon Wales entirely
submitted to the English Obedience.

These Troubles were scarce over, when another Storm threatened from Normandy:
The Duke spurred on by Philip of France, who promised to Aid him, a second time
prepared for England; but the King having an Army on foot, concluded it better
to seat the War in another Country than in his own; and therefore to prevent
the Dukes making his Voyage, Sailed to Normandy, whose surprising Landing,
brought great fear on the Country; however, the King finding himself able with
the Army he had to do no great matters, and being destitute of Money to raise
Forces Abroad, bethought him of a Stratagem to do it, viz. He sent to England
many chief Officers to Levy such for the Wars as were of Ability, and having
Listed Citizens of London and others to the number of 30000, when they came to
the Sea Shore, and most of them showed an unwillingness to Embark, as looking
back to their Wives and Children, from which many of them had been forced, upon
a pretended pressing urgency, it was Proclaimed, That such as would lay down
Ten Shillings should be Discharged from the Service, which most of them did
with great Alacrity; so that very few of them went: With this Money King
William underhand bought off Philip the French King from the Duke of Normandy's
Interest; which he perceiving, agreed with his Brother by Ratifying again the
former Conditions; and the Christian Armies being on foot in most parts of
Europe to rescue the Christians in the Holy Land from the Tyrany of the Turks
and Sarazens, Duke Robert (to raise Forces and accompany them) Pawned his
Dutchey of Normandy to King William for 10000 Pounds; and there did many
Valiant Exploits, insomuch that at the taking of Jerusalem he was first
proffered to be made King of it, and all the Country lying about it, larger
than what either David or Solomon possessed; but he refused it, in hopes of the
Kingdom of England after his Brothers Death, though he was disappointed of it and
Dyed a deplorable Death, which some have accounted as a Judgment for his having
refused the proffered Scepter of Jerusalem. However on his refusal, the Princes
chose Godfry of Bulloin, Earl of Flanders, with which Choice he Joyfully
complied, but would not be Crowned, as he said, with a Crown of Gold, where our
Blessed Savior for the Sins of Man, and to procure his Redemption, had some
time worn a Crown of Thorns. But nearer to My Purpose.

The King was no sooner returned out of Normandy, but News was brought him the
Welsh were again in Rebellion; whereupon he Marched to Subdue them, but
returned without effecting it, by reason of the violent Torrents occasioned by
the Rain, and their keeping among the Rocks and Fastnesses, till his Army was
tired out with Famine and other inconveniences; yet soon after they grew Quiet
of themselves. But scarce had he time to take breath, ere a Rebellion broke out
in the North, whither he hasted with his Army, gave the Rebels a great
Overthrow, and taking some of the Ringleaders caused them to be put to Death,
but extended his Pardon to the common sort; and Mowbray, who encouraged them,
was committed to Windsor Castle, where he continued a long while Prisoner.

And the Welsh growing again troublesome, by wasting the English Borders, and
carrying away great spoils, the King sent the Earls of Shrewsbury and Chester
against them with a strong Power, where after some Search, and as secret
Marchings as they could, they found them making Merry in the Isle of Anglesey
with the Plunder they had got from the English; and falling upon them when they
expected nothing less, their Feasting was turned into Mourning; for the greater
part of them was Slain, and those that were taken Prisoners mostly lost Feet,
Hands, or Eyes, or were put to worse Torments, as a Terror to the rest, that
they should keep Quiet within their appointed limits.

The King thinking all would now be Quiet, resolved to take his Ease; and then
forgeting how the English had faithfully stood by him and assisted him in his
most dangerous undertakings, he cast many of them out of Favor, Office, and
Trust; laying grievous Taxes on the Commonalty, Selling for ready Money the
best Promotions in Ecclesiastical and Civil Affairs, Prohibiting Anselm Arch
Bishop of Canterbury to Assemble any Convocations or Synods (for the well
ordering the Clergy, or for the Correcting such as did Offend) without his
Leave or License; by which means he secretly filled his Coffers with Treasure;
and though the Good Arch Bishop laid before him the ill consequences and dangers
of such Proceedings, and not being minded, he resolved to go for Rome, and lay
before Pope Urban the Third the danger the Church was in, by Misgovernment, and
to persuade him to Intercede with the King not to intermedle with
Church-Affaires, but leave them to his Clergy. The King hearing of his
Intention, sent to command him not to go; but the Old Man and his Retinue were
before on their Journey; however, the King sent after him, and Pillaged him
near Dover of all his Wealth, in hopes that would stay him, but it did not: For
he went to Rome, and made such Complaints, that the Pope in a chafe would have
Excomunicated the King; But his Clergy Advised him that having already
Excomunicated the Emperor Henry the Fourth, The first Christian Prince that
ever was under Excomunication, therefore it would be convenient to see the
Issue of that Sentence, ere he proceeded any further; For, says a blunt Abbot,
your Holiness must have a care how you heat any more Irons before you see how
those you have Heated already will be Quenched, least they prove too Hot for
your handling. However many Letters and Verbal Messages were sent to the King,
Admonishing him not to meddle any more with the Investing of Bishops, by giving
them the Cross, Ring, and Pastoral Staff, nor Prohibit the Assembling of the
Convocations or Synods, touching the Affairs of the Church, nor the Execution
of any Canons though they were by Regal Authority Confirmed.

To this the King Answered That he would still do as he Pleased, and not lose
so fair a Flower belonging to his Crown. And being Reproved in the absence of
Anselm, by Ralph Bishop of Chichester, he cast him into disgrace, and Suspended
many Churches in his Diocese, causing the Revenues to be brought into his
Exchequer; so that the Clergy finding no Redress, greatly Murmured, but in
vain, till his humor was over; and then he not only received the Bishop into
his extraordinary Grace and Favor, but Granted many Honorable Privileges to
his See, yet he stood not long on these terms, ere the Kings humor changing
again, he Banished him.

By these ways the King had Amassed great Sums, part of which he laid out in
Building, viz. He made outward Walls and Bullwarks about the Tower of London,
on this side the Ditch, which Ruined by Time and other Accidents are now
Demolished though some of the Ruins yet remain; also Westminster Hall being 90
Yards Long and 24 Yards and 2 Foot Broad; yet when he saw it, he said, It was
too Little by half, and therefore he would reserve it for a Bedchamber; though
indeed it is accounted the Largest in Europe; and one thing is remarkable, though
there are many Cobwebs in the Windows, and in the Glass Lanthorn above the,
Roof, yet on the large and curious Wooden Frame, though never Swept, not any
appear; which has given occasion to conclude it is made of Irish Oak, and that
the virtue of the Wood is such, no Spider will come near it.

The King being thus at Ease, the French were not wanting to take the Advantage
of it, especially since Duke Robert was absent, Warring in the Holy Land, and
had left his Dukedom in charge with the King of England, whereupon they laid
Siege to the City of Constantia in Normandy, and pressed it very sorely; of
which King William having news as he was in the height of Sport, Hunting in New
Forest, he left all his Company on a sudden, and Posted toward the Sea Side,
where finding a small Bark, he leaped into it, and commanded the Master to set
Sail for any part in Normandy; but the Sea running high by reason of a Storm,
he refused to weigh Anchor, laying before the King that the passing at that
time was full of danger, and therefore entreated him to wait for more
favorable Weather; whereupon much enraged, he commanded him to make no delay
for any fear or danger of Tempests, For when (said he) have you ever heard a
King was Drowned by a Storm? So that the Mariners plying the best of their
skill to bear in the Wind, they got safely over.

The French no sooner heard the King was Landed, but concluding he had a great
Army with him, or soon to arrive, were so chilled with fear, that Courage
failing them; in much disorder they raised the Siege, and the Besieged in
Sallying cut off a great many in the Rear, took most of their Tents and
Baggage, left behind for haste; and so the King with a small Train coming
thither, was joyfully received, and having better Fortified and Stored it with
Provisions, conferring some Honors and Gifts on those that behaved themselves
well, he returned to England, met diverse of the Nobility who had raised Forces
and were coming to his Aid, who scarcely believed he could be there in so short
a time, or what he related of the raising the Siege could be true, till they
had it confirmed from many hands.

In the second Year of this Kings Reign, a terrible Earthquake happened; and in
the fourth, such prodigious Lightening and Thunder as did great mischief in
diverse places, and particularly it Burnt the Steeple of the Abbey at Winchester,
rent the Beams of the Roof, and cast down the Image of the Virgin Mary,
breaking one of its Legs as also the Crucifix; and not long after, so great a
Storm happened at London, that it blew down 60 (some say 606) Houses, and took
off the Roof of Bow-Church, bearing it a great height in the Air, and six of
the Beams, being 27 Foot Long, with the fall run a prodigious depth into the
Ground, the Streets being then un-paved, so that with much labor they were
dug out. In his sixth Year was so great a Scarcity of Provisions, and a
Pestilence, that in Populous Places the Living were hardly sufficient to Bury
the Dead. In his ninth Year two Blazing Stars with long Firey Trains appeared,
one in the East, the other in the West, for twenty Nights, seeming to dart Fire
one at the other. And in the last Year of his Reign the Sea overflowed its
Banks in Kent, and laid under Water all the Lands that had been Earl
Goodwin's, being about 4000 Acres, Drowning much People and Cattle, and
Demolishing many Villages. And to this day has not been Regained. That
Overflowing is called Goodwins Sands, very fatal to Mariners. There also rose
up a Spring of Water of the Color of Blood, gushing out for 15. days in great
abundance at Finchamstead near Abingdon in Barkshire, which was held to Presage
the Kings untimely Death: For he Hunting in the New Forest, where his Father
had made such desolation of Churches, Religious Houses, and Villages, upon
pretense of Pleasure, as the Dogs were at Bay with a Stag, and he having
spoiled many of them, Sr. Walter Terrill, one of the Squires of the Kings Body,
let fly an Arrow, which glancing on the side of an Oak, slaunted on the King
who was pressing on to the Quarry, and entered so deep into his Breast, that he
dyed of the Wound; and almost on that spot, not long before, his Nephew Richard
Son to Robert of Normandy, was slain by a violent fall from his Horse, beaten
off by a Bow, all which Accidents were looked on as Judgments for the
Sacrilege and Waste committed on so trivial an occasion.

This William was Third Son to the Conqueror, by MIDLESEX By John Seller
map of Middlesex Maud his Wife, Daughter to Baldwin the Fifth Earl of
Flanders. He began his Reign Anno Dom. 1087, and Reigned 12 Years, 10 Months,
and 23 Days; being slain in the 44th Year of his Age, and Buried in the Quire
of St. Swithin, in the Cathedral Church of Winchester. He was of a comely
Stature, firmly compacted in his Limbs, very Strong and Active, of a high
Courage, and noble Valor; constant in his Resolutions, yet withal Covetous,
and exceeding Leacherous; so that though he left no Lawful Issue behind him, he
is said to have by his Concubins seven Sons and five Daughters.

Remarks on the County of Middlesex, and the famous Cities of London and
Westminster.
MIddlesex gains the Pre-eminence of other Counties by reason in it stands the
famous City of London, The Courts of Judicature, and Palaces of our Kings, and
by reason of the great numbers of Handicrafts; for few Manufactures used by the
English Nation, are here unpractised; being in all too many to inumerate. This
County produces a good sprinkling of Cattle, Corn, Pastures, Parks, Chases, and
store of Deer: It is Bounded on the North with Hartfordshire, on the West with
Buckinghamshire, on the South with the River Thames and Surry, on the East with
Essex: It is divided into seven Hundreds ( viz. Edmonton Hundred, Elthorn
Hundred, Finsbury and Wenslaxbarn one Hundred, Goare Hundred, Oswelston
Hundred, Isleworth Hundred, Spelthorn Hundred) containing 73 Parishes, (besides
those Parishes contained in the Cities of London and Westminster, which are
126, viz. 97 within the Walls of London, 16 without the Walls, but within the
Liberties thereof; and 7 in the City of Westminster) 2 Cities, London and
Westminster, the former being a Bishops See; 5 Market Towns, and 1 principal
River, viz. the Thames, which washes its South side: It sends Members to
Parliament 8, viz. London City 4, Westminster City 2, and 2 Knights of the
Shire.

London, a City of the greatest Trade in Europe, is pleasantly seated on the
Banks of the Thames, lifting up her lofty Head on gradually rising Hills, full
of Riches, and Beautified with many stately Buildings; King Lud, who Reigned
here a little before the arrival of Julius Caesar, much Beautified and Enlarged
it, if he were not the first Founder, calling it after his Name, Caer Lud; and
one of its Western Gates retains his Name to this day. It has a stately Stone
Bridge, with 19 Arches, passing over to Southwark; upon which are vast piles of
Houses. The Tower, said to be Built by Julius Caesar, and much Enlarged by
William the Conqueror, is for Strength and Prospect very Famous, having a Moat
and convenience to let the Thames Water in and out again. It is famous for
being the Prison of many Nobles as David King of Scots, John King of France,
etc. In it were Murdered Henry the Sixth, the two Princes Edward the Fifth and
his Brother Richard Duke of York, by Crookback Richard's Command; within its
Walls on the Green diverse Nobles have been Beheaded, as Robert Earl of Essex,
the Lady Jane Gray a little before Proclaimed Queen, and the Lord Dudly her
Husband, and many others, too numerous to mention. Here Sr. Tho. Overbury was
Poisoned, and Arthur Capell the Noble Earl of Essex, in King Charles the
Seconds Reign, was found Dead, his Throat being Cut from Ear to Ear. In London
one Gallus a Roman Leiutenant being Slain at a Brook, it was called thence
Galbrook now corruptly Wallbrook. The famous Cathedral of St. Paul's was Founded
by Sigebert King of the East Angles, and Ethelbert King of Kent, where before a
Temple was erected to Diana. In the Reign of Edmund Ironside this City was
closely Besieged by the Danes, but the Siege soon raised by that Valiant King;
Anno 1133, the greater part of it was consumed by Fire. In King Richard the
Second's time, was the great Rencounter in Smithfield, with the Rebels Wat
Tyler and Jack Straw, where the former was killed by Sr. William Walworth, the
Valiant Lord Mayor, For which the Dagger is added to the City Arms. This City
has had the Honor to Entertain several Kings and Princes; King Stephen kept
his Court where Crosby Square stands in Bishopsgate-street; King Edward the
Third in Cornhill, where the Popes-Head-Tavern stands; King John had his
Chapel where the Stone-House on London Bridge stands, and kept his Court in
Holy-Well-Lane by Shoreditch. King Henry the Eighth held his Palace in
Blackfriers, and some times in Bridwell, where he Lodged the Emperor Charles
the Fifth. Its Monument on Fish-street-Hill is very famous, Erected in Memory
of the dreadful Fire, Anno Dom. 1666, Sept. the 2. which consumed 13000
Dwelling-Houses, besides the Cathedral of St. Paul's, and almost all the
Churches, Chapels, Halls, and other Public Buildings. To Islington near this
City, comes a pleasant Stream from a small Spring in Hartfordshire called
Amwell, and supplies it by Wooden Pipes with Water in abundance. Bow Church in
this City has a Steeple accounted the finest in Europe. Its Exchange in
Cornhill is Beautified with the Statues of the Kings and Queens, and is a very
stately Structure, Its Conduits are curious Ornaments to the City, as also are
the Halls of the Companies; and likewise St. Paul's Cathedral, the East End and
about a Third Part of it being Finished, containing the most excellent
Workmanship that ever was wrought in Stone. Christ's Hospital, St.
Bartholomew's, the Charter House, Bethlehem, and Bridwell, are very famous for
Charity: In Christ Church three Queens were Buried, viz. Margaret second Wife
to Edward the First, Isabell Wife to Edward the Second, and Joan her Daughter,
Married to David King of Scots.

Westminster, the second City, standing in this County, has the River of Thames
pleasantly on the South side of it, and has been the most constant Residence of
the Kings and Queens of England, till White Hall was Builded by Cardinal Wolsey
in the Reign of Henry the Eighth, and yet claims the Coronation and Burials of
them, in its stately Abbey, Built in a place once called The Isle of Thorns, in
Henry the Sevenths Chapel; and has also given Birth to many great Princes.
This City is very Ancient, viz. about 1660 Years.

The Palaces of White Hall and St. James are very Stately, but the more to be
noted for being the ordinary Residence of our Kings and Queens. His Majesty's
Palace at Kensington is accounted one of the Pleasantest Seats in the County,
and extraordinary much delighted in by the late Queen.

Isleworth or Thistleworth is a Village pleasantly situate on the River Thames,
where Richard King of the Romans and Earl of Cornwall, had a stately Palace,
which was Burnt to the Ground by a Tumultuous Sally made by the London Mob.
Chealsea is pleasantly seated on the River, and above all Beautified with its
stately College, dedicated to the Use and Relief of decayed or disabled
Soldiers and Officers. Cambray-House beyond Islington is of very Ancient
Building, first Founded by a Grocer, and takes a fair Prospect of London.
Highgate, and Hampstead are situate on pleasant Hills, giving a large Prospect.
The next of note are Edger, Acton, Wilsdon, Edmonton, Tatnam Highcross, Harow,
Drayton, Hackney, Newington, Hampton, famous for its stately Court, which is
one of the finest in England, Built by the great Cardinal Wolsey.

The Seats of the Nobility in this City and County, are many, viz.
Norfolk-House in Arundel Buildings, belonging to the Duke of Norfolk;
Wallingford-House, one of the seats of the late Duke of Buckinghams;
Albemarle-House, one of the seats of the late Duke of Albemarle; Soho-Square, a
seat of the late Duke of Monmouths; Clarkenwell-House, belonging to the late
Duke of Newcastle; Cleveland-House, to the Duchess of Cleveland;
Worcester-House, to the Duke of Beaufort; Highgate-House, to the Duke of
Northumberland; Winchester-House, to the Duke of Bolton; Halifax-House, to the
Marquess of Halifax; Kent-House, to the Earl of Kent; Bedford-House, to the
Duke of Bedford; Thannet-House, to the Earl of Thannet; Leicester-House, to the
Earl of Leicester; Cambray-House, to the Earl of Northampton; Warwick and
Holland Houses, to the Earl of Warwick and Holland; Clare-House, to the Earl of
Clare; Mulgrave-House, to the Earl of Mulgrave; Chealsey-House, to the Earl of
Lindsey; St. Albans-House, to the Earl of St. Albans; Essex-House, to the Earl
of Essex; Cardigan-House, to the Earl of Cardigan; Anglesey-House, to the Earl
of Anglesey; Cravan-House, to the Lord Cravan; Ailesbury-House, to the Earl of
Ailesbury; Burlington-House, to the Earl of Burlington; Powis-House, to the
Marquess of Powis; Macclesfield-House, to the Earl of Macclesfield;
Conway-House, to the Earl of Conway; Campden-House, to the Earl of
Gainsborough; Faulconberg-House, to the Lord Viscount Faulconberg;
Mordant-House, to the Lord Viscount Mordant of Avelon; Sion-House, to the Duke
of Sommerset, also Northumberland-House in the Strand; Drayton, to the Lord
Paget; Hackney-House, to the Lord Brook; Charterhouse-Close, to the Lord Gray
of Wark; a House at Whitton to the Lord Culpeper; Lord Berkley Barron of
Stratton his seat Stratton-House, alias Berkley-House in Pickadilly; and at
Twickenham a seat of the Lord Bennets, Barron of Ossulston; The Bishop of
London's seats London-house, and Fullham-house.

As for Medicinal Wells in this County, there have been lately found out diverse
at Islington, Hoxdon, and other Places, by many highly approved for the Cure of
diverse Distempers.

The Reign of HENRY the First, Surnamed, for his great Learning, Beau-Clark, or
Fine Scholar.
WHen King William the Second was unfortunately Slain, Robert his Eldest
Brother, Fortunate in all his proceedings, save only in his Succession to the
Crown of England, was Victoriously Warring in the Holy Land against the Turks
and Sarazens; but hearing of his Brothers Death, he declined the Kingdom of
Jerusalem, to which the Christian Princes had Elected him, and hasted home; yet
left most of his Troops behind him.

But by means of his Absence, Henry, his Youngest Brother, so cunningly dealt
with the English and Normans, that he got much into their Favor; and the more,
because he was Born in England after his Father was Crowned King, and for as
much as he was of a mild disposition, many Princely Virtues making it apparent
that his Government would be accompanied with many Honorable Achievements,
Gratful, Safe and Profitable to the Church and Commonweal; so that all things
working to his Advancement,

He was Crowned at Westminster by Maurice Bishop of London (Anselm Arch Bishop
of Canterbury being Absent) on Sunday the 5th of August, Anno Dom. 1100; but
before his Coronation, the Nobles constrained him to Swear he would Ease the
People of the oppressing Taxes and other Grievances, and Restore to the English
the use of Lights and Fire in their Houses, which they had been denied, for the
most part, after the Ringing the Evening Bell, for the space of 33 Years.

After his Coronation, to make him more Easy in the Throne, he caused the
Great Seal to pass on several wholesome Laws, Subscribing them with his Name, and
commanded diverse of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal to do the like; and caused
Copies of them to be sent into every County, to be kept in the County Courts.
The Heads of the Laws were in these Branch^s.

1. That the Church should be free from Oppressions, and Reservation of their
Possessions upon vacancy. 2. That the Heirs of the Nobility should Possess the
Lands of their Fathers without Redemption from the King; which Favor likewise
should be Granted by the Nobles to their Tennants. 3. That the Gentry might
give in Marriage their Daughters and Kinswomen, without the Kings License, so
it were not to the Kings Enemies. 4. That the Widow should have the Jointure,
and not against her Consent be compelled to a second Marriage. 5. That the
Mother, or the next of Kin, should be Guardian of the Lands of their Children.
6. That Coiners of False and Counterfeit Money should be Capitally Punished,
and a Measure, to the Length of the Kings Arm, should be a Standard of Commerce
among the People. And 7. That all Debts to the Crown, before his coming to it,
should be forgiven, and all Murders before the day of his Coronation to be
Pardoned.
With other such like Indulgences: He also at this time Confirmed King Edward
the Confessor's Laws.

Now, though this went a great way with the People, who found themselves easy in
these Concessions, he yet used other Policies, as expecting a storm from the
Norman Coast, as soon as Duke Robert should Arrive, whom he had notice by his
Espialls, was on his way; for having Seized on the plentiful heaps of the last
Kings Treasure, he Liberally disposed of it among such of his Subjects as he
knew would stand him in the greatest stead, if things should come to Extremity.
Then he placed the more Popular Nobles in the chief Offices of State, and
satisfied the Leading Gentry with Titles of Honor, and Places of a lower
station, absolutely acquitting the People forever from the Tax of Dane Gelt (it
having been much lessened in the former Reign) and from all other Demands and
unjust Payments Imposed on them by the two former Kings, giving leave to the
Nobles and Gentlemen, for their Recreation, to Enclose Parks for their Deer,
and free Warrens for their Conies, Hares, and such like Game. And, as Traitors
to his Virtues, State, and Kingly Government, he Exiled from his Presence and
Court Sycophants, Parasites, Flatterers, Niceness in Behavior, Lascivious
Conversation, Sumptuousness in Apparel, Superfluity in Diet, etc. He made it
Death for any to Robb on the Highways, and with Indefatigable Endeavors he
Corrected and Reformed the Monstrous Pride, Intolerable Covetousness, Secure
Negligence and Sloth of the Clergy. Yet the better to please them, he Recalled
Ans^^ from Banishment, and Restored him to his Arch Bishopric of Canterbury,
giving him full Power to Assemble Convocations and Synods at his pleasure; and
for the amendment of such Irregularities as were insufferable in the Church, he
left it wholly to the Pope, as also to Invest Bishops, by giving them the Ring,
Cross, and Pastoral Staff. All such Ecclesestical Promotions and Dignities as
by the Lewd Advice and Council of Reynulph Bishop of Durham, his Predecessor
had Seized in his hands, and converted to his use, he voluntarily restored and
conferred on honest and grave learned Men, and Committed the Bishop of Durham a
Prisoner to the Tower of London, from whence he Escaped; and going for
Normandy, earnestly Incited Duke Robert by many moving Orations to Invade
England; who prone enough of himself, so harkened to him, and relying on the
Aids he had promised him here on his Landing, raised a great Army; of which
Henry having timely notice, thought fit yet to strengthen himself more by
Marriage, and in order to it he took to Wife Maud, Sister to Edgar King of
Scots, who was Daughter to Malcolm by Margaret Sister to Edgar Etheling, and
Daughter to King Edward the Son of Edmund Ironside, the Victorious Saxon King.

These Nuptials were no sooner consummated, and a firm League made with
Scotland, but Duke Robert Landed his Army at Portsmouth, which put the English
into apprehensions of being involved in a doubtful War; but this threatening
storm was soon blown over, by the discreet mediation and counsel of Friends on
both sides; so that a friendly Peace ensued between the two Brothers, upon such
like Conditions as had been Agreed on in William Rufus's Days; whereat the
Norman Lords were much displeased, and returned discontented with the Duke; so
that the King fearing he would not long rest contented with the Agreement,
resolved to be beforehand with him; and therefore raising a gallant Army he
Sailed to Normandy, and was joined by many of the discontented Nobles, giving
the Duke two great Overthrows: After which, he being in a manner forsaken,
shifted from place to place; when in the mean while the King pressing his good
Fortune, won the strong Cities of Roan, Caen, Valois, and others; and putting
them in trusty hands, returned for England; where he was received in Triumph.

The Duke perceiving his Fortune grew worse and worse, those that he most
Trusted growing Treacherous, and betraying his Councils to the King, as being
Bribed so to do, by which means he was almost stripped of his Duchy of
Normandy, he Resolved to make an adventurous Experiment, and in order to it
came privately into England, and humbly submitted himself to his Brother,
leaving it in his discretion to dispose of him and his Duchy as he pleased;
but the King desirous to Annex Normandy to his own Dominions, turned from him
in a slighting manner, and commanded him out of his presence; which great
Indignity roused the Dukes Courage, so that in a great Rage he flung out of the
Court, and returned to Normandy; resolving rather to dye by the Sword,
valiantly fighting in the Field, than again to be guilty of such Meanness.

The King, who was not unacquainted with his humor, rightly guessed at what
was intended, and therefore followed him with an Army, and much Treasure; and
after many Battles overpowering his small number, he was taken, brought
Prisoner to England, and closely confined; when endeavoring to make his
Escape, the King (to whom in William Rufus his Reign he had done many good
offices) ungratfully caused his Eyes to be put out with Burning Glasses; yet in
this Captivity he lived about the space of 20 Years; and then, as is said, the
King sending him a Suit of his Old Clothes, he took the Indignity so
impatiently, that resolving to live no longer in that Misery and Disgrace, some
Historians have it that he voluntarily Starved himself; others, that he Beat
out his Brains against the Stones of the Prison-Wall; however, certain it is
that in his confinement Dyed the Valliant, well Accomplished, and much Lamented
Robert, Eighth Duke of Normandy, a Prince in whom all Heroic Virtues shined.

The King seeming now to be rid of all his Fears, began to consider, the Clergy
by his concessions were grown exceeding Rich, and Engrossed many Temporalities;
so that resolving to come in with them for a share of what they had Accumulated
by his Bounty, he laid Taxes on some, and reassumed his power of Creating
Bishops; which so highly disgusted Arch Bishop Anselm, That he not only
bitterly inveighed against his Proceedings, contrary to his former Promises,
but absolutely refused to Consecrate such Bishops as the King Appointed.
However, to curry favor with the King, Gerald Arch Bishop of York, performed
that Ceremony; and Anselm, soon after being Banished, fled to Rome, and made
grievous complaints to Pope Paschal the Second, of the wrongs, as he pretended,
that had been done him; and upon the Popes Intercession, about two Years after
he had License to return; and at a Synod of the Clergy holden in London by the
Popes Authority, it was Enacted, That from thence forth no Temporal Person
should give Investiture to any Bishop by the Cross and Ring; yet three Years
after, Arch Bishop Anselm Dying, The Temporalities of the Sea of Canterbury
were Seized into the Kings hands, who converted them to his use for the space
of five Years, the Sea being so long kept vacant; he aledging to the Bishops
that sued to him, to Nominate an Arch Bishop; That he only kept it for a worthy
Person that might justly deserve it.

Anno Dom. 1108 The King erected the Bishopric of Ely, appointing the Diocese
to extend through the County of Cambridge and Isle of Ely, and Endowed it with
some of his own Lands in those parts; by which means he made fair weather with
the Pope, because by this addition he had strengthened his Interest the more in
England, and the Clergy seemed satisfied in part for their Damages sustained.

But now a Storm threatened in Normandy, for the King having gotten quiet
Possession after his Brothers Death, Lewis Le Gross, King of France, fearing a
further Incroachment on his Territories, if the King of England (wanting
Interuption) had liberty to grow Powerful, he procured Foulk Earl of Anjou, on
a weak pretense, to seiz on the Country of Main, and then animated Baldwin
Earl of Flanders, to Proclaim War for the King of England's with-houlding a
Yearly Pension of 300 Marks, which the Conqueror had settled on Baldwin fifth
Earl of Flanders, and had been paid by William Rufus to his Son and Nephew,
because the Earl had assisted the Conqueror with considerable Forces upon his
Invading Elngand: All these made strong preparations to Invade Normandy; But
the News soon roused the King from his Bed of Ease, and filled him with
Princely Resolutions; whereupon he passed the Seas with an Army of Nobles,
Gentry and common Soldiers; when losing no time, he set upon the Earl of Anjou
and his Associates, giving him an entire Overthrow, so that he was enforced to
save himself by shameful Flight, leaving the Prime Nobility and Gentry of his
Army dead on the Plains, or Prisoners of War, with 4000 of lesser note: And
near unto the Town of Nice, which was Surprised and holden by the King of
France, he Encountered the other Confederates, so that a very cruel Fight
beginning between them, it continued Nine Hours, and was on both sides fought
with such Eagerness and Heroic Resolution, that though the King won the Victory,
and kept the Field, whilst his Parties sent after them had a long chase of the
flying Enemy; he truly confessed, He Fought not then for Victory, but for his
Life.

Not long after these Victories, Overtures of Peace were made, and the King
fearing some practices against him in England might raise a Rebellion, if he
should be long entangled in War Abroad, he the more readily harkened to them,
and a Peace was concluded, upon a Marriage between William the Kings Eldest
Son, and the Daughter of the Duke of Anjou; but in their return for England
staying somewhat behind the King, and to make Merry, and take leave of their
Friends, in their Riotous Treatments, the Mariners got such plenty of Wine,
that being for the most part made Drunk, coming with full Sail, in hopes to
overtake the King, they run upon the Shallows, where the Ship beating along by
the violence of the Wind and Waves, Foundered; yet the Prince with his fair
Bride, and many others, got into the Longboat, and put off; but Mary Countess
of Perch, his Sister, crying from the Sinking Deck pitiously to him To take her
in, and not let her Perish in the Waters, he Rowed back again, thinking to do
it; but then many Lives being at the point to be lost, and in that great
Extremity ^very one valuing his own Life equal with his Princes, neither Words
nor Swords could keep so many from leaping in, as sunk the Boat, so that they,
together with Richard the Kings Younger Son, Lucia his Neice, and her Husband
the Earl of Chester, were swallowed up by the merciless Waves; only three or
four Sailors escaping on Planks to Shore, as sad Relators of the Tragical News,
which filled the Court with Mourning, and the whole Nation with an Universal
heaviness. However, the King bore it with Prudence, and much Princely
Fortitude, knowing his Grief could not Retrieve his great loss; nor had he any
long time after his Landing to weigh the mishap, ere Wars loud Alarms summoned
him to the Field; for in his absence, the Welsh, impatient of the English Yoke,
had strengthened themselves in Confedracy with some Irish Adventurers, and now
broke into open Rebellion; not as formerly abiding in the Mountains and
Fastnesses, but relying on a foolish Prophecy, That in that Year they should
recover their Ancient Territories, and have a King of their Nation Reign over
the whole Island, they boldly advanced, and unadvisedly gave him Battle in the
Plains, where they were Overthrown, and most of them Slain or taken Prisoners;
the King inciting the Sword to rage in their destruction, and consumed with
Fire all the places in his March, making such a desolation as had not been
known in that Country for many hundred Years; and by so mighty a Terror having
Quieted these People, he returned with great Spoil, and was joyfully received
at London: Where Assembling the Nobles, he desired a Supply to enable him to
Marry his Daughter Maud, to the Emperor Henry, who had demanded her in
Marriage; which they granted, and it was Leavied in the nature of a Tax on
Lands, being called Aid pur file Marrier; and the same custom for the Marriage
of the Eldest Daughters of the Kings of this Realm, was a long time continued,
and may yet be practiced on the like Emergency.

At the same time he devised and ordered the manner and fashion of a High Court
of Parliament, appointing it to consist of the Three Estates, of which himself
was the Head; so that the Laws being made by the consent of all, were highly
pleasing to the People. This happy beginning of a Good Constitution of
Government, was First Established at Salisbury, in April Anno Dom. 1114; some
Authors have it 1116. However it has proved, by the continuance and great
Improvement of Parliaments, happy for England to this day; seeing to those
August Assemblies we owe the well founding of the best constituted Government
it the World.

Soon after this, the King hoping in some measure to repair the loss of his
Children Drowned, as has been recited, Married Adilicia Daughter to Godfrey,
first Duke of Lovain: And Pope Calixtus the Second came to him in Normandy, in
hopes to persuade him not to meddle in matters belonging to Ecclesiastical
Affairs, but neither Flattery, Threats, or Persuasion, could work the King to a
compliance with his desires; and at this meeting two Youths, Sons to the Earl
of Mellent, and Servants to the King, Disputing with two of the Popes
Cardinals, with Logical Sylogisms, so Nonplus'd them, that they were compelled
to own their Ignorance.

About Three Years after, Pope Honorius the Second sent Cardinal Cremensis to
certify the abuses of the Married Clergy, and to that purpose he made a long
Oration in a large Assembly of Priests and others; in praise of Chastity, and
dispraise of Unlawful Lust; (for so he termed that of the Married Priests with
their Wives) but being narrowly watched by some of them, he was by a Public
Officer taken in Bed the same Night with a common Strumpet; and so laden with
Shame, compelled to return to his Master without Success. Yet the King
preferring Thurston, one of his Chaplains, to the Arch Bishopric of York, the
Proud Priest refused to Swear Obedience to the Sea of Canterbury, which his
Predecessors had both Sworn and performed; and Appealing to Rome, the King
permited the Pope to dispense with his Obedience to that See; but he proceeding
further, to give him the Investure of Arch Bishop, by delivering him the Pall,
Ring, and Cross, the King was so much displeased that he prohibited his return;
but in the end the Popes Threatenings, Menacing nothing but Curses,
Excomunications, and Suspensions, he had leave to Enjoy the Dignity of the
Archiepiscopal See; least evil affected Persons, taking advantage of the
Difference, might raise Commotions to disturb the Quiet of the Kingdom. And
soon after one Arnold, in a Divinity Lecture at Oxford, for Preaching against
the Pride of the Prelates, and Dissolute and Wicked Lives of the Priests, was
Assassinated, and found Dead, with near a Hundred Wounds in his Head, Face, and
other Parts.

In the 27th Year of this Kings Reign, Dyed the Emperor Henry the Fifth of
Germany, not leaving any Issue by Maud his Empress; whereupon the King, to
strengthen his Interest against France, Married her to Geoffrey Plantagenet,
Son and Heir Apparent to Foulk then Earl of Anjou, by whom she had Issue Henry,
afterward King of England, Geoffery and William. This fair Offspring enriched
the King with the truest endowment of Content, for that as he conceived he saw
in them the long continuance of his Line, in possessing the Crown of this
Realm; and to make it the more certain and sure to them, he took three sollemn
Oaths in the space of five Years of all the Nobility and chief Men of the
Kingdom, That with their best Advice, and with the hazard of their Goods,
Lands, Lives and Fortunes, they should Support and Maintain the Succession of
his Daughter and her Heirs. And so growing in Years, he went over to Normandy
to do the like there, and settle his Affairs; but Eating Lamprys at the Town
of St. Dennis he Surfeited on them, and after a short Sickness Dyed.

This King was accounted Wise, Learned, Mild and Just, beyond most of his
Predecessors; more inclined to Peace than War; extending his Bounty to such as
merited it by Public Service, confining his Gifts within the limits of Thrift
and Measure: He was a gentle Friend, but a stuborn Enemy. He had several
Children by his Concubins, which he promoted to Honors and Places of Trust. He
Erected the two Bishoprics Ely and Carlis^le, and Founded the Monastries of
Shirbourn, Circester, the Priory at Dunstable, and the Abbey of Reading in
Barkshire, where he was Intered in a stately Tomb.

He began his Reign Wednesday the First of August, Anno Dom. 1100, and Reigned
35 Years, 4 Months, and 1 Day; and was the 33d Sole Monarch of England.

In the 16th Year of his Reign great Thunders, Lightenings, and Hail happened
in December, doing much harm; and the Moon for two Nights appeared of the
Color of Blood; in October, the same Year, the Thames was so Dry, that the
People passed at the Tower, and almost as far as the Bridge, to the other side
on Foot. In the 33d Year of his Reign happened so great an Eclips of the Sun,
that at Noonday the Stars plainly appeared, and about two days after there was
a terrible Earthquake; and the same Year happened a dreadful Fire in London,
which consumed it from the West End of Cheapside to Aldgate; and the nex Year
Worcester and Rochester were Accidentally Burnt; and a little before his Death,
a Blazing Star with a Bushy Tail of the color of Blood, appeared at South West
Twelve Nights successively.

Remarks on Northamptonshire, etc.
NOrthamptonshire is a pleasant Inland County, held to be Situate in the Middle
of the Kingdom, being mostly Enclosure, affording store of Corn, Pease, Fruits,
good Pasturs, and larg Cattle, Sheep and Foul in abundance; diverse Parks stored
with Deer, and much Fish.

It contains in it one City, viz. Peterborough; which is a Bishops See, though
Northampton is the Shire Town: It is divided into 20 Hundreds, and in them 326
Parishes, 13 Market Towns and 5 Rivers. It is Bounded with Cambridgshire,
Huntingtonshire, Buckinghamshire, Oxfordshire, Warwickshire, Leicestershire,
and Lincolnshire; sends Members to Parliament 9, viz. 2 Knights of the Shire,
Peterborough 2, Northampton 2, Brackley 2, Higham Ferries 1.

Northampton is a Town pleasantly seated on the Banks of the River Nen, where
it meets with two Rivers, one North and the other South. This Town is memorable
in past Years for its Sufferings; Anno 1106, in the contest of the Conquerers
three Sons, viz. Robert, William, and Henry; and being held by the Barrons
against King Henry the Third, Anno 1263, it was taken by Surprise, and the
Walls Demolished; Anno 1459 King Henry the Sixth was here taken Prisoner after
a Bloody Fight, in which was Slain Humphrey Stafford, Duke of Buckingham, John
Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, the Lords Egremont and Beaumont: It suffered much
when it was Stormed in the late Civil Wars: The greatest Misery that befell it
was Anno 1675, when by an Accidental Fire it was almost all laid in Ruins; but
is since Rebuilt, and appears in greater Splendor than ever, being so Uniform
and Beautiful, that at this day it yields to few Cities in England. Here the
Earl Rivers, Father-in-Law to Edward the Fourth, and NORTHAMTON SHIRE.
map of Northamtonshire the Lord John his Son, were Beheaded by Robin of
Risdale and his Rout of Clowns.

Oundle, or Houndhill, is famous for a Well, wherein at certain times the
beating of a Drum is heard, and People say it is usually the Alarm or
Forerunner of Wars, or Changes of Government, and indeed before the late
Revolution it was for many days together heard very plain: It has a very fine
Church, a Free-Sohool, and an Almes-House.

Peterborough is famed for its Building, and the curious Work of its Cathedral;
It is seated, as Northampton and Oundle are, on the River Nen.

At Higham Ferries was Born Henry Chichely, Cardinal and Archbishop of
Canterbury, in the Reign of Henry the Sixth, who Founded All Souls College in
Oxford.

Edgcot on Danes Moor, near this place a Bloody Battle was Fought Anno 1469,
between Robin of Risdale, and Sr. John Coniers, against William Herbert Earl of
Pembrook, the Lord Rivers and others.

At Fotheringay Castle Mary Queen of Scots was kept a long time Prisoner, and
at last Beheaded in it. The other Towns of Note are Towcester, Daventree,
Wellingborough, Kettering, Brabrook, situate mostly on pleasant Streams that
branch in all parts of this County: At Wellingborough are Medicinal Waters,
upon the account of which Queen Mary the First Lay there for several Weeks. In
the midest of the River Nen South of Peterborough, is a deep Gulf, so Cold in
the Summer, no Swimmer is able to endure it, yet never Frozen in the Winter.
The whole County is pleasantly sprinkled with Woods, and Tufted Groves, wherein
great store of Hares shelter.

The Seats of the Nobility are Grafton Regis, a seat of the late Duke of
Grafton; Burghly, Worthorp and Wakerly, belonging to the Earl of Exeter;
Apethorp and Sewlhay Lodge, to the Earl of Westmerland; Brayton, Luswick, alias
Lowick. Thrapston and Sudborow, to the Earl of Peterborough; Althorp to the
Earl of Sunderland; Dean, to the Earl of Cardigan; Winwick, to the Earl of
Craven; Holdenby, to the Earl of Feversham; Kerby, to the Lord Viscount Hatton,
Baron of Kerby etc. Astwell, to the Lord Ferrers; Easton Mauit, to the Lord
Gray; Boughton and Barnwell Castle, to the Lord Montague; Rockingham Castle,
Warmington and Stoke Albony, to the Lord Watson; Stean, to the Lord Crew;
Peterborough-Pallace and Castle to the Lord Bishop of the Diocese: Besides
these, there are many stately Houses of the Gentry that give a curious Prospect
to most Roads in the County.

The Reign of King STEPHEN.
THough King Henry thought he made the Crown of England and Duchy of Normandy
sure to his Daughter Maud and her Issue, yet for a whole Reign it was debarred
from them; for Stephen, Third Son to Stephen Earl of Bloyce, by his Wife
Adilicia, or Alice, Third Daughter to Willian the Conqueror, having insinuated
himself into the Favor of the leading Nobles, Sailed for England, and Landed
at Whit-Sand Bay, with whom came a wonderful Tempest, attended with Thunder and
Lightening.

He was Crowned at Westminster on the 26th of December, Anno Dom. 1135, by
William Corbell Arch Bishop of Canterbury, and so well was he Instructed in the
former Examples, That by Wisdom and Policy he labored to lay a sure foundation
for his Advancement; and because Riches are the Sinews and Strength of the
Strongest Kings, he therefore, to Enrich himself, seized on the Treasure of the
Deceased King, and Bountifully disposed of it to such as either by Arms or
Council were most likely to stand him in stead; he also created sundry
Noblemen, and Dignified many others with the Honor of Knighthood; which made
him find many fast Friends; and because benefits received are more frequently
pleasing to the Vulgar, than Right or Reason, to ingratiate with the Common
Sort, he remitted several Taxes, of those Grievance they had complained in the
latter end of the last Reign, but could have no Redress; causing, the better to
confirm this Concession, a Charter to be made to the People under the Great
Seal, for an Assurance of his not Revoking what he had consented to; he also
made a Mitigation of the Severeties and Penalties of diverse Laws; and by Solemn
Oath Bound himself to Observe and Keep the same; he likewise Renounced the
future Seisures of all Ecclesiastical Dignities and Promotions, when they
should become Vacant, the better to Endear the Clergy to him; giving to the
Church and Churchmen such Graceful and Profitable Privileges and Immunities as
they would demand, exempting them (among other things) from the Authority of
the Temporal Magistrate, for all Offense whatsoever, unless the Ordinary
consent to give them up to the Secular Power. And to prevent sudden
Disturbances that might arise, he Builded many Forts, Fortresses, Bullwarks and
Castles, Licensing the Nobles, Gentry and Clergy to do the like, for their
Security: And to keep fair with David King of Scots, who was Uncle to Maud the
Empress, he gave him the County of Cumberland, to hold it in Fee of the Crown
of England, and do Homage for it when he should be so required, and Created his
Eldest Son Henry Earl of Huntingdon; yet this sufficed not that restless King,
for soon after he entered England in the Empresses Quarrel, and laid many Towns
and Villages Waste, but being Encountered by Thurston Arch Bishop of York, he
was Overthrown; and flying into Scotland, left about 10000 of his Men Dead
behind him. Nor were the Welsh less troublesome, though he had Banished Baldwin
D' Redvers for Rebelling against him, but greatly infested the Western Parts;
whereupon an Army was sent, and gave them Battle; but by the Negligence of the
Commanders, for want of due order, the English were put to the Rout, and many
Slain, though more taken Prisoners; many of which were lead away by the
Welsh-women, and so great a number were Drowned by the fall of a Bridge over
Tweed, That a Passage was made over the Water with their Dead Bodies.

In the Sixth Year of this Kings Reign, the Empress Maud, being accompanied by
her Brother-in-Law, Robert Duke of Gloucester, Landed in England with an Army,
which as it Marched was much increased by the coming in of many English; and
soon after joined by Randulph Earl of Chester, with a Body of Welsh; hereupon
the King, reposing no confidence in delay* but Experience advising him that
time would be the chief enabler of his Adversaries Success, he Levied a strong
Army, and Marched against them, so that a cruel Fight, with equal hopes, was
Fought for many hours between them; but at length the common Soldiers on the
Kings part, striving faintly, rather endeavoring to save, themselves, than to
defend their Prince, they at last betook them to Flight, and left him with a
few Nobles and Gentry; yet with his Battel-Ax in his Hand, like an enraged
Lion, he stoutly maintained the Combat, Slaying many of the Enemy; till at
last, being surrounded, and in vain demanded to yield, he made a War himself
against whole Troops, till being beaten down with a weighty Stone cast on him
at a distance, he was taken Prisoner, and carried to Bristol Castle; where
remaining about three Months, he was exchanged for the Duke of Gloucester, who
in the mean while was made a Prisoner to King Stephen's Queen. However after
this Battle, Maud received the Allegiance of all the Counties of England,
except Kent; and Marching to Winchester, received there the Crown and other
Regalia's, and so passing to London, she was received in Triumph; and now the
reports of King Stephen's Defeat and Imprisonment, flying into Normandy, caused
his Subjects there to slight him, and incline to Geoffery, Husband to the
Empress; but changed their Minds, when they heard the King was at Liberty, and
had strongly Besieged the Empress in Oxford, whither she was Fled, upon notice
the Londoners consulted to seiz her, and deliver her Prisoner to the King,
because she had refused to confirm to them King Edward's Laws, with all their
Charters and Priveledges. And withdrawing privately from London, for fear of a
Surprise, she posted to Oxford, where she had not been scarce five Days, ere
the King Beleagured the City, and pressed it with continual Assaults, though in
the depth of Winter; so that the Empress fearing to be Taken, dressed herself
in White, and passing the Thames on the Ice, went through the Snow, which lay
then thick on the Ground, to Abingdon, where taking Horse, she passed to
Wallingford-Castle, kept with a strong Garrison by her Friends; and by this time
her Brother and Son Henry were Landed at Warram-Haven, and from thence came to
her with some Forces; but she wearied with the various turns and chances of
War, soon after left England, and returned to her Husband who was in Normandy,
having sent Prince Henry before; and so Oxford being Surrendered to the King,
he went to Lincoln, and Summoned the Barons, who there Swore Allegiance to
Eustace his Son, whom he Created Duke of Normandy; and Theobald Arch Bishop of
Canterbury, refusing to Consecrate him, was obliged, for his contempt of the
Kings commands, to leave the Land, and fly to Normandy; whereupon the King
seized on his Temporalities, but did not dispose of the Arch Bishopric. It is
Remarkable that the Kings of England, before Stephen, refrained going into
Lincoln, upon the account of a fatal Prophecy pronounced by Merlin, viz.

When a King enters within Lincoln's Walls,
His Reign proves Stormy, and he Childless falls.
The Kings Treasure being much wasted in the Wars he Fought, he demanded a
Subsidy of the Clergy; but they refusing it, he was extreme angry with the
Prelates, demanding of the Bishops of Salisbury, Lincoln, and Ely the Keys of
their Castles, and exacted great Sums of Money from them, pretending they were
Indebted to the Crown for the Tenures of their Temporalities.

And now Prince Henry, being grown up gathered an Army, and Invaded England;
nor was the King slow to Oppose him, but was somewhat retarded by the
Indisposition of his Son, who fell into a Frenzy, of which he shortly Dyed,
greatly lamented of the King, who had no more Children; but Sorrow giving place
to Anger, he caused the Trumpets to sound a Charge against the Enemy; but as
the two Armies were about to join, such a Storm of Rain and Hail fell, and
continued so long that they were forced out of the Field to seek shelter; which
gave a time for Parley; and the King weary of the War, and pitying the
Sufferings of his People, being Childless, and not expecting any more Children;
after many Messages from one to the other, a meeting was appointed; in which it
was firmly agreed, That the King should Adopt Prince Henry his Heir, to Succeed
him in the Kingdom and other his Dominions; and in lieu thereof, he should
quietly enjoy the Crown during the Term of his Natural Life; which being Signed
and Sworn to, all Hostilities ceased, and Henry was sent to suppress the
Rebellion in Normandy, and oppose the intruding French, where in his Young
Years he showed himself an expert General and Soldier, in driving the
Frenchmen out of the Garrisons, and Castles they had taken; but whilst he was
busied in the Wars Abroad, King Stephen fell Sick of the Iliack Passion, and
Dyed in the Monastery of Monks at Dover.

This Stephen was King of England and Duke of Normandy, the third Son of
Stephen Earl of Bloyce by Adilicia, or Alice. He began his Reign on Monday the
Second of December, Anno Dom. 1135, and Reigned 18 Years, 10 Months, and 20
Days; being the 24th Sole Monarch of England. He was Buried at Feversham in
Kent, in an Abbey of his own Founding.

In his Reign, Anno 1136, a Fire began at London-Stone, and consumed all before
it thence Eastward, as far as Aldgate, and Westward to St. Paul's Church; and
the next Year Rochester was destroyed by Fire: And in the Third Year of his
Reign St. Martin's Church without the Walls, and the Hospital, with Thirty Nine
Houses, and much Riches, were Burnt. In the Last Year of his Reign, a little
before his Death, appeared a plain sign of a Cross in the Moon.

Remarks on the County of Norfolk, etc.
THis County is pleasantly Situated, and receives many Advantages by lying so
commodiously open to Sea, which Bounds it on the North-East, and part of the
West; on the South, it is Bounded by Suffolk; and the remaining part of the
West, by Cambridgshire. It produces plenty of Butter, Cheese, large Cattle,
Corn, Wool, Deer, Coneys; Sheep, and store of Woollen Manufacture. It has in
it one City, viz, Norwich, a Bishops See, it is divided into 31 Hundreds,
containing 660 Parishes, 33 Market Towns, and 3 Rivers of note, the River Yar
(from which Yarmouth takes its Name) being the Principal. It sends Members to
Parliament 12; Norwich 2, Thetford 2, Yarmouth 2, Lynn-Regis 2, Castle-Rising
2, and 2 Knights of the Shire.

Yarmouth lies advantagiously on the North side the River Yar, and has great
Trade by Shipping; it was Founded by the Danes, the better to favor their
Landing, when they Invaded this Island, and has been often Graced with the
Presence of many Kings and Princes, as William the Conqueror, who Fortefied it,
Henry the Second, and Queen Elizabeth.

Norwich, the Ancient Venta of the Romans, is a City of great Antiquity, often
Sacked and Burnt by the Danes, especially it was levelled to the Ground by them
Anno 1004. It suffered much in the Conquerers time, for siding with Earl
Randdulph. The Cathedral was Founded by one Herbert, who Translated the
Bishopric from Thetford to Norwich, and was the first Bishop of Norwich. This
City Imploys Thousands of People in the Woollen Manufacture, in making Stuffs,
Bays, Says, Serges, Stockings, etc.

Thetford, the Ancient Stigomagus of the Romans, was the principal seat of the
Saxon East-Angle Kings, where King Edmund the Martyr was Overthrown by the
Danes.

NORFOLK
map of Norfolk

Lynn is a pleasant Seaport Town, honored with the Gift of a Rich Cup by King
John; and their Charter was enlarged by Henry the Third, for their good service
against the Outlawed Barons, and other Privileges were added in Henry the
Eighth's time, the Name being changed from Lynn-Episcopi, to Lynn-Regis.

Elmham was Anciently the Bishops See, but it was Translated thence to
Thetford, and thence to Norwich, where it now remains.

The Seats of the Nobility are Dukes-Place, belonging to the Duke of Norfolk;
Oxnead-Hall and Paston-Hall, to the Earl of Yarmouth; Reynam-Hall and
Stif-key-Hall, to the Lord Viscount Towusend; Castle-Rising, to the Duke of
Norfolk; Norwich-Palace and Ludham-Hall, to the Bishop of the Diocese. Besides
diverse sightly Houses of the Gentry.

The Reign of King HENRY the Second, commonly called Henry Fitz-Empress.
AT the time when King Stephen Dyed, Henry was in Normandy, Besieging a strong
Castle the French had a little before taken by Surprise; and being advised by
some Nobles about him, to pass over for England, and leave the Siege, least
another in his Absence might step into the Throne, as before had happened; he
made a Reply full of Discretion and true Valor, to this effect: The Kingdom of
England shall henceforth be at my Command, in despite of those that dare to
cross me most; and so shall these Intruding Frenchmen, ere I raise the Siege.

This resolution redoubled his honor among his Friends, and brought fear on
the Enemy; for when they knew it, they surrendered the Castle, and submitted
themselves to his Mercy; and so having settled Affairs in that Dukedom, with a
Noble Train of Lords and Gentlemen he came for England, where he was Crowned
three times, viz. By Theobald, Arch Bishop of Canterbury, at Westminster; Then
at Lincoln, and lastly at Worcester: He chose his Council of the Gravest,
Wisest, and most Learned Peers, and made Thomas of Becket Chancelour, and
appointed such Judges and Learned Men in the Laws, by Industry and Labor, to
Refine them; That the Common Laws were greatly Mended and Improved, being
rendered more tolerable and profitable to the People; and after this, he divided
the Kingdom into six Circuits; and for the better administration of Justice,
and Trying of Causes between Subject and Subject, he appointed his Judges to go
those Circuits twice a Year; which Order yet continues. He Banished the
greatest part of Strangers, who in those days by multitudes flocked hither; and
by their extraordinary Sparing, and painful Industry, procured much Wealth, and
Beggered the Natives.

He Exiled many of the Nobles, who contrary to their Duties had adhered to King
Stephen; and differing much from the Opinion of his Predecessor, he affirmed
that strong Castles and Forts, maintained in the heart of the Kingdom, did
rather Animate Great Men, upon any displeasure to Revolt, than Fear them into
Obedience; whereupon he caused most of them to be Razed to the Ground, and
Seized such Manors, Lordships, Possessions, as his Predecessors had either
Sold or Given from the Crown, holding it to be the Duty of every Subject to
refuse the Gift or Purchase of such things as do immediately concern the Honor
and Maintenance of a King. And the like he did in the Northern Parts, where
many Great Men Commanding as they list, had wrought themselves and their
Posterity into many Honors, Castles, Manors, which properly appertained to
the Crown. He likewise took into his hands the Provinces of Cumberland,
Northumberland, and the Earldom of Huntingdon, which David King of Scots, and
Henry his Son, had received as a Gift from King Stephen, to favor his Wars
against the Empress. However the King entered into Amity with Malcolm King of
Scots, upon the same Conditions as were Agreed on in Henry the Firsts time; and
in Token of his Subjection, the Scot Offered his Bonnet and Saddle upon St.
Peter's Altar at York: And about this time, Theobald Dying, Becket was made
Arch Bishop of Canterbury.

This King, even in time of Peace, had generally an Army on foot, and rarely
kept them Idle; but would often Transport them to Normandy, and there having
Exercised them, would bring them back again, so that on all occasions they were
found ready and expert Soldiers. And now an advantage opened a way to the
English for the Conquest of Ireland: For the Eastern part along the Sea being
possessed by Dormat-Mac-Mahur King of Leinster, his Cruelties had highly
incensed his Subjects against him, especially upon taking away the Queen of
Morice, King of Mead; so that the Injured King Confederating with Roderick O
Conor King of Connought, they beat him out of his Country; so that he fled for
England, and craved Aid of King Henry to Restore him; which upon taking an Oath
of Fidelity and Subjection, was harkened to; when the better to encourage the
design, the King for a Sum of Money obtained leave of Pope Adrian, an
Englishman, then advanced to St. Peter's Chair, that he might Conquer Ireland;
promising moreover thoroughly to Establish the Christian Religion therein, and
bring it to an acknowledgment of the Sea of Rome; but whilst he was preparing
for this Expedition; new Troubles arose in Normandy which required his Presence
to pacify; but he granted his Letters Patents, by which he gave leave, with
Encouragement, to his Nobles and such others as were willing, to go for Ireland.

Dormat, impatient of Exile, laid hold of this first Advantage, and Solicited
the Nobles, but above all, he promised Richard the Kings Son, a Young Prince of
a Warlike Spirit, his Daughter, a very Beautiful Young Lady, and all his
Countries after his Decease to be made over to them; he likewise incited one
Fitz Stephens, who with a Band of Valiant Welshmen was the first that Landed,
and maintained his Ground with much Courage, till the Prince and diverse Nobles
came over; and with little trouble they seized the Town of Wexford, which was
given to Fitz Stephens, for his part of the Charge of the War; and soon after
many of the petty Irish Kings being Overthrown, Dormat was Restored, and Dublin
the chief City, Submitting to him, he put to Death, by many Cruelties, such of
his Capital Enemies as he found there.

However the Prince went Conquering on, and Subdued all before him; of which
King Henry had no sooner Notice, but fearing this might flush Ambition, and
make him practice with his own Subjects for the Crown, he speedily returned to
England, and sent Mandates Commanding all the English under great Penalties to
return; rallying the Nobility, for suffering the Prince in his Absence to go
over; he was in this so far Obeyed, that the Prince was left in Dublin with a
small Train; the Irish was not slow in taking the advantage of this Retreat,
and therefore Besieged him in that prime City with an Army of 30000 Men; upon
which he Sallied with about 1500, and utterly Routed them, taking great Spoils;
and so in obedience to the Kings commands, returned for England, where he
surrendered into his Fathers hands all the Forts and Cities he had taken.

Anno 1172 the King Landed in Ireland with a Royal Army, and found Dormar to be
Dead; however he brought such a Terror on the Country, That Roderick, and most
of the other Princes submitted to him, entreating him to take the Government on
him, as their Supreme Lord; which he Accepted, with their Oaths of Fealty, and
at Christmas he made a Royal Feast in the City of Dublin to the Petty Kings,
and most of the Nobility of the Kingdom; and having settled the Civil and
Ecclesiastical matters, reforming Barbarities and Abuses, he brought those that
held out in Vlster, under Subjection; and so returned in Triumph to London.

Thus was Ireland made subject to the Crown of England, and has so continued
ever since, being a very spacious Country, viz. in Length 303 Miles, in Breadth
112, in Circumference 948. And such was the over-fondness of this King to his
Eldest Son, Henry, that he caused him and his Wife Margaret, Daughter to Lewis
the French King, to be twice sollemnly Crowned in the presence of his People,
himself (the second time, for that day) leaving the Title of King, and serving
as a Servitor at his Son's Table; whereat the Bishop of Winchester whispering
the Young Henry in the Ear, said, Never any King of England had such a Sewer at
his Table: Nay, replied the Upstart, my Father need not think it any dishonor
to him, as being but Royal Born on one side, when I had both a King to my
Father, and a Queen to my Mother; upon this the old King shook his Head, and
whispered the Bishop, I find, my Lord, I have raised the Young Man too soon,
and too late repent of it: And from that time he labored to suppress the Pride
of his Sons, which made them often Rebel and Conspire with his Enemies, drawing
away the Hearts of many of his Subjects: And although at one time Lewis the
French King, Henry, Geoffry and John, three of his Sons, joined with Robert
Earl of Leicester, Hugh Earl of Chester, and William King of Scots, against
him; yet by plain Valor he Routed them, and made his Sons, and others that
were his Subjects, submit to his Pardon; and soon after his Son Henry Dyed, in
the flower of his Age.

But these were not all the Kings Troubles, for he was grievously pestered with
the stubbornness of Becket, Arch Bishop of Canterbury: For upon his first
admittance to that See, he refused to take the Oath for observation of the
Articles administered to the Clergy, which the rest of the Bishops had done,
because it was clearly against the Popes Authority; and perceiving the King
much displeased at his refusal, he resolved to set the Pope on his Back; and
therefore privately withdrawing himself, went to Rome, where he made grievous
complaints against the King and Clergy of England, to Innocent the Second; upon
which the Pope gave him the Pall, and appointed him Legate; so upon his return,
he delivered up his Chancelorship and Great Seal, not giving the King, or any
other, an account why he did so.

These Jars between the King and the Arch Bishop, imboldened the Inferior
Clergy to commit many Irregularities, for which they received but small
punishment; for if they committed Murders, Manslaughters, Fellonies or
Robbery, being Censured by Men of their own Profession, they came off as they
could wish; so that the Common Wealth being sorely oppressed, to Redress these
Grievances, the King found himself constrained to call a Parliament: In which
that Law made in King Stephens Reign, which exempted the Authority of Temporal
Judges from meddling with Ecclesiastical Affairs, was Repealed; and the Laws
held in the Reign of Henry the First, and other the Kings Predecessors,
Established and Enforced, being commonly called Avitae Legis; but he was
stoutly opposed in his Proceedings by Becket and some other Bishops, who
unadvisedly made themselves partakers of his Faction; but after many
Conferences, Disputes and Consultations, all (except Becket) Ratified and
Subscribed those newly revived Laws; but he by no means would do it, unless he
might enter this Clause, [ Salvo Ordine suo] which words clearly Annihilated
the Life and Substance of those Laws; but the Bishops fearing the Kings Anger
might turn to their great disadvantage, at last prevailed with Becket to Swear
to the said Laws; but upon another Pet taken, he recanted his Oath, and was
Absolved by the Pope: Yet it nothing daunted the King, but rather Irritated him
to Seiz into his own hands all such Temporalities as he had formerly given to
the Arch Bishop, requiring him to render an Account of 30000 Marks he had
Imbezilled during his being Chancellor. But the Prelate in Answer to this,
boldly affirmed the King had freely given it to him as a free Gift, and ought
not in Honor or Conscience to demand it back. Whereupon all the Movables that
appertained to him, were Seized by the Kings express command. At which Becket
being disgusted, he went to Rome, without the Kings License; and the King
perceiving his drift was to incense the Pope against him, sent his Ambassadors
to represent his perverseness, and evil carriage, and how reasonable things
were, he had imposed on him; entreating the Pope to divest him of his Dignity,
and he would provide for him and his in another station. But Becket had made
such interest in the Court of Rome, That the Pope not only refused it, but with
many Threatenings sent two Legates To Curse the King and all his People, unless
on their demands Becket were immediately restored to his Dignity, also to his
Lands and Movables that were Confiscated; and in the mean while he commended
him to the Abbot of Pontynack, where he was kindly received, and for a time
entertained. But upon the Kings Threats, that unless he was Expelled the House,
that he would leave no Monk of that Order in France, he was dismissed; the King
Commanding, That without his License no Cardinal nor Legate should presume to
set Footing in England, and hereupon he Banished all Beckets Relations, which
much grieved him, yet underhand he was encouraged, by Lewis the French King,
resolutely to persist in his Obstinacy; whereupon King Henry, to put an end to
this difference that much disturbed the Kingdom, Sailed to France, and in the
French Kings presence, Conferred with the Arch Bishop, making him an Offer,
That if he would take the Oath again, and subscribe the Instrument Triparte, as
himself and the Arch Bishop of York had done, he should be restored to his
Favor, and enjoy all that was formerly appertaining to him, and his Friends
recalled from Banishment; but then he started another obstacle, consenting to
do it, if it might be with an exception of [salvo honor Dei.] This more
angered the King than the former, for by it he seemed to Object the Laws made
tended to the dishonor of God; and if so, consequently were void in
themselves, bringing a scandal upon those that first Instituted them, and also
upon himself and the Parliament that had Revived them. Whereupon Becket plainly
told him, That he feared none but God; and since his Laws were derogatory to
the Ancient Customs and Privileges of the Church, and Robbed God of his
Honor, the King, in seeking to Establish them, should not have his will whilst
he lived. And upon this Disagreement, the Pope sent two Legates to Interdict
the Kingdom, till Becket should be restored to his Dignity. This so far
transported the King with Anger, (being then in Normandy) That he let some
words fall in his Passion, which being taken hold on by some of his Courtiers,
who mis-construed the Kings meaning, it proved the destruction of Becket: For
soon after having leave to return, and beginning new Troubles in Church
Matters, four of them Slew him at the High Altar in the Cathedral Church of
Canterbury, and with him two or three Monks that endeavored his Rescue. Thus
fell this troublesome Prelate, who rising from a low degree, his Father being a
Londoner, and his Mother a Sarazen, in his Pride contended many Years with a
Potent King, and brought many miseries on the Kingdom. Afterward he was
Sainted, and many Superstitious People went on Pilgrimage to his Tomb.

The Pope no sooner knew his Champion was fallen, but he Threatened, Cursed and
Fulminated, yet with little Terror. However, to make himself Easy, the King
admitted two Cardinals to take his Purgation, who allotted his Penance, when he
had denied his consenting to the Murder upon Oath, to War three Years in the
Holy Land; (which he Redeemed, by Erecting three Religious Houses) That he
should go from London to Canterbury bare Footed to visit Beckets Shrine, which
he performed, and suffered himself to be Scourged by the Monks with Rods on his
Naked Back; after which, upon his sending Presents to the Pope, he was Absolved.

During the Kings being thus Abroad his Queen had caused Rosamond his fair
Concubine to be Poisoned; which so enraged him, that he cast her into Prison,
and would be prevailed on by no Entreaty nor Submission to release her during
his Life, though she endured many Miseries and Hardships in her confinement; till
at length she was set at Liberty by her Son Richard's coming to the Crown, as
will more at large appear in his Reign.

Doctor Gilbert Folliott of Oxford, however hardly the Pope had used the King,
nevertheless persuaded him to regulate abuses in the Clergy, and curb their
Pride; showing him a warrant for it from the Word of God, and the Writings of
Eminent Fathers of the Church, and other Good and Learned Men, That for as much
as Kings are styled The Nursing Fathers of the Church: It is their Duty to God
to see it well Ordered and Governed, and like a careful Husbandman suppress and
keep under those rank Weeds of Error that would overtop and choke the Corn of
Truth: He used many other Reasons and Arguments, so that the King began to
assume his Power and look more narrowly into their Covetousness, Pride, and the
Oppressions they laid on such as their Jurisdiction extended over in
Temporalities; wherein he abridged and cut them short, which made them
greivously complain that the King hearkened to Persons evilly affected to the
Church; and the Pope having notice, who had advised the King, sent many Threats
and Menaces of what Mischief he would do in England, if he did not put him out
of his Protection; which he had no sooner done, but the Clergy, like so many
Harpies, grievously Persecuted him, till they made him Abjure the Land; but
this being contrary to the Kings pleasure, he was afterward recalled, and had
leave to live a private Life. However the King neglected to pay the Tribute
called Peter Pence to Rome, and Garrisoned his Towns in Normandy very strongly,
beating out the encroaching French, and Enlarging his Borders, though his Sons
proved still troublesome to him, in underhand siding with the French, and some
discontented Normans and English; However he surmounted all Difficulties, till
in Normandy he fell Sick, of a Fever and Dyed at Chinon, on the Sixth of July,
Anno Dom. 1189, when he had Reigned 34 Years, 8 Months, and 11 Days. He was
Eldest Son to Geoffery Plantagenet, Earl of Anjou, Son to Foulk King of
Jerusalem, by Maud the Empress, Eldest Daughter to Henry the First. He began
his Reign October 25, Anno 1154; and Dying (as is said) was Buried at
Font-Everard in Normandy.

He is accounted a Wise, Just, Learned and Valliant Prince; and though he little
burdened his Subjects with Taxes, considering the Wars he had, yet he left in
his Treasury 900000 Pounds in Coin and Plate, besides Jewels and other things
of great value, which furnished out his Son Richard for the Holy War. As for
his fair Concubine, whom he entirely doted on, he caused her to be Buried at
Godstow, near Oxford, and on her stately Monument placed this Epitaph.

Hic Jacet in Tumba Rosamundi non Rosa Munda,
Non Redolet, sed olet, que Redolere Solet.
And may be Englished thus Within this Tomb lies the World's chiefest Rose;
She who was Sweet will now offend your Nose.


In the Fifth Year of this Kings Reign, 30 Persecuted Waldenses flying their
Country came into England, and found here no better Entertainment, for being
Pronounced Heriticks by a Convocation of Bishops at Oxford, the King strictly
Prohibited his Subjects to relieve them, so that wandering up and down, they
Dyed with Hunger. And near this time, certain Jews Crucified a Child at
Gloucester, for which 20 of them were Hanged, and many Banished.

Anno 1163, one Peter, Priest of Cole-Church, was at the Charge of Building
London Bridge a New, with Timber. In the 20th Year of this Kings Reign
Leicester was Burnt by his command, the Walls and Castle Razed, and the
Inhabitants dispersed, for adhering to his Enemies. The same Year Christ-Church
in Canterbury was burned, and six Years after the City of York was Burned; and
1185, the Abbey of Glasenbury was consumed by Lightening; and the next Year a
terrible Earthquake happening threw down many Buildings, and rent in pieces the
Cathederal Church of Lincoln, Chichester was also Burnt.

Near Orford in Suffolk, a Monstrous Fish was taken, having the shape of a Man
upwards, and was kept a long time by the Governor in the Castle, Eating Raw
Flesh and Fish greedily; but at last it got away by the breaking of a Sluice,
and was carried to the Sea again; and People were persuaded if it could have
been made to Speak, it might have told many wonderful things.

Remarks on Notinghamshire, etc.
NOtinghamshire is advantagiously Situate, and stored with plenty of Cattle,
Corn, Wool, Fruits, Plants, etc. It is partly Hilly, and partly Champaine, and
pleasant Enclosures: It produces Cheese, Butter, Leather and Tallow good store;
and Good Fellows praise it much for the Excellent NOTTINGHAM SHIRE.
map of Nottinghamshire strong Ale Brewed in it. It is Bounded on the South
with Leicestershire, on the West with Derbyshire and part of Yorkshire, on the
North with part of Yorkshire and Lincolnshire, and on the East with another
part of Lincolnshire.

It contains 8 Hundreds, divided into 168 Parishes, as also 8 Market Towns; and
is Watered with 21 great and small Rivers. It sends Members to Parliament 8,
viz. East Retford 2, Newark 2, Notingham 2, and 2 Knights of the Shire.

Newark, in this County, is pleasantly seated on the River Trent, thence called
Newark upon Trent, to distinguish it: At Swinstead Abbey in this place, King
John was Poisoned by a Monk, and over the River there is a very fine Bridge.

Notingham is pleasantly seated on a branch of the same River, encompassed with
pleasant Fields and Groves. Its Castle was kept by the Danes against Burthred
King of Mercia, also against Ethelred and Alfred, two other Saxon Kings.

At Stoke near Newark, Lambert Symnel in the Reign of Henry the Seventh was
utterly Defeated, and his upholders, John D' La Pool Earl of Lincoln, Thomas
Garadine Chancelour of Ireland, Francis Lord Lovel, and others, were Slain,
with 4000 Common Soldiers, and Symnel taken Prisoner, June 16, Anno Dom. 1487.

At Mansfield was Born the first Earl Mansfield in Germany, now a famous Family
in the Empire, said to be one of King Arthurs Round Table Knights: Blythe is a
pleasant Town situate on the River Idle. Besides these of Note and Antiquity
are Hoverham, Retford, Worksop, and Southwell. In this County is the much noted
Forest of Shirwood, where Robin Hood held his chief Residence, and in it are
bred a great many of those Hares called the Laner. In this County they digg a
soft Stone, which Burnt makes a Plaster for Flooring their upper-Rooms, which
dried is harder than Plaster of Paris. About Worksop grows store of Liquorice.
The County contains many Parks full of Deer; The Rivers, Meers, and Ponds are
stored with Fish, and at the Season there is plenty of Wild-Fowl.

The Seats of the Nobility are Worksop, belonging to the Duke of Norfolk;
Welbeck Abbey and Notingham Castle, to the late Earl of Newcastle; Holm
Pierepont, to the Duke of Northumberland; Rufford, to the Marquis of Hallifax;
Houghton and Chare-House, to the Earl of Clare; Shelford, to the Earl of
Chesterfield; Bestwood, to the Earl of Burford; Newsted Abbey, Bulvel Park, and
Linby, to the Lord Rochdale; Averham and Killham, to the Lord Lexington,
besides diverse pleasant Seats of the Gentry, etc.

The Reign of King RICHARD the First.
RICHARD, the Eldest Son living of Henry the Second, was in Normanay at the
time his Father Dyed there, and could not come over so soon as was expected, by
reason that Country remained unsettled by Intestine Wars, and some Factions the
French had made at a great Expense, to keep it so; which required necessarily
his presence. However he sent over speedy orders for the Releasment of Queen
Elianor his Mother, who had endured a long and hard Imprisonment by the strict
command of King Henry, who would not forgive her at his Death, because she had
Poisoned Rosamond, his fair and much beloved Concubine; and after her
Releasment she was by King Richard appointed Regent of England till his Return.
And then, by reason her own Experience had informed her what hardships those
endured who Languished under Confinement, she caused to be set at Liberty all
such as were in Prison for ordinary Offenses, or small Debts. The latter she
Paid, that the Subjects should be no Loosers by her commiseration, and
Administered the Government Prudently, with much Moderation, Integrity and
Justice.

The King at length coming over with a splendid Train of Nobility, was received
with great Joy of the People, and putting an end to the Queen Dowager's Regency,
was Crowned by Baldwin Arch Bishop of Canterbury, and Swore to keep several
Articles administered to him by the Nobles, to the Ease and great Advantage of
his Subjects, freeing all that were in Prison for Offenses against the Crown,
and such others as (without injustice done to his Subjects) he could acquit;
and in the whole course of his Government so provided, that Mercy with Justice
might extend to all; and finding his Brother John of a Turbulent Spirit, he
heaped many Honors and Promotions on him, thereby to satisfy him, and alay
his thirst of aspiring; viz. He Created him Earl of Lancaster, and gave him the
Counties of Notingham, Devon, and Cornwall, Married him to the sole Daughter and
Heiress of the Earl of Gloucester, by which means he obtained the Lordship of
that County.

But these great Favors and Donations answered not the Kings expectations, for
when he had showered on him such Bounties, he found him by his practices
reaching at the Crown, as much relying on a Faction at home, and the promises
of the French to assist him, when need required it: It being a Policy of theirs
to divert King Richard, (whom all Historians allow to be a Valiant and Warlike
Prince) from Warring on France, in Reparation of the many Injuries his Subjects
in Normandy had Sustained by the Inroads they had frequently made. However, the
King mildly reproving his Brother, and showing him his Ingratitude, to nurture
such Designs, also the Guilt and Danger he would incur, he made many Excuses
and Protestations he had no such Designs as had been suggested of him, and they
were both his and the Kings Enemies who had spread those reports to set them at
variance.

These and his renewed Protestations of Loyalty and Obedience, resolving to
live quiet, and contribute all he could to the Advantage of the Commonweal,
prevailed with the King to accept of his Submission, and have a good opinion of
his Fidelity; and the King, as an Expiation for the Offenses himself had
committed against Henry his Father, making a Vow to accompany the other
Christian Princes for the Recovery of the Holy Land from the Turks, and other
Infidels, who grievously Oppressed the Asian Christians, he the more easily
winked at what he had plainly seen; so that a Reconcilement being made, the
Kings thoughts were wholly taken up with his intended Expedition; but having
Lavished away the vast Treasure his Father left in large Donations, he found
Money was wanting to furnish him out with such an Army and Equipage as might
stand with his Honor. He had been Solicited, besides his own Inclinations, by
the Pope, to this Undertaking, with many promised Blessings, (as others had
been) if by their Arms they Regained the Holy City Jerusalem from the Infidels;
yet to raise Money he refused to Levy any Taxes on his Subjects, but Sold his
Castles of Barwick and Roxborough to the King of Scots, for 10000 Pounds; the
Lordship and Earldom of Durham to Hugh, then Bishop of the Sea, for 16000
Pounds, as also Honors, Lordships, Manors, Privileges, Royalties and
Crown Lands upon other Grants and Tenures, to diverse of his Subjects for much
Money; so that having, as he supposed, a sufficient Treasure, he prepared
things in a readiness; but contrary to his expectation, it falling short, he
borrowed Sums of such as he had formerly Liberally bestowed his Bounties on,
protesting that for the performing so great and Honorable a service, he was
not unwilling to Sell his City of London, if he could find any body of Ability
to Purchase it, rather than by Taxes he would Oppress his Subjects.

In this Undertaking, at the Instance and earnest Incitement of the Pope, were
also Engaged Frederick the Emperer, Philip the Second, Surnamed Augustus, King
of France, Leopold Arch Duke of Austria, and many other Princes; so that a
gallant Army was prepared, and great store of Treasure. With these King Richard
entered into an Agreement that their General Rendezvous should be in the Island
of Sicily the following Spring, and That such Wealth and Booty as God and good
Fortune should put into their Possession should be equally divided between them
and their Forces; and thus every thing being in a readiness, King Richard
appointed William Langchamp Bishop of Ely, Regent, in his Absence; and soon
after, the better to Establish the Bishops Authority among the Nobles, who
little approved him, the Pope appointed him his Legate in England; and so early
in the Spring, the King with about 30000 Men at Arms, with diverse Nobles and
Gentlemen, set Sail and safely arrived in the Port of Messina in Sicily,
whither the King of France, and some other Princes whose Territories lay near,
were got before him; and there they renewed their Resolves not to Return till
they had won Jerusalem; but this fair Sunshine held not long on the French
Kings part, for his Army being exceeded by the Gallantry of the English, he
feared they would win from him the Glory of the Undertaking, which his
Flatterers had told him would redound totally to his Honor, and the lasting
Fame of the French Nation; so that clouds of discontent appeared on his Brows,
and in a little time he gave free Reins to the former Displeasure, that had
been hushed; for that King Richard had rejected his Sister, and Married the
Daughter of the King of Navar; yet as well as he could he dissembled his
displeasure, seeing the Eyes of all Christendom were fixed on this Undertaking;
and without the apparent loss of his Honor, he could not presently draw back
when he was so far Engaged; and so weighing Anchor, they set forward with a
fair Gale; but at length a Storm arising, the English Fleet was separated from
the rest, and driven on the Coast of the pleasant Island of Cyprus, where some
of his Ships putting in to Repair the Damage they had received at Sea, diverse
of their Mariners upon Landing were Slain by the King of the Island's command,
who professed himself a Christian and well-wisher to this Undertaking; this so
much transported King Richard with a desire of chastizing such Inhospitality
and Outrage, that he Tacked with his whole Fleet, Landed his Army on the
Island, and easily Overthrew the King and took him Prisoner, carrying him along
with him Manacled in Silver Chains to Syria; and having secured the Island to
his Interest, by leaving a Governor and Garrisons in the strong Forts, he
Sailed to Ptolomais, which place he had News the Christians had Besieged, and
there was Joyfully received by many of the Princes in Leagre; and having a day
or two refreshed and comforted his Forces, it was agreed that a general Assault
should be given at the places where the Battering Rams and other forcible
Engines had made Breaches in the Walls; which was so hotly carried on, that all
their Outworks were won in a few Hours; whereupon the Garrison, not expecting
present Relief, and fearing to be put to the Sword, if the Town was taken by
Storm, Surrendered upon Condition they might safely depart thence: This was
agreed to upon their leaving 5000 Hostages till a great Sum of Money should be
Paid, and that Saladine the Turkish Sultan, should deliver up such Prisoners as
he had taken being Christians; and so about 50000 Marched out, many of them
almost Starved, the Famine having been extreme among them.

No sooner they had vacated the City, but the Duke of Austria's Standard bearer
hasted to plant his Masters Colors on the Battelment, as if by the sole Valor
of the Austrian Arms the Place had been Taken; which indeed had the least share
in the Danger: This so highly displeased King Richard, that not staying to
Command any other to do it, he stepped on the Wall, and plucking down those Proud
Colors, trampled them under his Feet: This put the Duke into a great chafe,
which made him afterward Confederate with Lewis the Second, to hinder the
progress of Affairs in the Holy Land, that King Richard might not carry from
them the Glory: Yet he little regarded their Anger, but pursuing this success,
gave Saladine Battle not far from this City, and Overthrew him with incredible
Slaughter, having the execution of the Enemy for many Miles, so that the Fields
and Lanes were covered with their dead Bodies; and thereupon he Marched his
Army toward Jerusalem, being chosen General by the Knights Templars and most
of the Princes. But in the midest of these great Designs, Malice thrust in to
hinder the progress of the Christian Arms, as to what was intended to be done,
for the Discontents of Lewis and the Duke of Austria more and more growing on
them, they at length showed it so openly as to withdraw a great part of their
Forces from the Army; and the former pretending want of Health, and the
Climates not agreeing with him, Sailed back to France, carrying with him the
best of his Forces; and though before he went he gave his Oath, at the earnest
Request of the Popes Legate, that he would not injure King Richards Territories
neither in Normandy nor England, yet soon after recalling the rest of his
Forces, with them went the Duke of Austria, whom he had constituted his
Lieutenant General in Syria: He did make War against Normandy, and strove to
raise distractions in England; but in the former Attempt he was mostly worsted,
yet at last swept away some small Towns and Castles; and in the latter, the
Threatenings of the Popes Curse against all that should Rebel in England,
prevented his Intrigues in a great measure, though some Commotions happened, as
you will hear in the sequel.

Notwithstanding thse Disappointments, King Richard Wintered his Army in those
Towns the Sultan had Ruinated in his Retreat, to prevent their falling into the
hands of the Christians; Rebuilding and Fortifying those that were most
commodious, resolving in the Spring to lay Siege to Jerusalem; but when his
Forces were drawn into the Field, he found by Sickness, and many that had
Deserted, his Army was so wasted that he was not able to undertake it. The
Sultan fearing some such design had strongly Garisoned it with 30000 Men:
However the King Marched forward, and took by the way diverse Castles and
Fortresses, and 5000 Camels Laden with Riches from Egypt and Arabia, which much
Encouraged his Soldiers, as being mostly distributed amongst them: When one day
Marching, a Knight climbing up a high Hill, came hastily to the King, and told
him from thence he might have a Prospect of Jerusalem; which instead of Joy,
drew Tears from his Eyes, when lifting up his Hands he passionately said, O
Lord, I beseech thee let me not See thy Holy City, since by the Disappointments
I have met with, I am not able to Deliver it out of the hands of the Enemies of
thy Name; and so turning aside, he returned to Ptolomais, where he found some
new Adventurers Arrived, when Marching cross the Country, and Subduing all
before him, he brought such a Terror upon the People, that his very Name was
frightful to them; and as some Historians have it, a long while after used to
Bugbare their Children with it, when they cried and were untoward, viz. If you
hold not your peace, King Richard is coming, and will have you; which had such
effects on them, that they became still as Lambs. However finding no more
Forces were in Europe preparing to enable him to take Jerusalem, the main
design of his Preparations, having private notice that his Brother John was
practicing against him; and fearing whilst he was warring abroad, he might lose
his Kingdom at home, he resolved to make such Conditions with the Turkish
Sultan, as might be best for the Settlement and Peace of the Christians in
Syria. But the crafty Infidel being very sensible of the weak condition the
Christian Army was in, would not hearken to any other Terms than to have all
the Towns that were taken, Ptolomais Excepted, surrendered; and upon that
condition they should be suffered to have a quiet Enjoyment of their Effects,
and to Trade in the Country; and so having made this Agreement, and Sold the
Island of Cyprus for a Sum of Money to Hugh of Lusingham, the last Christian
King of Jerusalem, though at that time but in Name, which Title he confered on
King Richard, (and it lasted to many of our Kings afterward, who were styled
Kings of Jerusalem) he Embarked in diverse Vessels with his Queen, who had
accompanied him in that dangerous Voyage, and Sailed for England; but the Ship
he was in, being separated from the rest of the Fleet in a Storm, was driven on
the Coast of Histria, lying between Aquileia and Venice, where he was
Ship-Wrack'd, and saving his Life by Swimming, was made Prisoner, and presented
to the Duke of Austria, in whose Territories he Landed; but the Queen, who was
in another Ship, and the rest of the Fleet, came safe to England.

The King by misfortune thus made a Prisoner to his Enemy, whom he had
disgusted by throwing down his Standard, as is said, was Sold by him for 40000
Pounds to the Emperer Frederick, who set his Ransom at 100000 Pounds, Fourscore
Thousand of which was raised in England, but Duke Leopold was constrained to
Pay the other Twenty Thousand Pounds, before he could be released from the
Popes Curse, pronounced against him for making a Prince his Prisoner, who for
the honor of the Christian Name, had Warred Victoriously in the Holy Land: So
that after almost a Years Imprisonment, the King was set at Liberty; of which
Lewis the French King had no sooner notice, but be sent John the Kings Brother
word, The Devil was got loose again. However he did not immediately return to
England, but went to Normandy, and with the Terror of his coming frighted the
French out of many strong holds they had taken in his absence; then raising a
puissant Army, he entered France, wasting all before him with Fire and Sword,
reducing to his Subjection all such places as had been taken, and made the
Rebellious Norman Peers, who had engaged in the French Faction, prostrate
themselves before him, whose humble Submission he accepted, and accordingly
Pardoned them, on promises of future Obedience and Fidelity.

Let me now speak of something that happened Remarkable in England during the
Kings absence: I told you he had left the Bishop of Ely Regent; This Man being
of mean Parentage, his Grandfather a Plowman, and himself the Son of a
Cowheard, soon forgot his Original, (as such mostly do who are raised from a
low Estate to high Promotion) and grew so Insolently Proud, that he would not
Ride abroad without a Guard of 500 Men to attend him, his Table was exceeding
Expensive on the Public Cost, and his Insolences over all sorts (as well the
Clergy as Laiety) was so great, that he soon procured himself a Universal
Hatred, yet a while he Proudly spread his Peacocks Train, being Served at his
Table, and every where Waited on by the Sons of Noblemen, to whom he gave in
Marriage (with some Portion and Preferment) diverse of his Rustic Kindred,
thinking thereby to strengthen his Interest; but this proved to him a broken
Reed, for finding he was generally hated by the Nobles and Commons, to shun the
storm that threatened him with some violent End, he sewed up many Jewels and
some Gold in the Garments of a Pedlar Woman, and Disguised in that Habit
resolved to leave the Land, carrying under his Arm a piece of Country Cloth,
which he offering to sale at Dover, was Discovered, and Seized, suffering much
outrage from the Common People; and being sent to London, the Lords Committed
him to the Tower, where he remained till the Kings return; who not only
released him, but restored him to his Bishopric; yet having seen the folly of
his Pride, he grew more Humble, and shortly after Traveling to Rome Dyed by
the way, unlamented by all that had known his former carriage.

The Queen Mother, in the Kings absence, perceiving her Son John's aspiring,
who had a hand in bringing the Bishop of Ely into Disgrace, and Outing him,
made a strong Party of her Friends, as soon as she heard King Richard was a
Prisoner, compelling the Nobles, and such others as were in Offices and Trusts,
to Swear to be True to him, and Conserve the Realm to his use and behoof; and
John hearing he was Released, and in Normandy, hasted to excuse himself,
submitting to his Grace and Mercy, voluntarily surrendering all the Forts and
Castles he had Seized into his hands, saying, What ^e had done he was provoked
to do by the Extraordinary Pride and Insolent Behavior of the Bishop of Ely,
who unworthily had disordered the Government of the Realm, and particularly for
the Outrages he had committed on the Person of Jeffery Arch Bishop of York, the
Kings Brother: Yet by the Peers he was Condemned in the Forfeiture of his
Goods, Estate and Honors, but not long after received them again, and was
restored to the Kings Favor, and came with him to England, where the King at
his Landing was Joyfully received by Hubert, Arch Bishop of Canterbury, and
most of the Nobles; causing himself a second time to be Crowned, and the
Coronation Solemnity was performed at Winchester. Then he made a new
Broad-Seal, by which device he got much Money out of his Subjects, who were
obliged to have their Patents, Royal Grants for Offices, and other Evidences,
new Sealed; the former being declared null and void. And yet this not sufficing
to put the Kingdom in a good Settlement, pay his Soldiers Arrears, and repay
the Money that had been taken upon trust for his Ransom, the Treasuries of
Religious Houses were ransacked; and a Parliament being called, he was allowed
to reassume into his hands such Manors, Lordships, Lands and Offices as had
been disposed of at his setting out to the Holy War, for Ready Money; so that
the Purchasers were enforced to content themselves with the Profits they had
Received, in lieve of the Money they had Paid.

After this, as the King was at Dinner, in his Palace of Westminster, News came
to him that the French had Besieged Nerville in Normandy, upon which, in a
great Passion he Swore He would never turn his back till he had got thither
with his Army; and to save his Oath, a place by order was immediately broken in
the Wall through which he passed, the breach heing left open above a hundred
Years afterward, in Remembrance of it; and his Arrival so terrified the French,
That they no sooner heard of his Landing, but they raised the Siege: Yet
pursuing this Advantage, he gave a mighty Army of them Battle near Gysors,
slaying great numbers, and putting the rest to Flight, he not having half their
number: Whereupon said he, Not we, but Dieu Et Mondroit, that is, God and our
Right, has obtained this Victory. After which, the Kings of England made it
their Motto under their Arms; and so he prosecuting this Victory, took many
Towns. But in the midest of his Success, Pope Innocent the Third Interceding, a
Peace was concluded between the two Crowns; but it held not long, for the
French giving new provocations, he passed the Seas again with a powerful Army,
when closely Besieging the Castle of Challons near to Lymois, as he took a
private view, he was descried and known by a common Soldier, who Shooting at
him with a square impoisoned Arrow out of a Steel Bow, grievously Wounded him
in the Arm; yet he took the Castle by Storm, and caused all he found therein to
be Slain, except the Person who wounded him, who being brought before him, and
demanded how he durst shoot a Poisoned Arrow at the King? The Fellow (who
expected he was reserved for Death by Cruel Torments) seemed not at all
daunted, but boldly replied, That in the War he had lest his Father and his
Brother, and was exceeding glad Fortune had so well assisted him, in Revenging
their Deaths. Upon this resolute Answer, the King (much contrary to the
expectation not only of the Prisoner, but all the rest) freely Pardoned him,
and caused him to be led out of the Army, to avoid the violence of the Soldiers
toward a Person who had Slain their King; for indeed he Dyed within three days
after, viz. the 6th of April Anno Dom. 1199.

This King Richard began his Reign Anno Dom. 1189, and Reigned 9 Years and 9
Months, Dying in the 42 Year of his Age, and was Buried at Font-Everard in
Normandy, at his Fathers Feet, as himself had directed. He was, for his
surpassing Valor, called Ceur de Leon, or Lions-Heart, fearing no danger,
where the attempt was Honorable.

In his Reign the Jews were Banished out of Norwich, St. Edmunds-Bury,
Stamford, Lyn and York; in which last place about 500 of them, besides Women
and Children, entered a Tower of the Castle and when they found themselves hard
pressed by a Siege, they cut the Throats of their Wives and Children, and cast
them on the Heads of the Besiegers; then in a desperate mood, Fired the Tower,
and Burnt themselves in it, though Quarter was offered if they would have
Surrendered.

Also in this Reign flourished the famous Outlaws Robin Hood, or Robin of the
Wood, and Little John, who Robbed and Spoiled (for they had a large Retinue)
diverse places, Inhabiting mostly the Woods; yet took nothing from the Poor, but
on the contrary Relieved them with what they took from the Rich, and were
bountiful Benefactors to such as stood in need of it; but this Gang was broke
by the Death of Robin Hood, their Ringleader; who being let Blood for a
Distemper NORTHUMBERLAND.
map of Northumberland by a Friar, the Treacherous Monastic let him Bleed to
Death, and got by it the promised Reward of 500 Marks; though soon after being
taken by the rest, he was tied to a Tree and Shot to Death with Arrows.

Remarks on the County of Northumberland.
THis Northern County, the Extremity of England, is Bounded on the North and
part of the West with Scotland, another part of the West with Cumberland, on
the South with part of Cumberland and the Bishopric of Durham, and on the East
with the German Ocean.

In many Parts there is Plenty of good Corn, it produces a profitable Breed of
Cattle, has in it many pleasant Gardens, Orchards, Parks, Hare, and Coney
Warrens; on the Western side it is somewhat incommoded with Hills, but
otherwise produces Plains, Enclosures, Meadows, Woods, though not many. It
contains 46 Parishes, 5 Market Towns, and is branched with 21 Rivers. It sends
Members to Parliament 8, viz. Berwick upon Tweed 2, Morpeth 2, New Castle on
Tine 2, and 2 Knights of the Shire.

This County was the Ancient Northumbrian Kingdom of the Saxons, and suffered
much by lying so near the borders of Scotland; especially when the Scots
utterly destroyed the Pictish Kingdom, that had for some time screened them
from the Incroachment of that Northern Nation. At a Place called Otterburn, a
great Battle was Fought between the English and Scots.

Alnwick is of note for the mighty Victories the English gained over the Scots,
and being the usual Seat of the Northumbrian Kings; and lately of many of the
Noble Earls of Northumberland.

At Emildon, Duns, Surnamed Scotus, was Born; a Person of great Wit and
Subtilty in School Philosophy. Berwick is pleasantly situate on the Tweed,
looking a great way from its lofty Turrets into both Kingdoms, and is fam us
for the many Sieges it has held out against the Scots in diverse Kings Reigns.
Newcastle is pleasantly seated on the River Tine, that branches all the
Southern part of this County, and produces store of Salmon, as dos also the
River Bywel. Newcastle is also famous for furnishing the City of London with
Coals brought thence by Sea, and therefore commonly called Sea-Coals; which
Trade is also a great Nursery for Seamen. Upon the Hills near North-Tine, though
Boggy and full of Water, there are great heaps of Stones, which some take as a
Monument of a Roman, British, or Saxon Victory.

The Seats of the Nobility are Ogle Castle, Bothat Castle, Heple Tower,
belonging to the Noble Family of the Duke of Newcastle; Prudhoe Castle, to the
Duke of Summerset; Wark Castle, Chillingham Castle, Dunstaburg Castle, and
Horton Castle, to the Lord Gray of Wark; Widerington Castle, to the Lord
Widerington; and some Houses there are of the Gentry very Beautiful, and
pleasantly Situate; especially on the East side, with a curious Prospect to the
Sea; by means of whose Washing its Shoars, this County receives great Benefit.

The Reign of King JOHN.
RICHARD the First Dying in Normandy, and Buried at Font-Everard, his Brother
John Earl of Lancaster by his own Right, and of Gloucester in Right of his Wife,
having long aspired to the Crown, thought this was his time to push hard for
it, although Arthur Plantaginet, Son to Geoffery his Elder Brother, was Living;
and so with what store of Treasure he had heaped up, making many of the Nobles,
and some Leading Commoners of his Party, he openly laid claim to the
Sovereignty of England, as his Undoubted Right, and Arthur not being able to
stand in competition with him this way, as being little Interested in the
English, by reason he had for the most part been brought up beyond the Seas,
and consequently a Stranger to the greatest part of the Nation, his Right was
carried away in the current of the Peoples Inclinations, and John was Crowned
at Westminster by Hubert Arch Bishop of Canterbury; at what time the Bishop (to
flatter the People and curry-favour with the King) declared in an Oration, That
the Crown of England was merely Arbitrary and Elective; yet the more sober part
of the Nobility, knowing this Princes Haughty Temper, Swore him to several
Articles upon his admission to the Crown, for Observing and Maintaining their
Rights and Privileges, Ancient Laws and Customs, etc.

Scarcely was King John Settled in his Throne, but Philip the French King,
underhand assisted by others, sent for Arthur to his Court, protesting a great
deal of Love and tender Affection to him; Informed him of his Title to the
Crown of England, Duchy of Normandy, and Britany, animating him to raise his
Spirits, and use his Courage, for the recovery of what was so unjustly taken
from him; and that if he were destitute of Friends that might Advise and
Council him, he and his Nobles would willingly supply that defect; if he wanted
Gold or Silver, the Sinews of War, his Coffers should be open at his Service;
or if Valiant Men to Fight for him and his Right, many Thousand Frenchmen would
venture their Lives in his Quarrel.

These large and Friendly proffers, which rather proceeded from the fear King
Philip had of Englands Strength and Prosperity, which might (as indeed it
afterward fell out) get the Ascendant over France) than for any cordial Love
he bore to the Young Prince, keeping him only as a Trump Card in his hand, to
play his Game as he saw occasion: However these great Proffers bore up his
Spirits, and he wholly cast himself on the French King for Protection;
submitting to be Governed and Ruled by him in all things: Whereupon Forces were
Levied in France and Normandy, and hereupon some Strong Holds in the latter,
Revolted from King John, and declared for Prince Arthur, and others they won;
however the Kings Lieutenant raised Forces to oppose them; so that between both
Armies there happened diverse Encounters, with various success.

King John hearing of these stirs in Normandy, thought there remained no time
for delay, but gathering a strong Power passed the Seas, and joining with his
Lieutenant retook several Towns, and Overthrew the Young Prince in a set
Battle, with great Slaughter of the French Nobles and others, that were Engaged
with him.

This made the French King begin to consider he had laid hold on the wrong end
of the staff, and from that time procured diverse Prelates, and some Princes, as
Mediators, to bring on Foot a Treaty for a Peace; which Treaty gave both sides
a short breathing: But the King of England's Proposals being no less than the
restoring all the Towns taken, a defraying of the charges of the War, and that
King Philip should put for ever Prince Arthur out of his Protection, it came in
the end to nothing; so that the War renewed more furious than before, by which
means the poor Inhabitants of Normandy were grievously Oppressed, by Burning,
Plundering, and many other Miseries attendant on Hostilities.

However, to repress these Outrages of the Invading French, the King raised a
yet greater Army, but then found his Treasure was much too scanty to defray the
charges of that Expedition; of which the Nobles and Commons were no sooner made
sensible, but of their own accord they largely contributed, rather than the
Honor of the King and Kingdom should be Eclipsed by the Bravadoes of a
dastardly Nation; and then Landing with a gallant Army in Normandy, the number
of his Forces were daily augmented; and not long after the two Armies met, and
sought a dreadful Battle, in which the French were Overthrown, and Prince
Arthur, with diverse of the French Nobility, taken Prisoners, and sent to the
Castle of Roan; where, as it was given out, leaping from the Walls to make his
Escape, he leaped short, fell into the Moat, and there was Drowned: Though
Historians who have made Remarks What a few Steps there are between the Prisons
and Graves of Princes, though they do not charge the King with the knowledge of
it, are apt to conjecture that this Prince came to be Drowned by other means
than his own attempt. And indeed the King had all his Life afterward a very
troublesome and turbulent Reign. For now the Prince was Dead, the French King
began to pull off his Vizor, laying claim to Normandy in his own Right, and
poured in such a number of Forces, that King John's Treasure being spent, he
could not Levy in any reasonable time Soldiers sufficient to oppose their
torrent; so that wining many Towns and Castles, the whole Duchy (to prevent
the Ruin and Desolation threatened it) Subjected it self to the French King,
after it had been disbranched from France about 319 Years. And that the King
should not be at leisure to Regain it, the French King underhand found him work
at home, by making Pope Innocent the Third his Enemy. For about this time,

Hubert Arch Bishop of Canterbury, Dying, the Monks of the Order of St.
Augustine met in the Cathedral Church about Midnight without the Kings knowledge
or License, and chose one Reynold, a Brother of their own, to Succeed in the
Archiepiscopal See, taking of him an Oath to travel to Rome, and procure his
Investiture and receive the Pall from the Pope.

The King hearing of these unwarantable Proceedings, was much displeased; which
so affrighted the Monks, that to regain his Favor they proceeded to a second
Election, and chose John Gray, a Person whom the King had nominated to them,
who was then Bishop of Norwich; and so the Kings Anger being appeased, he sent
Ambassadors with his Letters to the Pope, to Entreat him to Ratify the second
Choice. But in the mean time a new Schism or Faction appeared; for the
Suffragan (because he was not made acquainted, nor an Actor in either of the
said two Elections) made suit to the Pope to displace them both.) But he,
imitating the proud Example of many of his Predecessors, who coveted to swim
against the stream, and seldom or never granted any Kings request, least in
some sort they should be thought to be yiedling, neglected both their suits*
and confirmed Raynold who was first chosen: But the King growing angry hereat,
the Monks to please him, rather out of fear than complacency, refused to
receive into their Quire, or own the Arch Bishop the Pope had Confirmed, though
he was of their own choosing; giving this Reason for it, viz. That it was done
Clandestinly, and at an unseasonable Time, for as much as the choice was made
in the Night, when as it should have been done in the open Day; and so they
concluded it void, and in it self a Nulity, yet remained good, till by Judicial
Proceedings, and a Sentence, it were pronounced void; so that this matter was
Controverted at Rome, where the Pope made specious shows and pretenses of
accomodating the matter to heal the Schism, so that it should be to the
satisfaction of the King and Monks; but his aim was otherwise, for he designed
to prefer a creature of his own, viz. Stephen Langton, a Man that would always
move by his dictates, having before been made Cardinal of Chrisogone, and
privately he Wrote to the Monks to Choose him; yet not so cunningly but the King
had Notice of it, and strictly charged them not to proceed to any other
Election; but the Popes Threats and Promises of Rewards, dispensed with their
Obedience to the Kings Commands so that they did Elect him their Arch Bishop.

This so exasperated the King, that he commanded, on severe Penalties, no
Appeals should be made to Rome, and that from thence forth he would take a
strict account of such of his Subjects that for any matter of Right or Justice
should go to Rome to require it, seeing he had Prelates, Noblemen, and Judges
sufficient to determine any Controversies within his Kingdom, that should
arise, either in Church or Commonweal; and added, That he would rather expose
himself to Ten Thousand Deaths, than basely (as he was required) make himself
and his Kingdom Servil to the Popes Insolency and Peremptory Commands. But on
the other side, the Pope threatened what he would do if he was not Obeyed in
the Election of Langton, and the calling home such Monks as had Fled through
fear of the Kings displeasure, on this last Election; and because this was not
speedily done, he sent his Apostolical Command to the Prelates of London, Ely,
Worcester, etc. to Interdict the Kingdom, if the King continued in his
obstinacy (as he termed it.) This Commission was put in Execution, and the
Church-Doors were shut up for several Years: Some Authors say Six; there being
neither Prayers, Sermons, Christenings, nor Service at the Funerals of the
Dead, said or performed publicly during that time; so that the People
distinguished not the Sabbath from other days, but followed their Work and
Sports on it, living More like Infidels than Christians; such power over the
Minds of besotted Men, had the Popes Usurpation in those dark and ignorant
Times.

For this Affront the King Banished diverse Bishops and others of the Clergy,
whom he found most forward in complying with the Popes Interest, seizing on
their Temporalities, resolving to take the like course with all such as
consented to receive Promotions, Investitures, or Ecclesiastical Degrees from
the Pope or new Arch Bishop; or that went to Rome upon any occasion without his
License, or did attempt to put in Execution any Command from the Pope within
his Kingdom.

The Pope no sooner heard of this, but resolving not to cool on it, he sent
into England two Legates, viz. Pandulph and Durant, to persuade the King to be
Reconciled to Langton, and the other Bishops and Clergy that were under his
Displeasure in England, or in Banishment, to restore them to their Lands,
Places, and Goods; that a good understanding might be renewed between the Pope
and him.

This did but little please the King; yet however, fearing to be Accursed, and
Embroyl himself in new Troubles (for in those days the Popes Leaden Sword did
more mischief in Kingdoms than many of Steel, People being for the most part
infatuated to believe what he did he did by the immediate Will and Command of
God, whose Vicegerent he assumed to himself to be) He promised to perform all,
but allowing the Election of Cardinal Langton, protesting that if another might
be chosen he would yet prefer him to some other Bishopric; but the Imperious
Legates, instead of gratifying the Kings Request, pronounced the Popes Curse
not only against the King, but all Persons who should do him Service, or give
him Attendance, or supply him with things Necessary, Absolving his Subjects
from their Allegiance, Duties, and Oaths, requiring all Christian Princes to
make War upon him, as upon the Arch and Grand Enemy of the Church of God.

The Pope also published and pronounced against him Sentence of Deprivation,
and gave his Crown and his Kingdom to Philip the French King, if by any secret
Plot or open Violence and Hostility he could Expel or Murder him.

These were the Fruits of this (pretended Holy) un-Holy Father, The Popes
Religion and Government; and this Usurping Arrogance was a badg of his
unsufferable Pride, in that he presumed to do what no Earthly Creature can do,
nor what a Christian ought to attempt to do against a Prince, who is Gods
Anointed, and against such a one as the Almighty has placed in his Kingdom to
Govern and Rule his People.

Yet this Fulmination did not much startle King John; and being determined to
know the minds of his People, how they stood affected to him after this matter,
he took a sollemn Oath of them for the defense of his Person, and the
performance of faithful Service to him; and then raising an Army, he went to
Scotland, because that King (encouraged by the Pope) was practicing against
him, sheltering such as had taken part with the Pope and fled out of England:
But King Alexander the Second perceiving that Fire and Sword began to devour
apace in his Country, he with much Humility sent to King John to desire him to
spare his People and their Substance, and what in reason he required he would
accord to, and a Peace was made shortly between them, he consenting to Banish
all the Kings Enemies out of his Country.

This much disappointed Philip of France, who was preparing to Invade England,
and had to that end provided a gallant Army; but by the Wisdom, Valor and
Circumspection of King John, and the Providence of God, 300 of his Ships Laden
with Corn and other Provisions and Necessaries for the Invasion, were Surprised
by our Ships, which great disapointment, put an end at that time to the Design,
and frustrated his vain hope. But after all this, the King finding so many
Efforts and Treacheries against him, that disparing to weather every one of
them, and pitying the sufferings of his People under these distractions, he
suddenly, without the Advice of his Nobles, or of his Privy Council,
degenerating from his former daring and boldness of Spirit, fell on his Knees
before the Legate, acknowledging his Disobedience, craving of him the Popes
Pardon, resigning (with his Crown) the possession of his Kingdom to the Sea of
Rome; which Crown the proud Prelate took, and to put him into some pain in
considering whether he should ever have it restored again, kept it Four Days,
and then returned it to the use of him and his Heirs, reserving 1000 Marks
Yearly, by way of Tribute to the Sea of Rome; which was the main thing the Pope
had aimed at, and for which he had all the while made such a prodigious noise
and bustle.

But this low and Un-Prince-like Submission to a paltry Priest, threw him into
another mischief, which was the contempt and dislike of his Nobles; so that for
the most part they Revolted from him, and entered upon a cruel and unnatural
War, which went very near to have enslaved this flourishing Island once more to
Strangers; for the Barons finding they were too weak to oppose the King, they
leaned on Philip of Frrnce, proposing, if he would assist them with sufficient
Forces and Money, they would soon Depose King John, and place the Crown upon
the Head of Lewis, Son to Philip: This News fired the Young Ambitious French
Prince, who had also something of a Martial Spirit, that he never left urging
his Father, till he had furnished him out with an Army. But the Pope having now
closed with King John, on his complaining of this to him, he sent his strict
command under many Threats, to the French King not to suffer his Son to pass
the Seas, or in the least to molest a Kingdom under the Protection of the Holy
See; though as you have heard, a little before himself had given it to them. But
Popes usually blow hot or cold, as their Interest Ebbs or Flows; and therefore
it was no wonder he should so soon change his side. But Philip refused to Obey
his Mandate, returning Answer, That no King without the consent of his Nobles,
Prelates, and Common People, can Subject his Kingdom to the Sea of Rome, or put
it under its Protection; it being Committed to them by God, and consequently
this Kingdom was not holden of the Sea of Rome, nor ought to be Defended or
Protected by her.

This Answer somewhat startled the Pope, yet using his old way, he sent Guallo
his Legate, Cardinal of St. Martins, to Curse Philip and Lewis his Son, and
such of the English Nobility as took part with them, as also all their other
Adherents and Accomplices; and though the wiser sort little minded this, yet the
ordinary degrees of Soldiers, whose Devotion more directly depended on Fear,
than Knowledge, or Judgment, to apprehend any danger that could ensue from such
threats, were so amazed and daunted, that they left their Leaders in the Field,
and returned home to their Wives and Children, etc. And the Rascally sort in
England, hearing diverse Noblemen were under this Curse, entered into their
Houses, Fields and Parks, Robbing, Spoiling, and bearing away whatever they
could find of value, being so far from doubting or disputing with their own
Consciences whether they did well in it or not, that (such was the blindness of
those Times) they supposed their so doing tended to the Glory of God Almighty,
and that their Rapin and Violence was well pleasing in his Sight; yet this
hastened many of the Lords, who had little left to subsist on, to submit to the
King, and prostrate at his Feet confess their undutiful Revolt, and crave his
Pardon. Upon this they were received into Favor, with gentle reproofs for
their former failures, and were restored to their Estates and Honors; so that
the Disorders that had happened were by this means settled, and a Peace for a
time ensued, to the great refreshing of a Nation wearied out with Intestine
Broyls.

The Pope intending to make his Proceedings with King John a President to other
Princes, Assembled a General Council at Lateran, where he caused to be
published, at large, the Assignment of the Kingdom of England to the Sea of
Rome; and there Otho the Emperor, Peter King of Arragon, Raymond Earl of
Toulouse, were Excomunicated, for no other material reason, than not submitting
themselves and Principalities to the Popes Pride and Insolency, to be disposed
of at his pleasure: Also the Empire, Kingdom, and Principality appertaining to
them, were Interdicted, on pretended Heresy. In this Council Auricular
Confession and Transubstantiation were Decreed, the Cup taken from the Laity in
the Communion, etc. And it was made no less than Eternal Damnation to such as
should speak evil of the Pope; and that they who were guilty of it, should
immediately when they Dyed descend into Hell, without being admitted by the way
to call in at Purgatory, to take leave of any of their Acquaintance: And that
no Man should presume to take on him the Imperial Diadem, till he was Sworn the
Popes Vassal, paid him Homage, and received that Crown at his Hands. But these
Princes despised him and his idle Menaces; yet he secretly wrought them many
Troubles, and put their Subjects into Rebellion; but in time the Storm blew
over, with the end of his restless Life.

During these stirs, the Irish fell into Rebellion, but were soon Quieted on
the Kings going over; for at Dublin he was met by Twenty of their petty Kings,
who submitted, and promised him their future Obedience. And one Gualter Maxes
Arch Deacon of Oxford, Preached against the Pride of the Pope, and wrote a
Book, Entitled, The Revelation of the Romish Goliath; for which the Bishops
greatly Persecuted him. And the Clergy not being heartily reconciled to the
King, because he had controuled them in many things, as he was in his Progress
to settle the Kingdom, so long disquieted and out of order, Dining at
Swinstead-Abby, not far from Lincoln, one Simon, a Villainous Monk, who served
at the Table, being of the Order of St. Bernard, Poisoned him, by delivering
into his hand a Bowl of Intoxicated Wine, and Poisoned himself also for
company; the King compelling him, (upon suspecting (by a sudden pain in his
Stomach) some Treachery) to Drink part of it: Too easy a Death for such a
Monster in wickedness; who considered not that Kings are God's Anointed, and
that the Affront is put upon Heaven when they are Injured.

Thus fell King John, after a troublesome Reign for the most part, when he had
Reigned 17 Years, 6 Months, and 13 Days. He Dyed on the 19th of October Anno
Dom. 1216. and was Buried at Winchester.

To palliate this execrable Murder, it was given out that he should say,
holding a Halfpeny Loaf in his hand, That if he lived a Twelvemonth, he would
make it at the Rate of Twelve Pence; and that he should have Ridiculed the
Mass, when the Pope had Accursed him, upon cuming to the Quarry of a Buck that
was Slain in Hunting, viz. See how fair and fat this Buck is, that never heard
Mass in all its Life: That when he was vexed with the Rebellious Barons, he
should send to Mira Mula, a prevaling King in Africa, for Assistance; promising
him to turn Mohammedan, and hold his Kingdom Tributary of him, if by his help he
prevailed over his Enemies. But these seem to be Monkish Stories, raised to
poison his Fame as well as Body, and are Rejected by Authentic Historians.

In the Ninth Year of his Reign, by a New Charter, he enabled the Citizens of
London, for their good Service done him, to make their Annual Choice of a Mayor
and two Sherifs, for the better Government of the City.

In his Reign London Bridge was Built with Stone-Arches, as still it remains,
being before only of Timber; and a dreadful Fire happening on it, taking both
Ends, by the vehemence of the Wind carrying the Flame in sheets from the one to
the other, the People that came to Quench it were caught in the middle of the
danger, and Boats coming to receive them by Water, they thronged in a hurry so
fast into them, that diverse Sunk; so that in the Thames and Flames 300 are
computed to perish.

In his time two terrible Blazing Stars appeared, at South and East, three
Weeks; many Firey Metors in prodigious forms were seen; The Thames was Frozen
over, that Loaded Carts passed it Thirty Days, and a mighty Serpent in
Northumberland, creeping out of a Rockey Cliff, for a considerable time much
terrified the People; till being slain by Arrows, it was weighed OXFORD SHIRE
By Ihon Seller
map of Oxfordshire at Two Hundred weight, the Skin being a long time kept as a
Memorial.

He left behind him Four Sons, viz. Henry who Succeeded him; Richard, Elected
King of the Romans; William of Valentia, and Guidio Disany; and Three
Daughters, viz. Isabella, Married to Frederick the Emperer; a Second to William
Marshal Earl of Worcester, and a Third to the Earl of Leicester.

Remarks on Oxfordshire, etc.
OXfordshire abounds in rich Pastures, store of Cattle, Corn, Fruits, Fish,
Foul, Coneys, Hares, Deer, and other things, to render it Pleasant and
Acceptable; being a pleasant Inland County, bounded with Glocestershire,
Warwickshire, Northamptonshire, Buckinghamshire and Barkshire: It contains one
City, which is a Bishops See, and in its 14 Hundreds has 280 Parishes, 12
Market Towns, and 5 Rivers: Isis, which gives an additional name to the Thames,
into which it falls, is very much Celibrated in Ancient Story. It sends Members
to Parliament 9, viz. Oxford City 2, the University 2, Banbury 1, New Woodstock
2, and 2 Knights of the Shire.

The Ancient City of Oxford, is renowned for many remarkable things, as being
the Place of Meeting of diverse Parliaments, and holding out many Sieges. Here
Maud the Empress was Besieged by King Stephen, and all in White got by Night
over the Thames on the Ice. This Place King Charles the First made his chief
Headquarters, during the Civil War, till it was taken by Sr. Thomas Farfaix.
King Richard the First was Born here. Its Churches are 13, besides the
Cathedral, most of them very Stately. It is Watered almost round, and is
supplied within the City by many Conduits, on one of which is the Figure of a
Queen, Riding on an Ox, in Brass. But the greatest Ornament of Oxford is its
being a University, and for the stateliness of its Colleges, their Liberal
Endowments, and the Number of Scholars contained in them, it is not (except by
its Sister Cambridge) to be parallelled in the whole Christian World. Of the
Number of its Colleges, the time of their Foundation, and their Founders, take
the following Account.

An Account of the Colleges in Oxfond.

1. University College, was founded by King Alfred, Anno 872, for 12. Fellows,
besides other Students.

2. Baliol College was founded Anno 1262. by John Baliol and Devorgilla his
Wife, Parents of John Baliol King of Scots, for 12. Fellows, etc.

3. Merton College was founded Anno 1274. by Walter de Merton Lord High
Chancellor of England and Bishop of Rochester. This has 19 Fellows, 14
Scholars, etc.

4. Exeter College was founded Anno 1216. by Walter Stapleton, Bishop of
Exeter, for 23. Fellows, etc.

5. Oriel College was founded Anno 1337. by King Edward II, for 18. Fellows,
12 Scholars, etc.

6. Queens College was founded Anno 1340. by Robert Eaglesfield B. D. for 15
Fellows, besides other Students of the Foundation.

7. New College was founded Anno 1375. by William of Wickham, Bishop of
Winchester and Lord High Chancellor of England; for 70 Fellows, 10 Chaplains,
3 Clerks, 16 Choiristers, etc.

8. Lincoln College was founded Anno 1420. by Richard Fleming, Bishop of
Lincoln, for 15 Fellows, etc.

9. All Souls College was founded Anno 1437. by Henry Chicheley Arch Bishop of
Canterbury; for 40 Fellows, besides Chaplains, Clerks, and other Servants of
the Foundation.

10. Magdalen College was founded Anno 1459. by William of Wainfleet Bishop of
Winchester and Lord High Chancellor of England; for 40 Fellows, and 30
Scholars, besides Chaplains, Clerks, Choiristers, etc.

11. Brazen-Nose College was founded Anno 1515. by William Smith Bishop of
Lincoln, and Richard Sutton Esquire for 20 Fellows, besides Scholars, and Students
of the Foundation.

12. Corpus Christi College was founded Anno 1516. by Richard Fox, Bishop of
Winchester and Lord Privy Seal; for 20 Follows, 20 Scholars, besides Chaplains,
and Clerks, etc.

13. Christ-Church College was founded Anno 1546. by King Henry VIII. for 8
Canons, and 100 Students, besides Chaplains, etc.

14. Trinity College was founded Anno 1555. by Sir Tho. Pope, for 12 Fellows,
12 Scholars, and other Students.

15. St. John's College was founded Anno 1557. by Sir Thomas White, Merchant
Tailor of London, for 50 Fellows, etc.

16. Jesus College was founded Anno 1572. by Queen Elizabeth; for 16 Fellows,
16 Scholars, and other Students.

17. Wadham College was founded Anno 1613. by Nicholas Wadham and Dorothy his
Wife, for 15 Fellows and 15 Scholars, etc.

18. Pembroke College was founded Anno 1620. by Thomas Teisdale Esquire and
Richard Wightwick B. D. for 15 Fellows, and 11 Scholars, etc.

The Seven Halls are Gloucester, Edmund, St. Alban, Magdalen, Heart, and S. Mary
Hall, besides New-Inn.

In all which Colleges and Halls there are fair Chapels, and Libraries. But,
amongst these, is the most famous Bodlean Library, which for choice Books, and
rare Manuscripts, falls little short of the Vatican.

Here is also that curious Piece of Architecture called the New Theater, built
for Scholastic Exercises, with a fair Printing House, by Dr. Sheldon, a late
Arch Bishop of Canterbury. The Musaeum, built at the Charge of the University,
for the Improvement of Experimental Knowledge, especially in Physic; with a
Laboratory furnished with all sorts of Furnaces, and other Materials, for
Chemical Practice; a Store-Room, for Preparations; and another Room, fitted up
for a Chemical Library. In the Musaeum is also to be seen a curious Repository.

The public Physic Garden deserves also to be mentioned here for its
Stateliness, and infinite Variety of choice Plants.

The Number of Students in Oxford is rickoned to be 3000, whereof 1000 live
upon the Revenues of the Colleges.

In this City was formerly a famous Castle, but now of no great Strength, being
mostly used for a Prison. It has several Bridges about it, but one more
specially, of Stone, curiously Arched; and is a Place of considerable Trade.

Woodstock was a long time the Country Retirement of our Kings; here it was
that Henry II built a sumptuous Bower for fair Rosamond his Paramour; here
Edward the Black Prince was Born, and Sr. Geoffry Chaucer Educated. At Islip
King Edward the Confessor was Born; the other Towns of Note are Banbury,
Chipingnorton, Charlbury, Bampton, Henly on Thames, etc.

Near Evisham, in the South of this County, are erected Stones called Roll
Richstone, in the nature of those on Salisbury Plain, but not so big, which
Fabulous Stories have rendered to have been Men Transformed into Stone; but
most certain they are a Monument of a great Battle fought there by Rollo the
Dane; near Oxford is the Well Dripa, whose Waters distill from a Rock that hangs
over it, very Medicinal. There is store of Oaker, Fullers-Earth, and Gipsum, at
Shot-over, Garsington and Whitney; and Tobacco-Pipe-Clay and Vmber is found
near Blanden, Cerulam, or Native Blue, near Blonds-Court, the Tera Lapidosa the
Color of Turkish Rusma, is found in the Quarries about Tame; the Gold-gritty
Clay at Hampton Gay.

The Seats af the Nobility are Cornbury, belonging to the Earl of Clarendon;
Blechington, to the Earl of Anglesey; Caversham, to the Earl of Craven; Dichley
and Les Rest, to the Earl of Litchfield; Ricot and Chesterton, to the Earl of
Abingdon; Broughton, Shutford and North Newton, to the Lord Viscount Say and
Seal; Water-Eton, to the late Lord Lovelace. Cuddesden, the Bishops Palace.

There are fine Parks in this County, stored with Deer, and many large Woods,
wherein abundance of Hares shelter: The Seats of the Gentry are not a few; so
that put together, it is a very fine Inland County, Watered in some parts by
the Thames, etc.

The Reign of King HENRY the Third.
AFter the untimely Death of King John, Henry his Eldest Son being but Nine
Years of Age, was Crowned at Gloucester in the presence of Wallo the Popes
Legate, and diverse Nobles; and by reason of his Nonage, was put under the
Gaurdianship of Pembrook, who was by the consent of the Peers made Protector of
the Realm during his Minority; who prudently managed Affairs, administering the
Laws and Justice uprightly to the People: Yet long he had not been Crowned,
before Philip the French King, thinking to take advantage of this change, dealt
underhand with some discontented Noblemen, and supposing by this means he had
made a strong Party in England, Invaded the Kingdom; yet the Protector was not
idle in his Charge, but Leavied a considerable Army; and though the Welsh,
under Llewellin their Prince, Rebelled, to favor the proceedings of the
French, he made head against them, and stopped their Ravages, before a sufficient
Force could come to his Camp from other parts, and slew many of them in several
Skirmishes, though as yet they came to no considerable Battle.

And now Pope Innocent being Dead, and Honorius seated in the Pontifical Chair
taking part with King Henry, not only confirmed the power of his Predecessors
Apostolical Legate in England, but by him Cursed Prince Lewis who came over
with the French Forces to take possession of this Realm, and all his Adherents,
Excommunicating and Depriving them of all the Privileges of Christians; which
put a stop to their carreer: So that Lewis made show as if he only waited for a
fit opportunity to depart, yet in the mean time King Philip his Father, with
great care and cost, prepared Reinforcements, and Shiped them for England: But
Hugh d' Burg, Master of the Cinque Ports, Manned out a Fleet, upon notice they
were putting to Sea; and after a sharp Engagement, Sunk, Burnt, and Took the
greatest part of the Enemies Ships, which consisted of 150 Sail. This Exploit
got him a good esteem among the People, which he after lost by his
Covetousness, as will appear, and much daunted the French that were already in
England, making Prince Lewis entreat the Popes Legate to Absolve him; and for
so much Money as would defray the charges of his Return, he promised to deliver
up all the Castles and Places he had in his possession; which being done and
agreed to, he Sailed for France, and left his Friends in England to shift for
themselves; many of which were forced into Banishment, and some of the more
forward taken and Executed, but the greater Number Pardoned.

Upon this, a Parliament was called, and in it the Ancient Saxon Laws of Edward
the Confessor, and diverse other good Laws, made by succeeding Kings, were
reduced into a smaller compass, what seemed superfluous, according to the
Constitution of the then present Government, being left out. And this has
continued a happiness to the Kingdom, being that Magna Charta, or Great Charter
of England, that set a Barrier between the Succeeding Kings and the People;
That the one should not encroach on the Subjects Rights, but live as free born
Subjects; nor the other upon the Prerogative of the Crown, but that the Scale
should be in a due Balance between Sovereign and Subject. This was Ratified
and Confirmed under the Great Seal, to the high satisfaction of the Kingdom; so
that the Parliament Granting the King a considerable Tax, the People paid it
with all the alacrity immaginable, with which Money he not only discharged his
Debts, but Levied a formidable Army, who under the Leading of Richard the Kings
Brother, and diverse Nobles, won much back again that the French had taken
during the Troubles in his Fathers Reign, entirely reducing the Provinces of
Poictiers, and Gascoyne; and returning with little loss of Men from this
Glorious Enterprise, were received with great Joy: However the absence of the
Army gave the French King leisure to practice his usual method of stiring up
Differences and Dissentions in those places, by which means he surprised some
Towns; but King Henry grown up, and being a Prince of Courage and Valor,
resolved to go in Person; whose Arrival so terrified the French, that they
Deserted diverse Places without contending; and those that yielded not on
Summons, were taken by Force.

The French King perceiving the Cowardice of his own Men, and the Courage of
the English, after many losses began to study how he might come to a Peace; and
upon surrendering what he had possessed himself of, it was concluded,
advantagiously enough to the Honor of King Henry and the English Nation. But
soon after this, some discontented Nobles at home, labored to Alienate the
minds of his Subjects from him, upon a Jealousy that he reposed his greatest
confidence in Strangers, and made little account of their Fidelity; but to
prevent any Eruption that might give his Enemies abroad the advantage of
Regaining what they had Lost, and what cost him much Treasure in Recovering, he
Labored to reconcile himself to them, and sent away many Strangers from his
Court; with whom indeed it was much pestered, and the English Nobles had some
reason to complain of it; by which means, and some other Concessions, a
Reconcilement was made. And now the Earl of Chester Dying without Issue Male,
leaving only Four Daughters, the King Seized his Possessions, and Annexed them
to the Crown, augmenting them with large additions of Yearly Revenues, Regal
Privileges and Honors, giving the Ladies in lieu of it diverse Castles,
Lordships, and Manors, which exceeded their own in true value; and having
Married Prince Edward his Son, to Elianor Sister to the King of Spain, he gave
him the Province of Guyan, and the Lordship of all Ireland, and created him
Earl of Chester and Prince of Wales, which two latter Dignities he then annexed
as inseparable Titles to the Eldest Sons of the Kings of England; and so they
at this day continue; soon after this, the King narrowly escaped being
Murdered by an Oxford Scholar, who about Midnight crept in at the Window of
that Chamber where he usually Reposed, but that Night he was absent at a
Merri-making; however the Student being found there with unusual Weapons about
him, upon Examination Confessed he came with the beforementioned Design, but
would not acknowledge what ^duced him to it, or any that we, ^upposed to have ^t
him on work; whereupon his A^ms and Legs be^g fastened to Four Horses, he was
by them Drawn (...) pieces.

The French King (as you have heard) entering into Peace with England, nothing
more at length appeared (...) it but that he did it to gain time, so that he
might ^come Stronger; for Philip being Dead, Lewis the ^inth, his Son, broke
out into open Hostilities without ^ving any warning, his Father before his
death having ^ade preparations to enable him to do it, wasting in ^uyan all the
places where he came. This roused King Henry, and made him Levy great Forces
with a purpose ^o drive him out, not only of that, but all Normandy, and ^uch
other places as he had a right claim to, and were ^etained from him by the
French: So that passing over unto France, many fierce Encounters passed between
them with various success, though in them the French were ^enerally worsted; but
Fortune no further favoring his endeavors, but only to stop the French
Torrent, and their further Encroachments, he returned for England. On his
departure, the French King Married Alphonsus his Brother, to the Daughter of
the Earl of Toulouse, and gave him the Earldom of Poictiers, and so cunningly
contrived it, that he would have procured the Earl of March to do him Homage
for such Lands as he pretended he held in that Province, but he refused it, and
could not by Entreaties or Threats be wrought on to comply; which so enraged
the French King, that he entered with an Army into the Earldom of March, and
laid all waste before him; but was Fought with by the English Army, newly
Transported, near Bordeaux; yet the English being much inferior in Number,
after a Long, Bloody and Doubtful Fight, were constrained to quit the Field;
and King Henry, who did wonders in the Battle that day, hardly escaped being
taken Prisoner; whereupon the Earl of March found he was in a necessity to
submit to the Terms offered him by the French King after which King Henry
settling his affairs as well as he could, returned to England, and made a fi^m
Alliance with the King of Scots, to strengthen his Interest against France.

This continued happy to him for a time; but his Court not being purged of
Parasites, and Whisperers, who with their stories set him against the English
Nobility, a fatal Discord befell, which at times lasted till his Death; for the
Nobles grudging he bestowed Favors on those that deserved them not, and was
scanty in his Liberalities toward them that had Merited of him, at the expense
of their Blood and Treasure, from Murmuring they fell to open Reproaches,
charging him with the violation of those Liberties and Privileges that he had
so solemnly Confirmed and Granted: This Angered the King, and made him inwardly
Fret, but finding they spoke the sense of the greatest part of the Nation, to
bring things to a quieter temper, and alay or satisfy the discontents of his
Subjects, he called a Parliament at Oxford, though in it what he aimed at was,
for the most part, if not altogether, frustrated; so that it was afterward,
through the Distractions that happened upon it, called Insanum Parliamentum, or
The Mad Parliament: For when multitudes of such as were Grieved came for
Redress of their Grievances, the Lords and Commons endeavoring to Redress what
was amiss, Established many things Profitable, as they intended, for the
Commonweal, but highly derogatory to the Kings Prerogative; and to the end
those things that they had so contrived, should be lasting, and inviolably
observed, they made choice of Twelve Noblemen, by the Title of Les douze Piers,
or The Twelve Peers, giving them absolute Power and Authority to Maintain and
Support those Laws; of whom the Earls of Leicester and Gloucester were chief;
and for this they had their Pattent, and took a solemn Oath, which was Sealed
and Ratified by the King, although he did it unwillingly; so that the
Parliament being ended, the Commissioners began by strict Execution to give
Life unto those Laws and Ordinances, thrusting out of their Places and Offices
many of the Kings Menial Servants, and Attendants, placing others in their
stead, which very much troubled him; for by these proceedings he perceived
those that waited on his Person, were rather to be Trusted by others than by
himself; and that he should be furthest from choosing those that were to be
nearest to him; this made him grow Melancholy, and vex himself exceedingly; yet
thinking to mend what he supposed amiss, he called another Parliament, which
contrary to his expectation Ratified and Confirmed more strongly all that the
former had done, though he at the opening of the Sessions had complained of the
hard Usage he had received from the Twelve Peers; and by the Arch Bishop of
Canterbury, and Nine other Bishops of the Kingdom, a solemn Curse was denounced
against all such as either by Direction, Council, Arms, or otherwise, withstood
or hindered the Execution of those Laws, or the Authority of the Twelve Peers.
This made the King more Melancholy than before; when, to divert himself he
Sailed to France, and had an Enterview with King Lewis, who highly welcomed
him, Lodged him in his own Palace, Feasted him, and used him with all
Gentleness, Courtesy, and Honor; protesting in his Parliament of Estates, That
he was much dissatisfied in his Conscience for detaining from King Henry his
Duchy of Normandy and such other Territories in France as in Right he ought to
Enjoy; and on the other hand King Henry intending to conclude an inviolable
Peace freely surrendered to him Normandy, Anjou, Poictiers and Mayn, and in the
same Parliament with great Solemnity and Honor, he received them again to
himself and his Heirs.

Whilst things thus proceeded in France, a Quarrel happened between Prince
Edward the Kings Son, and the Duke of Gloucester, about the Laws being put too
severely in Execution; which made the King hasten home, to prevent the Danger
or Mischief that might happen thereby, and with some difficulty he reconciled
them; and hoping to remove the curb the Peers had laid on him, with much
Expense, he procured Bulls of Pope Alexander the Third, by virtue of which
himself and all others who had Sworn to maintain those new Laws and Ordinances,
and to support the proceedings of the Peers and their Authority, were freely
Absolved from their Oaths; yet they took no notice of it, but proceeded to
displace such Judges, Justices, and Sheriffs, as the King had appointed, for
not following their Orders, and put such in their Places and Offices as they
thought fit: So that the King being no longer able to endure these Indignities,
caused the Popes Bulls to be Read and Proclaimed in the chief Towns and Cities
of England and Wales, straightly Commanding all Persons, of what Estate,
Condition or Degree soever, That from thence forth did by Word or Deed Support
or Maintain the said Laws and Ordinances, or the Authority of the Twelve Peers,
that they should be committed to Prison, and not delivered thence without the
Kings consent: And hereupon he Swore the Londoners from twelve Years Old, and
upwards, to be True and Faithful to him, and to be Aiding to him and his Heirs
against all Opposers. In the mean while the Barons met, and entered into a
Resolution among themselves, rather to lose their Lives than decline the
upholding the Laws; and fancying the King had some desperate design upon them,
their Jealousy so increased, that retiring to the Marches of Wales, they
raised a strong Army, and furnished it with all things necessary for the War
they intended; yet pretended to abstain from any Hostility or Violence, unless
the King compelled them to it. Then they sent their Letters in a most
submissive and humble manner to the King, protesting their Duty, Service, and
true Allegiance to him; entreating his Highness for the Honor of Almighty God,
for the health of his own Soul, and for the welfare and happiness of his People
and Kingdom, utterly to defy (except his Queen and Children) all such as
Councelled him, or did themselves intend to suppress the Laws and Ordinances
established in the Parliament at Oxford, or the Authority and Power, which for
the advantage of the common good, was Granted to the Twelve Peers. But the King
displeased at these Letters, returned not any Answer; which made them display
their Banners, and march toward London; and as they passed by the Houses of
such as favored the Kings proceedings, on the account of the Popes Bulls, they
Plundered and Spoiled them, and laid many in Ruins by Fire, Proclaiming such
Persons Enemies to the King and Government.

Approaching London, they sent their Letters to the Mayor and Citizens, to know
whether they were resolved to support the Laws and Ordinances or not, and the
Authority of the Twelve Peers; protesting before God, that themselves meant
not, nor intended any other thing; and if they were found defective in any
point, a speedy Reformation should be made.

These Letters were no sooner received and read, but they were sent to the
King, who demanded of the Mayor and Citizens whether they would support those
Laws and the Twelve Peers, or renounce them; but fearing their Plunder when
such an Army was at their Gates, they Assembled in Common Hall, and agreed to
send the King Answer, That they would stand by the Laws and Peers, though a
little before they had Sworn to the King to stand by him against all opposers.
This greatly displeased the King; but they setting light by his Anger, received
the Barons with their Army into the City, with many expressions of Joy; and
from hence they Marched to Windsor Castle, and displaced all Strangers, rifling
them of what they had gotten by their Places and Offices, especially such as
the Prince had put into Trust; this yet more offended the King: But his Privy
Council labored to pacify him, by sending to the Barons to restore the Goods
taken from the Aliens, and telling him that from thenceforth none but himself
should place Persons in Trust; but to neither of these the Barons would accord;
but at last concluded to put the descision of the Controversy to Lewis the
French King, and inviolably stand to his Award; and King Henry agreeing to it,
Peace for a time ensued; and the Swords on both sides were Sheathed; and the
matter Stated on either part being controverted before the French King, it was
by him Decreed, That all the said Ordinances and Laws should be Annihilated,
and from thenceforth no Authority or Power should be left in the Twelve Peers.
But this Sentence was so distasteful to the Barons, that they publicly accused
him of Partiality to curry-favour with King Henry, absolutely refusing to stand
by his Award; and so strongly were they bent to maintain whatsoever had been in
Parliament Established, That they repaired again to the Marches of Wales, and
Levied new Forces; and in their passage to London, Spoiled and Burnt the Goods,
Lordships and Houses of Sr. Roger Mortimer, who had Counseled the King against
them: To oppose their Proceedings, Prince Edward Marched with the Kings Army
against them; and a cruel Battle was fought for the space of a whole Day, in
which the Prince Acted Wonders beyond what could be expected from his Young
Years: But most of his Commanders being Slain, he was at length compelled to
leave the Field, and March hastily back again with his broken Army, leaving the
Barons Masters of the Field.

After this Victory, the Barons Marched their Army to London, where they were
received with great demonstrations of Joy; and soon after the Rifraff of the
City, contrary to the minds of the sober Citizens, appointed to themselves two
Captains, whom they styled Constables of London; and made Proclamation, That
all who were affected to their Party should take Arms, upon Ringing the great
Bell at St. Paul's; and so Assembling in a Tumultuous manner, they committed
many Outrages upon the Houses of those that did not approve their Proceedings;
and then in a great troop went to the Palace of Richard, King Henry's Brother,
who by the German Princes had been Elected King of the Romans, and entering it
by force, seized and carried away all his Plate, Treasure and Rich Furniture,
pulling down and defacing, for the most part, that stately Building.

This made him, of a Friend, ever after an Enemy to the City and Barons: For
whereas before he had labored a Reconcilement between the King and them, he
utterly gave over that good office, and exasperated him to continue the War
against them; so that the King having notice that Sr. Peter Montfort had
gathered considerable Forces near Northampton, declaring for the Barons, he
Marched thither, whereupon Mountfort retired into the Town with his Forces, and
was straightly Besieged; so that in a little time it being taken by Assault, he
with Simon the Earl of Leicesters Son, and many others, were taken Prisoners,
and disposed of in several Goals, till a further course could be taken with
them. But the Barons being strong in the Field, little regarded this blow, but
advancing their Banners near Lewis in Sussex, gave the Kings Army Battle, which
continued with such obstinate cruelty on both sides, that Fathers and Sons,
Brothers and other near Relations Killed one another without Remorse; and such
a havoc was made, that the Army on either side being much wasted, the King
taken Prisoner with his Brother, etc. after Fourteen Hours desperate Fighting,
and the slaughter of 20000 Men on both sides, the Royal Party by these
Accidents was so weakened, that a Treaty ensued; and it was Agreed, That the
King should by new Articles, and the renewing his Oath, Confirm the Authority
granted to the Twelve Peers, and all the Ordinances and Laws; with this Caution
notwithstanding, That Two Lords Spiritual, and Two Temporal, should take a View
of, and Examine the said Laws and Ordinances, and if they saw any reason to
Amend or Alter them, they might do it, and if they agreed not in their
Opinions, Then the Duke of Britany as Vmpire, should be invested with full
Power to Arbitrate and End the Difference: And the King and his Brother for
standing to this, had their Liberty, and gave their two Eldest Sons as
Hostages, who upon that account were detained in the Castle of Dover about nine
Months.

Upon this the King called a Parliament, which again crossed his expectation,
by Confirming and Ratifying the Laws of the Oxford Parliament, and Authority of
the Twelve Peers, which constrained the King to take a new Oath to maintain
them, and the Peers Authority; till according to Agreement, if any thing was
found amiss, it should be Reformed, etc. and all such as in those Wars, or
otherwise, had Maintained them, were Pardoned by the King: Whereupon the Young
Princes were set at Liberty. But soon after, fell a Difference between the
Earls of Leicester and Gloucester, the two heads of the Barons Faction, which
made them divide into parties to decide their Quarrel by the Sword; yet the
King, fearing this might Involve many of his Subjects in Ruin, and shake the
Quiet of the whole Kingdom, interposed his Authority and Mediation to make them
Friends: But whilst this was doing, Prince Edward, the Kings Son, taking
advantage of their difference, departed secretly from Court, and consorting
with the Earls of Gloucester and Warren, Sr. Roger Mortimer, and others, they
raised an Army on the Marches of Wales, and fell on the Earl of Leicesters
Forces with such fury, near Eversham in Worcestershire, that they totally
Routed them; and in this Battle the Earl of Leicester, Simon his Eldest Son,
Sr. Hugh Spencer, and many others of note, were Slain; and so enraged were the
Soldiers, that they dispitefully used the Earls dead Body, by cuting off the
Head, Hands, Feet, and Privy Members, sending them into diverse Shires, as
Trophies of their Victory.

This turn of fortunate Success, so ellevated the drooping King, that he
resolved utterly to throw off his Fetters, and assume his Kingly Authority
uncontrouled; whereupon, whilst his Enemies were full of fear and mistrust, and
their strength in a manner utterly broken, he summoned a Parliament, which
conforming to his will, more through dread of his Anger, than voluntarily,
Repealed the Laws and Ordinances made in the Oxford Parliament, disannuling the
Authority of the Twelve Peers; and all Patents, Commissions, and Instruments
whatsoever, that tended to the Establishing and Ratifying those things, were by
the Kings express Commandment brought forth, publicly Cancelled and made void;
by which means he regained his former Power and Liberty, to say and do as he
pleased.

This Parliament was no sooner ended, but the King expressed his anger toward
the City of London, because (as is alleged) the Rulers and Inhabitants had
always despised him, and taken part with the Barons against him; vowing to
consume it with Fire, and leave it in a heap of Rubbish, as a lasting Monument
of their Rebellion to succeeding Ages; and so firmly had he determined it, That
all his Friends and Favorits had much ado to avert him from this purpose, nor
could it be done, till the Citizens caused an Instrument in Writing to be
drawn, and Ratified it with their common Seal, by which they Confessed their
Rebellion, humbly craving Pardon, and without any restraint or exception
submitted their Lands, Goods, Lives, and the whole City, to the Kings Grace and
Mercy: Whereupon paying 1000 Marks Fine, they were Restored to their Liberties
and Customs, which had been seized into the Kings hands, during which space
they had suffered much damage; yet for what Wrongs soever they received, they
could find no Redress: And many Robberies and Piracies during the Wars being
committed by the Inhabitants of the Cinque Ports, to hinder his Courts of
Justice being pestered with many Complaints, he ordered they should be heard in
the Courts within the Jurisdiction of those Ports; where the Persons agrieved
expecting little redress, because the Inhabitants were parties, few Complaints
after that were made.

Gilbert Clare Earl of Gloucester, by his revolt from the Barons, and joining
his Interest with the Prince, expecting high preferment for the success that
had given the King all these Advantages, and not meeting with it agreeable to
his mind, grew angry, and Meditating Revenge, retired from Court into the City;
where the Citizens forgeting how lately they had been Pardoned, and the danger
they were in, flocked to him in great Numbers, and then Sallying through Temple
Bar, went to the Kings Palace at Westminster, which they Rifled, with the
Houses of many Court Favorites in and out of the City. This Outrage made the
King pronounce no less than utter Destruction to them. But the Prince and Kings
Counselors, fearing such severity might renew the Civil War as dangerous as
ever, with much ado pacified him so far, that he Granted a Pardon to the Earl
of Gloucester, and all that had Acted in the late Tumult. Yet the Earl finding
but cold Entertainment at Court, fearing some mischief might befall him at home,
Made it his request to the King that he would send him with an Army to make War
in the Holy Land. This motion, though it tended to much charge and expense,
pleased the King well; for he considered if he continued at home he would still
be Plotting, but abroad he could little injure the quiet of the Government; so
that an Army being raised, the Earl repented him of his Undertaking, and
feigned so many causes for delay, that the King took the Command out of his
hand, and gave it to Prince Edward, who Transported the Army into Palestine,
and by his valorous Acts brought such a Terror on the Turks and Sarazens, That
they seldom, if they could avoid it, adventured themselves against the
Christians in that Quarter where the Prince drew up; and the Terror of his
coming made them raise the Siege of the City of Acon, which they had pressed
hardly for a long time, with 100000 Men; which made them secretly contrive his
Death: For a Sarazen, under pretense of delivering him a Letter, Stabbed him in
the Arm with an Impoisoned Knife; whereupon the Prince struck him down with his
Foot, and upon the noise, his Guards coming in, cut the Villan in pieces; yet
so desperate was the Wound, by reason of the venom, that the Surgeons declared,
That unless any at the hazard of their Lives would daily suck the Wound, to
draw away the Poison, his Life could not be saved; this, when all his Courtiers
strained Courtesy to do, or utterly refused, was undertaken by Elianor his
virtuous and loving Wife, Sister to the King of Spain, who had accompanied him
in that tedious Journey; and yet she was not at all injured by it.

And now the King having had some Peace, was a little disturbed by a Tumult in
Norwich, who Burnt the Monastery of the Trinity; but he hasting thither, they
dispersed, yet escaped not so, for a strict enquiry being made into the matter,
50 of the chief Actors were Drawn, Hanged and Quartered, and their Quarters
Burned. Soon after this, the King fell Sick, and Dyed at the Abbey of St.
Edmund's in Suffolk, on the Sixteenth of November, Anno Dom. 1275, in the 57th
Year of his Reign, and 65th of his Age. He was Buried with great Magnificence
at Westminster.

In this Kings Reign, an Imposture at the Provincial Synod at Oxford, suffered
himself to be Wounded in the Hands, Feet and Sides, saying he was Christ; and a
Woman that went about with him called herself the Virgin Mary; but being taken
and closed up between two Walls, they there miserably perished.

On St. Paul's Day in the 15th Year of his Reign, such an unusual Thunder and
Lightening happened, That whilst Roger Niger Bishop of London was at Mass, in
St. Paul's, the Cathedral was so shaken, that the People verily supposed it
would have falln, and that they should have been burned with the flashes of
Lightening; whereupon all, except the Bishop and Archdeacon, ran out; but it
being more terrible abroad, they fell on their Faces, and lay as astonished
near an Hour. There also appeared as it were four Suns, besides the Natural
one, which had a great Circle of a Crystal color; and after St. Martins Day,
it began to Thunder very horribly, which lasted 15 Days.

The Jews at Norwich Stole a Boy and Circumcised him, intending to have
Crucified him at Easter; for which diverse were Convicted, and put to sundry
Punishments. In the 20th Year of the King, the Thames over-flowed its Banks, so
that Boats were Rowed in the great Palace-Yard at Westminster, and also in the
midst of the Hall. Pope Gregory the Ninth wrote to the King, That he might have
safe conduct to come and see England; but was denied, in consideration it was
thought he did it with an intent to Embroyl the Kingdom. In the 23d of the King
a great Plague happened, consuming 500000 People of all Degrees; and Newcastle
upon Tyne with the Bridge, was consumed by Fire; and two Years after, the Sea
Flowed without any considerable Ebb, and in the Night by the fighting of the
Waves seemed all on Fire; making a terrible Noise, which was heard many Miles.
On the 43d of the Kings Reign a Jew at Tewksbury fell into a Privy on a
Saturday, and refused to be helped out, because it was on their Sabbath;
whereupon the Duke of Gloucester, Lord Lieutenant of the County, made him keep
our Sunday there; when on Monday Morning he was found Dead.

And about this time Dr. Sternham wrote, That the Sufficiency of Holy
Scripture, without Tradition or Innovation, were only necessary to Salvation;
and Roger Bacon, a famous Divine of Oxford, was Imprisoned and severely
Persecuted by the Pope, for Preaching against the Absurdities of the Church of
Rome. And John De Warren Earl of Surry Killed Alen de La Zouch in
Westminster Hall, on an Affront given by a Jostle. Seven Hundred Jews were
Slain in London upon an Insurrection, because one of them had extorted more
than two Pence per Week for 20 s. Interest. Anno Dom. 1269, the Thames was so
hard Frozen, that Men, Cattle and Wains, passed over on the Ice, a considerable
time. Anno Dom. 1271 the Steeple of Bow-Church in Cheapside, London, fell; and
in the fall oppressed many People which were slain in its Ruins.

Remarks on the County of Rutland.
RUtlandshire, or the County of Rutland, is commodiously Situate among diverse
fertile Shires or Counties; being Bounded with Lincolnshire, Northamptonshire,
and Leicestershire, being very neatly compacted, producing some considerable
sprinkling of Corn, but more Pasture; being for the most part Plain without
Hills, and few Woods in it that are considerable; also Cattle, Wool, Fish,
Fowl, and many other things, worthy to Rank it with the rest. It is divided
into 5 Hundreds, containing 48 Parishes, 2 Market Towns, and is a third part
bordered by the River Weland, branching into many pleasant Streams, over which
is laid a very advantageous Bridge, leading to Barrowden. It sends Members to
Parliament, Two Knights of the Shire.

Oxenham in this Shire is famed, as having been an Ancient Station of the
Romans, and for a great Overthrow the Danes received by Catmose. There is
Ketton, memorable for a great Battle fought between King Arthur and the Saxons,
wherein he became Victorious, forcing them into Lincolnshire, where in their
rage they destroyed the most Ancient University of the Britains, Founded at
Stamford, RUTLAND By I. Seller.
map of Rutland said to be so by King Bladud who found out the Virtue of the
Mineral Waters at Bath.

Whitwell is memorable for another Overthrow given the Danes. Scyten is noted
for a Speaking Eagle in the Reign of King Harrold the Last, which Prophesied
the coming in of the Normans, and the Subjection of the Kingdom by them. The
other chief Places are Whissenden, Ashwell, Barrow, Market-Overton, etc.

The Seats of the Nobility are Exton, Brook, and North Luffingham, belonging to
the Earl of Ganesborough. The Gentry have some Seats here, but not very many of
any note. In this County were formerly many Castles, but Demolished in the
several Civil Wars and other Commotions that have happened in this Kingdom, the
Ruinous Foundations of many yet being upon digging broke up. I find but Four
Parks in this County, and some of them but slenderly stored with Deer; yet
there are many Hares, some Coneys, and pleasant Fishing and Fowling at the
proper Seasons.

The Reign of King EDWARD the First (since the Norman Conquest.)
KING Edward had News of his Fathers Death when he was Warring in the Holy
Land, which made ^im settle the Affairs of the Eastern Christians on such Terms
as could be so suddenly obtained, very advan^agious for them; and so returned
home to take care ^f his more near concerns, his Queen in this Voyage ^eing
brought to bed of a Daughter.

Upon his Arrival, he was Received by the Nobles and Commons with many
demonstrations of Joy, and ^n a few Days he and his Queen were Crowned by
Robert Killwarby Arch Bishop of Canterbury, and having disposed of diverse
Trusts and places of Honor, giving some Largesses to ingratiate himself with
the Higher and Lower Degrees, he called a Parliament at Westminster, and
thither Llewellin Prince of Wales was Summoned to do Homage for the
Principality he held. But he taking disgust, because Elianor Daughter to the
deceased Earl of Leicester was taken by the English on the Seas, as she was
coming from France in order to Marry him, not only refused to come, but because
the Lady was detained from him, raised a considerable Army of Welshmen, and
Borderers, and fell into Rebellion, entering England and doing great Mischief.
But the King resolving to make his first Expedition Terrible to that
Languishing Nation, raised such a Power as Llewellin found himself in no
capacity to oppose; wherefore leaving his Men, he came privately to the King,
and prostrating himself begged Pardon; protesting that his Love was so
exceeding great to the Captive Lady, that nothing but the hopes of Redeeming
her, and entering on those Nuptials that had been Agreed on at the Court of
France, could have made him draw his Sword; so that if she might be given to
his Arms, he would from thenceforth live in Peace and Obedience, be always
ready to use his Sword at the Service of King Edward against the French King,
or any other, when he should Command it.

King Edward upon this, considering his Government not to be very well settled,
and that the French King much relied on the Disturbances the Welsh could give
when he designed any thing against England, freely consented to what he
demanded; and upon Llewellin's Swearing Fealty, the Lady was put into his
possession with many Rich Presents bestowed on her at her departure by the
Queen and Court-Ladies; and the Nuptials were Solemnized to their mutual
Satisfaction. Soon after this King Edward, in Monumental Honor to his Queen,
for the great Love she had showed in Sucking his Envenomed Wound, and
accompanying him in the Holy Land, where she endured many hardships, raised
Crosses in the most Remarkable Crossways in England, with the Arms of Spain
Quartered with those of England, and the Queens Statue in Marble on the most
Remarkable of them; and remembering the Treacherous Practices of the Jews
against him Abroad, and their always taking part with the Infidels against the
Christians, he Banished them out of England, to the Number of 15009 Persons,
Confiscating their Goods; by which means, and Fining corrupt Judges and
Officers, he replenished his Treasury with 236000 Marks. And about this time
Dr. Scotus, called Subtilis, Preached against the Popes laying claim to St.
Peter's Keys, his abusing the Episcopal Authority, as also that
Transubstantiation (which wild Notion had been Introduced not long before) was
contradictory to Scripture and common Reason; but the Popish Clergy soon
Persecuted him into silence.

Long had not the Peace continued between England and Wales, ere Llewelling by
the rash Persuasions and Incitement of his Brother David (a Man more
contentious than Provident, and less Valiant than Mutinous, and yet one whom
the King did extraordinarily love and favor) fell into Rebellion again,
forgetting his Oath, which made him little prosper in his Enterprise to enlarge
his Borders; for after many sharp Encounters with Sr. Roger Mortimer, the Kings
Lieutenant on the Western Marches, he and his Brother were taken, their Heads
struck off, and placed on the Tower of London: Yet their followers gave not
over, but kept in Parties, Ravaging and Spoiling by Incursions within the
English Pale, and then with their Booty retired again to their Woods and
Fastnesses, where they had Builded Huts, as if they conceived this Trade would
be of a long continuance, without shifting: But the King, not longer able to
bear the Cries and Complaints of his suffering Subjects, Marched a sufficient
Army thither, but not finding the Enemy in the Field, to Ferret them out he
caused the Woods to be cut down and consumed with Fire; whereupon some
submitted, others dyed of Cold and Hunger in their Retreatments, and many of
the Ringleaders were put to Death by sundry manner of Executions; by which
means they were reduced to a more sociable kind of life, and began to practice
diverse commendable Occupations, Arts and Sciences, and took some pleasure from
thenceforth to live like Honest Men.

After this, Alexander King of Scots, by a fall from his Horse off a Cliff by
the Seaside (whither, upon some sudden Fright, he carried him furiously)
breaking his Neck, and leaving no Male or Female Issue, his three Sisters, (the
Eldest of which was Married to John Baliol Earl of Galloway, the Second to
Robert Le Bruce, Lord of Valley Androw, and the Third to John Hastings, Lord of
Abergavennie, an English Peer) laid claim to the Crown by their most powerful
Friends; many Disputes passed, and Reasonings about it; but these little
availing, it came at last to the Sword, which for many Years made miserable
Havoc in that Kingdom, each of the Competitors laying claim to the Crown in
Right of their Wives, refering the Decision of their Cause to King Edward,
under whose Ward they agreed to put the Government till matters could be
determined; whereupon he passed into Scotland, attended with a considerable
Army, there as Sovereign Lord to determine the Strife, and put the state of
Affairs in good order. But such was their mutual desires to Reign, that no
persuasions prevailed to make any one of them recede from his coveted
Sovereignty; yet they all agreed by a public Writing under their Hands and
Seals to refer themselves and their Titles to the Censure and Judgment of King
Edward; and by the same Instrument surrendered the Crown and Administration of
Affairs to him. To the end that thereby he might enable himself absolutely to
possess such a one of them of the Kingdom, as in his Judgment ought to have the
Regal Dignity conferred on him; and with the Writing he received their several
Demands and Claims fairly drawn up, with the Proofs and Arguments to maintain
them: Whereupon he Summoned a Council of Twenty English, and as many Scotch
Noblemen, Prelates, and Lawyers, to consider and advise what was most proper to
be done in this great Affair; and when he had duly informed himself of the
matter, and was well satisfied in his Conscience about it, he gave the
Definitive Sentence in favor of John Bailiol who had Married the Eldest of the
Three Sisters, and he (upon doing Homage to King Edward) received from him the
Crown and Government of Scotland.

Whilst these things were doing, the French supposing the King over-busied in
so weighty a matter, and not altogether at leisure to mind his own concerns,
entered into Guyan, Gascoyne, and other his Territories beyond the Seas, taking
some Towns, and committing many Outrages on his Subjects, and their
Possessions. The King roused upon notice of this in^ury done him, summoned his
wonted Courage, and gave speedy orders for Levying a potent Army; but upon
computing the Charge, Money was found in a great measure wanting; so that by
the Advice of William Marcbyan his Treasurer he exacted it of the Clergy, who
for the most part having been exempted from the charge of former Wars, were
grown very Rich; he demanded of them half the profit of their Ecclesiastical
Revenues, seizing into his hands the useless or superfluous Plate, Jewels, and
Treasure of the Churches, Abbeys, Monasteries, and other Religious Houses and
Places. This made them exceedingly murmur against him, and labor to Alienate
the Hearts of his Subjects from him; though in some sort he was not wanting to
give them satisfaction, by promising restitution when his Treasure should by
increased; and though they little relied on such a Promise, as thinking the King
would at no time empty his own Coffers to replenish theirs, finding they should
be stripped of their Treasure without remedy, they found out another way, as they
supposed, to make themselves amends in time, though no great matter presently
could be expected from it.

There had been a Statute Enacted in the Fourth Year of his Reign, strictly
Prohibiting the giving and conveying Lands or Tenements to any Corporation
whatsoever, called, The Statute against Mortmain, unless with the Kings
consent; and this stood in the way, especially to hinder Persons in their
Wills, to bequeath any thing of that kind to the Church or Religious Houses:
This they prayed might be Revoked, But he Replied, As of himself he could make
no Laws, so without the Consent of Parliament much less could he Annihilate
them; (for he was honester than to pretend to a Dispensing Power) and though this
vexed them inwardly to be frustrated of all that could be expected to their
advantage, yet such was the power he had gained ove^ them, that they durst not
express any outward dislike of his Proceedings.

After this he imposed a Subsidy upon every Sack o^ Wool, also upon all Flesh,
and Hides that were to b^ Transported out of the Kingdom; and further to
maintain his Wars, required the tenth part of every Man's Substance, or moveable
Goods, compelling the Clergy over and above to bring into his Treasury all such
Sums of Money as they had promised to remit to Rome for the Popes use, toward
the maintenance of the War against the Turks and other Infidels in the Holy
Land, and so having sufficient, he Transported his Armies, sending with them,
besides other Necessaries, 100000 Quarters of Wheat for their Subsistence;
where many Battles were Fought between the English and French in Guyan,
Gascoyne, and other Provinces; the former being mostly Victorious, recovering
many places, and driving the Enemy for the most part out of his Territories
there. But whilst the King was intent to go over and finish what had been so
well begun and carried on; the French King, as much as in him lay, to cross his
proceedings, had made a Faction in Scotland against the new King, who compelled
him to renounce his Allegiance to King Edward, and send Defiance to him; nor
was this all, but with an Army hastily gathered, he entered and wasted the
Northern parts of England, Slaying, Burning and Plundering without Pity or
Remorse: Whereupon King Edward, recounting his manifold Favors, and the great
love he had to the Revolted King of Scots; this base Ingratitude so stirred his
Anger, That he resolved a bloody chastisement should be the punishment of his
unthankfullness: Whereupon recalling some of his Forces, and raising more, he
Marched to the succor of his Subjects; and such was his good Fortune, that in
a little time he met with and fought the Scotch Army, slaying 25000 of them,
winning the strong Castles of Berwick and Dunbar, and soon after the City of
Edenburough, with many other places of note; which made King John too late see
his Errors, and to what distress his rashness had driven him: However, thinking
to find Favor by an humble submission, or at least prevent the further Ruin
and Desolation of his Country, he came and cast himself at King Edwards Feet,
wholle submitting, with himself the Crown and Kingdom of Scotland, to be at his
dispose, in expectation to have been Restored; but King Edward, resenting very
heinously his ungrateful proceedings, sent him under a strong Guard to the
Tower of London; yet ordered him allowance of Liberty, Diet, and Attendance, as
became his state; when Marching from Sea to Sea, without any farther
resistance, he settled the Affairs of Scotland, committing the Government of
the Kingdom to John Warren Earl of Surry, as his Lieutenant; Constituting Hugh
Cressingham Lord Treasurer, and William Barnsley his Chief Justice; confining
some of the Rebellious Scots within the Marches of England, that they might be
disabled from giving any Disturbance in his Absence; and so returned in
Triumph, with great Honors, and high applause of his Subjects.

The King being now at leisure to remember the Injuries the French had done
him, and resolving to Revenge them, Leagued with Guy Earl of Flanders, and
Transported an Army thither, and Fought with Robert Earl of Arthois, whom he
Routed, taking many Towns and Fortresses on the Frontiers; which made the
French King play over the game again of stirring up the Scots to Rebellion,
hoping by that means to constrain him to return; but on the contrary, he
appointed Henry Piercy Earl of Northumberland, his General for that War; who
managed it with that Prudence, that after some Marching, Training them into
the open Field, he gave them Battle with incredible Slaughter, so that many
Miles of Ground were in a manner covered with their dead Bodies, by which great
Overthrow they found themselves constrained to return to their former
Obedience; so that the French King perceiving his Project took not on that
side, seemed very desirous to try his Strength with King Edward in the Field;
but his Courage failing, he reposing more confidence in his Policy than Valor,
he proceeded to tamper about proposals of Love and Amity, that might settle a
lasting Peace; and King Edward being now a Widower, he earnestly solicited him
to take his Sister to Wife, to make the Alliance stronger; which by the cunning
subtilty of some Courtiers, Bribed by the French King, was brought about; and
Peace ensued after a tedious War that had caused much Bloodshead. So the King
with his Queen returned home, and soon after he made Prince Edward his Son, who
had been Born at Carnarvan in Wales, the better to ingratiate himself with
those People, Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester; and to gain the Hearts of
the Londoners, he restored them those Liberties his Father had deprived them
of, and without which they had continued the space of Twelve Years; during
which time a Governor was set over them by the King, and their Magistrates
chosen by his order. But whilst things were well ordering at home, the Scots
again fell into Rebellion: Whereupon the King sent to demand their
Ringleaders, who had drawn them into this danger, (which principally was one
Wallis, a Gentleman of an inveterate Spirit against the English Nation) with a
promise of Pardon to all the rest, upon their laying down their Arms; or else
threatened to waste the Country with Fire and Sword from Sea to Sea, and spare
none of that Nation he should find in his way. But driven on by their hard
Fate, they were Deaf to these Proposals, making yet greater preparations to
weather (as they thought) the Storm they could not but expect; and so upon the
Kings entering the Marches of Scotland, they bid him Battle; where, before the
Armies joined, he made them the same Offers, which they seemed to reject with
scorn; so the Bloody Blast being sounded by the order of the Incensed King, who
resolved now to Scourge them in earnest, the English fell on with such fury and
violence, that they broke, like a Tempest, into the Scots Battle, carrying all
before them, so that a miserable slaughter ensued, and the King pressing too
furiously upon those that Fled, in the eagerness of the Pursuit, fell from his
Horse, and broke two of his Ribs; yet he lightly remounting, and not regarding
his Hurt, drove them out of the Field with the slaughter of 32000 of them; he
not now (as at other times) restraining the Swords of his Soldiers, but gave
scope and encouragement to their thirst of Revenge, and in this Battle fell the
flower of the Scots Nobility and Gentry; but on our side very few were slain;
some Historians make mention but of 28 of all Degrees, though that seems too
Partial. But in comparison of the Scots, they were certainly very
inconsiderable.

The Prisoners that were taken were not many, by reason few were spared in the
Fight, or in the pursuit that were overtaken; so that the small remainder of
the Nobles came and Humbled themselves before the King, charging the fault on
such as they said had justly received their Deserts by being slain in the
Battle; and this Submission, upon their taking a new Oath of Fealty and Homage,
was accepted; and returning home, upon the earnest request of Pope Boniface the
Eighth, he Released John the Deposed King of Scots out of the Tower, who went
to Normandy to live quietly there on Lands allotted him, called Bayliolls
Lordship or Lands; where falling Blind, and being much in Years, he Dyed,
leaving his Estate to his Son Edward. However his Death put not an end to the
Scots Troubles; for they had not long enjoyed Peace, but forgetting their
Oaths, or at least despising all conditions with the English, they again
Revolted, and again felt the same Scourge of War, the King taking by force and
surrender all the strong Castles and Fortresses into his hands, and Oath of the
Justices, Mayors, and Officers of the several Towns and Forts; and having
disposed all things to the best advantage, and settled the Government in trusty
hands, he brought away the Crown, Robes of State, and Marble Chair from Scone,
in which the Scots Kings had always been Crowned; and placed the latter in the
Kings Chapel at Westminster; and on it there is said to be a Prophetic Latin
Distick; in English to this Effect: Where ever this Stone is Placed, the Scot
shall find;
And there shall Rule, for there his Reign's Assigned:
This may indeed seem to be verified in the Union of the two Kingdoms under
King James the First, of the Scottish Line. But to proceed.

As soon as King Edward was returned from his Journey, he caused an Enquiry
(which was termed Troli Baston) to be made in all his Dominions of the
Misdemeanors and Oppressions of his Officers and others; so that the Number of
the Transgressors were so many, that heavy Fines being laid on them, and they
like so many full Spunges Squeezed of their Unjust Gains into the Kings
Coffers, they were plentifully replenished thereby; not only to Pay off old
Debts, but to Recompense such as had at their own Expense faithfully Served him
in his Wars; and among other Complaints, Dr. Langton Bishop of Chester
Exhibited one to the King against Prince Edward, whom he said at the
Instigation of Pierce Gaveston, his Loose and Evil Counselor, had forcibly
broken into his Parks, wounded his Servants, and destroyed his Game: Whereupon
the Prince was committed to Prison during the Kings pleasure, and Gaveston
Banished upon pain of Death, never to return into the Land; and Edward Earl of
Cornwall, Son to Richard King of the Romans Dying without Issue, he gave that
Earldom to Prince Edward; which Title, with that of Chester, have been since
inseparable from the Princes of Wales.

A Peace being now had in Scotland, things remained quiet for a time; during
which space, Robert Bruce, one of the Competitors, came with diverse Nobles to
the English Court, and was highly Entertained; which they did only for a show,
whilst they were dealing underhand with the Pope to favor their Cause; nor was
he slow in it, but sent an Instrument in Writing by which he pretended to lay
claim to the Kingdom of Scotland, as holden of the Sea of Rome; wherein King
Edward was peremptorily required to surcease from all Demands of Tenure and
Sovereignty over it. But he stoutly Answered by his Ambassadors, That it did
belong to the Kings of England, and not unto the Sea of Rome, or to any other;
requiring him to revoke his unjust Claim, for that both he and his Nobles were
resolved to maintain his Right therein at the hazard of their Lives and
Estates; and the Ambassador showing the Hands and Seals of the Nobles, and most
of the Prelates of England, that had Sworn to this Resolution; the old Blade
with the Leaden Sword drew in his Horns; whereupon Bruce secretly withdrew and
raised Tumults in Scotland: Yet the King forced him to fly into Norway, where
he remained; till in Edward the Seconds Reign he returned to broach new
Troubles. But the King, upon his Marching through Scotland, Dyed; commanding in
his Last Will, That his Son should SHROP SHIRE By John Seller
map of Shropshire carry his Bones with him, till he had utterly Subdued the
Rebels; and that Gaveston should not be Recalled from Banishment; also that
his Heart should be carried to the Holy Land, and there Buried: He began his
Reign November 16, Anno Dom. 1272, and Reigned 34 Years, 7 Months and 21 Days;
being the 29th Sole Monarch of England. He Dyed of a Dyssentery at Burg upon
Sands, July 7, Anno Dom. 1307, in the 69th Year of his Age, and was Buried at
Westminster.

In the Third Year of this Kings Reign, on St. Nicholas Day, very terrible
Thunders, Earthquakes and Lightenings happened; also a great Fiery Dragon in
the Air and a Blazing Star, which much amazed the People. In the Year 1288 the
Summer was so Scorching, that many Dyed of extreme Heat; yet Wheat was Sold at
2 s. 8 d. the Quarter, and all Corn at a proportionable rate; but the Year
following, by reason of the great Rains that fell, Wheat was raised to 20 s. a
Quarter, and so continued near Forty Years, which was in those times accounted
a great Dearth. Anno Dom. 1299 the Kings Palace at Westminster with the
Buildings of the Monastery, were consumed with Fire; and a great Whale coming
up the River, was struck and taken over against Erif, being 40 Foot Long, and
proportionable in Bulk, etc.

Remarks on Shropshire, etc.
SHropshire is commodiously situated, intermixed with Hills, Plains, Woods,
Forests, Chaces, etc. and produces Corn, Rich Pastures, Cattle, and many other
things, to the advantage of the Inhabitants. It is Bounded with Cheshire,
Staffordshire, Worcestershire, Herefordshire, Radnorshire, Mongomeryshire, and
Denbyshire: It contains 15 Hundreds, divided into 170 Parishes, and ha^ in it
14 Market Towns, and 18 great and small Rivers, branching mostly from the
Severn; which plentifully Waters this Shire and others. It sends Members to
Parliament 12, viz. Bishops-Castle 2, Bridgnorth 2, Ludlow 2, Shrewsbury 2,
Wenlock 2, and 2 Knights of the Shire.

In Shropshire, besides Shrewsbury, the County Town, a noted Mart for Cloth
and Frizes brought from Wales, and thence dispersed into diverse parts of
England, There are Remarkable Ruins of some Ancient Places, which were
certainly Towns or Cities of great splendour; as Workcester Uriconium the
ancient Usoconia, of which Okenyat is a small remainder; Oswalstree retains
its Name from Oswald the 11th King of Northumberland, who was here Slain in
Battle by Penda King of the Mercians; The other Towns of Note are Wellynton,
Newport, Braynton, etc. At Shrewsbury, and other places on the Severn, is taken
a Fish called a Mort, in Taste like a Salmon; at Pitchford is a Well whose
Water casts up a Scum of Liquid Bitumen, and near Oswaldstree is a Vestigia of
a Roman Camp.

The Seats of the Nobility are Pepperhill, belonging to the Earl of Shrewsbury;
Highercal and Eyton, to the Lord Viscount Newport; Cherbury, to the Lord
Herbert Baron of Cherbury; It has also in it 13 Bridges, 13 Castles, 7
Forests, and 27 Parks. The Seats of the Gentry are likewise very pleasant, and
there is almost every where great store of Game, and abundance of Fish.

The Reign of EDWARD the Second (usually called Edward of Carnarvan.)
EDWARD the Second Succeeded his Father in the Throne; but having been brought
up tenderly, and given too much to Flatterers and loose Company, he very early
gave the Nobles cause to distaste his Government; for though his Father in his
Last Will had strictly Prohibited his Recalling Pierce Gaveston from
Banishment, a Person who by his evil Example and pernicious Counsels had been
the great Debaucher of his Younger Years, yet he did it, though contrary to the
Mind of his People in general; and to despite them the more, took him into his
particular Favor, Vowing if it lay in his power he would willingly share the
Kingdom with him, heaping Honors on him, and Liberally opening his Coffers to
him; so that he no sooner asked, but his desires were granted. This much
perplexed the Nobles, and made them Remonstrate to the King the ill
consequences that were likely to follow on such his Proceedings, putting him in
mind of his dying Fathers charge to him, and urging many other things; but he
little regarded them; so that perceiving the King entirely to dote on this
upstart Favorite, who thereupon grew very Proud and Insolent, advancing him to
the Barony of Wallingford, and Earldom of Cornwall, making him Master of his
Jewels and Treasure, a great part of which he sent beyond the Seas, to provide
for himself against such a Storm as he might reasonably expect, They for a time
held their peace; though they inwardly grieved at the Miscarriage of things.

The King was now Married to Isabel Daughter to Philip the French King, a Lady
of admirable Beauty, but of a haughty Mind, impatient of Injuries; yet this
Loose Favorite, to cross her, because he stood not high in her esteem,
labored by introducing fresh Beauties to the King, to Alienate him from her
Society and Bed, carried him often to Revellings, and made him Drink to Excess,
that his Conscience might not find any deliberate time to Check him for his
Lawless Enterprises.

The Queen at this was both Grieved and Angry, laboring however, by all mild
ways and endearing persuasions to Reclaim the King, laying before him his
Unkindness to one that so tenderly Loved and Honored him, and the Scandal and
Contempt he would cause of himself among his People, if he who was placed in so
eminent a Station, to give good Examples to others, as Patterns for them to
follow, showed in himself such an evil one; Entreating him to follow the
Prudence and Heroic Virtues of his Father, and not despising the sober Advice
of his Grave Counselors, harken to and be lead away by base Parasites and
Flatterers. But the King, not regarding what she said, though the People at the
same time greatly Murmured and spoke evil of him for his Loose and Un-Princely
manner of Living, as also of Gaveston to whom they bore an irreconcilable
hatred: The Nobles found themselves constrained (for redressing these
Mischiefs) and preventing greater, that threatened the Kingdom, To Petition the
King for Gaveston's Banishment; wherein they set forth his evil Practices and
Faults, with the Sorrow of his Majesty's best affected Subjects, for that he
(more than was fit or comely) was Guided and Governed by that unworthy
Favorite; earnestly entreating his Highness he would be pleased (for
preventing such Mischiefs as were otherwise likely to ensue) To Banish that
Lewd Person from his Court and Kingdom.

The King upon this, fearing some danger threatened if he refused to comply with
his Nobles, whom he found resolutely bent no longer to suffer such Indignities
as Gaveston had put upon them; though much against his will, agreed he should be
sent into Ireland; which accordingly was done; yet the King sent after him many
comfortable Messages, and at length constituted him his Lieutenant of that
Kingdom, sending him store of Plate, Jewels, and Corn to maintain his State and
Gran^ure; by which he might conclude his Banishment but ^n Honorable Embassy,
and an occasion presented ^hereby to the King to make him more Rich and Po^ent.

Besides all this, the Kings discontents and passions ^or his Absence, appeared
to be so many and great, That the Nobles were grieved for the perplexities of
^is Mind; which made them (in hopes of his Favorites ^^ture amendment of all
things that had been found ^miss in him, after this Humbling) of their own
accord Petition the King that he might be Recalled: But ^ike the Leopards
Spots, his Vices were so natural to him, and so inherent in him, that he was
nothing changed; but upon his return grew more Insolent than ^ever, which
occasioned him but a short time; for at the ^ncessant Importunities of the
Nobles, he was again Banished into Flanders; yet remained not long, ere the
King (impatient of his Absence) Recalled him without the consent of his Nobles;
and to Agrandize him the more, Married him to his Kinswoman the Earl of
Glocesters Daughter, a Virtuous and Honorable Lady; when bearing himself much
on this Alliance, he grew to such a height, that he scorned the greatest Peers
in England; and in his State, Attendance, and Table, out^ied even the King;
Glorying and openly boasting how he Ruled the King; and by what ways he had
misle^ him. This however did him no kindness, for the King ^^^ding he could no
longer Protect him against the potent Nobles and the clamours of the Common
People, which ^hreatned ruin in his stay, he was constrained to part with him a
Third time. But the ^oise and discontents by his Absence was no sooner pacified
and alay'd, but the King sent to him privately to Return, though very fatal to
him; for upon his Landing, entering into the Castle of Scarborough, he was
there Besieged and taken by the Earl of Warwick, and with the consent of the
Earls of Lancaster and Hereford, carried to Warwick-Castle, and Beheaded.

The King had no sooner notice of the untimely end of his Favorite, but in a
vehement passion he Cursed those Noblemen, and expressed his Anger and Vows of
Revenge in many threatening terms: But Time rendering him cooler, and the
Reasons that were given for their hasty Proceedings, he Pardoned them, in
consideration that all which belonged to Gaveston, should be put into his
hands. However his inclinations were such that he could not be long without a
Favorite, to whom he might impart his Secrets on all occasions; wherefore he
made Sr. Hugh Spencer, and Hugh his Son, of his Cabinet Council; raising them
from a mean Estate, to Lord it over the Nobles; and whatever he did of any
importance, was by their Advice and Direction; he made the Elder of them Earl
of Winchester, and gave to both of them many Honorable Places and Offices,
which caused them to become more Insolent than Gaveston, and altogether as much
hated in a little time.

Robert Bruce, mentioned in the foregoing Reign, upon notice of these Disorders
in England, thought it was now a fit time for him to possess himself of the
Crown of Scotland; and therefore returning from Norway, he was Joyfully
received by the Scots, as well Nobles as Commons; and was by them a second time
Crowned King; whereupon he Levied a great Army, and entered into the English
Marches, miserably wasting the Country as he passed, with Fire and Sword; which
made King Edward shake off his soft repose, and hasten to the Field; whose
coming put a stop to the torent, and made the Scots retire beyond the Tweed.
Whereupon King Edward having strengthened his Army, entered Scotland, doing
great Damage; but was at Bannocks Bourn Encountered by King Robert, who
Surprisingly fell upon the English, by reason of their remissness, and the
unwillingness of some of the Nobles to Engage, because King Edward had given
the great Commands into the hands of mean Persons by the Advice of the
Spencers; and after a bloody and long Fight, totally Routed them. And here King
Edward, through bad conduct, having been a Spectator of the slaughter of many
Valiant Men, (among which were Gilbert D' Clare Earl of Gloucester, and 42 other
Lords, with more than 60 Knights and Baronets, besides 22 of Note, who were
taken Prisoners) he was compelled for his own safety to hasten back for England
(leaving all his Treasure, Ammunition and Baggage behind him, and 22000 common
Soldiers Slain and made Prisoners) exceedingly disconsolated and perplexed;
where he soon found new Troubles: For one John Poldras, a Tanners Son of Exeter
in Devonshire, boldly affirming himself to be the truly begotten Son of Edward
the First, aledging that he was changed by his Nurse in his Cradle for a
Carters Child, raised by this Chimera strange Commotions, many People believing
by King Edwards proceedings, so disagreeable to those of the preceding King,
that there was some ground of truth in it. He also offered diverse colorable
Proofs for what he said, and among others he strongly insisted on the unworthy
and sordid conditions of the King, sorting to none so fitly as to one of
obscure and common Birth; so that a great many of the Commons in those parts
unadvisedly flocked to him, and owned him for their True King, looking on
Edward as a Changling; but they in a hot Skirmish being Defeated, the Impostor
was taken Prisoner, and confessed his Treason and Folly, but not any one that
set him on work, and encouraged him to it; so that being convicted by his
Confession, he was Condemned and Executed, and the rest Pardoned; which at this
time put an end to the Western Troubles.

But in the North, the Scots pursuing these Success, taking many Places
Garisoned with English, by force, and had the strong Castle of Berwick betrayed
into their hands by the Deputy Governor, who let them in, in the dusk of the
Evening, at a Sally-Port he had purposely left open; yet in the dark scuffle he
had his Reward, for going with the appointed Signal of safety, and in the dark,
it not being discerned by the Scots, they Slew him.

Nor was this all the misery at this time the Northern County suffered, their
Cattle Dyed of a grievous Murrain, and Famine was exceeding amongst them.
Moreover diverse notorious Thieves and Robbers (to the number of 200) taking the
advantage of these stirs, put themselves into Friars Weeds, and Robbed,
Ravished, Burned, and laid Waste where they came, Murdering diverse who
Resisted them; but in a few Months most of them were taken and put to Death by
sundry Torments. The Famine was likewise succeeded by a Plague; so that the
Living were scarce able to Bury the Dead.

These Calamities and daily cries of his People made the King advance Northward
with an Army; yet bad success attended him, for giving the Scots Battle, he was
Overthrown, and a great part of his Army Slain; and so in much vexation
returned home. This made the Nobles grievously complain of the Spencers, and
others, the Kings Favorites, by whose bad Mannagement of Affairs the Realm
was at a point to be overwhelmed in Misery, laying before the King their
Misdemeanors and ill treatment of his Subjects; how many Thousands suffered by
the Maladministration of Government, and the great Callamities approaching,
if speedy Redress was not had, even to the subversion of the State; and then
became Importunate Suitors to him, that he would be pleased to put those from
him that had caused so many Grievances, and made him careless of those Duties
which by Almighty God were required at his hands. They told him likewise, As
Subjection belonged to the People, so the King was bound to Protect them; and
that most dishonourably he had left his Commons in the North a Prey to the
Scots, and grievously oppressed with Wants and Extremities; and that if he
pleased not (upon their humble Entreaty and Request) to dismiss the Spencers
from their Places and Service, They must and would presume to do it, though with
the hazard and perril of their own Lives.

At this, though the King in Conscience could not but hearken to it, being an
apparent Truth, yet it so highly displeased him (who preferred his Favorites
before the Good of all his People) That he bit his Lip, and with an austere
Countenance turned at first from them, without speaking; but considering the
ill consequences that might attend his slighting them in a business wherein all
his good Subjects were concerned, he turned again, and gave them a pleasing
Answer, viz. That since things were come to such extremity, there could be no
suitable Redress but in a Parliament, which he speedily intended to call, and
would submit to what that Assembly should determine most Necessary for the good
and welfare of the Kingdom.

However, the Nobles afterward seemed dissatisfied, as fancying the King (when
they were so Assembled) designed to Seiz them, and forcibly make them comply
with his Terms; yet finding such a meeting was necessary, they came strongly
Guarded with a numerous Train, all in one Livery; this much startled the King,
but most of all it grieved him he now saw he must part with the Spencers, whom
in the Ecstasy of his Expressions he had declared to Love dearer than his Queen
or Children; and accordingly they were Banished during their Lives, the King
being bound not to Recall them upon any pretense whatever. But this caused a
hatred in him against the Barons, so that he expressed it in Threats, and that
he ought not to be forced to do any thing against his Mind. So that although
the Younger Spencer, geting a Squadron of Ships turned Pirate, Robbing the
English Merchants and Strangers, The King would not consent to their Entreaties
that a Fleet might be sent out to surpress those apparent Injuries and
Disgraces, but Laughed at them when they proposed it, as inwardly pleased at
the News they had brought him; and soon after, contrary to the expectation of
all Men, Recalled them from Banishment, restoring them to their Honors and
Offices, wherein they became more Insolent than ever.

The Barons grieved at these Proceedings, and Expecting no Redress from the
King, immediately took up Arms, and the King did the like; so that after many
sharp Bickerings and Encounters, both Armies joined in Battle, and Fought
cruelly; Kindred against Kindred, making no distinction of Relations, in the
bloody Field: But when many of the Barons and other Leaders were Slain, their
Party gave way, and the King Pursued very furiously, so that a miserable
Slaughter happened, and at Burrow-Bridge, near where this Battle was Fought,
The Earl of Lancaster (the Kings Uncle) and 90 other Nobles were taken
Prisoners, and sent to Pontfract-Castle, where the Noble Earl staid on a
Scaffold Seven Hours before they could procure an Executioner to Behead him, so
greatly was he Beloved by all sorts of People; but at length a vile Wretch was
procured out of a Goal, for a sum of Money, to perform that Office. Five others
were put to Death there, and at York the next day the Lords Clifford, Mobray
and Derwell were Hanged in Iron-Chaines. The Earl of Hereford likewise lost his
Head; in all (at several places) Twenty Noblemen; so that in no Reign so much
Noble Blood, by Executions, wet the English Earth.

These terrible Executions astonished the rest, and broke their Strength, which
greatly puffed up the Spencers, by whose Instigation, more than any cruel
inclination in the King, it was thought to be done, to secure their own State,
which after this they imagined could not be shaken: For soon after, some
Courtiers Entreating the King for the Life of a Person of mean Rank, who had
committed a Murder, he broke out into a violent Passion in these words, viz. A
Plague overtake you all, for Flatering Knaves; you make much Suit for the Life
of an errand Caitiff, but which of you spoke a word for the good Knight Lord
Thomas my Uncle? By the Bread of God this Varlet shall Dye the Death he
deserves; and so in a Rage he turned from them, and soon after he called a
Parliament at York, in which Prince Edward his Son was Created Prince of Wales
and Duke of Aquitain; and Sir Andrew Harkly, whose extraordinary Service was a
principal means of the Barons Overthrow, Earl of Carlisle; and demanded the
Sixth Penny of all Temporalities in England, Wales and Ireland, to defray the
Charges of his intended War against the Scots, which he obtained; yet the
People grievously Murmured at Paying it, affirming they were altogether
Impoverished by the late Wars and Famine.

And now the Scots geting secret Inteligence of what the King intended against
them, resolved to begin first, and well knowing they had Impoverished the
Northern parts, and that no further Booty was there to be had, they crossed
over the Narrow Straights, and fell very furiously on Ireland; but by the
Courage and prudent Conduct of the Bishop of Armagh and the Lord Brinningham,
they were Overthrown, their King Slain, and most of them Cut in Pieces; upon
this advantage, King Edward Marched into Scotland, which he found full of
Terror and Confusion, the People every where flying before him into the Woods,
Mountains, and other Fastnesses; thinking by that means to weary out the
English; and indeed their Project failed not, for Snows, Rains, and bitter
Frosts ensuing, the English were unable to keep the Field, especially their
Provisions being near spent, and a great Mortality (by reason of the raw Damps
and Colds) grievously afflicted the Camp; so that, contrary to the mind of the
King, they were forced to return; which the Scots perceiving, crept from their
lurking Holes, and carried Fire a cross, which is the usual Signal for the
Alarm, or raising the Country, and soon gathered into such Multitudes, that
following and wasting his Rear, at last they boldly set on his main Battle and
discomfited it; so that he was constrained to fly, and leave them Masters of
his Treasure, and Baggage. This Defeat is said to be occasioned by the
Treachery of Sr. Andrew Harkley, who had been lately Created Earl of Carlisle;
who being Bribed by the Scots, betrayed his trust in the Battle. But however it
happened, it was charged upon him, and for it he lost his Head.

Upon the Kings return, there happened a Quarrel between the Queen and the
Spencers; she charging them to have Alienated the Kings affections from her,
and to cause him to place it on Harlots, and the King seeming to excuse or take
part with them, she so highly resented the Affront, that under pretense of
visiting her native Country, she obtained leave to go over with the Prince her
Son, where she was received by King Charles her Brother ( Philip her Father
being Dead) with many expressions of kindness, and showing her dislike to
return unless matters might be Reformed at home, some of the Barons in England
sent secretly by Letters, to Advise her, That if she could procure one Thousand
Valliant Strangers, they would join her on her Landing with a considerable
Force, and endeavor once more to Redress the Disorders of the State: This she
made known to her Brother, who comforted her by earnest Promises and Oaths,
That by his Assistance, and at his Cost, her Wrongs and the Kingdoms Injuries,
should be Repaired; but kept not his Word, for being Bribed by the Spencers,
who by their Spies had notice of her tampering in the French Court, when she
demanded his Performance, he grew cold upon it, and chid her for such
Intentions; saying She was foolishly afraid of her Shadow, since she had
Undutifully forsaken the company of her Lord and Husband.

The Pope also, and chiefest Cardinals, being Engaged by great Rewards,
strictly required the French King, upon pain of the Apostolic Curse, to send
home the Queen and Prince, so that she perceiving he intended to deliver her
into the hands of such as would have Forcibly brought her over, she secretly
retired with her Son into the Empire; however during her stay at the French
Court, she had done England a kindness, in causing by her Mediation the
Troubles in Gascoyne to cease; and making an Agreement in other matters
relating to the King her Husband: In consideration of which, he was to confer
the Duchy of Aquitain and Earldom of Poictou on the Prince his Son, which he
did, under his Seal; and he did Homage for it to his Uncle the French King; but
upon his sending for her home, she refused to come, unless hers and others
Grievances were Redressed by Parliament; which occasioned his trying by other
means to make her return; but as is said, she retiring into the Empire, upon
suspicion of what was Intended, went to Hainalt, where she was kindly received;
and to make her Interest strong at that Court, she without the consent of her
Husband, or the Peers of England, Married the Prince to Phillipa, the Earl of
Hainalts Daughter; upon which account, and the means of what Treasure she had
brought, she raised 2700 Soldiers, Commanded by Sr. John of Hainalt, and the
Lord Beamont, to whom Joined the Young Lord Mortimer, who had escaped out of
the Tower of London, and got beyond the Seas, with some other Exiled English
Noblemen and Strangers, so that having all things in a readiness, she Sailed
for England, and Landed at Orwell in Sussex, whither a great Number of English
resorted to her; and the further she went, her Army greatly increased.

King Edward having notice of this, left his Court, and retired hastily into
the West to raise Forces; promising 1000 l. to any that should bring him the
Lord Mortimer's Head; The King was no sooner retired, but the Londoners taking
the Advantage of his Absence, seized upon the Bishop of Exeter, who was
appointed to Govern the City, and without any Legal Proceedings or Judicial
Sentence, caused his Head to be stricken off at the Standard in Cheapside; and
then with great violence broke down the Tower Gates, killing all they found in
it, and secured that and the City to the use of the Queen, and of the Prince
her Son.

The King being Informed of these Proceedings, his Heart failed him; so that
desisting from his intent of raising Forces, he Posted to Bristol and Fortified
it, committing the Defense thereof to the Earl of Arundale, and the Spencer's,
Father and Son, entered with him into the Castle, which they determined as a
last Refuge to defend with all their Strength; but within a few days after, the
City was Besieged, Assaulted and Taken by the Queen and Barons, who took and
Committed the Earl and diverse others of Note to safe custody; the King and his
two Favorites dispairing of Safety there, got out to Sea in a small Fisher
Boat, intending for Ireland; but so Providence ordered it, that it was thrice
(when put out) driven by the shifting of the Wind near the Castle; so that the
last time the Lord Beamont Manning out a Vessel seized it, and found there the
King and the Elder Spencer, the other having got on Shore, and shifted away for
a time: These the Queen presented before the Castle, which the Garrison no
sooner perceived, but they Surrendered; and here the Lord Arundel was Beheaded,
and the King sent Prisoner to Kenelworth Castle; and by the way they contrived
to Shave him, to Disguise him, least being known he should be Rescued; when the
Impudent Fellow of a Shaver set him on a Molehill, and told him That Cold Water
must now serve his turn, pointing to the Ditch; at which Indignity, the King
burst out in Tears, saying, There should be Warm Water whether he would or no.
The Queen having thus far proceeded, determined the Death of her Capital Enemy,
dooming him to be Quartered Alive; which was done, and his Head and Quarters
set up in diverse places; she gave a considerable Reward to the Person who
brought her the Head. Young Spencer, soon after was taken with the Lords
Baldock and Reading, carried to Hereford, and Hanged on a Gallows 50 Foot high:
And thus fell these Favorites, who put too much trust in their own Strength
and Policy, little expecting such sudden turns of Fortune to alter their
conditions, by throwing them from the Pinnacle of Honor into the Gulf of Misery
and Disgrace, which ought to be a Warning to all who undeservedly aspire,
cautiously to behave themselves.

Upon this, a Parliament was called to settle the disordered Affairs of the
Kingdom, who Resolved to transfer the Crown from Edward to his Son; whereupon
three Bishops, three Earls, two Barons, two Abbots, and two Justices, were
appointed to demand (in the Name of the Parliament) a surrender of it; which if
he refused, they would perhaps take other measures and give it from his Family,
to one more worthy. This he took so grievously, that after many complainings of
his hard Usage, and a confession of his Failures in Government, he fell in a
Swoon, which moved the Lords to pity him; but being brought to himself, after
some time bemoaning his hard Fate, seeing there was no other Remedy, he Signed
and Sealed the Instrument tendered him, by which he passed over his Crown, and
Right and Title to all his Dominions, to Prince Edward his Son; whereupon Sr.
William Trussel, one of the Judges or Justices, in the name of the whole Realm,
renounced Homage to the King in these words, viz.

I William Trussel in the name of all Men of the Land of England, and of all
the Parliament, Procurator, do resign to thee Edward, the Homage that was made
to thee some times; and from this time forward I defy thee, and deprive thee
of all Royal Power and Authority; I shall never be tendant to thee, as for
King, after this time.

Edward being thus Unkinged, the Strangers were dismissed with large Pay, and
many things were Reformed. SOMERSET SHIRE
map of Somersetshire But as it is a true saying, There are but a few Steps
between the Prisons and Graves of Princes, so here it fell out; for the King
being taken from Kenelworth by Sr. John Matravers and Thomas Gourney, and
carried to Bracklay Castle, he was in a most Inhumane manner Murdered, by
running a Red-hot Spit through a hollow Horn they had placed in his Fundament,
up into his Body; for which they afterward fled, and dyed miserably in
Banishment. Thus fell the Deposed King, whose Reign is accounted but 19 Years,
6 Months, and 18 Days, tho he Lived some time longer; being 40 Years of Age,
and was Buried at Gloucester.

In this Kings Reign, Anno Dom. 1311, The Order of the Knights Templers that
Fought so long in the Holy Land, was Abolished in all Nations. Anno 1318,
happened such a grievous Famine, That the Poorer sort Eat Dogs, Cats, Rats, and
other Unclean things. The Prisoners in Goals Murdered diverse fresh comers,
and Eat them, and yet many Thousands Dyed for want of this Nauseous Food. This
was succeeded by a Pestilence, and Rot of Cattle, Breaking in of the Sea, Huge
Land-Floods, Fiery Armies Fighting in the Air, and a Terrible Blazing Star.

Remarks on Somersetshire, etc.
SOmersetshire abounds in Corn, Cattle, Wool, Woollen-Cloath, Serges and many
other valuable Commodities: On the North-West it opens to the Irish Sea, and
for the rest it is Bounded by Devonshire, Dorsetshire, Wiltshire, and
Gloucestershire; it contains 42 Hundreds, 2 Bishoprics, viz. Bristol, Bath
and Wells, which are accounted Cities, 385 Parishes, 35 Market Towns, 9 Rivers,
45 Bridges, 2 Forests, and 18 Parks: It sends Members to Parliament 18, viz.
Bath 2, Bridgwater 2, Bristol 2, Ilchester, 2 Milborn Port 2, Minhead 2,
Taunton 2, Wells 2, and 2 Knights of the Shire.

Bath, in this Shire, is very Ancient, famed for its Mineral Waters, Curing
Diseases in many People; said to be First found out by Bladud an Ancient
British King; Bath and Wells jointly together make one Bishopric, though Wells
is principally esteemed for its curious Cathedral, held to be Built by Inas
King of the West Saxons. At Pen the Britains were Overthrown by Kenwald, King
of the West Saxons, and afterward the Danes by Edmund Ironside; Bridgwater is
noted for a great defeat given the Danes Anon Dom. 845: And for the Battle of
Sedgmore near it, beeween the late King James's Forces and the Duke of
Monmouth, Anno 1685; wherein the latter was totally Routed.

Glassenbury, the Avalonia of the Romans, is famed for the Burying Place of
Joseph of Arimathea, the first Preacher of the Gospel in this Island, and here
it is thought King Arthur was brought and Buried; Cadburn is remarkable for a
greak Defeat King Arthur there gave the English-Saxons; Banesdown (Mons
Bandonicus) was doubtless some Encampment of the Romans, as appears by the
Coins found there; and on the Top there remains the Ruins of some Noble Castle,
said to be one of the Palaces of King Arthur, though some Writers have placed
this Town in Cornwall; Ilchester is of good repute; Taunton for its Memorable
Siege in the Civil Wars, and Bristol for the great Trade it drives, and the
many Sieges it has endured.

On Mendip Hills, and several Places on the Shore of the River Froom, is store
of Pit-Coal: In the Quarrey at Kingh^^ are found Spiral Stones in the form of
Snails; at Ochyhale near Wells is a deep Cave, in which are many Rivulets and
hollow Recesses, The Monument of Stones near Stanton Drew near Pensford is very
remarkable, being great Tracts of some vast Foundations; St. Vincent's Rock is
famous for the Stones found there, nearly resembling Diamonds, being equal to
those of India in luster but not hardness.

The Seats of the Nobility are Clevedon Court, belonging to the Earl of
Bristol; Hinton St. George, Court of Ewick, Lenn Court and Walton, to the Lord
Paulet; Connington, to the Lord Clifford: Wells Palace and Banwell, to the
Bishop of Bath and Wells; Bristol Palace, to the Bishop of Bristol: With diverse
Houses of the Gentry pleasantly Sighted, etc.

The Reign of EDWARD the Third (commonly called Edward of Windsor.)
EDWARD, upon the offer of the Crown to him in his Fathers Life time, not being
Fifteen Years of Age, refused it with Tears and Detestation; till Mortimer and
the Queen his Mother, by Threats and Persuasions wrought him to some
compliance; nor then would he yield to be Crowned, till his Father had
Resigned; nor then, till he was made sensible by some faithful Counselors it
was the only way to secure the Life of the Deposed King, and the Crown in the
Right Line: For many feared that Mortimer being great with the Queen, and high
in her favor, would find some means to rid her of her Husband, and by Marrying
her place the Diadem on his own Head; for which reason he ever after hated that
aspiring Lord, and labored to Revenge the Indignity and Death of King Edward
the Second; which in time he in some measure did, in the Execution of Mortimer,
as will hereafter appear.

In the beginning of this Kings Reign, the Scots denounced War against England,
thinking to make their Advantage in the Kings Minority; but he, though Young,
being of a Martial Spirit, scorned to be outbraved; whereupon he raised an Army
of 50000 valiant Men, and Marched into Scotland, chasing the Scots from place
to place, who nowhere durst appear in the Field, in any Number; and having
seized several Towns and Castles, and finding his Soldiers tired out in
following through Woods, Marshes, and over Craggy Hills, he resolved to return,
which he did, and assembled his Parliament at Northampton, in which the two
Executed Spencers, and Walter Stapleton Bishop of Exeter, who had been put to
Death by the Londoners, were Attainted of High Treason, and all their Goods,
Lands, etc. Seized into the Kings hands, and then the King by the direction of
his Mother and Mortimer, concluded a dishonorable Peace with the Scots,
releasing them of their Homage, Fealty, and Service due from that Kingdom to
the Crown of England, and delivered up the Grand Instrument or Charter, called
Ragman, which under the Hands and Seals of their Late King and of the Nobility
of Scotland, testified their Tenure and Subjection to the Kings of this Realm.
After that, he Married his Sister to David Son to Robert Bruce, and created
Mortimer Earl of March, at which the Generality of the Nobility were
exceedingly disgusted.

Mortimer upon his new Advancement to Honor, and relyance on the Queens
favor, though he found the Nobles were not in his Interest, bore it with a
higher hand than formerly; and perceiving Edmund of Woodstock Earl of Kent, the
Kings Uncle, stood most in his way and crossed his aspiring, he and the Queen
so labored with the Young King, That infecting him with a Jealousy, that the
Earl had Designs upon his Life and Crown, which being backed by false
Witnesses, he ^dvisedly gave way to Articles that were suggested ^ brought in
against him, so that by Mortimers Crea^es he was found Guilty and Beheaded, to
the great ^ef of all True Englishmen, being a Person of singular ^lour, a great
Statesman, Prudent and Virtuous: but ^ Blood (so Treacherously spilt) was not
slow in ^ying for, and procuring Vengance; for the King ^ing made sensible of a
familiarity between Mortimer ^d his Mother, more than was decent, and much to
^er dishonor, by being got abroad among the Vulgar, ^using many scandalous
Reports, he would not how^ver lightly believe it; yet one time being assured
she ^as at Mortimer's Castle, he with a resolute Band of ^is Followers,
privately in the Evening entered a back ^way, and seizing such Servants as he
met, to prevent ^iscovery, went by the direction of one of them, to ^he Chamber
where the Queen Lodged, and there ^ound her in Bed, and Mortimer undressing in
order to ^leep with her: This so exasperated the Young King, that calling him
Trator and Villain, he seized him with his own hands, and delivered him to the
Guards, he not offering to resist or call for help, though he had a far greater
number of Attendants in the Castle than the King brought with him; and being
Committed to Prison, free liberty was given for any that would to Exhibit their
Complaints against him, which were summed up in the following Articles,

1. That he had wickedly contrived and procured the Murder of the Kings Father.

2. That by his false Accusations and sinister Counsels, he had caused the King
to take away the Life of his Uncle, who was truly Noble, Religious, Devout,
Honest, and a strong Pillar of the Commonwealth.

3. That too familiarly he conversed with Queen Isabel the Kings Mother, to her
just Reproach, and the dishonor of the King.

4. That he received of the Scots a Bribe of 20000l. for which he procured the
Kings Retreat out of Scotland, and the Releasment of his Signory and Homage due
for that Kingdom.

5. That he had deceitfully couzened and beguiled the King of his Wards and
Treasury, converting the Moneys and Profits to his own use and behoof.

For these Wicked and Treasonable Practices he was Tried and Condemned, and
afterward Hanged at Tyburn, where he remained Hanging unpittied for two Days.
And in a little time after the King abridged the Queen his Mother in her Dowry,
allowing her but 1000 l. per Annum, restraining her within a certain Limit.

In the Fifth Year of the Kings Reign Philip D' Valois, who Succeeded Charles
in the French Throne, required him to come over and pay Homage and Fealty for
his Dutchey of Guyan, and accordingly he went, and was kindly entertained till
he refused to do it by any more Ceremony than Words; but that not being
Accepted, he returned to England, and upon a Second Summons sent it in Writing
under the Great Seal, which was not looked on as sufficient; yet this
submission displeased the English Nobility, who told him he ought not to pay
any Homage, for as much as the Crown of France in Right of his Mother properly
belonged to him, and thus stated his Title, viz. Isabel was Daughter to Philip
the Fair, Son to Philip the Hardy, That Philip the Hardy, the Queens
Grandfather, had two Sons, viz. her Father, who was King, and Charles D' Valois
who was also King after him; Philip the Fair had three Sons, all which Dyed
without Issue Male, he had also a Daughter which was this Isabel, Married to
King Edward the Second, and that Charles D' Valois the Second Son of Philip the
Hardy was Father to Philip D' Valois who then Reigned in France; and although
by the Salique Law of France Women are barred to Rule, yet King Edward being a
Male of the Elder branch, ought to take place before a Male of the Younger,
though coming by a Female; and that there was no force in that Law to debar him
of such a Right.

This the King considered prudently, and deliberated with Grave Counsel about
it, who all concluded it was his undoubted Right; and the Earl of Arthois (who
fled out of France for saying (upon the French Kings Sentencing his Earldom to
Maud Countess of Burgundy) By me was he made a King, and by me shall he be
Deposed) vehemently solicited the King to claim and prosecute his Right,
promising him his Interest to make him many Friends even in the Heart of
France: But this was laid aside a while, by reason of a difference arising
between England and Scotland: For King Edward sending to David the Scots King,
who had Married his Sister, to restore the Castle of Berwick, and do him Homage
for his Kingdom, he Answered, That by the Sword he had won the Castle, and
would keep it; and as for the Homage demanded, his Father never acknowledged
any such Service; and if he had, King Edward had released it, if any such was
due; and therefore he would not confess any Tenure of the Crown of England.

This slighting Answer highly exasperated King Edward, so that he raised a
powerful Army, and Marching into Scotland soon subdued the better part of it;
Fortifying and Garisoning to his own use the Towns and Castles he took, and in
his return posessed himself of Berwick, and caused Edward Bayliol Son to John
Bayliol who had been King of Scotland but was deceased, there to be Crowned
King of Scotland, to hold it in Tenure of him, and committing to his charge the
Government of the Town of Berwick: Yet he had not long withdrawn his Army, ere
the Scots had outed this new King, and compelled him to fly into France;
whereupon King Edward Marched against David, who had procured a great many
French Forces, and Overthrew him with a great Slaughter of his followers; and
so again having secured that Kingdom more strongly than before, he returned in
Triumph.

And now he had leisure to consider how to possess himself of the French
Diadem; and the firmer to bind the Earl of Arthois to his Interest, he created
him Duke of Richmond; and to carry on the thing secretly till it should be ripe
for execution, The King by private Messages craved the Advice of the Earl of
Hanialt his Wives Father, the Lord Beaumont, and others, who had great Interest
in Germany and the Netherlands, who all approved it, promising their best
assistance; and that he might have power to command the Nobles and Common
People of those Countries when occasion required it, They procured him to be
created Vicar General of the Empire.

All this while the French King was Ignorant of their Proceedings, being
extremely busy in providing Necessaries for an Army of 60000 Men, with which he
intended to pass into the Holy Land, making his Brother John Duke of Normandy
and Regent of all his Dominions till his return; but at length having secret
Notice of King Edwards Pretensions from some Treacherous Counselors in
England, who underhand were his Pensioners, he laid aside his intended Eastern
Expedition, to defend his own Country; yet this Discovery sooner than was
wished, did not at all amate King Edward, nor slacken him in what he Designed;
but knowing Money is the Sinnew and main support of War, by many Politic
Devices he got vast Sums from his Subjects, and Treasured it in his Coffers,
till his Affairs should require it, so that for a time Money became so scarce
among the Trading People, That a fat Ox was sold for a Noble, a fat Sheep for
Twelve Pence, a Quarter of Wheat for Two Shillings, and other Provisions
proportionable.

Matters being thus Resolved on and Forwarded, he Sailed to Flanders with his
Queen, where he met and Conferred with a great many Princes of Germany, who
agreed to assist him; and returning, raised an Army of 27000 Men, with which he
Landed in France; and to oppose him, the French King took the Field with an
Army of double the Number; but when they were ready to join in Battle, Jone
Countess of Hainalt, Sister to King Philip, and Mother to the Queen of England,
by her unwearied Mediation staid their forward Swords, by procuring a
Twelvemonths Truce; whereupon the French King dissolved his Army, and King
Edward with his returned to England: Yet he gave not over his Design, for going
to Brussells after the expiration of the Truce, the German Princes firmly
Engaged themselves to his Interest, and solicited the Flemings to Confederate
in the League; but they excused it, unless the King would style himself King of
France, and quarter the Arms of that Kingdom with his own, That so he might be
empowered to release unto them a Bond of Two Millions of Florins wherein they
stood obliged not to wage War against the King of France. These things he
actually did; and then they consorted with the German Princes who Signed and
Sealed an Instrument to be True to King Edwards Interest; and thereupon he
returned to England, to make speedy preparations for the War; and found that in
his Absence the French Squadrons had Burnt Southampton, and Ravaged Hampshire
and part of Sussex, carrying away much Booty; but not doubting they should one
day pay dear for it, he called a Parliament, who Granted him a Fifth part of
Moveable Goods, and a Third Part of Corn, also a great Tax on Wool, which lay
heavy on the Meaner Sort. He Borrowed morover of his Rich Subjects, and the
City of London, furnished him with 20000 Marks; he Coined much Gold and Silver
with the French Arms Quartered with the Lions; and so early in the Spring
Sailed to the Sluice, which he found Blocked up by a Fleet of French, Genois,
Picards, and other Nations, about 250 Sail, and on Board them an Army of 40000
Men, these he Encountered and utterly Defeated; Destroying all that he seized
not to his use, sending a Multitude of Prisoners into England; which Victory
obtained by much an inferior Number of Ships and Men, gained him a large
Reputation among the Princes his Confederates, and greatly dismayed the French;
and Marching into Flanders, he joined the Forces of Jacob Dartwell, General of
the Flemings; with those of the Duke of Guelders, the Marquess of Muse, Earls
of Mons, Suvians and Hainalt, the Lord Tralquemont, and many Thousand Germans,
etc. and laid Siege to the City of Tournay, which the French King prepared to
Relieve, but as before, by the incessant Mediation of the Countess of Hainalt
when the Place was at point of Yielding, another Truce was made, and the Armies
Dissolved to the great perplexity of most that had Engaged.

Whilst King Edward was employed abroad, the Scots by the Encouragement of the
French King Deposed Edward Bayliol, and Renounced their Homage to the Crown of
England; but upon his Marching thither with 6000 Horse and 40000 Foot, he
Regained what had been Lost, and made them Submit: Yet he was no sooner
retired, but David coming out of France with some Forces, raised an Army and
Invaded England, wasting all before him, till he came to Newcastle on Tyne,
which he closely Besieged; when 40 resolute Men of the Garrison, resolving to
surprise him in his Tent, ventured in the Night time into the midst of the
Scots Camp, and though they missed of him, because he had that Evening removed
his Tent, yet they seized the Earl of Murray, and brought him Prisoner to the
Town; which so Terrified the Scots, that they soon raised their Siege, and
Marched farther into the Country, taking the City of Durham, putting all to
the Sword they found in it; but as they passed by the Castle of Roxbourough,
that was kept by Sr. William Montague Brother to the Lord Montague Earl of
Salisbury, then Prisoner in France, wherein was the Earls admirable Beauteous
and Virtuous Lady, he Sallied with Forty Horsemen, fell in the Rear of the
Scots Army, killed about 200, and took 20 Horses Laden with the richest Spoils
they had taken at Durham: Whereupon the Army faced about, and Besieged the
Castle, which was manfully Defended for a long time, when fearing it would be
taken, the Governor, when all others refused it, broke through the Scots Camp
singly on a swift Courser, and carried notice to the King of the Distress it
was in, who hasted to its Relief: The terror of whose approach, made the Scots
raise their Siege a day before he could arrive there; yet was he entertained by
the Countess of Salisbury in the Castle with great Thankfulness, Duty, and
Respect; and was so taken with her exceeding Beauty, That he earnestly sued for
Enjoyment, but the Virtuous Lady first with mild and kind Entreaties, and
afterward with quick and nipping Reprehensions, strove to make him see his own
Error; but such was his desire, and her denials so peremptory and resolute,
That discontentedly he left her, and cashiered his Army; so returning to London
he proclaimed great Feasting and Sports to Recreate his weary Warriers, to
which resorted diverse out of Foreign Nations; and in the Justings Sr. John
Beaumont was unluckily Slain. And after this was finished, a Parliament was
called, wherein he created his Eldest Son Edward Prince of Wales, and had four
Fifteenths of the Laity, and three of the Clergy given him, toward ^he support
of the War, certain Lords and others being appointed by Parliament to see it
was employed to no other use; and the Year following (to increase desire of
Martial Glory in his Nobles and Others, according to the Custom of other
Countries) he ordered an Order of Knighthood, which he called, The Order of the
Garter: Some say from the Countess of Salisbury's droping her Garter in a
Dance, which the King taking up, and seeing some of his Nobles smile, he said,
HONISOIT QVI MALY PENSE; that is, Evil be to him that Evil thinks; vowing ere
long such honor should be done to that Silken Tie, that the best of them
should be proud of it; and this has eversince been the Motto on the Garter
incircling the Arms of England; he confined the number to 26, of which himself
and his Successors were to be Sovereigns, stiling them, Knights of the most
Noble Order of the Garter. The Rights and Ceremonies of this Order were Yearly
to be Solemnized with Princely Magnificence at the Castle of Windsor, where
their Achievements are to be seen in St. George's Chapel, many Officers
belonging to and attending on these Knights on the Ceremonies of their
Installment.

Soon after this he Levied an Army, and sent it under the Leading of the Earl
of Derby into Gascoine, where he won many Towns, Castles, and Forts: And about
this time one Jaques Dartwell, a Fleming, who from a low condition had raised
himself to the highest Command and Power among the People that ever any Man had
before him, by whom he was esteemed as the only Patron of their Country,
laboring with the Flemish Lords to gain their consent for the Deposing Loys
their Earl, as a Fool, and unfit to Govern, and to place Edward the Black
Prince, Son to Edward King of England in his stead, the Popular Tide suddenly
turned upon him, from Love to mortal Hatred; and though he was warned to shun
the danger, yet going to his House at Gaunt, not doubting but the Storm would
blow over, and that their former Love to him could not be altogether so soon
extinguished, but might in time revive; yet no sooner had he entered into the
House but it was Besieged by the common sort, railing at him, and reviling him
in bitter terms; so that thinking by his Authority to appease their Rage, he
spoke to them from a Window, but their clamor drowned his Voice, and Sticks
and Stones flew about his Ears in Numbers; soon after they broke in, and in a
barbarous manner Murdered him. This one displeasing fact outballancing all the
good deeds he had done for that Country through the greater part of his Life,
in Fighting their Battles, and often saving them from apparent Ruin; so little
stress is there to be laid on popular Greatness and Applause. And by this
tampering, King Edward lost many of his Friends, the Flemings altogether
enclining to the French Interest, who before were at his devotion; and several
of the German Princes fell off and withdrew their Forces. Yet these his
Misfortunes so little availed to discourage him, that he resolved to pursue his
Right with his own Strength; and hearing soon after, that John, Eldest Son to
the French King, had Besieged the Castle of Aquillon in Gascoyn with 10000 Men,
which was Nobly Defended by the Earl of Pembrook and Sr. Walter Manney, he with
14000 Men, laid Siege to Harflew, which he Took, and gave the spoils to his
Soldiers, which were very great: He likewise Sacked Cheirburg, Mountborough,
Quarentine, and the Castle belonging to it, and overrun all Normandy, greatly
enriching his Army; and then pitched his Tents before the City of Caen, in
which were the Earls of Tankervile, Ewe, and Guyens, and with little loss of
Men took and ransacked that great City, and the Earls were made Prisoners; and
so Marched to Lovers, which he Took; then Entered the Province of Eureux which
he Wasted, laying in Ashes many Towns, Cities, and Castles, and passing on
pitched his Tents within two Leagues of Paris, from whence the French King
(after he had Encouraged the Citizens to stand out manfully if they were
Besieged) fled to St. Dennis, where his Army lay. But King Edward finding his
Army not sufficient to Besiege so great a City, wherein were six times the
number of his Men, having by the way Overthrown diverse Parties of French sent
out to observe his Motion, and got more Spoils than his Army knew well how to
carry, he passed the Soam, beating off 12000 French that Guarded the Foard of
the River, and coming within some Leagues of Cressey, he had notice by his
Scouts, That the French King had drawn out his Army to oppose him, consisting
of diverse Foreign Princes, the chief Nobility of France, and 150000 common
Soldiers; yet with an undaunted Courage he Marched on; and coming within sight
of the Enemy, Marshalled his small Army, resolving to abide the Battle, viz. He
divided it into three Battles, all which he Impaled in the Rear with Carriages,
and gave the conduct of the First to Prince Edward his Son, who was (by reason
of his Young Years) assisted by the Earls of Warwick and Crawford, the Lords
Harcourt, Stafford, Manney, De La War, Chandois, Clifford and Bourchier, ^ving
800 Men at Arms, 2000 Archers, and 1000 ^hers: The Second Battle was Commanded
by the ^rls of Northampton and Arundel, accompanied with ^vers Nobles and
Gentlemen, consisting of 800 Men (...) Arms and 1200 Archers: The Third, and
main ^ttel, the King Commanded; and having Prayed for ^^ccess, and Refreshed
themselves, they prepared for ^e Fight, but that day the French declined the
Battle; ^t the next it was begun on their side by 15000 Ge^is, with Crosbows
Shooting Bearded Arrows, but ^ey Charging on the Princes Battle were soon
over^rn by the English Archers, and in their Retreat put ^e French Kings Battle
into disorder, whereupon ^any of them were Slain by their Friends; and then ^e
French main Battle Charged on the Prince and put ^im so hard to it, that he was
obliged to send to the King to succor him; who asked the Messenger, Whether he
was Alive or not? And being Answered, He ^as, he said, Report to him from me,
That he must expect no Aid, for this shall be the day wherein he shall win his
Spurs ^r lose his Life; whereupon the English, as Men in despair, Fought so
desperately that they put the French Army in all parts to the Rout, the Kings
Battle standing entire and not Engaging, slaying more than 30000 of them; and
the next day they Overthrew another Army, that, not knowing of the Defeat, was
coming to the Camp under the Leading of the Arch Bishop of Roan and Grand Prior
of France; and among the Slain were 11 Princes, 80 Barons, 1200 Knights, and
many of Note made Prisoners: The Plunder of the Field the King bestowed upon
his Nobles, Gentry, and common Soldiers, which greatly Enriched them; carrying
the Slain of Note to Mountrell, and there Honorably Interred them.

After this great Victory, with inconsiderable Loss to the English, the King
laid Siege to Callis; and the French King, though he made some shows with a great
Army to Relieve it, defending the Passes, stopped their retiring; the Besieged
were Summoned and threatened if they Surrendered not immediately to expect no
Mercy; they Capitulated, but their Terms offered was not accepted, they
obstinately resisted so long, that being brought to extremity the King would
not accept of their Submission then tendered, unless six of their chief
Inhabitants would present themselves before him in their Shirts, with Halters
about their Necks, and deliver up the Keys, which was done, when forthwith he
commanded them to be Hanged, but at the entreaty of the Queen and Nobles they
were spared.

Whilst this Siege lasted, David King of Scots with an Army of 50000 Men
entered England, and did great mischief; but the Queen being then at home, gave
him Battle with an Army of 12000, and gave the Scots a fatal Overthrow: King
David was there taken Prisoner by one John Copeland, who refused to deliver him
to the Queen, as claiming him his Prisoner by the Right of War, till going over
to the King he desired him to do it, and for his good Service settled on him
500 l. per Annum in Lancashire, and made him a Squire of his Body; whereupon
King David was committed Prisoner to the Tower of London.

The King having appointed Sr. Andrew D' Pavie a Lombard, Governor of Callis,
and turned out the French Inhabitants, returned to England; but upon private
notice the Governor (for a great Sum) designed to betray it to the Lord
Cherney Captain of Arrays, he went over and was received in the dusk of the
Evening; he prevented it by surprising that Lord and his Soldiers when they had
partly entered, and the rest waited for admittance. Yet in this Fight the King
Encountering hand to hand with Eustace of Ribomount, was by him twice stooped
on his Knees, but scorning to yield, he advanced with such fury and redoubled
strength, that he beat him down and took him Prisoner; but having experienced
him to be a Valiant Knight, he soon released him without Ransom. About this
time King Philip Dyed, and John his Son was Crowned, and the Calicians took the
strong Castle of Guyens, and the King, upon the obstinacy of the Flemings in
refusing to Aid him, removed the Marts to Callis, settling there the Woollen
Manufacture; so that by the Privileges and Imunities granted to Artificers,
happy was he that in a few Years could obtain the Kings leave to go over.

Soon after Prince Edward, Surnamed for his valourous deeds the Black Prince,
Landed an Army in Gascoine, soon subduing the greater part of that Province,
which made the French King hasten thither with a very numerous Army; and though
he was six to one against the Prince, the Battle was Fought near Poictiers,
where the English Archers put the French Horse into such confusion at the first
onset, that they fell into Rout, and disordered all the Squadrons that were to
support them; however the Battle where the French King fought valiantly, stood
manfully to it a considerable time, but such was the prevailing valor of the
English, That King John, and Philip his Younger Son were taken Prisoners, many
Thousands Slain, and the rest put to Flight. The Fight being over, Prince
Edward treated his Royal Prisoners with all Gentleness and Humility, cheering
up their drooping Spirits, attending at the Kings Table, Lodged him in his own
Bed, and provided for him Honorable Attendance, insomuch that he confessed, He
rather fancied himself at his own Court, than a Prisoner, by having met with so
Courteous an Enemy: From hence he was conducted to Bordeaux, and so into
England, where he was Entertained with the like civilities and respect by the
King and Queen; and besides these, and what Nobles were Slain, there were taken
17 Earls, 51 Barons, and a great Number of Knights and Gentlemen; the English
Soldiers throughout the Army that had fewest, being possessed of two Prisoners,
and moreover the rich Spoils of exceeding value were divided amongst them; and
a Truce was concluded for two Years. In the mean while the King of Scots, who
had been Ten Years a Prisoner, was Released at the Ransom of 100000 l. to be
Paid in Five Years, and upon taking his Oath not to bear Arms against England,
nor be Aiding to any other in doing it; and further, he acknowledged Homage and
Fealty for his Kingdom of Scotland to King Edward. And proposing to the French
King his Ransom, with Articles to be signed on his Enlargement, he sent them to
Charles his Eldest Son, who was Regent in his absence, and to the Nobility of
France, who utterly disliking the Conditions, prepared to Invade King Edwards
Terretories, to compel him to more easy Terms; but not to be behind hand with
them, he passed to Callis with an Army, taking the Black Prince along with him,
and so wasted the Countries with Fire and Sword, taking many strong Towns and
Castles, that they became humble Suitors to him for a Peace, and submitted to
his Terms; so that after a short Treaty, Articles were Agreed on, viz.

That the French King, for his Ransom, should Pay King Edward 500000l. and not
Aid any King of Scots in any War or Rebellion against England; and That King
Edward should not take part with the Flemings against France, That the Kings of
England should be ever quit of their Homage for Territories holden in France;
and That in Consideration these were performed, King Edward, in the behalf of
himself and Successors, Kings of England, should renounce and leave the Name
and Title to the Kingdom of France; and so Hostages being delivered, the French
King (after he had remained more than Four Years a Prisoner) was set at
Liberty; and soon after he came with the Kings of Cyprus and Scots to visit
King Edward, and pay his respects for the Royal Treatment he had during his
Imprisonment, but falling Sick at the Savoy, he Dyed, and his Body was conveyed
to St. Dennis in France.

And now Fortune seemed to turn against King Edward, that had hitherto ever
been Favorable to him, for Peter the King of Castile, being driven out of his
Kingdom by Henry his Bastard Brother, came to the Prince of Wales (who then
lived at Bordeaux) with his Family, Imploring his Assistance to Restore him,
which he did, Overthrowing a Spanish and French Army that had joined the
Revolted Castilians with great Slaughter; yet he was no sooner retired, ere
King Peter was again driven out, and being taken in his Flight, was by the
Usurper put to Death; but leaving two Daughters, the Eldest Married John of
Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, and the Younger Thomas of Woodstock, King Edwards
Sons, who laid Claim to the Kingdom of Castile in their Right, yet an unlucky
Accident crossed all, for the Black Prince (to Pay his Soldiers) Leavying a
Tax on the English Subjects beyond the Seas, they not only refused to pay it,
but looking on it to be an Innovation and Oppression, they persuaded Charles
the new French King to break the League his Father had made, and generally
Revolting delivered up most of the Cities, Towns and Castles into his hands;
and he growing Proud of his Success, sent a huge Navy into the Narrow Seas,
which was defeated and beaten home by the English; and hereupon the King sent
the Duke of Lancaster with an Army to Callais, from whence he Marched to join
the Prince at Bordeaux, beating the French Kings Army by the way, and forced
his Passage; and soon after another Army was sent to St. Omers under the
Leading of Sr. Robert Knowls, which took the strong Towns of Vanes and Ruily,
but there grow-a difference between him and the Lord Fitz-Walter, The French
King took the advantage of it, and fell on the English Army near Paris, slaying
1000, and putting the rest to flight; and immediately sent an Army into Cuyan,
where the Prince being weakly assisted, most of the Towns were Lost. To Remedy
this evil, the King called a Parliament, wherein the Temporality granted him a
large Subsidy, but the Clergy complaining of Poverty, gave him only fair words
and promises of future Aid, which made him (in his Anger) turn them out of all
Offices and Places of Trust in Temporal matters. And the English Navy going to
Relieve Rochel under the Conduct of the Earl of Pembrook, was worsted by Henry
the Usurping King of Castile, who kept the Narrow Seas for the French King, the
Earl was Taken and diverse others; whereupon Rochel and many strong Towns
Yielded. This made John Duke of Britanie, fear the French Greatness, and offer
King Edward his Assistance; so that another Army was sent under the Leading of
the Duke of Lancaster, which greatly Endamaged the French, but coming to
Bordeaux, he found the Prince his Brother exceeding Sick, who resigning the
Government of King Edwards Territories to his Conduct, came for England; and
though Treaties were set on foot by the Mediation of Pope Gregory the Eleventh,
yet such were the insolent demands of the French, that they came to nothing.
Whereupon the King called a Parliament, who refused to Grant him any Aid,
unless the Lord Latimer, and other evil Counselors were Removed; which being
done, they Liberally supplied his wants. But the Black Prince Dying the 8th of
June, Anno 1376, in the 40th Year of his Age, and Buried at Canterbury, the
King in his Old Age being over persuaded, Restored those Officers that had been
turned out, to the high discontent of his People; and having Created Richard
(Son to the Black Prince) Prince of Wales, Earl of Chester and Duke of Cornwall,
and committed the Regency of the Kingdom in his Minority to the Duke of
Lancaster: He Dyed on the 12th of June, Anno 1377, in the 51st Year of his
Reign, and about the 65th of his Age, and lies Buried at Westminster; being the
One and Thirtieth Sole Monarch of England.

In this Kings Reign John Wicklif, the First English Reformer of Popish Errors
and Superstitions, Preached openly, and soon after Nicholas Lyryan and Doctor
Ockham, so that People began to Search the Scriptures, and protest against the
Abominations of Rome.

Anno 1339 an Inundation of Water broke down part of the Wall of Newcastle, and
Drowned 120 People; a Serpent, at Chiping-Norton in Oxfordshire, was found with
two Heads and Faces like a Woman, the one dressed in the New Attire, and the
other in the Old, by a resemblance of Scales and Pleats, having Wings like a
Batt; and Fiends and Devils and strange Apparitions were seen by Men, and spoke
to them as they Traveled in solitary places; and such a Plague happened, that
50000 Persons Dyed in London.

Anno 1366, Peter Pence was ordered no more to be paid to the Sea of Rome; and
Dr. Orum Preaching before Pope Urban at Rome, condemned the Papacy, and writ an
Epistle from Lucifer to the Clergy, thanking them for sending so many Souls to
Hell, etc.

Remarks on Staffordshire, etc.
STaffordshire is commodiously Situate, pleasantly accomodated with Meadows,
Enclosures, Hills, Valleys, Woods, and Champian Grounds; abounds in Cattle,
Corn, Butter, Cheese, Wool, and some Minerals: It is encompassed with
Cheshire, Derbyshire, Leicestershire, Warwickshire, and Shropshire: It contains
5 Hundreds, and in these are 1 City, 130 Parishes, 12 Market Towns, 5 Castles,
13 Rivers, 19 Bridges, 1 Chase, 1 Forest, and 38 Parks.

It sends Members to Parliamenn 10, viz. Litchfield City 2, Newcastle Underline
2, Stafford 2, Tamworth 2, and 2 Knights of the Shire.

Stafford, the County Town, Anciently Bitheny, from Berteline a Holy Hermit: It
was Founded by King Edward the Elder, and made a Corporation by King John;
Tamworth is Memorable for the Mercian Kings keeping their Courts there.

Litchfield is an Episcopal See jointly with Coventry, the Cathedral was
Builded by Oswin King of Northumberland, upon a Conquest gained over the
Mercians; and here Wulferre and Celred, two Saxon Kings, were Buried: It was
for some time an Arch Bishopric, by the means of King Offa. At Blore Heath in
this County, a Battle was Fought between the two Houses of York and Lancaster,
and 2400 of the Yorkists slain.

In Mendip-Hills are very profitable Lead Mines; At Pensneth Chare, store of
Pit-Coal; and in some parts Alabaster, Potters Earth, Marle, Lime, Slate,
Tobacco-Pipe Clay, etc. There are two Lakes, one by its Roaring is said to
Forebode some strange alteration; the other, called Mahel, if a tired Horse
Drinks of it, he becomes fresh again; the Castles of Note are Sturton, Dudly,
Tamworth, Chartly, to which I might add an old Castle at Stafford, STAFFORD
SHIRE.
map of Staffordshire though now Demolished; There are several famous Bridges
over the River Trent and Dove, etc.

The Seats of the Nobility are Blore Hall, belonging to the Noble Family of
Newcastle; Newborough, to the Earl of Bridgwater; Cherley Castle, to the Lord
Ferrers; Throwley, to the Lord Cromwell; Beudesert and Seaney Park, to the Lord
Paget; Rolleston, to the Lord North and Gray; Gerards Brumley, Sandon and
Wislow, to the Lord Gerard of Brumley; Hamstal Ridware, to the Lord Leigh;
Dudley Castle and Hinley, to the Lord Ward; Litchfield Close and Eccleshal
Castle, to the Bishop of Litchfield and Coventry: The Houses of the Gentry are
likewise many and spacious.

The Reign of RICHARD the Second, (commonly called Richard of Bourdeaux.)
RICHARD the Second, Son and Heir to Edward the Black Prince, was Crowned Anno
1377, not much exceeding 11 Years in Age, so that Charles the French King
taking advantage of his Minority, set out a great Fleet, Sacked and Burnt the
Towns of Dartmouth, Plymouth, Portsmouth, Hastings, Rye, and others on the
Seacoast of England, but after they had roamed up and down doing great
Mischief for three Weeks, they were beaten off with considerable Loss, by
Edmund Earl of Cambridge the Kings Uncle, and others; nor were the Scots
(Incited by the French King) less troublesome, Burning Roxborough, and taking by
surprise the Castle of Berwick, but the People breaking down the Drawbridge
shut them out of the Town; and being straightly Besieged, all the Scots in the
Castle were put to the Sword, except Alexander Ramsey who was reserved for a
large Ransom; yet the French, though they had been beaten off, not giving over
their designs, Landed again and did much mischief at Winchelsea, Dover,
Gravesend, and other places on or near the Seacoast: So that the King (to
Enable him to set out a Fleet, and Transport an Army that might put a check to
these Insolences) fummoned a Parliament at Westminster, in which a Subsidy was
Granted him of Four Pence a Head on all Persons above the Age of Fourteen
Years, which was looked on in those days, as a very grievous Tax; and the
Gathering it was attended with bad consequences. However the Money set out an
indifferent good Fleet; and an Army were sent into France under Lord Thomas,
one of the Kings Unkles, who wasting all in his way, joined with the Duke of
Britanie, and much anoyed the French, Recovering many Towns and Castles; but
whilst this was doing abroad, a dangerous Mischief befell at home.

John Wall, a Factious Priest, by his going from place to place and Preaching
to the inferior sort of People, That they were Free by the Law of Nature; and
that Laws were made by Crafty People to keep them Poor and Low, so to Enslave
them; and that by their Pedigree, derived from Adam, the good things of the
Earth should be equally divided amongst them; and not some grow Fat and Rich,
whilst others Pine and Starve: And moreover, no Taxes were due on any pretense,
but People Free Born in their Liberality ought to be left Free.

This and such like Cant being suitable to their humor and wishes, mainly
wrought with them to become Levellers, so that these pernicious Insinuations
spread soon into most parts of England, before the Magistrates were aware to
suppress it; and to bring about what was wished by some cunning Knaves, to
Enrich themselves in the Spoil of others, they raised Tumults, and possessed
the Country People with a belief, That the City of London was at their
devotion, and only waited till they came to take possession of it; whereupon
they flowed thither like an outrageous Torrent, from Kent, Essex, Sussex,
Bedfordshire, and other places, stiling themselves The Kings Men, and the
Servants of the Weal Public; chosing as their chief Captain one Wat Tyler, by
profession a Tailor; and as his subordinate Officers, Jack Straw, Jack
Shepherd, and some others; and to this Rout, the Incendary of a lewd Priest,
John Wall, Chaplain; and being Encamped in Kent and Essex, they sent to the
King to come and Treat with them; but he was dissuaded by his Nobles: Whereupon
those in Essex crossed the Thames, and joining the Kentish Rebels, came to
Southwark, which they Plundered, and finding London Bridge Fortified against
them, intended to have Burnt the Suburbs on the South side, and have Murdered
such as they had notice were not pleased with their Proceedings: But the
Citizens, to prevent so great a Mischief, let down the Drawbridge, and
admitted them into the City, Feasting and Carressing them, rather out of fear
than good will; however they Burnt the Duke of Lancaster's House at the Savoy,
and Murdered all his Servants they found in it. They ransacked the Inns of
Court and Law Offices, Burning all the Law Books and Records that came to their
hands, Plundering the Churches and Religious Houses; and Wat Tyler having
seized Richard Lion his Master, with whom he had been Apprentice, caused his
Head to be Cut off, and carried before him on a Lance, because in his Service
he had sometimes Beat him for his Rogueries: They Plundered likewise the Houses
of all Strangers: They likewise forced into the Tower, where the King Lay,
Plundered his Mothers Lodgings, and broke her Head, because she reproved them
for their Insolency. They Murdered Simon Tybald Arch Bishop of Canterbury,
because he had some time before Imprisoned Wall for his Seditious Doctrine; and
after several meetings, the King finding he could do no good with them, their
Behavior being so Audacious, and their Demands so Insolent and Unreasonable,
he labored to make the Citizens his Frinds, and resolved to repel them by
force.

Whereupon a Conference being appointed in Smithfield, the King beforehand
thinking to bring them to better Terms without Extremity, if possible, sent
them several of his Ensigns and their Pardons, as a token that he owned them
for his good Subjects, and freely forgave them for what had happened; and then
meeting them as appointed he persuaded them to desist from all Violence,
assuring them that upon trial they should find him to be their Good Lord and
Gracious King. But Tyler with a frowning countenance, insolent behavior, and
rough speech, refused to accept the Kings Grace and Favor, proudly telling
him, That all those Troops, and many more Thousands, were at his dispose, to
Execute whatsoever he would command: Then he commanded Sr. John Newton one of
the Kings Attendants, who bore the Sword, to deliver his Dagger; which by the
Kings command he did: Then he Insolently proceeded to demand the Sword; but he
stoutly Answered, It was the Kings Sword, and should not be given to a Knave;
which so incensed Tyler, That he Swore he should lose his Head before himself
would Eat or Drink, commanding the King to deliver him up to Execution; which
Insolent Behavior, Sr. William Wallworth, Lord Mayor, not able to endure,
Stabbed him with his Dagger, so that he fell down Dead; and then hasting to
raise the City Militia, the Rebels after some time were so amazed, that they
scattered, and every one fled for his safety; and it was not many days before
most of the Ringleaders were, by their Companions (a thing that seldom fails in
such tumultuous Rebellions) delivered into the hands of Justice, the better to
obtain their own Pardons, which in the height of their Pride, they had
scornfully thrown up, and the King at this last Conference before their Faces
had Cancelled them; so that about 1500 or more of the principal Agents were
Convicted, and Executed in diverse Places, which put an end to these Popular
Disorders; and for this Exploit of the Lord Mayor, the Dagger was added to the
City Arms.

Things thus Quieted, and the Peoples Fears over, The King sued for the Lady
Ann (Daughter to Charles the Fourth, and Sister to Winceslaus, the Emperor of
Germany) in Marriage; which was Accorded, and the Lady (who was exceeding
Virtuous and Beautiful) was received with great Joy by the King and People; and
Anno Dom. 1385, he Summoned a Parliament at Westminster, in which he Created
his Uncle Edmund of Langley, Duke of York; and Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of
Gloucester; his Cousin Henry, Eldest Son to the Earl of Lancaster, Earl of
Derby; Edward Son to Edmund of Langley Earl of Rutland; Sir John Holland Earl
of Huntington, and Thomas Lord Mowbray Earl of Notingham, Declaring Roger
Mortimer Earl of March, Son to Edmund Mortimer and Philippa his Wife, Daughter
and Heirs to Lionel Duke of Clarence, Third Son to Edward the Third, Heir
apparent to the Crown; but he was Slain by the Rebels in Ireland, before the
Kings Death.

And now the King fell into the dislike of his People, by hearkening to evil
Counselors, especially one Michael De La Pool, whom he had made Chancellor,
and created Duke of Suffolk, and Robert Vere whom he created Marquess of
Dublin and Duke of Ireland, and would have made him King of that Country, if
the Nobility would have consented to it; so that he respected not the sage
Advice and Counsel of the grave and most experienced Lords; of this the
Parliament took great notice, and upon the Chancellours insisting on the Kings
behalf for a Tax of four Fifteens, affirming no less could support his Estate,
or maintain such Wars as he was likely to undertake, the Lords and Commons not
only opposed the motion, but accused the Duke and others for lewdly Counselling
the King, and by their Purloyning to enrich themselves, wasting his Treasure;
That by their bad Advice they had kept the King from coming amongst them; which
according to a received Law and Custom, if he refused to do in Forty Days, they
might Legally break up, and depart to their own homes without his leave, and of
this and other particulars they sent word to the King, desiring him within
three days he would come amongst them, and give Life to those Laws they should
make, or they were resolved to separate. But in Answer to this, he required
that a select Assembly of Fifty of their Members should attend him. This was
refused, and the Duke of Gloucester and Thomas Arundel, Arch Bishop of
Canterbury, were only deputed; who plainly told the King of the Grievances of
his People, and that by his Absence from Parliament he obscured the light of
Justice, and hindered the Negotiation of the Commonweal: And if he further
declined it, they must break up and depart to their homes. They also craved,
with humble submssion, as they were commanded, to be informed by whom his
Majesty's Treasure, belonging to the Commonweal, was prodigally consumed, and
how it came to pass that his large Revenues could not suffice to maintain his
Estate and charge* seeing he had no Wars.

This Message, and their Demands, so angered the King, That he Swore had he
fore-known the saucy bouldness of his Subjects, whom as he supposed, intended
to rise in Arms against him, he would more willingly have submitted himself to
the King of France, and have relied on him for Protection, than thus to be
baffled and made servil to those whom his Sovereignty ought to command. But the
two Lords in all humble Duty showed him, that his People stood well affected
toward him, and that the French had been and were inveterate Enemies to the
King of England: With this and suchlike submissive Discourse, he was some what
pacified, and promised to come to his Parliament in three days, and failed not
to do it; where by Proof and Accusation of the Lords, Michael De La Pool,
Chancellor of England, and Duke of Suffolk, was Convicted of Purloyning the
Kings Treasure, and purchasing Estates with it, to his own behoof; and giving
evil Counsel to the great damage of the Kings Subjects, and other things, so
that his Lands were Sequestered to the King's use, his Person Fined 20000
Marks, committed close Prisoner, and deprived of his Chancellourship and other
Offices. The Arch Bishop being made Chancellor in his stead; and in the same
Parliament thirteen Persons were Elected, Sworn, and Authorized, with ^he
consent of the King, published in Writing under ^is Seal, to Examine all or any
of his Officers, touching their Demeanours in their several Offices and Trusts;
(...) censure and condemn any that should be found ^uilty of henious Crimes,
and the King took an Oath ^ot to revoke or suppress this Commission without the
^onsent of Parliament; and it further passed into a ^aw, That if any Person
should attempt directly or ^^directly to persuade or encourage the King to
in^^ge his Oath and Promise, touching all or any of these matters, for the
first Offense, to lose his Lands and Goods; and for the second, to be proceeded
against as a Traitor to the King and Kingdom: And then a Subsidy of one half
Fifteen was granted, if the Commissioners, upon view of the Kings Estate,
thought it needful; and so an end was put to this Sessions of Parliament.

This was no sooner done, but the King at the persuasion of his Counselors
Released his Favorite De La Poole, and went with him, the Duke of Ireland,
Tresillian his chief Justice, other Judges and Ministers of State, to
Notingham, where they Pronounced the Duke of Gloucester, Arch Bishop of
Canterbury, and the Thirteen Commissioners, to be Guilty of High Treason;
because against his will and consent they had compelled the King to Ratify the
Commission by his Oath* and under his Great Seal; so going to Coventry, the
Judges by an Instrument in Writing under their Hands and Seals, declared and
confirmed their Opinions to be agreeable and consonant to the Laws of the Land
touching these matters.

Whilst Affairs had but an ill Aspect at home, the French King, to Embroyl the
Kingdom more, if po^sible, sent his Admiral with a Thousand Noblemen an^
Gentlemen into Scotland, with Arms and Warlik^ Stores, who joining the Scots
Army, Marched into England; but upon notice of King Richard's approac^ with a
formidable Army, they crossed the Mountain into Wales, leaving Scotland open to
the English who Burnt Edenburg, St. Johnstons, Sterling, and Dundee; an^ having
harassed the Country almost from Sea to Se^ they returned Laden with much
Booty. This gre^^ Loss so perplexed the Scots, who had got little Plunde^ among
the Barren Mountains, that on their retur^ they made the French Admiral, and
most that Atte^^^^ him of note, Prisoners, till the French King (who (...)
precipitated them into this War) should make (...) satisfaction, as designing
his own Interest and ^^vantage by it, and not theirs; and though he was very
^^gry at it, yet the Scots kept them Prisoners till the ^^ey demanded was sent
for their Ransoms. This ^red up the French King to raise a mighty Army with
^^solution to Conquer England, and to Transport it, (...) prepared 1200 Ships;
but when they had a long ^e, in their unruly March, Plundered the French and
^nings, and by reason the Duke of Berry, the Kings ^kle, who was to command
them, approving not (...) Enterprise, delayed to come to them; their wants ^e
so great, that to supply them they Sold their ^rses, Armor, Weapons, and
lastly their Clothes; (...) then fell so horribly to Plundering the Country,
(...) the French King not able to endure the cries and ^plaints of the
oppressed People, and dispairing to (...) any thing in England with such a
half-starved dis^erly Rout, Disbanded them, after he had been at ^000 l. Charge.

The English Nobles now began grievously to com^n of the Kings breaking his
Oath and Promises in ^rkening to the evil Counsels and Advice of Robert (...)
Vere, Michael De La Poole, Alexander Arch Bishop (...) York, Nicholas Bamber,
and Robert Trisillian his Chief ^ice, together with those flattering Judges,
who, to ^se the King, had Subscribed to the Nullity of the ^mmission, and had
Censured all such as procured it, ^e Traitors to the King, etc. Entreating him
to ^ish them the Kingdom; but he would in no wise ^rken to any Proposals of
parting with those Favo^, who for their better safety, counseled him to give
(...) Callice, and his other Towns in France, to the French ^g, and rely on him
for Aid to curb those proud Subjects, who sought to Enslave him their Sovereign
but this he looked on as dangerous, and would not agree to it: But the Nobles
finding no Redress, flying to Arms, he practiced with the Lord Mayor of London
to raise him an Army in and about the City; which he labored to do, but the
Graver Citizens who were well affected to the Nobles, not only refused to
further it, but hindered it all they could, declaring it was a means to hasten
the desolation of that great City, humbly beseeching the King not to require
any such thing at their hands, but rather seek an Accommodation of Differences:
This extremely vexed him, but finding he misse^ of his purpose, he dissembled
his displeasure, and laid aside that Project, yet forgot them not. But some
time after this, desiring a Loan of 1000 l. and it being refused him, he seized
into his hands their Charter and Liberties, dissolved their proper Magistracy,
turning out John Hind their Mayor, Henry Warner and John Shadworth Sherifs;
appointing Sir Edward Dallingredge Warden of the City. However finding he could
not raise such an Army as he intended, by reason most of his inferior Subjects
were well affected to the Lords, because they sought not to injure the King,
but to remove his evil Counselors, who were great Oppressors and Disquieters
of the Kingdom, he promised to call ^ Parliament, wherein matters might be
Debated with out heat or animosity, and that there his five Favors should be
Answerable to all Objections; and if Convicted, stand to such public Censure
or Punishment as the Parliament could justly inflict on them.

This Concession much pleased the Lords, so that they disbanded their Forces,
and returned the King their humble thanks: But it was not long before they were
sensible a Snare was laid for them, for the Duke of Ireland was privately
Levying 5000 Men, pretendedly for his Guard and Defense; but it was secretly
intimated they were to lie in wait in Parties, and Surprise the Lords as they
were coming to Parliament, so that they suddenly recalled their disbanded
Forces, and shut him up on the Banks of the Thames, which he was forced to Swim
on Horseback for the preservation of his Life; and posting to the Sea Coast,
took Shipping for France, where some Years after* he was Slain in Chasing a
wild Boar; but so great was then the Kings Love toward him, That he caused his
Dead Body to be Embalmed, brought over, and Magnificently Buried.

After the flight of the Duke, the Lords Executed some of the chief
Ringleaders, and suffered the rest to depart to their Houses, and so passed
with their Army to London, where they were Joyfully received by the Citizens.
The King, who kept his Court at the Tower, well perceived how much they had
gained the Hearts of the greater Part of the People, and therefore for his own
safety he desired a Conference with them, in which it was Agreed a Parliament
should be speedily called, to Redress Grievances; and accordingly a Parliament
was Assembled, in which the evil Counselors and corrupt Judges were Sommoned
to appear and Answer to the Articles Exhibited against them; but upon their
default, they were Attainted of High Treason against the King and Commonweal,
and for this John Earl of Salisbury, and Sir Nicholas Bambre lost their Heads;
the Lord Chief Justice Trisilian was Hanged at Tyburn, and the rest of these
Judges had suffered in like manner, had not the Queens incessant supplications
prevailed to change their Dooms into Banishment; and in this Parliament the
state of Affairs was settled to the high contentment of the People. And though
the next Year the Scots began to bustle, yet at the Mediation of the French
King a Truce was made between the three Kingdoms, and King Richard by this
means in Peace and Tranquillity, assisted the Duke of Lancaster to raise an
Army, when Leaguing with the King of Portugal, he Warred on the Spaniard for
the Kingdom of Castile, which he claimed in Right of his Wife; and so
prevailed, That the Spaniard was compelled to sue for a Peace; which was
granted on that Kings Marrying Constance the Dukes Eldest Daughter, Loading him
Eight Wagons with Gold, and allowing him and his Duchess during their Lives
10000 Mark a Year. And after having Married Ann, his Younger Daughter, to the
King of Portugal, he returned into England, Laden with Riches and Honor. And
now all Appeals to Rome, and the Popes Authority in this Kingdom, was Abrogated
by Parliament; and soon after, the Virtuous Lady Queen Ann Dyed; whose Death so
exceedingly grieved the King, that for some Weeks he would not be comforted,
causing the stately House at Sheen in which she Dyed, to be utterly Razed;
Cursing any that should afterward Build it; yet this Sorrow wasting by time, to
strengthen his Alliance he Sailed to France, and took the Lady Isabel, Charles
the Sixth's Daughter, to Wife, and brought her to England with her Nurse, and a
great Train of Ladies; and not exceeding Seven or Eight Years, she was called
The Baby Queen; the King having contracted not to Bed her till she should be
Fourteen Years of Age, and a 30 Years Peace was concluded; whereupon the King
gave up to the Duke of Britany, the strong Town and Castle of Breast; which much
offended the English Nobles, especially the Duke of Gloucester his Uncle, who
plainly told him, he had dishonored himself and the English Nation by tamely
parting with such an important Place, which had not been gained but at the
expense of much Blood and Treasure; this so angered the King, that he privately
Swore to be Revenged on him and such other Noblemen as he said usually checked
and controuled him in his Proceedings; and accordingly getting a Parliament to
his mind, Sir John Bushe one of his Creatures being Speaker of the Lower House,
This upstart Speaker boldly Accused Thomas Arundel Arch Bishop of Canterbury,
who fitting in the House of Peers by the King, was ordered not to Answer and it
should be no damage to him, his silence nevertheless was taken for Confession,
and he was Banished the Realm; the Earls of Arundel and Warwick in this
Parliament were Attainted of High Treason, upon which the former lost his Head,
and the latter being confined to the Isle of Wight, through Grief and want of
Necessaries, shortly Dyed. But the Duke of Gloucester stood too high in the
Peoples Favor to be reached this way; therefore he was privately seized at his
own House, hurried to Callice, and there by the command of Thomas Moubray then
Earl of Notingham, and for this wicked exploit created Duke of Norfolk, the
Valiant, Prudent, Virtuous, and Renowned Duke, was Smothered to Death; though in
the manner of it Authors disagree; some will have it by pressing and keeping
him long between Feather-Beds; others, that he was thrown into, and headed up
in a Butt of Malmsey: However here he was wickedly made away, and never seen
afterward, to the great grief of all but the King and his Favorites who hugged
themselves with joy, to think they had removed out of their way the great
Obstacle that hindered their Advances to Arbitrary Power.

After this Moubray proceeded to Accuse Henry Duke of Hartford, Son to the Duke
of Lancaster, of Speaking Treasonable and Scandalous Words of the King;
whereupon Hartford Challenged his Accuser to the single Combat, to try by the
Sword the Truth and Justice of his Accusation; but when they were both entered
the Lists, and prepared for the Encounter, the King threw down his Warder,
staid the Combat, Banished Hartford for six Years, and Moubray forever; who
Travailing to Venice, there Dyed miserably, confessing his Guilt and trouble
for the Death of the Noble Duke of Gloucester; but Hartford was honorably
Entertained by Charles the French King, who would have Married him to a
Beautiful Lady, Daughter to the Duke of Berry his Uncle; but King Richard
industriously prevented it, as fearing such an Alliance might enable him to
grasp at his Crown; and when the Duke of Lancaster Dyed, he seized on his vast
Treasure, though he had given his Cousin Henry leave (on his departure) to
appoint his Attorney to Act for him, and take care of his Inheritance. But
these Proceedings bred much Mischief: For the King having lost most of his old,
and getting a new set of Counselors, viz. The Earl of Wiltshire, Sir John
Bushe, Sir James Bagot, and Sir John Green; they advised him to many things
contrary to the Advice of his grave Council and much troubled the People; and
now the Irish Rebelling, the King to Raise an Army Farmed the Kingdom, and all
his Revenues belonging thereunto, for certain Years, and Sailed for Ireland.

The Duke of Hartford who wanted no Intelligence how matters went in England,
looked on the Peoples Ferment, and the Kings Absence, to give him a very
favorable advantage to shake off his Chains; wherefore as privately as he
might, he came to England, accompanied by the Banished Arch Bishop and many
other trusty Friends, declaring to the People he only came to take quiet
Possession of his Duchy of Lancaster, which by the Death of his Father was his
Undoubted Right; so that Trousands flocked to him. And finding how the People
were bent to favor his cause, he Raised a considerable Army, and seized the
before named Counselors, whom they Beheaded.

King Richard in Ireland hearing of these Stirs, settled Affairs there as well
as he could, and hasted over with a small Army; but before he could pass Wales,
most of them had Deserted him; and then being ascertained that his Counselors
in whom he had reposed much trust to Levy Forces for him* were taken off,
despairing of any safety to be gained by force, he came to Henry Duke of
Lancaster of his own accord; and publicly owned his Insufficiency and Weakness
to Govern well; praising the Duke's rare and singular Virtues, his absolute
worthiness to be a King, etc. profering to make him an absolute Surrender of
his Kingdom, if he would accept of it.

The Politic Duke, who well knew this proceeded not cordially from him, but
from the effects of fear and constraint, however refused it; for though he much
affected the wearing of a Crown, yet he thought it more advisable to receive it
at this time from the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty; and hereupon he caused
the King with a very respective and honorable Attendance, to be conveyed to
the Tower; and a Parliament being called in his Name, Twenty Four Articles were
Exhibited against him for Mismanagement and ill Conduct in Government, and many
henious Crimes; which in his Restraint he seemed to confess and own, and by an
Instrument under his Hand and Seal, he Resigned his Crown and Kingdom to Henry
of Bullenbrook Duke of Lancaster; which being publicly and generally Ratified
and Approved by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons Assembled in
Parliament, Henry stood up and made this Challenge to the Crown, viz.

In the Name of God Amen, I Henry of Lancaster, Claim the Realm of England and
the Crown, with all the Appurtinances, as coming by the Blood Royal from King
Henry the Third, and the Justice which God of his Grace has sent me by the
help of my Friends, for the Recovery of the said Realm, which was at the point
of Perdition, through default of Government, and breach of Laws.

These words being said, all the Estates acknowledged him for King; and Richard
was formally Deposed, in the words and in manner Recited in Edward the Seconds
Reign, and thereupon was sent to Pomfret Castle; but long he had not been
there, ere upon some practices of his Favorites to Reinstate him, he was
villanously Murdered by Sir Pierce of Exton and Eight others, of whom he
Valiantly killed Four with a Bill he wrested out of one of their Hands.

Thus untimely Dyed King Richard the Second, when he had Reigned 22 Years, 3
Months, and 8 Days: Being the 32d Sole Monarch of England. After his Death, his
Body was brought to London, and exposed to the view of the People to satisfy
them he was Dead, and prevent their taking part with Impostors; and then Buried
at Langley.

In this Kings Reign the River Ouse between Swelstone and Harleswood near
Bedford, stood still, and divided it self; so that the Botton in the Middle
remained dry for three Miles. Soon after Vtred Bolton, John Ashwerby, Walter
Bruce, John Ashton, and Peter Peteshall, were Persecuted; some by Perpetual
Imprisonment, some by Banishment, for Preaching and Maintaining Wickliffe's
Doctrine.

In the last Year of this Kings Reign, all the Bay-Trees in England Withered,
and when Lancaster came to the Crown fresh Branches sprouted from the supposed
dead Stocks: And an Army of Birds Fighting in the Air, strangely destroyed each
other.

THE County of SUFFOLK
map of Suffolk

Remarks on the County of Suffolk, etc.
SUffolk has many Advantages in its Situation, by reason the Eastern part of it
opens to the Sea, and is stored with commodious Havens; besides this County
abounds with Cattle, Wool, Corn, Marshes, producing fat Pastures, store of
Butter, and much Cheese, but not much approved of; It is mostly plain, branched
with several curious Rivers, flowing from and running into the Ocean: On the
North, it is Bounded with Norfolk; on the West, with Cambridgeshire; and on the
South, with Essex: It contains 22 Hundreds, 575 Parishes, 28 Market Towns, 1
Castle, 2 principal Rivers, 32 Bridges, 27 Parks, most of them well stored with
Deer: It sends Members to Parliament 16, viz. Alborough 2, Dunwich 2, St.
Edmunds-Bury 2, Ipswich 2, Orford 2, Sudbury 2, Eye 2, and 2 Knights of the
Shire.

Ipswich in this County was Founded by one Gipsa; it has a flourishing Estate
in Shiping-Trade by reason of the Navigable River it stands on; it was often
harassed in ancient times by the Danes; and is particularly noted for the Birth
of that great Pagentry of Fortune, Cardinal Wolsey, whose Father was a Butcher
in it. St. Edmunds-Bury is Memorable for King Edmund's being Shot to Death by
the Danes; for Expiation of which Cruelty, King Canute Erected here a stately
Monastery, once accounted the Richest in Europe: And here a Parliament was held
in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth: Exning is the Birthplace of St. Audri,
Sister to King Ina. At Renlisham, Redwald (the first Christian King of the
East Angles) kept his Court: Lidgate is the Birthplace of John Surnamed
Lidgate, a famous English Poet.

The Seats of the Nobility are Busbrook Hall, belonging to the Duke of St.
Albans; Ewston, to the Earl of Arlington; Christ's Church in Ipswich, Sudbury
Hall, Soham Lodge, to the Lord Viscount Hereford; Denham Hall, to the Lord
Viscount Townsend; Broom Hall, and Carleford Hall, to the Lord Cornwallis.
Besides these, there are a great many stately Buildings belonging to private
Gentlemen. In some of the Cliffs to the Sea, Hawks build; and there is much
Game for Recreation, as Fishing, Fowling, Hunting, etc. Here also stands
Framlingham Castle, a place of great State, Beauty, Strength and Convenience,
and the Ruins of Burgh Castle Remain.

The Reign of HENRY the Fourth (commonly called Henry of Bullenbrook.)
THIS Henry was Crowned by the consent of the Estates, in the life time of
Richard the Second, and created Henry his Eldest Son Prince of Wales, Duke of
Cornwall, and Earl of Chester: Then he called a Parliament in his own Name, in
which the Bishop of Carlisle, for speaking in the behalf of King Richard, and
moving a commiseration of his wrongs, was committed close Prisoner to the Abbey
of St. Albans, and the Crown was entailed on Henry and his Heirs forever.

This Parliament no sooner ended, but many Lords Conspired the Death of the
King, entering into Oath and Covenant to do it at Oxford, where they had
appointed sollemn Sports for his Entertainment, in honor (as they Flatteringly
pretended) of his happy Accession to the Crown; but really with an intent to
restore King Richard: And accordingly they met Armed, all but Edward
Plantagenet, Duke of Aumarle, Son to Edmund of Langley, Duke of York, the Kings
Uncle; who as he sat at Dinner with his Father, had by chance the Label of the
Instrument of Combination hanging out at his Bosom, of which the old Duke
taking hold, drew forth the whole Writing, and Reading the Contents of the
Conspiracy, prepared for Windsor, to give the King an account of it; which the
young Duke perceiving, hastily took Horse, and outstript him, himself revealing
all the Intrigue, for which he had his Pardon.

Upon this Discovery, the King put off his Journey to Oxford, and hastened to
the Tower of London, securing the City to his Interest, and raising an Army; of
which the Lords at Oxford had no sooner notice, but they increased their
Forces, causing one Magdalen, much in likeness, to Personate King Richard, and
advanced their Standard to meet the King; but finding they were much inferior
to him in Number, their courage failed; which so disheartened the Soldiers,
that they dispersed and left their Leaders to shift for themselves; so that
most of them were Taken and Executed in diverse places; others fled the Kingdom,
and reserved themselves to broach new Broils; and this hastened King Richard's
Murder, in the manner as has been said: For King Henry complaining that so
long as he Lived he should never be at rest, and demanding if none loved him so
well as to rid him of that Torment, Pierce of Exton, to curry favor with him,
posted away, and with other Ruffians villainously performed it; at which the
French King was mightily displeased, purposing to send his Letters of Defiance
to King Henry, and Invade his Kingdom; but upon second thoughts, though he had
raised a potent Army, he dissolved it, and proceeded no further in the
business. Yet soon after he Levied another Army to Invade Aquitaine, and Guyan;
but was so stoutly withstood by King Henry's Forces, That he retired and
Disbanded them. But the King of England doubting the security of his ill-got
Title, labored to make Peace with him, the better to strengthen himself,
offering a Marriage between Henry his Son, and the Lady Isabella, Widow to King
Richard, and Daughter to Charles the Sixth of France; but that King considering
how unfortunate Marriages had been between France and England, refused it;
whereupon she was sent over in great State, and Married to her Cousin Charles,
Eldest Son of Lewis Duke of Orleance, her Uncle.

Soon after this, Owen Glendour, with his Welsh, Rebelled; Overthrowing the
King's Army, and taking the Lord Gray of Ruthen and Edmund Mortimer, the Kings
Cousin, Prisoners; using them exceeding hardly, the sooner to oblige the King
to Ransom them; but he neglected it, because Mortimer was nearer Allied to the
Crown by Right of Descent, than himself; yet though he might have had his
Liberty, if he would have joined with the Welsh, and some English Nobles, that
were fled thither, he rather chose to endure Extremities, than to comply with
them: Whereupon they solicited the Scots, who Invaded the Northern parts of the
Kingdom, doing much Mischief; but the King soon requited it, by entering
Scotland, and laying all waste before him: However he no sooner returned, but
the Scots re-entered England with 20000 Men, committing many Barbarous
Cruelties; but being Encountered by Henry Surnamed Hotspur, Son to Henry Piercy
Earl of Northumberland, 10000 of them were Slain, and 500 taken Prisoners; and
of note Mordacke Earl of Fiffe, Archibald Earl of Douglas, Thomas Earl of
Murray, and Robert Earl of Angus. The following Year the French sent 12 Ships
with 1200 Nobles, Gentlemen and others, to assist the Welsh, but most of them
were Shipwrack'd on the Point of Cornwall, and the rest with much difficulty
returned to France; yet soon after he Landed 12000 Men in Wales to assist
Glendour and his Rebellious Companions, who joined them with 10000. But upon
the Kings approach with an Army, the Welsh fled into the Woods and Mountains,
leaving the French to shift for themselves; which made them hasten to their
Ships, and return to France, without doing any thing Memorable; which made the
French King become a Jest to the English, viz. That he was often Big, but never
Brought-forth. Notwithstanding King Henry, to Strengthen his Interest Abroad,
Married Jane, Widow to John the deceased Duke of Britany, and gave Blanch his
Eldest Daughter, to William Duke of Bavaria, Son and Heir Apparent to the
Emperor Lewis of Bavaria; and some time after Philippa his Youngest Daughter
to the King of Denmark.

In the Third Year of his Reign he required Henry Piercy Earl of Worcester,
Henry Piercy Earl of Northumberland, and Piercy Hotspur his Son, to deliver up
the Scots Prisoners taken in the late Battle on the Northern Borders; but was
Answered, Those Prisoners were theirs by Right of War, and they would not part
with them; desiring him at the same time to Ransom his Cousin Mortimer; but
this he refused, alleging, That he had voluntarily made himself a Prisoner to
give Glendour and other his Accomplices a colorable pretense for Rebellion,
seeing he was so near Allied to the Crown; and therefore his own Safety, and
his good Discretion, gave him Advice not to hearken to their Motion, but to
punish his offense.

This much displeased the Piercies, and designing to Levy War against the King,
they Ransomed Mortimer at their own charge, secretly entering into a League and
Friendship with Glendour, they promised him great matters when King Henry by
their United Strength should be Deposed; then they Engaged the Scots Prisoners
to take part with them; also the Earl of Stafford, Richard Scroop Arch Bishop
of York, and many others; and as they had done against Richard, so they framed
and published Articles against him, as to his Misdemeanors in Government,
false claim to the Crown, charging him with the Murder of King Richard his
Lawful and Rightful Sovereign; also his refusing to Ransom his Cousin Mortimer
who was taken Fighting in his Cause, but rather wished he might die in a
loathsome Prison, because the Crown of Right belonged to him, as being Son and
Heir to Philippa, Daughter and Heiress to Lionel Duke of Clarence, Elder
Brother to John of Gaunt, Father to Henry, whom they styled a Usurper.

This made many join with them, so that their Army became very Formidable to
the King: And to bind the Welsh more firmly to them, Edward Mortimer Earl of
March, Married Glendour's Daughter; by which means in a little time they
flattered themselves they should have a King of England of the Ancient British
Blood: And indeed a very great danger about this time threatened the King, for
a Calthrop, or Engine with three very sharp Teeth or Spikes, was placed in his
Bed, which had certainly procured his Death, had he suddenly lain down upon
it, but it was timely Discovered; yet the Party who placed it could not be made
known, and diverse Gray Friars scattering defamatory Libels against the King,
several of them were taken and Hanged.

The King finding his greatest advantage now lay in Expedition, suddenly
raised an Army, and by long Marches prevented the Earls joining with the Welsh,
so that both Armies meeting near Shrewsbury, Piercy Hotspur, a Person of
undaunted Courage, no sooner saw the Royal Standard, but he resolved to throw
his Fortune on the hazard of a Battle; so the Charge being Sounded, the Scots
gave the first onset, and Fought desperately, but were overborn, and a great
part of them Slain; yet notwithstanding the Lords renewed the Battle with great
fury and obstinacy, persuading themselves of good success, until the King and
the Prince his Son (determining by Honorable Death to leave their Bodies in
the Field, rather than fall into the hands of their Enemies, or betake them to
shameful flight, and leave their Men a Sacrifice behind them) redoubling their
Strength and Valor, set such Examples to the rest, that the declining Battle
was restored, and Piercy Hotspur with many of chief Command being Slain, the
Lords Army fell into rout and confusion; so that in the Field and Pursuit 6000
were slain, the Earls of Worcester, Douglas, and many others were taken
Prisoners, and a famous Victory was obtained; and it is said the King slew in
this Battle 36 with his own hands; but because the Earl Douglas in single
Combat had fought with him, and approved himself a valiant Man, he had his
Liberty granted without Ransom; but the rest of the Prisoners had not that good
luck; for the Earl of Worcester, and several of the chief, were Beheaded; many
of a lower degree Hanged and Quartered, and their Heads placed on London
Bridge. In this Battle the King lost not above 600 Men.

To follow this lucky Success, the Prince was sent into Wales, with part of the
Army; where he found Owen Glendour forsaken by most of his Companions, and with
the rest for his safety he retired into a vast Wood, which being encompassed
and narrowly watched, he was there, with many others, Famished to Death; and
such as were taken by hunting and beating that Wood, suffered by Execution. And
hereupon the Prince returned to the King; and in the mean while the Earl of
Northumberland came and submitted himself to the Kings Mercy; and though he was
excused, it was with no hearty goodwill, but rather to prevent the Castle of
Berwick, and other strong Places on the Frontiers, from falling into the hands
of the Scots, as being held by such Officers as the Earl had appointed under
him.

These Troubles were no sooner over, but Lewis Duke of Orleance sent the King
(in a Bravado) a Challenge to meet him and a Hundred French with a Hundred
English, to Combat it for Honors sake in an indifferent place; whereto the
King returned Answer, That his former Actions in Warlike undertakings, could
clearly acquit him from the imputation of Cowardice; and that Kings ought not
to be so careless of their Peoples welfare and safety, as to meet every Madman
who had the vanity to send them a Challenge: But that he would be at all times
ready to Repel any Violence or Injury which he should dare rashly or
unadvisedly to Attempt against him or his People. This exceedingly nettled
Mounsieur; so that in an angry mood, designing Revenge, he Besieged the Town of
Vergie in Guyan; but having wasted his Army in almost a four Months Siege, he
was constrained to raise it, and retire with disgrace.

After this the Duke of Burgundy, to mend the matter, raised an Army to reduce
Callis; but upon King Henry's preparations to pass the Seas with an Army, he
was Remanded by the French King; which he looking on as the Duke of Orleances
doings, to hinder him from gathering expected Laurels, a mortal hatred sprung
up between them, and several Battles were Fought; King Henry first assisting
Burgundy, and then Orleance; and gained much Money by their Contention, whilst
they weakened each other, and the whole Estate of France; whilst they drew in
Parties to side with them. In the mean while the Marshal of France laying Siege
to a Town in Gascony with 4000 Men at Arms, was beaten off by Sir John Blunt,
with 300 English, 12 Noblemen, and 120 Gentlemen, taken Prisoners and carried
into the Town in Triumph.

And now though the King had Pardoned the Earl of Northumberland, yet he
resenting some Indignities put on him, grew restless for Revenge, and therefore
Associating with Richard Scroop Arch Bishop of York, Thomas Moubray, Earl
Marshal, The Lords Hastings, Faulconbridge, Bardolf, and diverse others, Forces
were resolved to be raised, and another hazard of the Field to be Enterprised:
But the Earl of Westmoreland, whom they would have drawn to their Party,
revealing their Design to the King, he secretly Marched with an Army into the
North, and surprising Moubray, Scroop, and some others, caused their Heads to
be stricken off; but Northumberland, Bardolf, etc. Escaped to France, from
whence they afterward came to Scotland, where that King promised to Aid them;
but to prevent the threatening Danger, the King raised a potent Army, and sent
it under the Prince of Wales into Scotland, where he Retook Berwick, Alnwick,
and other strong places, that the Earl had delivered to the Scots, and Burnt
many Towns in the heart of that Kingdom; whereupon the Scots, finding
themselves unable to make Resistance, craved a Truce, which was Granted for
twelve Months; and thereupon the Prince returned home with his Spoils.

Whilst this was doing, the French (to favor the Design) set out several Armed
Ships, to Alarm the Coast Towns of England, when the Lord Castile, with three
other Lords, 20 Knights, and a great many Soldiers, Landing at Dartmouth, were
Encountered by the Country People, who Slew Castile, and most of his Soldiers;
and taking the rest Prisoners, brought them to the King, who very well rewarded
the Rusticks for their Care and Vigilance, and put the Lords and Knights to
great Ransoms; and the King going to see them on Board at their departure, in
his return from the Downs very narrowly escaped being taken by a French
Privatier's supposedly lying purposely in wait for him; whereupon the Lord
Commois who attended him, being a Norman Nobleman, was suspected of Treachery,
but upon his Trial acquitted, and received into Favor.

The Truce with Scotland Expired, Northumberland and Bardolf Animated the Scots
to Invade England, which they did, doing much mischief in Northumberland, and
other Northern parts: Whereupon the King Levied an Army and Traveled by long
Marches to Encounter them, but before his Arrival, they were Fought-with and
Overthrown by Sir Thomas Rookby, High Sherif of Yorkshire, who slew the Earl
and sent his Head as a Present to the King that was very acceptably received,
and the Lord Bardolf being Wounded, fled into Scotland, and there Dyed of his
Wounds.

After this the King Assembling a Parliament, Created therein his three Younger
Sons, viz. Thomas Duke of Clarence, John Duke of Bedford, and Humphry Duke of
Gloucester; and many Laws were therein Enacted profitable to the Commonweal;
and from this Day till his Death, the King Enjoyed a Life free from Hostility,
but found such Inward perplexities of Mind, for having Consented to, or
Instigated, the Murder of King Richard his first Cousin, for the lucre of his
Crown, that to make some Atonement, and quiet his Conscience, he Levied an
Army, resolving (as he had Vowed) to make War against the Infidels that
Oppressed the Christians in the Holy Land; which the Popes of those times
declared was a full Atonement, or sufficient Expiation for any Crime, how
Notorious so ever; but whilst things were getting ready, he fell into an
Appoplexy; and finding Death approaching, caused his Crown to be placed on his
Pillow, with an intent to deliver it to the Prince when he was near Departing;
but he, impatient of delay, supposing him (when fallen into a Drows^ness) to be
Dead, removed it thence; whereupon the King raised himself, and missing it,
demanded Who had taken it? And the Prince Replying, It was he: The King fell
back, and fetching a deep Sigh, said, My Son, what Right I had to this Crown,
and how I have Enjoyed it, God knows, and the World has seen; and thereupon he
fetched a deep Groan; but the Prince not minding that, said, Comfort your self
in God, Father; The Crown you have, and if you Dye, it is mine, and I will keep
it with my Sword as you have done; and within a few Hours the King dyed, in the
46th Year of his Age, when he had Reigned 13 Years, 5 Months, and 19 Days; and
was Buried at Canterbury, Anno 1412.

In this Kings Reign two Blazing Stars appeared before the breaking out of the
Piercy's Rebellion, and many Drops of Blood fell on Peoples Garments in the
Northern Parts, as from the Clouds.

Anno 1407 a great Plague happened, that destroyed in London 30000 Persons, and
multitudes else where; and the Year after, a violent Frost held 15 Weeks.

And by the wicked procurement of Thomas Arundel Arch Bishop of Canterbury,
William Sawtree, William Swinderby, and William Thorp, worthy Divines, suffered
Martyrdom for opposing the Romish Superstitions and Idolatry, Preaching the
Gospel, and much adhearing to Wickliffe's Doctrine.

Remarks on the County of Surry, etc.
SUrry is a very spacious County, and would be abundantly Fruitful, did not a
ridge of barren Hills run in a manner quite through it; however it abounds in
Corn, Cattle, Rich Medows and Vpland Pastures, and Open and Enclosed Grounds,
yields store of Honey, Wool, Fowl, Fish, Deer, and is abundant in pleasant
Gardens and Orchards of Fruit Trees. It is Bounded on the North, with the
Thames and Middlesex; on the East, with Kent; on the South, with Sussex; and on
the West, with Hampshire and Buckinghamshire. It contains 13 Hundreds, in which
are 141 Parishes, 8 Principal Market Towns, 7 Bridges, 4 Forests; and 17
Parks; as for Rivers, there are many small ones, as at Gilford, Casholton,
Kingston upon Thames, Wandsworth, and other places; but the River Thames which
is a great part in this County, is the most Remarkable, and the little River
Mole, that runs a great way under Ground, and rises again. It sends Members to
Parliament 14, viz. The Borough of Southwark 2, Rygate 2, Blechenley 2, Gatton
2, Guilford 2, Haslemore 2, and 2 Knights of the Shire.

In this County the little Town of Lambeth is noted for the stately Palace of
the Arch Bishop of Canterbury, being founded by Arch Bishop Bladwin, who made
it his Seat Anno 596; here Henry Canute the Danish King Dyed, of a Surfeit.
Croydon is also famed as another Seat of the Arch Bishops, and for the stately
Monument of Dr. Gilbert Sheldon, Erected there to his Memory. At Ockley,
Ethelwolfe won a great Battle over the Danes. Near Oatlands, Julius Caesar
first passed the Thames, at a place then called Cowstakes. Putney gave Birth to
that great Minister of State Thomas Cromwell, who from a Black-Smiths Son, in
Henry the Eighth's time, rose to be Created SURREY By J. Seller.
map of Surrey Earl of Essex, and made Vicar General of England, being greatly
Instrumental in the Reformation. At Wimbleton Anno 560, Cheaulin King of the
West Saxons, gave a great Defeat to Ethelred King of Kent: Richmond is famed,
as having been the Country Retirement of a great many of our Kings and Queens,
and much delighted in by his present Majesty King William the Third; and in
this place, besides a great many of her Predecessors, Queen Elizabeth drew her
last Breath. Kingston on Thames is Memorable for the Residence and Coronation
of the Saxon Kings, Ethelston, Edwin, Ethelred, and others; Gilford was the
Seat of many Saxon Kings, and is famous for its Hospital and Free School. At
Morton a Parliament was held Anno 21 of Henry the Third, which produced an Act
which to this day is called The Statute of Merton. There is a Bourn near
Croydon by its rising foretells Mortality. At Casholton are excellent Trouts,
and near Nonesuch a large Vein of Potters Earth: Here are found at Ebsham or
Epsom, as also near Lewisham, those Medicinal Waters that Cure many Diseases in
all sorts of People.

The Seats of Pleasure are Richmond, belonging to the Royal Family; Albury and
Waybridge, to the Duke of Norfolk; Nonsuch to the Duke of Southampton;
Rowhampton, to the Duke of Devon; Byflet, to the Duke of St. Albans;
Flanchford, to the Earl of Plymouth; Rygate Place, to the Lord Mordant; Towting
Graveny, to the Lord North and Gray; and the Bishop of Winchesters Place in
Southwark, called Winchester-House.

The Reign of HENRY the Fifth (commonly called Henry of Monmouth.)
THis Henry, the greater part of his Fathers Reign, was much lead away by evil
Company, and was not free from committing in his Frolicks Robberies on the
Highway, especially on his own Receivers; and one of his Gang being taken, and
about to be Sentenced in the Court of Kings Bench, he rushed in and labored to
pull off his Irons, in order to set him at Liberty; but the Lord Chief Justice
commanded him to desist; whereupon in a rage, he went up to the Bench, and
Struck him on the Face; for which (after he had given him some mild Reproofs,
as that the Bench he sat on was the Kings, and that himself in that place
represented his Person, and what Injury was done to him, was done to the King;
and if he showed such evil Examples, none would Obey him when he came to Reign)
he sent him to the Kings Bench Prison, till the Kings pleasure should be known
in the matter. The King no sooner heard of it, but he commended the Judge for
his Courage and Impartiality, wishing all his Ministers were like him; and
though the Prince was Enlarged, yet for this he was put from his Presidentship
in the Council, and his Younger Brother Thomas Duke of Clarence placed therein,
to his great Grief.

These and other Irregular Passages of his past Years, (when he was Crowned by
Arundel Arch Bishop of Canterbury at Westminster) he wisely considered; and to
repair what had been amiss, strictly forbid the Lewd Companions of his Youth to
enter his Court, or any where come near his Person, till he had some cause to
believe they had reformed and mended their Manners; yet ordered some of them,
who had run out their Estates in pursuing his wild Extravagancies, small
Pensions to Subsist on, till they could better provide for themselves, Electing
none for his Council, nor into Places of Justice, or public Government, but
such as were of known Integrity, Wise, Sober, and not to be Biased through fear
or favor; greatly laboring to Reform the Abuses of the Clergy; and for the
better security of the Marches, he caused the Castles and Towns thereabouts to
be Repaired and Strongly Garisoned, by which means he Awed the Scots and Welsh,
and kept his People free from their former fears and apprehensions of danger.

And the better to show he had no hand in, nor was consenting to the Death of
King Richard, he caused his Body to be brought from Langley to Westminster, in
much Funeral Pomp, and to be Interred by Queen Ann his beloved Wife.

In the Second Year of his Reign he Assembled a Parliament at Leicester,
wherein he was Importunately Addressed to supress Religious Houses, where they
were ill managed, and in stead of promoting Godly Lives, had been made the
Nurseries of Gluttony, Idleness, Pride, and all Uncleanness; considering they
would yield into his Coffers an Annual Rent of 20000 l; which might be better
Employed for the Support of the Crown, and Honor and Safety of the Kingdom, in
maintaining 15 Earls, 1500 Knights, and more than 6000 Men at Arms; besides a
great Number of Alms Houses for the support and relief of the Poor.

This much startled the Abbots, Priors, Friars, Monks, Nuns, etc. as fearing to
be Vn-Hived, and forced to Labor for their Livings; which they were little
able to do, considering they had so long been inured to a habit of Idleness;
and therefore to turn the Stream another way, at their instant Entreaties,
Henry Chichesly who Succeeded Thomas Arundel in the Archiepiscopal See of
Canterbury, took an opportunity in a very Learned Oration to make the King
sensible of his Right to the Crown of France, inciting him to Claim it as his
proper Inheritance; and in the Clergies behalf, for the carrying on the Wars,
he offered a large Sum of Money; whereupon the other business was laid aside,
and nothing now considerably debated or spoken of, but how the King might
Recover France: The People every where showing a willingness to Embark in the
Undertaking: And a Noble Embassy was sent to King Charles the Sixth,
peremptorily to demand the peaceable delivery of the Kingdom, together with the
Dutchies of Aquitain, Normandy, Anjou, and whatever had formerly appertained to
the Crown of England; and if the French King without Effusion of Blood would
yield to his demands, he would take the Lady Catherine, the Kings Daughter, to
Wife, and Endow her with all the Dutchies and Provinces; and be tractable in
every thing tending to the French King's Honor and Estate; but upon the
Refusal, he would attempt the gaining it by the Sword, and bring on that
Kingdom all the Miseries that are inseparable attendants on a cruel War.

The unexpected strangeness of this Message, so amazed the French King and his
Nobles, that they could make no ready Answer, but promised to send Ambassadors
to King Henry, who should endeavor to Adjust this weighty Affair; yet the
Dauphin of France had no sooner notice of the King's Demands, but despising his
Youth, and holding him unfit to attempt a matter of so high a consequence, in a
scoffing manner sent him a Tun of Racket-Balls to sport with in his
Tennis-Court: This so Angered him that He Vowed (by Gods assistance) ere many
Months were over, he would toss so many Iron Balls within the Kingdom of
France, that their strongest Rackets should be too weak to turn them. And
hereupon he Levied a puissant Army; so that the Dauphin seeing him in earnest,
began to repent of his Rashness, and governing Affairs under his Father, whose
Imbecility rendered him not very capable of it, he sent Ambassadors to Inform
King Henry, That if he would desist from his Purpose, and Live in Amity with
that Nation, and take the Lady Catharine his Sister to Wife, he should then
receive with her a large Sum of Money, with some small Territories and
Possessions in that Kingdom.

To this King Henry Replied, That unsess with the Lady he might have the
Dutchies of Normandy, Anjou, Aquitain, and all the other Signories, to him and
to his Crown justly appertaining, he would not wave his Title to the Crown of
France, but attempt by all Hostile means to win it, if he might; and with this
Answer the Ambassadors departed much dissatisfied: Whereupon King Henry
settling his Affairs, appointing his Mother Regent, and joining to her Council
many grave Persons for the Management of the Government, he Marched his Army to
the Sea Coast.

And now the Dauphin began to play another game; for Richard Earl of Cambridge,
Henry Lord Scroop, and Sir Thomas Gray, three approved Captains, Bribed by him
with vast Sums, resolved to Seize the King, and carry him into France; or if
that proved too difficult, to Murder him in his Tent before he took Shipping;
but this Treason being timely Discovered, and made out by Proof, and their own
Confessions, they were the day after their Trials Executed in the Camp; and as
soon as the Wind served in 140 Ships he Transported his Army to Normandy; and
in 34 Days Took Hareflew, on the River Seine; Enriching his Army with the
Spoils, and placing the Duke of Exeter his Uncle, as Captain there, and a
Garrison of 1500 Men. He resolved, because the Season advanced apace, to March
over-Land to Callis, and Winter there.

The Dauphin by this time had got a very numerous Army in the Field, and was
attended by almost all the Nobility and Gentry of the French Nation, and having
notice of King Henry's March, it was Debated whether he should be suffered to
pass to Callis, or be Fought with by the way; at last in the French Kings
Council by far the greater Number, it was carried to give him Battle, since he
had passed the River Soam, and was entangled in the Country, his Army
consisting but of 2000 Horse, and 13000 Archers and Men at Arms, many of them
being Sick, and wanting mostly Provisions; whereupon a Herald was sent to him
with Defiance, commanding him to prepare within a few days for the Battle: To
this he presently Answered, That his Army being afflicted with Sickness and
Wants, he was bending his Course to Callis to Refresh his Men, and therefore
would not seek his Enemy; but if they dared to Interrupt him in his Passage, he
was of sufficient Force to Repel all Violence which the French Nation should
oppose against him; upon this Answer a Proclamation was put out, That all who
loved their Country, and were desirous to fight for Honor, should
straight-waies repair to the French Kings Standard; so that the Army soon
increased to upward of 60000, mostly Horse, consisting of the Flower of the
French Nation. King Henry was not Ignorant of this, nor of their hasty Marches
toward him; so that pitching his Tents between the Towns of Balangie and
Agincourt, in the County of St. Paul, he resolved to expect them; which was not
long, so that in a manner Incompassing his little Army with their Multitudes,
they were so sure of Victory, that they made great Fires; and held Revels in
their Camp, whilst King Henry and his People were in a deep Humiliation,
desiring assistance of God.

On the 25th of October, Anno 1414, The Armies on both sides were set in Array,
each dividing into three Battles; King Henry's Vaunt-Guard was Commanded in
chief by the Duke of York, the Main-Battel by himself, and the Rear-Guard by
Thomas Duke of Exeter; and to prevent any sudden breaking in of the French
Horse, he caused his Archers and Men at Arms to be environed with Stakes six or
seven Foot long, headed with sharp Iron, which fastened at one end in the
Ground, might easily upon occasion be removed; on the Wing, as the French Horse
were to come on, he placed in a Meadow 1500 Archers, having a Ditch before
them, that could not easily be Leaped; and when Sir Walter Harpington Marshal
of the Field, cast up his Gantlet, the whole Band of Archers were to deliver
their flights of Arrows with a great shout; all which was so exactly observed,
That the French Horse of their first Battle were no sooner within the danger of
the Ambush, but they were gauled by the Archers, and many of their Riders
thrown to the Ground and trampled to Death; Then the English Vant-guard let
fly, dimming the Air with their showers of Arrows, working a miserable
Destruction to the French; so that by the unruliness of the wounded Horses,
this Battle soon fell into disorder and confusion, pressing violently upon one
another, breaking in upon the Foot for Retreat, and doing great mischief; which
the English perceiving, slung their Bows and with Mawls, Axes, Swords, Gleves,
and Bills, made an incredible slaughter among them; and having put these to the
Rout, they run fiercely on the middle Battle of the French, who for a while
Fought with great Courage and Resolution; and having done them considerable
mischief, they seemed Politickly to Faint and Retire, which was to train the
Enemy on their sharp pointed Stakes; and it so well succeeded, that the French
Horse rushing on furiously, without seeing the danger, were miserably Goared,
stopping one another, and making a Barricade for the English, whilst they had
leisure to ply them with their flights of Arrows, till in a short time that
Battle (as the former) was altogether in Rout and Confusion; and then the
English breaking in as before, the King fought hand to hand with the Duke of
Alanson, and was so violently stricken by him, that it broke the small Crown he
wore on his Helmet that day; to distinguish him in the Battle; and he had
nearly taken him Prisoner, but the King recovering from the Stund he received
from the forcible blow, slew two of his Companions, and beat him down; whereat
he cried out, I am your Cousin Alanson, spare my Life; and though the King
labored to do it, his Guards were so enraged against him for endangering the
Life of their Sovereign, that they slew him as he lay on the Ground.

This Battle being utterly Defeated, the Third (which consisted almost all of
Foot) being Charged, and fearing to be Encompassed, threw down their Arms, and
as many as could fled; but great Numbers who could not, fell on their Knees and
begged Quarter, which was granted: But fatally to them, in the close of the
Fight, Robinet of Bonvile with 600 of those Horsemen which had first acquitted
the Field, entered the Kings Camp, Guarded only by Lacquies and Scullions, and
slew many of those weak Defendants, who raising a doleful cry, the King verily
supposed fresh Forces were come to Engage his weary Soldiers; and there being
almost as many Prisoners as he had Men of his own, fearing they should Revolt,
and do him great mischief in a renewed Fight, he caused it to be Proclaimed on
pain of Death, That all ordinary Prisoners should immediately be put to the
Sword; which was accordingly done to about 8000; but when the King knew the
true cause of the new uproar, and had slain almost all those 600 that rifled
his Camp, he condemned himself of too much Cruelty in putting the Prisoners to
the Sword, when he had given them Quarter, bewailing it with Tears, and caused
his Surgeons to lookafter such as yet weltered in their Blood, or there might
be any hopes to recover, and some were recovered; for in so sudden an
Execution, many received Wounds that were not Mortal.

This famous Victory obtained, the King fell on his Knees, and caused all the
Army to do the like; and with up-lifted Hands say, Lord, Not unto us, not unto
us, but to thy Name be Glory and Honor.

In this Battle (which the King said should be called The Battle of Agincourt
to all Posterity, because Fought near that Town) were slain of the French,
Charles Lord Delabreth, Constable of France, Jaques Lord of Dampire, High
Admiral, John Duke of Alanson, Anthony Duke of Brabant, Edward Duke of Bar;
The Earls of Marle, Vaudemont, Blawmount, Grand Pree, Russey, Faulconbridg,
Foys, and Lastrake, 25 Lords, 8000 Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen, and about
10000 of the meaner sort.

The Prisoners of Note were Charles Duke of Orleance, John Duke of Burbon, The
Lords Donuart, Fosseux, Humiers, Roy, Cawny, Hamcourt, Noell, Bonciqualt, and
some others; and on King Henry's part of Note were slain Edward Duke of York,
and the Earl of Worcester: Some Historians will have the latter to be the Earl
of Suffolk, and not above 600 others of all Ranks. The King who before the
Battle had Vowed to Dye or Conquer, and that England should never be at a Penny
charge for his Ransom, was informed by some of his Noble Prisoners, That the
French were so confident of the Victory, that they had not only disposed of his
Person, and the spoil of his Camp before hand, but also of Places and Offices
in England: But when Man proposes, God disposes.

The Dead being Honorably Buried, and the Soldiers Enriched with the Spoil,
the King Marched to Callis, without any interuption; and having settled his
Affairs, passed into England, where he was received by his Subjects with
unspeakable Joy.

Soon after this, the Duke of Exeter, Captain of Harestew, Ravaged the
Countries, and Overthrew the Earl of Arminiack, the new Constable of France,
with considerable slaughter; taking many Prisoners, for which he had large
Ransoms: And Sigismund the Emperor of Germany coming into England, labored to
conclude a Peace between the two Kings; but not being able to effect it, he
made one for himself; and being honorably attended by the King and his Nobles
to his Ships, he returned home, highly satisfied with his Entertainment:
Shortly after the Duke of Burgundy made a Peace with King Henry only for the
Counties of Flanders and Arthois, for which he was suspected as an Enemy to the
Crown of France.

In the Kings absence, the French Besieged Hareflew by Sea and Land; but their
Fleet, Commanded by John Viscount Narbon, was utterly destroyed by John Duke of
Bedford; whereupon the Constable raised the Siege by Land, and hasted to Paris;
upon which the French Nobility Quarelled among themselves, about the several
bad Successes, charging the Miscarriage upon one another, which made for King
Henry's Interest; so that he called a Parliament at Westminster, declaring
publicly his Right and undoubted Title to the Crown of France, and the many
wrongs the French had done the English Nation, which now they had an
opportunity to repair, in giving him Supplies to enable him in the prosecution
of his Wars, which they liberally Granted him; and it was raised without any
murmurings of the People, as in other Reigns had happened on the like occasion:
In the mean while John Holland Earl of Huntington, after a sharp Engagement,
took three Carracks of Genoa, and sunk other six, that were going to Aid the
French; and in the Prizes found great store of Treasure; and early in the
Spring the King Landed a strong Army in Normandy, took the Castle of Tonque,
whereupon the Villagers of that Duchy fled into their Walled-Towns, and he
laid Siege to the City of Caen, which after many fierce Assaults, he took,
putting to Death the most obstinate, who had too long refused his proffered
Mercy, in holding out against him; and the more Wealthy Citizens he put to
Fines and Ransoms.

And now a Quarrel happened between the Queen of France and the Dauphin her
Son, for she having raked together great store of Treasure, he forcibly seized
it for the use of the War; which so enraged her, that she vowed Revenge, and
procured John Duke of Burgundy to be Protector of the Kings Person and of the
Kingdom; so that an irreconcilable Quarrel continued among them: The
Constable and Dauphin laboring to weaken his Interest, and he on the other
hand supported by the Kings Favor, was not wanting to do the like for them.
Whilst King Henry was Warring in Normandy, and took in about 50 strong Towns
and Castles, reducing the Normans for the most part to his obedience, and
having appointed Sir Gilbert Vmphrevile Captain of Caen Castle, and Sir Gilbert
Talbot the like of the Town, Sir John Popham Baylif, etc. and disposed the
other Places in Trusty Hands, he Marched to Roan, where he found the Citizens
had drawn a great Trench about it, and strongly Fortified it with Towers and
Bullwarks, and having laid Siege to it, at Pontle-Arch he laid over a strong
Chain, and a Wooden Bridge to hinder any Succors coming by Water, keeping
likewise that Passage blocked up with a strong Squadron, under the Command of
the Earl of Warwick; and whilst he lay at this Siege, the Lord Kilmay with
16000 Irishmen, came to him Armed with Darts and Coats of Mail, being joyfully
received, and proved very servicable. But the King finding his violent Assaults
were repulsed, the Garrison being very Numerous, encompassed the place to the
Landward, with a wide and deep Trench, impailed at the bottom with sharp
Stakes, and so well guarded with Archers, that they durst not approach it; so
there being Multitudes of useless People in the City, the Famine increased so
sore among them, that nothing Unclean was left uneaten; nor were those they
turned out suffered to pass the English Camp, so that many Hundreds with
piteous cries lay and died under the Walls; and the Siege having continued from
Lamas tide, till Christmas, on New Years Day they desired safe Conduct for
their Commissioners to pass to the King, which was allowed, but to little
purpose; for a bold Frenchman so angered him with his vaunting speech (wherein
he taxed him with unprincely degenerateness, and meanness of Courage, for
Cloistering up the Garrison to Starve them, as not daring to let them be at
liberty to Fight, and sell their Lives bravely in the Field) That he resolved
not to hearken to any Terms, but the Surrender of the City upon discretion,
Granting them only a Truce of Eight Days to well advise in the matter; but
nothing being determined, the half-Starved Inhabitants with hideous cries and
shouts compelled the Governor and Magistrates to a Surrender; so that having
Four Days more allowed, they Surrendered the City and Castle to the King, there
being Famished during the Siege 5000, and 12000 Starvelings were turned out,
who many of them dyed in the Fields and Lanes: Then he compelled the Burghers
for their Ransom to pay him 356000 Crowns and swear Fealty to him and his
Successors, and with this Capital City went the current of the rest, so that he
became sole Master of Normandy.

Upon this, the Duke of Burgundy came to King Henry under safe conduct, to
treat of an Accommodation; but whatever the King asked, was denied; which made
him in a passion Swear, That he would have the Lady Catharine in Marriage, and
what he demanded with her, or otherwise he would ere long drive both him and
his Master out of the Kingdom: To which the Duke Replied, Those words were
easy to be spoke, but that he must take much Labor and Toil to make them
good. After this, the Duke reconciled himself to the Dauphin, ratified under
their Hands and Seals before a public Notary, and King Henry to let the world
see he resolved to persist in what he had enterprized, created Gascoyn D'
Foyes, Earl of Longeville; Sir John Gray, Earl of Tankervile; and Sir John
Bourchier, Earl of Ewe in the Kingdom of France; and upon the approach of
Captain Bueff with 1500 Men to Ponthoyse, the Lord Listendame, the Governor,
with 10000 Inhabitants, Deserted it, leaving for haste most of their Rich Goods
behind them. This Place the King Fortified, and Marched to Paris, which he lay
before Three Days, bringing a great terror on that City; but with his small
Army not able to incompass it, he Marched back to Ponthoyse.

John Duke of Burgundy, as is said, having reconciled himself to the Dauphin,
yet it being superficial, and not hearty, he determined in a more submissive
manner to humble himself unto him, that thereby their Loves taking a deeper
root, might bring forth the fruits of Unity and Peace; but when they met, the
Dauphin, whose Malice was irreconcilable, and whose mistrustful Jealosie did
persuade him that the Duke would not be faithful, procured him treacherously to
be Murdered, by the blow of a Battel-Ax in his presence, as he was about to
kneel and pay him Homage. This was looked on by many as a just Judgment,
because much in the same manner he had caused Lewis Duke of Orleance to be
Murdered in the Tenth Year of King Henry the Fourth.

This made not amiss for King Henry, but hastened his advancement; for Philip,
Son to the Murdered Duke, was so highly displeased, that he not only in his
melancholy Anger determined forever to separate himself from his Innocent
Duchess, without any other reason or cause, than that she was Sister to the
Dauphin; but as his fury abated, her Tears and the sober Advice of his
Counselors, brought him to better reason; so that for that time his Love
continued to her as at first: Yet he resolved on Revenge another way, viz. By
joining his Interest with King Henry; for he was very powerful in Flanders, as
well as Burgundy, and was able to give a considerable check to France, but more
especially to the Dauphins Interest; and to bring this about, he labored to
Reconcile the Kings of England and France; and in those his endeavors he was
the more powerful,

1. Because his Wife was Daughter to the French King.

2. Because the Lady Catharine, who could do all with ^^een Isabella,
passionately desired to be Married to King ^enry.

3. Because the Queen, for depriving her of her Treasure, ^^d some other
Affronts put upon her, had conceived a mor^^ hatred against the Dauphin,
insomuch that she could not ^^dure to hear him Named.

4. Because the Dauphin was more Subtle, Cunning, ^afty, and Revengeful, Than
Politic, Wise, or Valliant;

And Lastly, Because the treacherous Murder of Bur^^ndy had rendered him
Abhorred among the Neighboring ^rinces, and for the most part in France.

And soon after this, by the means of the Duke and Queen of France, matters so
ripened toward a Peace, That it was Agreed King Henry should have an Interview
with Charles the French King, his Queen, and Daughter, at Trois in Campaign;
whither he went, accompanied with his Brothers, the Dukes of Clarence and
Gloucester, the Earls of Warwick, Salisbury, Huntington, Longevile, Tankervile
and Ewe; and to prevent any Treacherous Surprise, drew a Camp of 15000 Men ^ear
the Place; and so luckey were their Consultations, that within a few Days a
strict Amity was made, and a Peace Proclaimed between the two Kings, upon many
Articles: But the Substance briefly was,

That the Crown of France and all its Rights, after the Death of King Charles
and his Queen, should re^^in to King Henry and his Heirs forever; whereupon
(...) Married the Lady Catharine with great Pomp and ^^endour: So that the
Salique Law of France was at ^s time made void. Yet the Pope being solicited to
^^firm King Henry, would not consent to it: How^^er the Articles of Peace and
Agreement were Pro^^med in both Kingdoms; so that King Henry being ^w more at
leisure, and commanding for the French King, as being appointed Regent or
Protector of France, he pursued the Dauphin from place to place, stripping him
with little labor of many important Towns, Castles, and Fortresses; and in the
strong Town of Moylin on the River Seine, they took the Lord Barbason, and
diverse others, who were concerned in the Murder of the Duke of Burgundy; who
being sent to Paris, were Tried, Sentenced, and put to Death; and the Duchess
Dowager of Burgundy Appealing to a Grand Council in which the two Kings sat as
Judges against the Dauphin and seven others, they were Summoned to appear at
the Marble Table in Paris at a fixed Day; but failing to do it, as likewise in
the Parliament soon after called, They were Banished the Realm, deprived of
their Honors, Names, Titles, and Dignities whatsoever, and Proclaimed Enemies.
This greatly perplexed the Dauphin: Yet going into Languedock, he was succored
and supported with Money Arms and other Necessaries, by the Earl of Arminack.

Almost all France being reduced to Obedience, the two Kings and Queens took
leave; and Henry received in his way to England Homage of all the Nobles of the
Duchy of Normandy, and conferring high Honors and Titles on many, came to
Callis, and from thence Sailed for England, where he was Joyfully received; and
the February following Queen Catharine was Crowned at Westminster, with great
Solemnity.

The Dauphin upon King Henry's departure, began to look up a little, and having
made the Young Duke of Alanson his Lieutenant; the Duke of Clarence was left
Lieutenant for Henry, who deceived by one Andrew Forgusa, a Treacherous
Lombard, whom he too much Trusted, thinking to repress the French Forces, was
drawn into their Ambush, and after a desperate Fight against four to one, the
English were Overthrown near Blangy; yet the French lost 1200 of their choicest
Men; and of the English were slain the Duke of Clarence, the Earl of
Tankervile, Sir Gilbert Vmphervile, the Lord Ross, and near 2000 of less Note;
and taken Prisoners the Earls of Suffolk, Sommerset, and Perch; the Lord
Fitz-Walter, and others: But upon the approach of Sir Thomas Beaufort with a
Band of Archers, the French hasted out of the Field with their Prisoners and
Spoil, as having had hot work on it already, and not willing to try a second
Encounter.

The King was much troubled at this Overthrow, and the death of his Brother;
but resolving Revenge, he sent the Earl of Mountague to succeed him in the
Command of the Provinces, and assembling a Parliament, caused to be laid before
them the State of both Nations; whereupon to enable him in his Wars, the
Temporality gave him one Fifteenth, and the Clergy two; and for Expedition, the
Bishop of Winchester Advanced 20000 l. and received it again out of the Tax
Granted by Parliament; whereupon an Army consisting of 24000 Men was
Transported under the Command of John Duke of Bedford, the King's Brother,
driving the Dauphin from the Siege of Chartieres, from thence the Duke Marched
to Paris, and was soon joined by the Duke of Burgundy with 4000 Horse; nor was
the King slow in following his Army, having with him James the Young King of
Scots, who with his own People Besieged and Took Direux, and delivered it to
King Henry, and so they chased the Dauphin out of all his strong Holds,
compelling him to take Refuge in Berry, whither the King thought not fit to
tire his Army in following him; but having taken in a great many places,
repassed the Loire.

About this time Queen Catharine was delivered of a Son at Windsor; which News
coming to the King, very much troubled him, because he had charged her not to
Lye-in there; but being unexpectedly taken in Labor, necessity compelled her
to do it. The King's Reason for it, was grounded on an old Prophecy, Predicting
No Prince Fortunate that should be Born there: Whereupon, in a Passion he said
to the Lord Fitzhugh, his Chamberlain, Good God! I Henry of Monmouth shall
have but a short Reign, and Win much; but Henry of Windsor shall Reign long,
and Loose all: But God's Will be done.

Soon after this, the King having Reduced the Isles of France, and almost all
other Places, fell Sick, and unable to Travel: whereupon he committed the
charge of the Army to his Brother John Duke of Bedford. Then calling together
his Nobles, and sending for the Queen, he appointed the Duke of Bedford Regent
of France, and Lieutenant General of Normandy; and his other Brother Humphry
Duke of Gloucester, Regent of England, and Protector of his Son's Person;
Exhorting the Nobles to maintain the Friendship with the Duke of Burgundy, and
always to be at Union among themselves; to be faithful to his Son and Queen,
and never to conclude a Peace with the Dauphin till he submitted to his Son:
Soon after this, he Dyed, August 31st Anno 1422 at Boice Le Vincenois in
France, of a Burning Feavour, and Flux, in the 30th Year of his Age, when he
had Reigned 9 Years, 5 Months, and 10 Days; and his Body being brought over,
was Buried among his Noble Ancestors at Westminster, with extraordinary
Solemnity.

In this Kings Reign those that held Wickliffe's Doctrine were sharply
Persecuted, at the Instigation of the Roman Clergy; 73 languished in Prison,
and Lawrence Redman, David Sawtree, William Jones, Thomas Brightwel, William
Hawham, Ralph Greenhurst, and John Schute, SUSSEX By I. Seller
map of Sussex were Burnt and Strangled in St. Giles Fields. And Sir John Old
Castle, styled Lord Cobham, being Condemned in Parliament, though he produced the
Articles of his Belief, and offered to Prove them by his Sword in single
Combat, according to the Word of God; neither that, nor the great Services he
had done, could Protect him against the Clergy's Malice; for being hung up in
an Iron Frame, he was Burnt Alive in St. Giles Fields, being a Man truly
Religious, Virtuous, and Valiant.

Remarks on the County of Sussex, etc.
SUssex is a very pleasant open County in most parts, and much advantaged by
its lying open on its South side to the Sea; It produces a considerable
sprinkling of Corn, flocks of Sheep, and many Large Cattle; Fruit great store,
and much Pasture-Ground; It abounds in Butter, Cheese, and some Honey, Flax and
Hops; on the West it is Bounded with Hampshire, on the North with Kent and
Surry, and on the East with the Sea, and some little part of Kent: It contains
1 City, viz. Chichester, which is a Bishops See, 65 Hundreds, Parishes 312,
Market Towns 17, 1 Castle, 2 Rivers, 10 Bridges, and 33 Parks.

It sends Members to Parliament 20, viz. Arundel 2, Bramber 2, Chichester 2,
East Grinstead 2, Horesham 2, Lewis 2, Midhurst 2, New Shoreham 2, Steyning 2;
and 2 Knights of the Shire: Besides the Cinque Ports, viz. Hastings 2, Rye 2,
Seaford 2, and Winchelsea 2.

Chichester in this County is held to be Founded by Cissa a South Saxon, and
the Bishopric was Translated thither from Sesley by William the Conqueror; at
Lewis King Ethelston Coined his Money, and a strong Castle was Built there by
Earl Warren, and a Bloody Battle fought near it between King Henry and his
Barons; at Pensey or Pevensey the Conqueror Landed when he won England; and
near Hastings the great Fight was fought between William and King Harold for
the Kingdom, and the place is called to this day Battel-Field; at Buckstead the
first Great Iron Guns in England were Cast: The Waters in this County produce
the best Carp in the Island, and on the Sea Coast store of Lobsters are taken.
Near Walsal are store of Lime Pits; Sesley is famed for Cockles; near Tenderden
Steeple is a Stone that sensibly appears to Grow by the falliag of the Rain.

The Seats of the Nobility are Arundel Castle, belonging to the Duke of
Norfolk; Buckhurs and Stoneland, belonging to the Earl of Dorset; part of
Bolebrook, to the Earl of Thanet; Herst Monceux, to the Earl of Sussex;
Cowdrey, Battel-Abby and Poynings, to the Lord Montague; Petworth-Place, to the
Duke of Sommerset; Eridg, to the Lord Abergavenny; Up-Park, to the Lord Gray;
and Chichester Palace, to the Bishop of the Diocese: And many sightly Houses
belonging to the Gentry, etc.

The Reign of HENRY the Sixth (commonly called Henry of Windsor.)
HENRY the Sixth, being at the Death of his Father not above three Months Old,
a Parliament was soon after called, and he Crowned at Westminster, at five
Months Old, the Queen holding him in her Lap whilst the Ceremony was performed,
and likewise brought into the Parliament House, where the Lords paid Homage to
him as their Rightful Sovereign; a Speech on his behalf being made to them by
the Queen, Exhorting them to be steadfast and Unanimous in securing his Right,
and opposing his Enemies, etc. which they promised to be, and endeavor to the
utmost.

Not long after this, King Charles the Sixth Dying, the French Nobles began to
bethink themselves, that it stood little with their Honor to be subject to a
Prince of another Nation, whilst they had a Son of their King amongst them; and
forgeting their Oaths and Fealty, they began on a sudden to grow cold toward
the English, and seemed desirous to shake off their Yoke; of which the Regent
giving notice to his Brother in England, care was taken continually to send him
over Men and Money, to compel them, if necessity required it, to their
Obedience; but first he used all manner of fair Means, minding them if they
persevered in their Loyalty, the happy conclusion would make them Rich and
Fortunate, win to them the Love and Favor of their Young King, as he grew up
and increased in Wisdom and Years, etc. However the Dauphin got himself Crowned
by his Party, under the Title of Charles the Seventh; and with his small Army
took the Field, sending the Lord Grandval to Besiege Pont-Melance on the River
Seine, which he had the fortune to surprise before the English Garrison was
aware of his coming, putting most he found therein to the Sword; but it was
soon regained by the Earl of Salisbury, and the Lord Grandval swore Allegiance
for his Ransom, to King Henry, but basely revolted as soon as he was Enlarged:
Then the Earl took Senes; whereupon the Parisians sued to the New French King
to assist them underhand, though at the same time they had for a color sent some
of their Citizens to King Henry, promising a continued Duty and Loyalty, for
yet they found not matters ripe for an open Revolt: But whilst the Regent was
Magnificently Celebrating his Nuptials with the Lady Ann Sister to the Duke of
Burgundy, they secretly sent to Charles, Advertising him, That if he came
speedily with any considerable Power, they would over-master the English
Garrison, and deliver the City into his hands.

This greatly Rejoiced him; but whilst his Preparations were slow, the
Conspiracy was made known to the Regent, who swiftly Marched his Army in at
their Gates, seized on the chief Conspirators, and caused them to be Executed
in sundry places of the City; placing a greater Garrison, which very much
curbed them, bridling them more with the Castle of Pacy and Coursay, not far
from thence, which he took, and strongly Fortified; and to prevent the Scots
Aiding the French, James their King was sent home, who had been taken on the
Seas, and a Prisoner at Large to the English many Years; yet the English
Interest was something weakened by the Revolt of the Duke of Britainy, who
fearing the Regent growing Powerful might bring him into subjection, joined
with the Dauphin, as did his Brother Arthur Earl of Yvrie, causing that Town in
Normandy of which King Henry the Fifth had made him Captain, to Rebel; yet that
and Vernoille, which had likewise Revolted, were soon Regained, and the French
Armies that came to Relieve them, were Overthrown.

Soon after, the defeated Governor of Yvrie, whom the Dauphin had unworthily
made Constable of France, Besieged St. James Town in Bayon, with 4000 Men, but
the Besieged issuing out with hideous cries of St. George and the Earl
Salisbury, who by his Martial deeds was grown Terrible to the French, that Army
being seized with a fear that the Earl was entered with his Army on the other
side, and about to break-in upon them, all in confusion threw away their Arms
and fled; so a handful of Men pursuing, a great many of them leaped into the
River and were Drowned, others were slain, and all the Rich Plunder of the Camp
fell to the English. But whilst we thus Triumphed in France, a Mischief had
like to have marred all at home, by a discord that happened between the Duke of
Gloucester and his Uncle the Bishop of Winchester: But the Regent leaving the
Earl of Warwick his Lieutenant General in France, came timely over, and made
them Friends in a Parliament he called; in honor of which Reconciliation, the
Young King held a solemn Feast, and the Regent Dubbed him a Knight; after
which, the King made Richard, Son to the late Earl of Cambridge, Duke of York,
and Restored John Moubray Earl Marshal, to his Fathers Duchy of Norfolk; and
the Bishop of Winchester going to Callis, met the Popes Bull which Invested him
with the Dignity of a Cardinal, which highly pleased him; and new Forces being
Levied in England, were sent to strengthen the Armies in France; so that a
great number of Towns that had Revolted, were Regained, and many French Nobles
put to their Ransoms, which raised Money to maintain the War.

Orleance being now the strongest place the French held, the Earl of Salisbury
laid Siege to it; but after two Months lying before it, the Earl from a
Watchtower taking a view of the Town where it was easiest to be Assaulted, was
slain by a shot from a Culverin; being the first Noble Englishman ever known to
be killed by a Great Shot; and with his Death, the Courage of the English much
abated. However, the Earl of Suffolk succeeded him in the Command, who sending
out Sir John Falstaff to procure Provisions for the Camp, the Lord Delabreth in
his return intending to surprise him with a great Power, was beaten by his
small Party, as being catched again with the Agincourt Trap, by Goaring their
Horses on Irons Pointed, whilst the English retired safe behind them, and with
their Arrows made a miserable Slaughter of 2500 of his Men, taking 11000
Prisoners, and a great Boo^; whereupon the Besieged in Orleance offered to
deliver up the City to the Duke of Burgundy, if he would take them into his
immediate Protection, which he consented to do, if the Regent would Agree to
it: But when he proposed it, the Regent told him, He could not, for since King
Henry had been at such great Charge to reduce it to Extremity, and at a point
to Yield, it was altogether reasonable it should obey no other Sovereign but
him. This much perplexed the Duke, and made him ever after lessen his
Affections to the English, till he quite fell off, and to their great detriment
joined with the adverse party.

The Citizens of Orleance finding their Proposal fruitless, sent to the Dauphin
for speedy Succor, resolving to hold out to the last Extremity, and the
Watches of the English Camp being careless, as expecting every day it would
Surrender, in the depth of Night they thrust several Thousand Men in, with
store of Provisions; so that within a few days they boldly Sallied with their
main Strength, won a strong Pass, and slew 600 English that Guarded it, but
Assaulting a Bastile where the Lord Talbot lay, he fell on them with such fury,
that leaving half their Number Dead, the rest fled fearful into the Town. But
the next day the Earl of Suffolk, by reason of the new Supplies, seeing no
probability of winning the Place, raised the Sirge, and put the greater part of
his Army into Garrisons; but whilst himself lay at Jargeaux, the French won it,
and took him Prisoner, and many Noble Prisoners were Slain, because the French
hotly contended among themselves to whom they rightly belonged; and about 25000
French under the Earl of Vendosm and others, meeting with the Lords Scales,
Talbot, and Hungerford who Fought with them desperately; but not having above
5000 English, they were Overthrown, and the Lords taken Prisoners; yet the
French magnifying their Victory, many small Towns and Castles Revolted to them,
as Trois, Rhemes, Challons, and many others; which made the Regent resolve to
give Charles Battle, sending to defy him as a Usurper and Traitor to his Lord
and Master; and though he drew out his Army and made some semblance as if he
accepted the Challenge, yet he shifted and fled from place to place, and could
not be brought to a fair Field; and the Towns still Revolting, it was thought
Expedient to send for King Henry over, thinking his Presence might keep the
rest in Obedience; and accordingly coming to Paris, he was Crowned there King
of France, with much Royal Pomp and Solemnity: Yet this stopped not the current
of the Revolt; whereupon no sooner was the King returned to England, but the
Regent hastened into Normandy to secure his Interest there; for things run so
strongly, he knew not whom he might trust.

Whilst these things were doing, Charles who had been likewise Crowned King of
France, with many Flatteries and large Promises of Honor, Riches, and
Promotion, labored to withdraw the Duke of Burgundy from King Henry's
Interest; yet at this time, though he was not well affected to the English, by
reason of the distaste he conceived at the Siege of Orleance, he refused his
offers, and acquainted the Regent with the whole Intrigue; so that when Charles
perceived this device was fruitless, he drew down his whole Army before Paris,
but after many Assaults, he was beaten off, with a great slaughter of his Men,
by the English in Garrison there, and some few Citizens as were well affected to
King Henry; for which the Regent at his return gave them many Thanks and
Rewards; at which they seemed greatly to rejoice, promising much, but in the
sequel performing little.

These troublesome Wars having held a long time, the Princes of Europe mediated
for Peace, which only came to a six Years Truce, and yet that was broke much
sooner, upon the death of Ann, the Regents Duchess, Sister to the Duke of
Burgundy, and his Marrying the Lady Jaquet, Daughter to the Earl of St. Paul.
For as much as hereupon the Duke of Burgundy's Love to the English more and
more declined, and the bond of Affinity that tied him more strictly to the
Regent, being sundered by the Death of his Sister; and now the French taking
all advantages, secretly conveyed 200 Men into the Castle of Roan in Normandy;
but they were Assaulted by the Garrison with such timely Courage (for they had
been Introduced by the Treachery of the Deputy Governor, as Friends) that they
were beaten into the Dungeon, from whence they were sentenced some to the
Gallows, others to a different manner of Death, by Cruel Torments; and those
that sped best, were put to great Ransoms.

Hereupon the Regent took the Field, and being Reinforced by 800 Men at Arms,
brought over by the Lord Talbot, who had sometime before, by his Ransom being
paid, been set at liberty; and often urged the French to a Battle, which they
declined: In the mean while, the Boors in Normandy rose in a tumultuous
Rebellion, but being Overthrown by the Earl of Arundel, about 1000 of them
Slain, and several of their Ringleaders Executed, this disturbance was quieted.
But as the Earl went to recover St. Rue, which had Revolted, attempting to take
in by the way Greborie Castle, he was shot in the Ancle with a Culverin Ball,
and being taken Prisoner, soon after Dyed of his Wound. The Duke of Bourbon,
who had been taken Prisoner at the Battle of Agincourt, after fifteen Years
Imprisonment, paid his Ransom; but the day he intended to Imbarke for France,
Dyed at London. And now after many Jealousies between the Regent and Duke of
Burgundy, their Friends labored to Reconcile them, and they seemingly were
again united in strict Amity: But going together into the Town of St. Omer's,
the Regent expected the first Visit, as due to his Character and Dignity, but
the Duke being Sovereign Lord of that Town, supposed he should be Checked by
his Subjects for such a dishonorable condesention; thereupon they declined the
Visits, and both left the Town in much Anger, and forthwith the Duke of
Burgundy entered into a strict League with Charles, who had taken on him the
style of King of France. After this, St. Dennis, and other Towns were
Surprised, or otherways Taken by the French, but many of them again Retaken;
and those that were not looked on as Teneable, Dismantled: And now the Regent
by reason of his unwearied Toil, falling into a desperate Languishment, Dyed;
and was Buried in a stately Monument, erected for him in our Lady's Church in
Roan; and Richard Duke of York appointed Regent in his stead, against the Mind
of the Kings nearest Friends and best Counselors, who were not Ignorant of
his Aspiring and pretensions to the Crown: Soon after Paris Revolted, and
another Rebellion was raised in Normandy, but soon suppressed by the Lords
Talbot, Seals, and others, and the Duke of Burgundy laid Siege to Callis, but
was compelled to raise it and fly by Night, upon notice the Protector was
sending great Forces from England to Relieve it; and 20000 Men soon after
Landed, Burning and Wasting the Dukes Countries of Flanders, and Arthois. But
now the French began to deal with the Scots, the better to Favor their
Designs, and James the First of Scotland forgetting the Benefits he had
received from King Henry the Fifth, entered England with 30000 Men, and
Besieged Roxborough Castle; which was valiantly Defended by Sir Ralph Gray: But
upon the approach of the Earl of Northumberland, he raised his Siege, and fled.

About this time Queen Catharine, Mother to King Henry, Married Owen Tuther, a
goodly Gentleman, descended from Cadwallader the last of the British Kings; and
by her had Issue two Sons, viz. Edmund and Jasper; Edmund was by King Henry
created Earl of Richmond, and took to Wife the Lady Margaret sole Daughter to
John Duke of Sommerset, and on her he got King Henry the Seventh; and Jasper
was created Earl of Pembrook. And now the Kings Council so prevailed with him,
that Richard Duke of York was discharged from his Regency in France, and the
Earl of Warwick appointed in his stead; who beat the Duke of Burgundy from the
Siege of Croy, when in his flight Sir Thomas Tyrrel falling in his Rear, took
his Cannon, and the greater part of his Baggage, finding in Plate and Money
20000 l. And the Earl of Mortayn, Son to Edmund Duke of Sommerset, Assaulting
the Castle of St. Avyar in Mayn, took it by Storm, and put to the Sword 300
Scots, and Hanged all the Frenchmen he found therein, because having Sworn
Allegiance to King Henry, they Revolted.

Whilst these things were doing, the Elder Son of Charles raised a strong
Faction, and Rebelled against him, and by public Edicts divulged the
insufficiency of his Father to Rule that Kingdom. This Cloud threatened a
coming Storm, and begat the Question in his Father and his Counselors of
State, Whether it was most proper to attempt the curing this Mallady by Civil
War, and letting of Blood, or by Discretion and Policy, without Blows: But the
Latter was approved, and Proclamations made by the French King to Prohibit all
his Subjects on pain of Death, not to yield any Obedience to the Dauphins
Commands, Pardoning such as by his persuasion had undertaken his Service; so
that diverse Letters and Messages passing between them, an Accommodation was
made.

Whilst this Difference lasted, the English endeavored the regaining Paris;
but that failing, John Lord Clifford surprised Panthois, by Attiring his Men in
White, and passing the Ditches hard Frozen and covered with Snow, scaling the
Walls and killing the Watch. And now the noble Earl of Warwick Dying, the Duke
of York a second time was made Regent of France; yet the French by
Encroachments and Revolts of many Towns, encouraged (when their Courage failed)
by one Joan of Arc, a Martial Maid, who pretended she was sent by Heaven to
assist her Bleeding Country, and indeed Leading the French Troops, she did many
brave Exploits, till taken by the English, after she had received many Wounds,
they tried her and burnt her for a Witch, though great Ransoms were offered for
her by the French; and this they the rather did, not only for that she beat
them off from the Siege of Orleance, and worsted them in many Skirmishes, but
because the French conceived a superstitious confidence that whilst she Lived,
their Proceedings would be successful and prosperous: Yet both Potentates in
the End, on the French recovering Ponthois, growing weary of so tedious a War,
that had wasted their People and Treasure, a Conference was appointed at
Callice, and here they often consulted about Peace; but in conlusion adjourned
the Negotiation, because King Henry's Demands were looked on as unreasonable in
Three Points, viz.

1. In regard of the great Ransom demanded for the Duke of Orleance. 2. For
that the peaceable and quiet possession of the Dutchies of Aquitaine and
Normandy were required without any Homage or Sovereignty acknowledged to the
Crown of France. 3. For that the surrendering and yielding up into King Henry's
hands all such Cities, Towns, Forts, and Territories in France as the English
had at any time enjoyed within the space of thirty Years past, was required.

However though the Parley was dissolved, yet the Duke of Orleance being brought
to Calice, though King Henry the Fifth on his Deathbed had commanded he should
not be Ransomed, he was Ransomed by the Duke of Burgundy, and Honorably
conveyed to the French Court. And now to make way for Calamities at Home, as
well as Misfortunes Abroad, a Quarrel arose between the Cardinal of Winchester
and Duke of Gloucester; for the Duke being Protector of the Realm, making
Complaints against the Cardinals Acting many things contrary to the Interest of
the King and Kingdom, without any Warant, or making the King Acquainted with
it, The Cardinal in Revenge procured the Duchess of Gloucester to be accused
of Sorcery and Witchcraft, holding correspondence with Witches, to take away
the King's Life; and though most believed there was nothing at all in it, yet the
Cardinal being backed by the Clergy, procured her upon groundless suggestions,
to do public Penance twice in the City of London, and to be doomed to
perpetual Imprisonment; and the better to color the matter, some who were
pretended to be her Associates, suffered the Flames.

After the refusal of some other Matches, as the Earl of Arminack's Daughter,
etc. King Henry (by the means and procurement of the Earl of Suffolk, Bribed by
the French King) Married the Lady Margaret, whom he received by Suffolk his
Ambassador at the Hands of the French King, and Reyner her Father, Duke of
Anjou, Titular King of Sicily, Naples, and Jerusalem, though with her he had
little or no Dowry; which made the Match be much disliked by the Nobles and
Commons. Yet for this Service the Earl was created Duke of Suffolk, and stood
high in the Queen's favor; and they soon found means to dismiss the good Duke
of Gloucester from his Protectorship, after he had a long time faithfully
Served the King and Kingdom. And soon after, the deposed Protector, by the
contrivance of his Grand Enemies, was Accused (in a Parliament assembled by the
Queen in the King's Name at Bury) of High Treason, and committed to the Tower;
where the next day he was found dead in his Bed, to the great Grief of almost
all the Kingdom, as being a Pious, Valliant, and Virtuous Prince; it was
generally concluded he was Smothered, for no Wound was found about him: But God
was not slow in requiring his Blood at the hands of those that were undoubtedly
the contrivers of his fall; for upon the removal of this great and beloved
Statesman, Richard Duke of York found an open way to thrust in, and set up his
pretensions of Title to the Crown, making himself strong in Friends and
Treasure, the better to carry on his designs. So that being now Intent on his
own Advancement, he grew carless of his Command, which turned greatly to the
advantage of the French; for the Truce no sooner expired, but they came
strongly prepared into the Field, and making three Armies, took in diverse
little Towns; and this success emboldened them, that holding secret
correspondence with the Inhabitants of Roan in Normandy, they drew an Army
before that City; whereupon the Citizens compelled the Earls of Sommerset and
Shrewsbury to Surrender the place; having leave to depart to Caen with all
their Goods: Soon after Hareflew, and diverse other places were lost.

A Rebellion about this time breaking out in Ireland, the Duke of Sommerset was
made Regent or Lieutenant in Normandy, and the Duke of York sent over to quell
the Irish Rebels, which he easily effected. But this dividing, weakening the
English Strength, the Kings Army in Normandy was Overthrown, and Caen Lost, and
soon after all Normandy; and now Divisions happened at Home; for the Duke of
Suffolk the Queens Favorite, being Envied by the People, they were Instigated
by the Duke of York, and his Faction, to make many grievous Complaints against
him, upon the miscarriages in Government; whereupon he was (to please them)
colourably committed to the Tower, yet had his Liberty at will; which so
Incensed them, that making a Fellow their Captain, nicknamed Blewbeard, they
fell into Rebellion; but were soon Quelled, and some of their Ringleaders
Executed, the rest were Pardoned. Hereupon the King and Queen thinking to
reconcile all Differences, a Parliament was called; but contrary to their
expectation, the Commons craved Justice on the Duke of Suffolk, and upon his
Associates, viz. James Fines, Lord Say, and Treasurer of England, John Bishop
of Salisbury, and some others; whereupon he was Banished for Five Years; but as
he Sailed for France, being way laid, he was taken by an English Man of War,
brought to Dover, and had his Head Choped off on the side of the Ship's Boat;
supposed to be done by the Duke of York's contrivance; yet he was not Lamented
by any but the King and Queen, because it was verily supposed he had a hand in
the Duke of Glocester's death. And now the Duke of York (though in Ireland) did
by his Agents here stir up a Rebellion among the Plebeans, whose Ringleader was
Jack Cade, who falsely Named himself John Mortimer right Heir to the Crown; but
the King's Forces dispersed them, many being Slain, and Cade being Proscribed,
and a Thousand Marks set on his Head, it was soon after brought to the King.

The Duke of York being defeated in this, by the Advice of his Friends returned
out of Ireland without the King's leave, and consulting with the Earls of
Warwick, Devonshire, Salisbury, and others, they resolved to complain in
Parliament of the Queen's Misgovernment; who by reason of the Kings Weakness
and Imbecility, did what she pleased, as also did her Favorites, the chief of
which now was the Duke of Sommerset; but his complaints not taking such effect
as he supposed, upon new Counsels he took other Measures, raising an Army under
pretense of removing Evil Counselors from the King, charging the Duke of
Sommerset with oppressing the People, and the many Miscarriages in France
during his Regency, occasioning the loss of Normandy and Aquitain, with many
other things. The King upon this fearing the worst, raised likewise an Army;
whereupon the Duke of York sent a submissive Message and Letter to him, That he
intended nothing against his Royal Person, nor against the State, but only
craved, That in Parliament the Duke of Sommerset might be Tried, and caused to
Answer to such Crimes as would be Objected against him; and the Duke of
Sommerset upon this, being for show sake, committed to the Tower, the Duke of
York dissolved his Army, and came to the King; where contrary to his
expectation, he met with the Duke of Sommerset, who Accused him of Treason, for
that without the Kings Leave or Commandment, he had raised an Army, with which
he intended to have Murdered his Sovereign, and made himself Inheritor and
Possessor of the Crown: Whereupon the Duke was Arrested, but in a few days
Released.

Whilst these things happened in England, the Lords of Guyan and Aquitain threw
off their Subjection to France, and sent secret Messages to King Henry, That if
he would furnish an Army to Protect them, they would re-deliver those Provinces
into his Possession; upon which, the Earl of Shrewsbury was sent with 3000 Men,
who received them into the Kings Protection: But soon after, being fought with
by 20000 French, he was Overthrown and Slain, with almost all his followers;
and thereupon these Provinces were utterly Lost. In the mean while the Queen
was delivered of a Son, whom she caused to be Named Edward.

The Duke of York having strengthened his Faction, made grievous Complaints to
the Lords in Parliament against the Duke of Sommerset, so that in the Queen's
Chamber he was Arrested for High Treason, and conveyed to the Tower. But the
Parliament being suddenly Adjourned, and the King by many protestations
faithfully promising, that at some other time he should Answer those
Accusations, he was set at Liberty, and made Captain of the Castle and Town of
Callice, which made the Duke of York Leavy another Army, and fought with the
King at St. Albans, and so prevailed, that the Duke of Sommerset, the Earls of
Northumberland and Stafford, the Lord Clifford, and about 8000 others, were
Slain; the King was also hurt in the Neck with an Arrow, and taken Prisoner;
but used with much dissembled Civility, and brought to London; where at the
Duke of York's entreaty he called a Parliament, and the Earl of Salisbury was
made Chancellor, The Earl of Warwick Captain of Callice; The Duke of York was
likewise appointed Protector of the Kings Person, and of the Realm; but the
Queen being persuaded he Aimed at the Crown, they were soon displaced.

Whilst these Differences continued, many disorders happened; The Houses of
Merchant-Strangers were Rifled and Robbed in London, and the French greatly
Annoyed our Merchants on the Seas, which compelled the Queen (who was Wise,
Politic, and of a Masculine Spirit) to use a Stratagem, which was to get the
King to retire into the North for his Pleasure, and sent Letters to the Three
Lords immediately to come and Confer with him, who delayed not to do it; but
having secret notice their destruction was intended, they timely Fled, and
prevented their Ruin. Yet the King advised by his grave Counselors, labored
for an Accommodation of matters, appointing for this purpose a General Meeting
of all his Lords at London, who came strongly Guarded with Friends and
Servants, where the Arch Bishop of Canterbury, and other great Clergymen, used
such Persuasions and Arguments, That the King, Queen, and all the Lords, were
pleased in friendly and in kind sort to consent that all Jars and Discontents
should be laid aside; and by Instruments in Writing a Reconciliation was
outwardly Confirmed, but not with any hearty goodwill on either side; yet it
greatly Rejoiced the People, who thought it Real. After this, the King rod
through the City with the Crown on his Head, the Duke of York conducted the
Queen, and the Lords of either Faction rod two and two together.

Not long after this, one of the Kings Servants was Wounded in the Court by a
Gentleman belonging to the Earl of Warwick, who escaping, the rest of the Kings
Servants fell upon the Earl as he came from the Council Table, but he Escaped
by Water, and was searched after in London in order to be sent to the Tower;
yet he was not there but fled into Yorkshire, complaining to his Father the
Earl of Salisbury, of the Injury that had been done to him; who Advised him
immediately to repare to his Government of Callice and then the Earl of
Salisbury raised an Army, and Marched toward London, of which the Queen had no
sooner notice, but she sent the Lord Audley to oppose him; so that the Battle
being joined, after a sharp Fight the Lord Audley and 2200 of his Men was
Slain, the rest flying, and leaving Salisbury Master of the Field; upon this
success, the Duke of York conceiving he should gain what he aimed at, raised an
Army on the Marches of Wales, and Joining with Salisbury near Ludlow, the
King's Army came in sight of them; but the Lords fearing they were Betrayed by
one Andrew Trollop and John Blunt, two famous Captains, trained up in the
French Wars, who had been brought over by the Earl of Warwick, because after
they had showed them advantageously how to Attack the Kings Army, they had on
scruple of Conscience deserted and gone over to him; raised their Camp in the
Night, and secretly Retiring, disbanded their Army, and shifted for themselves;
yet several of their Captains being Taken, were Executed, but the common
Soldiers Pardoned, and the flying Lords Proclaimed Arch Traitors to the King
and Kingdom; their Goods, Offices, and Lands Sequestered to the Kings Use, etc.
And the King made Henry, Son to the Duke of Sommerset, Slain in the Battle of
St. Albans, Captain of Callice; and now the King on good Advice Assembled a
Parliament, in which the Lords of the Yorkist's Faction were Attainted of High
Treason; and to prevent the Returning of such as were Fled beyond the Seas, the
Ports were Fortified, and strictly Guarded; yet they returned, took Sandwich,
and in a short time raised an Army of 25000 Men; with which they Marched
toward London; to secure which, the Lord Scales was sent by the King; but the
Lord Mayor refused him admittance, saying, He was able to defend the City, and
would do it, seeing the King had committed it to his charge; so that after many
Countermarches, the Army the King had raised, and that of the Lords, met near
Northampton, where the King was Overthrown and taken Prisoner, 2000 of his Men
were Slain, and of Note Humphery Duke of Buckingham, John Earl of Shrewsbury,
Thomas Lord Egremont, and John Viscount Beamont; whereupon the Queen, with the
Young Prince and Duke of Sommerset, fled into Scotland, and were kindly
received; the King was conveyed to the Tower, and the Lord Seals attempting to
pass the River in disguise, was discovered by the Wherryman, who cut off his
Head and left his Body on the Sands; and Thomas Thorp, the Second Baron of the
Exchequer, shaving his Crown, and putting himself in the Habit of a Monk, was
taken flying to the Queen, and being brought to the Earl of Warwick he
committed him to the Tower, where he remained a long time after.

The Duke of York informed of this Victory, hasted from Ireland, and procured a
Parliament to be Assembled in the Kings Name at London, where placing himself
in the Throne, he declared his Right to the Crown, viz.

That he was Son and Heir of Ann, Daughter to Roger Mortimer Earl of March, who
was Son and Heir to Philippa, sole Daughter and Heiress to Lionel Duke of
Clarence, Elder Brother to John Duke of Lancaster, Great Grandfather to the
present Henry the Sixth; and then proceeded to lay before them the Mischiefs
and Losses that had befallen the Kingdom by misplacing the Succession, by
reason God was Angry with them for so doing; and to prevent many more he
desired it might be restored in the Direct Line.

When the Lords and Commons had deliberated upon this weighty Affair, the
contrary Party (more out of fear than conscience, goodwill, or affection)
agreed with the Duke's Faction; and it was Enacted, That King Henry during his
Natural Life should retain the Name and Honor of a King; and that the Duke of
York should be Proclaimed Heir apparent to the Crown, and be Protector of the
Kings Person and of the Realm, and should have the present possession of the
Crown delivered to him, if at any time King Henry, his Friends, Allies, or
Favorites, on his behalf attempted to infringe this Act, which was Agreed to
and Confirmed by their Oaths.

The Duke of York by this means being got near to what he aimed at, required
the Queen, the Dukes of Sommerset and Exeter, the Earl of Devonshire, the Lords
Clifford, Ross, and others, immediately to repair from the North, whither they
were fled, and confer with the King; but instead of so doing, being much
displeased with the Proceedings of the Parliament, they Levied an Army and with
it advanced toward London: The Duke of York had soon notice of it, and Marched
with all speed to oppose them, leaving the King in the custody of the Duke of
Norfolk and Earl of Warwick; and the two Armies met near Wakefield: Where the
Duke being too weak, was persuaded to stay for the arrival of Edward Earl of
March, his Son, who was advancing from the borders of Wales with an Army to
Join him; but being carried headlong by his forward Destiny, which designed him
not to be a King, though he wanted but one step to the Throne, he forthwith
gave the onset; but within an Hours space, almost three Thousand of his
Companions were Slain, together with himself, and his Youngest Son the Earl of
Rutland, not exceeding 12 Years, who kneeling on his Knees desired Mercy, but
was cruelly Stabbed to the Heart by the Lord Clifford; who horribly Swore, By
that Act he would be Revenged for his Fathers Death: So that upon this the rest
of the Army Fled: The Duke of York's Head being cut off by those that found him
dead in the Field, was presented to the Queen, who caused a Paper Crown to be
set on it in derision, and placed it on the Walls of the City of York,
Beheading the Earl of Salisbury, and others of his Favorites, who were taken
Prisoners, and placing their Heads with his to bear him company.

The Queen supposing now her fears were over by the slaughter of her Capital
Enemies, Advanced toward London, overthrowing the Earl of Warwick, and such
Forces as he had gathered to oppose her, by which means King Henry was set at
Liberty, and Joyfully received by her: But then News came that the Earl of
March, who hearing of his Fathers death, had taken on him the Title of Duke of
York, had Overthrown the Earls of Pembrook, Ormond, and Wiltshire, Beheaded
Owen Tuther, the King's Father-in-Law, who had Married his Mother the Queen
Dowager, and diverse others, whose Heads he placed in the Room of his Fathers,
and other Heads of his Friends, which the Queen had caused to be set on the
Walls of York.

This sudden Turn of Fortune made the Queen draw out her Army and hasten
toward him, having raised an Army of 60000 Men, and near a Town called Towton,
the New Duke of York and Earl of Warwick met her with near 50000; so that a
cruel and bloody Battle ensued, wherein on both sides about 36000 were slain,
among whom were the Earls of Northumberland, Westmorland, the Lords Dacres,
Wells, Clifford, etc. The Dukes of Sommerset and Exeter saved themselves by
flight, but the Earl of Devonshire with sundry others of Note were made
Prisoners.

Upon this great Overthrow (for it fell on the Kings-side, who was always
Unfortunate in the Field) he with the Queen and Prince fled into Scotland,
where they were favorably received, and in lieu of their kind Entertainment
delivered Berwick to the Scots, which they much desired, and attempted often
times to gain, though beaten off with great loss; so that the Duke of York being
every where Received as King, may be said here to put an end to Henry's Reign
(though he Lived much longer) when he had Reigned 38 Years, 6 Months, and 3 Days,
and was after Stabbed in the Tower by Richard Duke of Gloucester, King Edward
the Fourths Brother, Anno 1471 in the 49th Year of his Age as will appear more
largely in the Reign of that King: His Body was first Buried in the Abbey of
Chertsey in Surry, then by King Henry the Seventh at Winchester, after removed
none can tell where, as not being found in History.

In this Kings Reign from the beginning of April to Allhallontide, fell such
abundance of Rain that the Corn and Hay Harvest were utterly spoiled, which
occasioned a dearth among Men and Cattle.

Anno 1435 the Thames was so Frozen, that no homeward-bound Ships could enter
it, and Games and Pastimes were Exercised on the Ice.

Anno 1438 all the Lions in the Tower of London dyed; and in the 23d Year of
the King, on Candlemas Eve, terrible Thunders and Lightnings happened, by which
the Church of Baldock in Hartfordshire, and that of Walden in Essex were
greatly shattered, and St. Paul's Steeple in London set on Fire.

WARWICK SHIRE
map of Warwickshire

Anno Dom. 1459, the Useful and Noble Science of Printing was found out by a
Soldier, at Magunce in Germany, and brought into England about 12 Years after,
by William Caxton a Mercer.

Remarks on Warwickshire, etc.
WArwickshire is an Inland County, very pleasantly situate, well Wooded, and
incumbered but with few Hills: It is Bounded with Staffordshire,
Leicestershire, Northamptonshire, Oxfordshire, and Gloucestershire: It abounds
with Cattle, Corn, Wool, Cheese, Butter, pleasant Pastures, Fish and Fowl. It
contains 5 Hundreds, in which are 158 Parishes, 14 Market Towns, 4 Castles, 10
Rivers, 10 Bridges, 13 Parks, and 2 Forests: It sends Members to Parliament 6,
viz. Coventry City 2, Warwick 2, and 2 Knights of the Shire.

Warwick, the Shire Town, is of very Ancient foundation; held to be Builded by
Gurguntus a British King, 375 Years before the Birth of our Savior; the Castle
yet retaining very many marks of great Antiquity, and Memorable for the
Residence of the Renowned Guy Earl of Warwick, where is kept a Vessel called
his Pot, and usually filled with good Liquor to be Drunk by all comers, on
memorable Days. It is commodiously situate on the River Avon.

Coventry jointly with Litchfield make a Bishopric; on one of its Gates,
called Gifford-Gate, is the Bone of a Monstrous Beast fastened, said to be that
of the huge Boar Guy slew, who with his Snout turned up a deep place now called
Swanes Mear.

At Wolney, Anno 1469, King Edward the Fourth was taken Prisoner by the great
Earl of Warwick, and his Forces scattered. At Backlow Hill, Pierce Gaviston was
taken and Beheaded. The other Places of Note are Henly, Southam, Sutton,
Atherstone, Kyneton, Rougby, Aulchester, Bitford. The River Tame abounds with
Fish and finely branches the Northern part of the County, as Avon does most of
the rest, over which leading to Warwick is a sightly and strong Bridge. At
Lemington a Salt Spring arises a great distance from the Sea. At Newenham or
Menhem Reges is a Petrifying Well. Snale Stones, Star Stones, and Cockel
Stones, are found near Shugbury.

The Noblemens Seats are Milcot-House, belonging to the Earl of Dorset;
Compton-Place, to the Earl of Northampton; Newnham Padox, to the Earl of Denby;
Wormleighton, to the Earl of Sunderland; Comb, to the Earl of Craven; Ragley
and Luddington, to the Earl of Conway; Hewel Grange, to the Earl of Plymouth;
Ettington, to the Lord Ferrers; Warwick Castle, Knowel, and Beuchamps Court, to
the Lord Brook; Fletchamstead and Stonely, to the Lord Leigh; Wotenwaven and
Aln-Lodg, to the Lord Carrington; besides many pleasant Seats of the Gentry,
sightful to Travelers.

The Reign of King EDWARD the Fourth.
EDWARD Duke of York having prevailed over the Lancastrians, and put to death
many of his great Enemies, Marched Triumphantly to London, where he was by the
Citizens joyfully received, and Proclaimed King on the 4th of March Anno 1461,
and the 19th of June following he was Crowned at Westminster; but his carriage
toward the Citizens afterward made them repent their forwardness to take part
with him against King Henry, who had always loved them, and been their constant
Friend. Soon after his Coronation, he called a Parliament, and labored therein
to settle the Affairs of the Kingdom which were much disordered by the Civil
War. And all former Statutes made in the Reign of Henry, which Attainted him
and his Adherents of High Treason, were Cancelled and made void. The Earl of
Oxford, and Sir Awbrey Vere his Son, were in this Parliament Attainted of
sundry Treasons, and lost their Heads; and to strengthen his Interest, he
conferred Titles of Honor on a great many of his Friends. Whereupon seeing
little hopes left of King Henry's Recovering his Crown, the Duke of Sommerset,
Sir Ralph Piercey, and others, submitted themselves to Edward's Mercy, and were
received into favor; but upon notice the Queen was arrived from France in the
North, and by the Aid of the Scots had raised a considerable Army, they
secretly fled to her.

Edward had soon notice of these Proceedings, and sent the Lord Montacute
before him with a considerable Force, himself followed with the rest of the
Army; and this Lord with such resolution and bravery set upon the Lords
Hungerford and Ross, that at the beginning of the Fight they Cowardly fled away;
but Sir Ralph Piercey, and other stout Commanders, who preferred an honorable
death before a shameful desertion of their Men, fought it out bravely till they
lost their Lives in the Field, and left the Victory to their Adversary.

The Lord Montacute flushed with this success, and thursting after fame,
without staying for the King, set upon Queen Margaret's Army, and after a
bloody Fight put her to the Rout; and Henry Duke of Summerset, William
Tallboies (who styled himself Earl of Kent) the Lords Ross, Mollines and
Hungerford, Sir Henry Nevel, Sir Thomas Wentworth, and Sir Richard Tunstal,
being Taken, were in several places Beheaded, and 27 others were shortly after
Executed in diverse manners. But after this Overthrow, Henry Escaped to Scotland
with his half-Brother Jasper Earl of Pembrook, Sir Ralph Gray, and others, and
hereupon all the Castles in the North fell into King Edward's hands.

For this Service done by the Lord Montacute, the King would have given him the
Earldom of Northumberland; but upon that Earls submitting, though he had fought
against him, he restored him to his Lands and Honors, giving Montacute in lieu
of his Resignation, the Title of a Marquess; and to encourage his Soldiers, and
such as had deserved well, he bestowed on them great Bounties out of the
confiscated Estates of his Enemies, causing many advantageous Laws to be
Enacted, the better to settle him on the Throne, by gaining the affection of
the People. Soon after this, King Henry returning disguised into England, was
discovered, taken Prisoner, and sent to Edward, who committed him to close ward
in the Tower.

King Edward now thinking himself firmly fixed in the Throne, by the advice of
the Estates, after the proposals of several Matches, concluded to send his
great Friend Richard Nevill, Earl of Warwick, to require the Lady Bona,
Daughter to Lewis Duke of Savoy, and Sister to Charete Queen to Lewis the
Eleventh King of France, in Marriage; the Earl was sent over with a very
splended Equipage, and with many Rich presents to the Lady; and was so
prosperous in his Negotiation, that all things he had in Commission were soon
agreed to, the Portion assigned, and the Instruments for settling her Dowry
ratified; but this wrought much mischief to King Edward: For going to Recreate
himself at his Manor of Grafton, he there cast his Eyes on the Beautiful
Elizabeth, Widow to Sir John Gray, slain in King Henry's cause at the Battle of
St. Albans; and by no persuasions being able to gain her for his Concubine,
though he had freely granted her her Husbands Estate, which she Petitioned to
him for, so enflamed was he with the desire of Enjoying her, (and she plainly
telling him, As she thought her self of too mean a condition to be his Wife; so
she thought her self much above his demands of being his Concubine; and though
her Life might be at his dispose, her Chastity was not to be violated but with
that Cumpulsion that would pull down vengance on his Head) that laying aside
the thoughts of any other, he Married her; promoting all her Kindred to
Dignities and Honors, creating the Lord Rivers her Father Earl Rivers, and
High Constable of England; her Son Sir Thomas Gray, Marquess of Dorset, and
preferred him and others to Rich Heiresses of Noblemen, and did many other
things for them, that displeased his nearest Friends: For no sooner the Duke of
Clarence his Brother heard of the Earl of Warwick's being greatly displeased at
the Kings having put that affront on him, but they met and consulted which way
to constrain the King to lay aside these new Favorites; and so great was the
Earl of Warwick's Anger for the disgrace the King had made him incur in Foreign
Courts, by this Marriage, which utterly disannulled that which he had treated
about, that he cast nothing in his mind more, than how he might Depose him, and
Restore King Henry; and several Consults with the Marquess Montacute his
Brother, and others, were held, to further his purpose.

The King (who feared Warwick's Greatness and Popularity) was not altogether
ignorant of his discontents, though he outwardly dissembled it as well as he
could; and therefore the better to weather the Storm he saw coming, though as yet
at a distance, he concluded a Truce for Fifteen Years with the King of Scots,
to weaken the Earl on that side; and to Henry King of Castile and John King of
Arragon he sent (as a Present to make Friends with them) about a Hundred
Cotshall-Sheep, a thing they never before, nor any of their Predecessors, upon
any Entreaty, or for large sums offered, could obtain from the Kings of
England; from which small Number such Multitudes have since Increased, as in
the Woollen-Trade has turned greatly to our damage. And that he might be the
better able to deal with Lewis the French King, if War by him should be
Proclaimed, or he should underhand assist the Earl of Warwick in any attempt,
he made a League with Charles the Hardy, Duke of Burgundy, and gave him his
Sister Margaret in Marriage, and two other Sisters, to the Dukes of Exeter and
Suffolk.

But for all this, Warwick's design was closely carried on, and it was Agreed
among them, That he and the Duke of Clarence should go to Callice; and there to
strengthen the Alliance, the Duke should Marry Isabella the Earls Daughter; and
in their Absence, as if without their knowledge or consent, the Marquess
Montacute and Arch Bishop of York Brothers to Warwick, should with the help of
their Friends raise a Rebellion in Yorkshire; which they did, by inciting the
Rusticks not to pay Tribute of Corn to the Hospital of St. Leonard in the City
of York, which upon refusal being exacted by the Collectors, commotions arose,
and at length about 15000 came before the City with an intention to Plunder and
Demolish that Hospital, etc. but by a Sally of the Citizens, they were beaten
off, and so Marched away toward Northampton, Headed by Sir John Conyers an
Experienced Soldier, but were met by William Earl of Pembrook, and Humphry Lord
Stafford, who by the Kings Command had raised Forces in Wales, and after they
had overthrown 2000 Archers that the Lords had laid in Ambush to fall on their
Rear, upon a dissension arising between Pembrook and Stafford, the latter
withdrew his Forces, so that the former with much courage, though few in Number,
giving the Rusticks Battle in Banbury Field, having near gained the Victory,
the Scale of success was suddenly turned in a surprising manner, viz. One John
Clapham, a Servant to the Earl of Warwick, having got his Masters Standard, in
which was Portraied the White Bear, coming in with a small Troop, and crying A
Warwick, a Warwick; so daunted the Kings Men (who thought the Earl had been
there with a fresh supply) that they threw down their Arms and fled; and being
hotly Pursued, more than 5000 were slain: Sir Richard Herbert, and Eight others
of Note, being taken Prisoners, were Beheaded at Banbury by the Rusticks. Upon
this Success, their Army greatly increased, and a separate Party making one
Robin of Risdale their Captain, Plundered the Kings Mannor-House at Grafton,
and finding there the Earl of Rivers, Father to the Queen, and his Son John,
they carried them to Northampton and Beheaded them; and some of the Kings
Forces having Taken the Lord Stafford, he lost his Head at Bridgwater for
Deserting the Earl of Pembrook at Banbury Field.

The Duke of Clarence and Earl of Warwick taking the advantage of these
Troubles, Landed; and with considerable Forces put themselves at the head of
the Rusticks; so that by this addition, and Warwick's Great Name in War, they
became so formidable to the King, that (at the earnest request of some Nobles,
who feared the desolation of their Country by such a cruel War as was
threatened) he consented to a Treaty; during which, the King being more
careless than he ought to have been of his Person, the Earl of Warwick with a
strong Band entered his Camp by Night, and having killed the Watch, carried him
Prisoner from his Tent to the Castle of Middleham in Yorkshire; Committing him
to the ward of the Arch Bishop; but soon after, having liberty to go a Hunting,
he was Rescued by Sir William Standley and Sir Thomas Burgh, who upon private
notice lay in Ambush behind the Wood with a Troop of Horse, and immediately
Posted to London. This inwardly vexed the Earl of Warwick, who thought to draw
great Advantages from his Imprisonment: However the Truce continued, and a
meeting of both sides was appointed in the great Hall at Westminster, where
nevertheless the objections of good Deserts and unthankful Requitals, were with
such vehement expressions repeated and maintained by the Earl of Warwick, that
the King being highly displeased, with Threats and Fury they parted from each
other: The King taking his way to Canterbury, and the Confederate Lords into
Lincolnshire; where they raised an Army, and placed Sir Robert Wells, Son to
the Lord Wells, in chief Command over it, as being very expert in Millitary
Affairs.

King Edward had no sooner notice of this, but he sent for the Lord Wells and
Sir Thomas Dymock his Brother-in-Law, commanding them to use their endeavors
to bring over Sir Robert to his Interest; but though they very much labored to
do it, it proved without effect; which so angered the King, that contrary to
his sollemn promise, he caused the Heads of the Lord Wells and Sir Thomas
Dymock to be stricken off; which gained him much displeasure of the Nobles and
Commons, and hastened Sir Robert Wells to give him Battle ere the Confederate
Lords (who wanted but a days March) came up, with the Lincolnshire-Men he
commanded; so that the King oppressing him with his Number, though he fought
Valiantly to revenge his Fathers and Unkles Death, his Soldiers at last tired
out for want of fresh supplies, gave way, and soon after fell into a general
Rout, throwing away their Coats to run the nimbler; for which reason it is to
this day called the Battle of Loose Coat Field; and in it were slain about
10000; Sir Robert and some other of Note being taken Prisoners, lost their
Heads.

The Earl of Warwick, Duke of Clarence, and other Lords, hearing of this fatal
Overthrow, distrusting the fidelity of the Army they Commanded, left it
secretly by Night, and with a small Train took Shipping at Dartmouth, and
Sailed till they came before Callice; but was denied Entrance by Monsieur
Vaucler, whom the Earl had left as his Deputy there; for which he was made
Captain of the place by King Edward, and had a Thousand Pounds a Year Pension
from the Duke of Burgundy. And here on Shipboard the Duchess of Clarence was
brought to bed of a Son, to whom Vauclear would not send any Necessaries, nor
suffer the Child to be brought on Shore to be Christened; yet Sailing hence to
Diep, they took by the way a Rich Prize belonging to Burgundy, and Landing were
met by the French King at the Castle of Amboys on the River Loyer, and highly
welcomed, with promises of Assistance; and being conducted to the French Court,
they found there Queen Margaret, Prince Edward her Son, and Jasper sometimes
Earl of Pembrook, who had escaped a little before out of the Tower of London,
with others; where they entered into new Conferences in order to Depose King
Edward and Restore King Henry; and the Earl of Warwick to make his own Party
the Stronger, gave his Second Daughter in Marriage to Prince Edward, and soon
after the French King furnishing them with Shipping, Men, and such Necessaries
as they required, leaving Queen Margaret and the Prince her Son at the French
Court, to attend their success; they put to Sea, and Landed at Dartmouth in
Devonshire; where the Earl Marshalled his Forces, then few in Number, but
quickly increased by the Peoples flowing to his Standard from all sides, upon
his putting out a Proclamation in King Henry's Name, requiring them to repair
to his Aid with Money, Victuals, and all things Necessary for the War, and
valiantly to fight against the Duke of York, whom he styled a Usurper, and
bloody Tyrant, untruly and falsely calling himself King.

Having by this time mustered a powerful Army, he Marched it toward London:
The King was not idle at this Juncture, but with what Army he could gather on
the sudden, Marched to give the Earl Battle; yet on the way hearing that in
all the places where his Enemies came, the People applauded them, and no cry
was heard but King Henry and a Warwick, and having little confidence in his own
Soldiers, by the wavering he found in them; notwithstanding his wonted courage,
his Heart now failed him: Whereupon in the Night taking with him about 800 of
his Friends he could rely on, he left the Army, and posted into Lincolnshire;
but finding nothing there in a readiness to advantage him, he took Shipping and
Sailed for Holland, and so passed to Burgundy, where he was kindly received by
the Duke his Brother-in-Law.

Upon this the Earl of Warwick came to London, and King Henry was taken out of
the Tower, and carried in Triumph to St. Paul's Church, where having paid his
Devotions, and made his Offerings, he was conveyed to the Bishop of London's
Palace, where he kept his Court, with much Bounty and Magnificence; and a
Parliament being assembled at Westminster, in his Name, in it Edward and all
his principal Adherents, were Attainted of High Treason, their Goods and
Possessions Confiscated to King Henry; and by the same Authority the Duke of
Clarence was declared to be the next Heir to Richard Duke of York, though his
Second Son, and the Duchy of York was settled on him and his Heirs: Also the
Crown entailed to King Henry and the Heirs Male of his Body; and for want of
such Issue, to the Duke of Clarence and his Heirs Male; and such as had been
dispossessed for Henry's Cause, were restored to their Titles and Estates:
Clarence and Warwick were styled the Kings best Friends, Patriots of their
Country, and made chief Rulers in all things under Henry.

Upon notice of this great Revolution, Queen Margaret and her Son came over;
but long they had not been here, ere Edward furnished by the Duke of Burgundy
with Ships, Men, and Warlike Stores, Landed at Ravenspurg in Yorkshire;
declaring he came not now for the Kingdom, but to possess himself of the Duchy
of York, his Rightful Inheritance, on which he intended as a Subject to live
Peaceably; which drew many to favor his Cause; but having got admittance into
that City, he soon discovered other Intentions: For though a little before he had
Sworn the contrary to the Citizens, ^he Garisoned it with his own Soldiers, and
exacted Money of them to raise more Forces, and so Marching toward London, the
Marquess Montacute, who was sent to oppose him, let him pass; whereupon he
caused himself to be Proclaimed King, setting up the Royal Standard: This
obliged the Earls of Warwick, Oxford, and diverse other Nobles, to raise an
Army, and advance to give him Battle, but the Duke of Clarence Marching another
way, with a separate Army, being reconciled to his Brother Edward, and joining
his Army with him, the Earl thought fit at that time to take other measures,
not harkening to any fair Words or large Promises, to draw him from King
Henry's side, but bitterly inveighed against the Duke of Clarence, saying, He
had always rather be an Earl firm to his Word and Oath, than a Perjured Duke,
though in hopes of a Kingdom.

Edward being now very much strengthened, Marched to London, whilst Warwick was
raising more Forces; and being with some difficulty received by the Citizens,
he sent King Henry again to the Tower; yet having continual News of Warwick's
approach, he drew out his Forces, and Encamped near Barnet, about Ten Miles
from London, having King Henry as a pledge with him, fearing if he had left him
in the Tower, the Londoners in his Absence would have set him at Liberty; and
the next Morning the Earl of Warwick resolving to throw all on the fortune of a
Battle, drew up in Battle Array, viz. The Right Wing he gave to the Marquess
his Brother, and the Earl of Oxford; the Main Battle to the Duke of Sommerset
and others; the Left Wing was Commanded by himself and the Duke of Exeter; the
Vant-Guard of King Edward's Army was commanded by the Duke of Gloucester, the
Main Battle by himself and the Duke of Clarence, in which was King Henry the
6th; the Rear-Guard by the Lord Hastings; and after they had confronted each
other a little space, and both Generals made moving Orations to animate their
Soldiers, the Trumpets sounded the Charge, and they rushed together with great
fury, fighting five or six Hours so desperately, that Victory seemed to incline
to no side, whilst the City of London was greatly amazed and terrified with
various Reports of the different success: But at length the Earl perceiving
fresh supplies continually press on his weary Soldiers, thinking by his Example
to give them new Courage, he dismounted; and with his Sword in his Hand pressed
into the Front of his Enemies, making miserable slaughter: But breaking in too
far, and not being timely succored, he was slain; together with the Marquess
his Brother, who threw himself into the opening Jaws of Death, in hopes to
bring the Earl off.

These great Commanders slain, the Army grew faint, and giving way by degrees,
at length fell into a total rout, about 10000 being slain; and of King Edward's
Part, of Note, only Sir Humphry Bourcher Son to the Lord Barns; and the dead
Bodies of the Earl and Marquess being brought to St. Paul's, were exposed to
view three Days, and then Honorably Interred among their Ancestors in the
Priory of Bissam. Queen Margaret having notice of this Defeat, fled with her
Son to the Abbey of Bewley in Hampshire, whither diverse Lords resorted to her,
and agreed to raise new Forces, and try the fortune of another Field, which
they did, and were Overthrown at Tewxbury; about 3000 being slain, and of Note
the Duke of Sommerset, Sir John Lewkner, Sir John Delves, etc. The Prisoners of
Note were the Queen and Prince, the Prior of St. John's, Sir Jervis Cliffton,
Sir Thomas Tristram, and Twelve others of Note; all but the two first being
Beheaded the next day; and soon after Prince Edward being presented to the King
by Sir Richard Crofts who took him Prisoner, was piteously Murdered in his
sight, by the Dukes of Clarence, Gloucester, and others, on the signal given by
the King, in striking him on the Mouth with his Gantlet; nor was it long after,
that Innocent King Henry was Murdered in the Tower by the same Duke of
Gloucester, who struck a Dagger to his Heart; his Body being afterward exposed
to view in St. Paul's, three days, that the People might be sure he was Dead;
however these Proceedings caused the King much hatred among the People; when
somewhat to satisfy them, he consented to Ransom the Queen, to pay which the
poor Prince her Father sold his Titles to Jerusalem, Naples, and Sicily; and
returning home she Lived a Melancholy and Disconsolate Life, which lasted not
long ere she dyed of Grief, particularly for the Death of the Prince her Son,
whom she dearly Loved.

King Edward by Bloodshed being rid of his greatest opposers, took sollace in
Pleasures, being very Lustful, and was rarely without two or three Concubins,
though his Queen was Young and Beautiful; and among them Jane Shore, Wife to
Matthew Shore, a Goldsmith in Grace Church Street, was most pleasing to him;
though in the end it brought her to shame and misery. But to pass this over,

The King being now as I may term it Established in the Throne, the Duke of
Burgundy vehemently incited him to War on France, and recover it as his Ancient
Right and Inheritance; upon which condition himself promised to do great
matters toward assisting him. The King was not slow in listening to it, for
many reasons urged by his Council; as, The French having frequently assisted
his Enemies, etc. Yet Money being wanting, it seemed difficult. But to surmount
this, he resolved without a Parliament to ask it of his Subjects, as a Free
Gift; which many indeed complied with, though with an ill will. But one thing in
this is Remarkable, The King to oblige them to bring in more freely, if not for
Love, yet for fear of after-claps, on Penal Laws, seeing many that were Rich
had engaged their Persons or Purses in the War against him, he sat sundry Hours
in a Day to receive it himself; when among others, a Rich yet Nigardly old
Widow brought Twenty Pounds, this so highly pleased him, That he not only
returned her thanks, but told her For her kindness she should Kiss a King; and
having performed it once, the Old Woman pulled out another Bag, crying
Vdsbodikins, if Kings Sell their Kisses so Cheap, give me the other Touch on the
Lips, and here is another Twenty Pound for you: The King smiled at this, took
her at her word; and thought his Kisses well Sold.

With this Benevolence of his Subjects, and his own Treasure, he Transported a
fair Army over Sea, but found the Duke of Burgundy altogether unprovided even
of the promised Necessaries for the support of the English, who Lying without
the Towns on the cold Ground, soon began to murmur; however to employ them, he
Marched with the Duke toward St. Quintins, which was secretly promised to be
delivered to him by Lewis of Luxemburg, great Uncle to King Edward's Queen; but
on their approaching its Walls, the Cannon not only played fiercely on them, but
the Garrison made great Sallies; so that finding no good to be done, they were
constrained to draw off; and soon after the Duke (without taking leave) went to
raise Forces, leaving only word, That he would come again with an Army as soon
as he was able: These Proceedings made the King begin to repent he had come
over upon his account; and the French King making large offers to obtain a
Peace, it was after some debate Agreed to without the Dukes consent, viz. 1. In
consideration the French King Paid Edward 65000 Crowns toward his Charge, and
50000l. per Annum for his Life. 2. That in one Year he should send for the Lady
Elizabeth, King Edward 's Eldest Daughter, and Marry her to the Dauphin,
allowing them for Nine Years space Annually 50000 Crowns, and then the
Peaceable possession of the Duchy of Guyan; and in consideration of this,
Hostages should be left till the English had quitted France, and were returned
home.

This being Agreed on, though the Marriage was never performed, the Duke of
Burgundy hastened to the Kings Camp, and in a blustering and storming manner
greatly inveighed against what he had done, and was as sharply Answered by him;
whereupon he rod away in much discontent, and the French King came to an
Enterview with King Edward, highly Feasting him and his whole Army, giving
Money to the Officers, and Soldiers, and commanding all his Subjects to use
them with much Bounty and Civility; which done, King Edward Marched to Callice,
and there passed over to England; and then the Lord Howard and Sir John Cheney,
the Hostages, were sent after him with great Rewards. The Duke of Burgundy
however continued the War, and was thrice Overthrown in one Year; and in the
last, at Nancy, he was slain.

King Edward being now at leisure to look if ther^ were (after so many
slaughters) any that could lay ^ Claim to his Crown, or Interrupt by such a
pretense the Peace of him or his Heirs; for by this time he had two Sons and
five Daughters, he at last thought on Henry Earl of Richmond, who remained with
the Duke of Brittany, he being of the Royal Blood, and near of Alliance to the
Crown: To get this Prince into his hands, he Bribed Peter Landois the Dukes
Treasurer, with great Sums of Money, to Betray him over, which he earnestly
labored to do, showing him the Kings Letters in a Loving style, wherein he
invited him into England, promising at his Arrival to give him his Daughter
Elizabeth in Marriage, and by this means the Treacherous Treasurer trained the
Earl to St. Malloes, where a Ship and Equipage lay ready to Transport him. But
no sooner had John Chevelet, the Earls Friend, truly informed the Duke of
Brittany that this pretended Marriage was designed for the Earls destruction,
but he commanded his Treasurer o^ pain of Death to re-possess him of his
Person; who accordingly stole him from the English, whilst himself made merry
with the Ambassador, and caused his Servants to thrust him into a Sanctuary,
whose priviledg^ might not be violated; excusing and laying it on the^ own
Negligence, for not taking more care to keep ^im when in their custody. This
Loss both of Money and of Prey, made King Edward exceeding Angry, but there
being no remedy, he seemed slightly ^o pass it over.

Not long after this, by the instigation of the Duke ^f Gloucester and others,
the King grew exceeding Jea^ous of his Brother the Duke of Clarence, being the
more incited to it by an old Prophecy which Predicted (...) G should Reign
after an E, and this Dukes Name ^eing George, he verily believed he was meant
by it; ^alling freshly into his mind his Practices with Warwick, and what had
been done concerning him in Parliament; and thereupon, by his contrivance, he
was accused of High Treason, for Conspiring his Death, and Aspiring ^o the
Throne: and after a few days Imprisonment, ^e was found Drowned in a Butt of
Malmsey, leaving ^ehind him but two Children, Edward and Margaret, who were
both Unfortunate; for Edward being crea^ed Earl of Warwick, was Imprisoned very
Young, and ^auslesly Beheaded in the Reign of Henry the Seventh, ^n a surmize
he intended to Escape Prison, and join with Perkin Warbeck, to raise
Commotions: And Mar^aret was Married to Richard De La Poole Earl of Salis^ury,
who being a Widow after the Earls Death, was ^eheaded in the Reign of Henry the
Eighth: so strange ^^ is that Competitors for Crowns rarely enjoy that Calm and
Tranquillity that attends on a meaner Estate: Nor do Historians excuse this King
from being of a ^ruel Temper, as causing a Mercer in Cheapside to be ^anged at
his own door for Jestingly saying to his ^ttle Son, If he would be a good Boy,
he would make him ^eir to the Crown, meaning his House bearing that Sign; ^ut
it being otherways wrested, it cost him his Life. ^e also caused one Thomas
Burdet Esquire to be Beheaded upon a very slender occasion, viz. Being on his
Progress in Warwickshire, he chanced to Hunt in one of Burdel's Parks, and
among others killing a White Buck which he highly esteened, News of it was no
sooner brought, but the Gentleman in a passion wished The Horns in the Belly of
those that Counseled the King to kill him: This being told by some Pick-thanks
to Edward, with this addition, viz. That he wished the Horns in his Belly; the
Judges soon construed it that thereby he wished the King's Death; who with
those Horns in his Belly could by no means Live; and so the poor Gentleman, in
lieu of the great Entertainment he had given the King and his Nobles at his
House, lost his Life at Tyburn, being there Beheaded.

The King in the latter-end of his Reign, contrary to his former Generous
humor, grew exceeding Covetous, and Nigardly, so that to increase his
Treasure, he extorted much Money from his People, by vexing them with the
execution of Penal-Laws, which quenched their Love and Affections very much;
with this Money he proposed to Match his Daughters, and sent to the French King
to mind him of his Oath sworn to in the Articles that he should send over for
the Lady Elizabeth, and Marry her to the Dauphin; but he never intending it,
excused it only with fair promises that he would do it speedily; and whilst
this was on foot, James the Third, King of Scots, required the Lady Cicilia,
another of the Kings Daughters, in Marriage with his Son and Heir apparent,
which was agreed to, and part of her Portion paid before hand; but instead of
her being sent for, and a Friendly Alliance concluded, the King of Scots with
this Money raised Forces and entered England, committing many cruel outrages
(...). The Duke of Gloucester was sent with a (...) ^^ble Army, forcing his way
into the Town of Berwick and Besieging the Castle, defended by Earl Bothwel;
but purposing to March into Scotland, he left the Lord Standly with 4000 Men to
maintain the Siege, and pursued the Scots King, wasting his Country with Fire
and Sword: Till the Nobility perceiving the miserable estate of the Realm,
humbly sued to the Duke for Peace; which was granted on these Conditions, viz.

That full Restitution should be made to King Edward 's Subjects for the
Injuries done them: That the Scots King should Restore his Brother the Duke of
Albany, who was in the English Army, to his Honors, etc. That the Castle of
Berwick should be Yielded, or not Rescued from the present Siege, and the
Marriage Money Re-paid.

The First of these they performed not, as being unable; but the other were
observed, and the Castle of Berwick soon Surrendered. But the French King
utterly broke all Frindship with King Edward, by denying the Yearly Pension,
and Marrying the Dauphin to the Lady Margaret, Daughter to Maximillian Son of
Frederick the Emperor; which Affront had certainly caused a War, had King
Edward lived to have prosecuted what he had projected; but falling Sick of a
Surfeit with Eating too excessively at a Banquet, he grew daily weaker and
weaker, and a visible decay of Nature appearing in him, he called his Nobles
about him, and labored to make Friendship between his Wives kindred and his
own, causing them to Embrace and give Solemn assurances of it in his presence;
then recommending to them the care of his Queen and Children, earnestly
Exhorting them to live in Unity, he gave up the Ghost at Westminster, on the
ninth of April 1483, in the 40th Year of his Age, and 23d of his Reign. His
Body being buried in a Chapel of his own foundation at Windsor.

In this Kings Reign John Hust was Burnt on Tower Hill for the profession of a
good Conscience. A Rose-Tree in the beginning of the calamitous Wars between
the two Houses, Bore on one Branch a White and a Red Rose, the Cognizances of
York and Lancaster; and a Spring of Blood gushed out near Lancaster. Amazing
Voices were heard in the Air, Firey Meteors and Blazing-Stars, etc. appeared;
as also Fiery Armies Fighting furiously.

Remarks on Westmorland, etc.
THis County is partly Hilly, and partly Plain; It produces Cattle, a good
sprinkling of Corn, store of Wild-Fowl, and in some places abounds in Fish,
Venison, etc. It is Bounded with Yorkshire, Lancashire, and Cumberland. It is
divided into five Wards, containing 26 Parishes, and 8 Market Towns, 6 Castles,
8 Rivers, over which are 15 Bridges; 2 Forests, and 10 Parks: It sends Members
to Parliament 4, viz. Appleby 2, and 2 Knights of the Shire. In this County is
the famous Forest of Marlerstrange and the Castle of Howgil: Its chief Towns
are Appleby, Kendale, Kirby, Burg, or Brough under Stainmore: This last is
undoubtedly the Ruin of an eminent Place anciently called Verterl, where a
Roman Commander kept his Station with a Band of Directors.

Amble-side or Amboglana, not far from Winander Mere (in which a Fish called a
Charr is found, and in no other Water) is the Ruins of some famous City of the
Romans which may be gathered from Paved Ways leading to it, and the Roman Coins
that have been often Dug up there.

The Rivers Spaud and Barrow with many windings pleasantly water the Country.
The Peak of Morton is much taken notice of, for near the River Loder there are
Piramidal Stones pitched for a Mile together, some Nine, some Fourteen Foot
thick; and near Kirby Longdale are WESTMORLAND COUNTY
map of Westmorland many deep places like Caves. The River Ken in this County
has a Cataract which is held by its fall to foretell Rain or Fair-Weather.

The Seats of the Nobility are Beltham-Hall, belonging to the Earl of Derby;
Appleby-Castle, Brough-Castle, and Pendragon-Castle, to the Earl of Thanet; and
some very sightly Houses belonging to the Gentry.

The Reign of King EDWARD the Fifth.
KING Edward the Fourth being Dead, and leaving the Crown to Edward his Son,
being about Twelve Years of Age, who kept his Court at Ludlow in the Marches of
Wales, the better to Ingratiate himself with the Welsh, and continue them firm
to the English Interest: That Prince upon notice of his Fathers Death, prepared
for his Journey to London, in order to be Crowned; being then under the tuition
of Anthony Earl Rivers, the Queens Brother; but whilst great preparations were
making in order to his Reception, Richard Duke of Gloucester was contriving how
he might defraud his Nephew, and place the Crown on his own Head, drawing into
his Confederacy Edward Duke of Buckingham, Richard Lord Hastings, and others:
And having laid the Project, in the next place they proceeded to remove all
Obstructions; and hearing that the Lords of the Queens Blood intended to bring
the King up with an Armed Power, the Duke of Gloucester wrote dissembling
Letters to the Queen, putting her in mind of the Friendship the deceased King
her Husband had made between those of his own Blood and hers, on his Deathbed;
Entreating her she would not give any cause of distrust in that matter; and
desired she would Write to the Lords to dismiss those Forces, for saving
Charges, and quieting the Peoples minds, who might draw conjectures from it
that there was Misunderstandings among the Nobles, tending to another Civil
War: That as for himself, he Protested and Swore, That his humble Duty to his
Sovereign, his unfeigned Love to her, her Children and Kinsfolks, had incited
him thus seriously to Counsel and Advise her and them in so weighty a matter,
as might be for the good of them all, with much more to the same purpose; which
prevailed with her to believe it Sincere; that she Writ to her Brother and Son,
who were principally the Young Kings Conductors, to dismiss their Armed
Attendants and come to London by easy Journies, with a small Number of his
select Friends: This however they had some scruple to do, before Gloucester
wrote to them very obliging Letters, protesting an Eternal friendship and
kindness: So in an unlucky hour, contrary to the minds of many with them, and
of the Young King himself, the Guards was sent every Man to his Habitation, and
with a slender Train they kept on their Journey.

The Duke of Gloucester having gained this main Point, delayed not to hasten
his meeting the King, taking with him the Duke of Buckingham and a strong
Guard, and by this time the Earl Rivers had brought the King to
Stoney-Stratford; but because that little Town could not accommodate his Train,
the Earl took up his Quarters at Northampton, about ten Miles from thence;
where unlooked-for, the Dukes of Buckingham and Gloucester came into their Inn,
and courteously saluted them; but the Scene was soon changed; for they were no
sooner in their Beds, but the two Dukes seized on the Keys of the Inn, causing
the Ways between the two Towns to be stopped, and strongly Guarded; pretending
for excuse, that no Man before them should in the Morning pay his humble Duty
to the King: Earl Rivers having notice of this, perceived he was overreached
and ensnared by Gloucester's Policy; and resolving to make the best of it,
dissembling his fears, came to the two Dukes, and demanded in a forced Jocose
way, Why they had so done? But in stead of giving any satisfactory Answer, they
fell into a needless Quarrel with him; and causing him to be Arrested, and put
under strict Ward, hastened early the next Morning to Stoney-Stratford, and in a
submissive manner presented their humble Duty to the King, who received them
with much kindness and affection, as being ignorant of what had passed: But
this Scene was likewise changed, upon their Arresting the Lord Richard Gray,
the Kings half Brother, and Sir Thomas Vaughan in his presence; of which usage
when he complained, they told him all should be well; and what they did, was
for the best; protesting abundance of Love and Loyalty. However, they sent the
Lords and Knights to Pomfret Castle in the North, under a strong Guard, out of
which they came not Alive: Then they removed from the King all his Officers,
and placed Creatures of their own about him, giving out that those of the
Queens Blood intended to destroy all the Kings nearest Relations, and to Rule
both Him and the Kingdom at their pleasure.

The Queen who lay at Westminster, hearing this unexpected News, greatly
grieved that she had been overreached by Gloucester's cunning to Write to the
Lords to dismiss their Strength; and fearing the worst, retired with her Son
Richard Duke of York, and her five Daughters, into the Sanctuary. In the mean
while they brought the much discontented King to London, where he was received
by the Lord Mayor and 500 Citizens in their Formalities: In whose presence
Gloucester, played his part so cunningly, that not only they but the Nobility
were won to believe him sincere; and thereupon he was appointed Protector of
the Kings Person and Kingdom: Which Trust he most passionately desired, to
further his main Design, which now he questioned not to bring about, if he
could get the Duke of York into his possession; and in order to it, calling a
Council of Nobles and Prelates, he laid before them how disgraceful it was that
the Queen in her perverseness should keep an Innocent Prince in Sanctuary, which
was looked on as a place suitable to protect the Guilty; that it would cause
them to be spoke evil of abroad, and therefore desired them to advise how they
might get him out of her hands, to solace and sport in the company of the King
his Brother, who was Melancholy for his absence, and passionately desired to
see him.

This, and much more to the same effect, made them think the Dukes words
Reasonable, and thereupon agree to send such as had greatest Interest with the
Queen, to persuade her to deliver him; of whom the Arch Bishop of Canterbury
was to be Spokesman, who laid many Reasons before her of the Necessity at that
juncture which required her consent: But with Sighs and Tears she Replied, That
the Duke being Sickly and Weak, none was more fit than his own Mother to look
to him; that Brothers (when together) rarely so well agreed as with those that
were not so near a kin. But the main is, said she, my Lord, it is dangerous
that these Princes, as Affairs stand, should be together; since asunder they
are each others safety. And if the one of them do well, the other cannot be in
Peril or Danger; and there is nothing more hazardous than to keep them in one
place; since the Life of the one separate, is maintained in the Body of the
other.

But for all these Reasons, perceiving he would be forced from her, if she
consented not willingly to deliver him, after many tender Kisses and falling
Tears, praying Almighty God to preserve and defend him from all dangers, she
delivered him; bitterly Weeping to the Arch Bishop, saying, That before the
High Majesty of Heaven, she should require that poor Innocent Infant at his
Hands.

The Protector, who with many Nobles waited in the Star Chamber, was over-joyed
when he saw the Archbishop return with what he so passionately desired, and
taking the Young Duke in his Arms, he kissed him, and said, Welcome, my Lord,
with all my Heart: Protesting so great a love to him, that most believed it
real.

Thus having gotten the Prize he aimed at, the better to secure it, he conveyed
both him and the King in great State through the City of London to the Tower,
in order as he pretended to the Coronation when things were settled; though indeed
there was nothing out of frame but what himself had disordered; where having
placed them under such as he confided in, he began more openly to tamper with
the Duke of Buckingham whom he knew was Popular and Powerful, offering to Marry
his Son to his Daughter, and give him the Earldom of Hartford (which the Duke
claimed in King Edward's time as his Right, but could not obtain) if he would
to the utmost endeavor to place the Crown on his Head; and by this means he
won him entirely to his Interest, though it afterward proved to his destruction:
For Gloucester being made King, performed nothing of his promise.

The next thing he had to do, was to gain the Lord Hastings, who had been in
high favor with Edward the Fourth, and was now Lord Chamberlain to the Young
King; but fearing to disclose his mind openly to him, for great Rewards he
procured one Catesby, a Favorite of Hastings, secretly with dark discourse to
sound him: This Man, though he had been maintained by that Lord, and had his
Fortunes raised to what he was by him, proved so Treacherous, that having done
what he could, and finding that Lord no ways inclinable to favor Gloucester's
design, he not only told him of it, but encouraged him to remove him out of the
World, if he intended to compass his desires: Which being Resolved on, he
called a Grand Council of Lords at the Tower, to consider of suitable
preparations for the Coronation; and when they had sat a considerable time, he
came in and took his Chair, Jesting with some of them, after he had excused his
too long stay, requesting of Doctor Morton Bishop of Ely some Strawberries that
grew in his Garden at Holbourn; which he immediately sent for, and took it as a
favor that the Protector was so kind to him, as to put it in his power to
oblige him in any thing; for there had been formerly no good understanding
between them. Then making excuse for a short Absence, he desired them to
proceed in the method proposed; when about an hour after, coming in, he took
his Chair, frowning, biting his ^ip, and rubbing his Fist; which tokens o^
displeasure strangely amazed them, so that they kept a profound silence; which
the Protector perceiving, demanded what punishment they deserved who had
wickedly procured his destruction, he being Uncle and Protector of the King?
This amused them more than before; but knowing themselves Innocent of any such
intention, the Lord Hastings, who by reason of the ancient Friendship that had
been between them, thinking he might make bold, Replied, My Lord, such as have
so transgressed, deserve the severest Punishment the Law can inflict: To which
the other Lords Assented: Then, said he, that Sorceress (meaning the Queen) and
Shoars Wife, having Conspired by Witchcraft to destroy me: So drawing up his
Sleeve, he showed his Arm, which had been wasted from his Infancy, as they all
knew, as a Testimony of what he had said; biding them behold how their Charms
had begun already to take effect on him. Hereupon the Lord Hastings, who had
taken Jane Shore to his Bed, upon the Death of King Edward, thinking to excuse
her, said, My Lord, if they have done so, they deserve punishment: Thou
Traitor, Replied the Protector, Servest thou me with Iffs and Ands? I tell thee
they have done it; and that I will make good upon thy Body: And so striking his
Fist upon the Table, the Room was presently filled with Armed Men, one of which
struck at the Lord Standley, and as nimble as he was to sink under the Table,
grievously Wounded him in the Head, and himself Arrested the Lord Hastings;
biding him make have to shrive himself; For by St. Paul (which was his usual
Oath) he would neither Eat nor Drink till his Head was off: And accordingly he
was Beheaded on a Log on the Green within the Tower; and the same day by the
Protectors order, the Lords, and Sir Thomas Vaughan were Beheaded at Pomfret;
to whose Death this Lord had consented, as appears by his own Story to one
Hastings a Priest, whom he met on Tower Hill, as he was going to the Council,
viz. That he should soon hear that Snare they had laid for him in Edward the
Fourths time, which caused him much trouble, would now take themselves.

One thing more is remarkable, The Lord Stanley, the Night preceding, Dreamed
That he and Hastings were Wounded by a Boar, that the Blood run about his Ears;
and seeing the Protector had the White Boar for his Cognizance, he truly
Interpreted it, desiring he would accompany him in Flying, ere they could be
missed, out of his reach; but he made slight of it, desiring the Messenger to
tell his Lord, That Dreams were Fables and Fancies; yet at his Death he
repented he had not taken this warning as sent from Heaven.

The Protector having Imprisoned the Lord Stanley, Archbishop of York,
Cardinal, Bishop of Ely, and several others, put himself and the Duke of
Buckingham into old Armor, as if first come to hand, in some great danger; and
sending for the Lord Mayor, and many of the chief Citizens, movingly told them,
That himself and the Duke of Buckingham were by Conspiracy of Hastings and his
Accomplices to have been Murdered at the Council Table, had he not by force
prevented it; desiring them to make that report to their Neighbors; and that
this was all that had occasioned the Disturbance and Execution in the Tower:
Nor had Hastings been dead above two Hours ere a large Proclamation, with the
Broad Seal to it, was read in diverse parts of the City by a Herald at Arms; so
that it was plain to the People, that this matter was not sudden, but
premeditated.

These Advances coming near the Throne, the Citizens were Assembled at
Guild Hall, and the matter openly proposed to them by the Duke of Buckingham,
who used many Arguments to induce their consent to the Proclaiming Richard Duke
of Gloucester King, and lay aside King Edwards Line; but they appeared little
inclinable to it. However Dr. Shaw, Brother to the Lord Mayor, in a Sermon at
St. Paul's Magnified him as a Prince of the greatest Magnanimity and Virtue
imaginable; laboring to Bastardize Edward the Fourth, and all the other Sons
of Richard Duke of York, except this Richard, who he said was his own Picture,
and the true imitator of his Valor and Virtues: Which was taken for such a
piece of Dissimulation and Flattery, that he being afterward very evilly
spoken of, he was ashamed ever after to appear in a Pulpit.

This weighty matter being now brought to a home push, the Duke of Buckingham,
to finish the work he had begun, carried diverse Citizens of the meaner sort to
Baynards Castle, where the Protector kept his Court; where he made them seem to
impose the Crown on him; with threats, if he refused it, to place it on the
Head of some Nobleman not of the Family of the Plantagenets, for they would not
have any of Edward the Fourth's Line to Rule over them: This and much more to
the like purpose, the Duke spoke for them, which with a faint shout of God save
King Richard, made him with great unwillingness (as appeared to them) accept
what he had so hard labored for, and passionately desired: And thus an end was
put to Edward the Fifth's Reign, if I may so term it, two Months and thirteen
Days after his Fathers Death; and was afterward, together with his Brother,
Murdered in the Tower; as will appear in the next Reign.

The Reign of King RICHARD the Third.
RIchard Plantagenet, Third Son to Richard Duke of York, having by Policy and
Stratagem crowded himself into the Throne, he called a Parliament, wherein by
the power of a leading Faction, he was confirmed King: The Crown Entailed on
him and his Heirs, his only Son Prince Edward being made Heir apparent: But
against his Coronation, fearing some Insurrection on the meeting of so great a
concourse as that solemnity required, he sent for 5000 Soldiers out of the
North, under the Leading of Robert Risdale; and after it, he set at Liberty the
Archbishop of York and the Lord Stanley; but continued Bishop Morton; yet at
the humble supplication of the University of Oxford, he was delivered to the
Duke of Buckingham, who sent him to his Castle of Brecnock in Wales, as a
Prisoner at large; for he had his Liberty of the Parks, and Grounds lying about
it.

King Richard knowing his Title to be bad, labored by Favors and Interest to
strengthen it: He Created his Son about Ten Years of Age, Prince of Wales, and
John Howard (a Man of great Experience in feats of Arms) Duke of Norfolk; and
Sir Thomas Howard, his Eldest Son, Earl of Surry: The Lord William Barkley was
Advanced to the Earldom of Notingham; and Francis Lord Lovel, his great Crony
and Favorite, was made Viscount Lovel.

And thus, as he immagined, having settled his Estate securely at Home, he sent
Ambassadors to Lewis the French King, to conclude a Peace with him; thereby to
prevent Storms from Abroad: But that Prince so far detested his proceedings
with his Nephews, That he would not admit his Ambassadors to his Presence, nor
own him for a King: This much perplexed him, and as is thought put him upon the
Project of Murdering the Young Innocent Princes, as supposing by what had
passed at the French Court, he could never be Reputed and truly Honored as a
King, whilst they Lived; and that their Murder might not be imputed to him, he
purposely took a Progress to visit the City of Gloucester, from whence he
sometimes took his Title; and from thence sent his Letters to Sir Robert
Brakenbury Lieutenant of the Tower, whom he had raised from a Low Degree to a
considerable Fortune, expressly Commanding him to make away the two Princes:
But either fear of after-claps, or his abhorrence of so villainous a Deed, made
him absolutely refuse it: Upon notice whereof Richard stormed, and appeared
much perplexed in Mind; retiring himself for some Hours to consider how it
might be done; and then remembering there was one Sir James Terril, a retainer
to the Tower, whom he knew to be very Indigent and Necessitous, this Man he
doubted not to prevail on for the Execution of his wicked purpose; and
therefore sent him a supply of Money, with large promises of preferment, if he
Executed his pleasure; and withal his Commands to the Lieutenant to deliver him
the Keys of the Tower. This wicked wretch not weighing the Guilt, closed with
the Golden offers, and had the Keys delivered to him, though not without regret,
by Sir Robert Brakenbury; and the same Evening he hired two desperate Ruffians,
viz. John Dighton and Miles Forest, to Smother the Princes in their Beds,
which they as wickedly performed, by claping Pillows on their Faces, and lying
on them with all their force, till by their no longer struggling, they found
they had bereaved them of Life.

This cruel Murder being committed, the next thing was to consider how to
dispose of their Bodies; which after some consults about it, they Buried under
the Stairs, from whence they were removed, and Buried none knows where: Thus
King Edward the Fourth's Male Issue, became extinct; which some looked on as a
Judgment, for his consenting to the Murder of Pious King Henry, and Innocent
Prince Edward his Son. However it alleviates not the Guilt of those that dipped
their hands in this Blood; for all that were concerned in it, came to untimely
ends; so just and severe is God in punishing Murder, even in this Life; for
rarely we find his vengance stays till the shedders of Innocent Blood drop
into a timely Grave.

This being rumoured abroad, though many things were urged by his creatures to
excuse the Kings knowledge of it, and Terril was secretly commanded to fly
beyond the Seas: But in Henry the Seventh's time returning, was Executed for
Treason; yet the People, as well Nobles as Commons, detested him for it. The
Queen grew Frantic for some time, and much ado they had to prevent her laying
violent hands on herself; but being brought to her Senses, with Tears and
bitter Excecrations against her wicked Brother-in-Law, she passed a Melancholy
Life for many Months: King Richard after this, was troubled with fears and
frightful Dreams of Devils and Spirits, haling and tormenting him, that he is
said to shed some Tears, and wish it had not been done: However he came to
London and summoned a Parliament, wherein (to ingratiate with the People) many
good Laws were made, which are highly in Esteem to this day: But God showed him
an early token of his displeasure, by taking away his only Son, being all the
Children he had, he falling from a Horse dyed of the Bruise.

Bishop Morton, as is said, being committed to the Duke of Buckingham's
Custody, that sagacious Prelate so wound himself into his favor and good
opinion, that finding he was Ambitiously inclined, he spared nothing to
increase his aspiring thoughts to that height, as to make him look with envious
Eyes on King Richard's Crown, and fancy it would sit more comely on his own
Head: He was indeed of the Royal Blood by the Female side, but at a
considerable distance: However King Richard having broke Promise with him by
detaining the Earldom of Hartford, though he had been chiefly instrumental in
Advancing him to the Royal Dignity; That for many Reasons the Bishop urged, he
began to hate him; which more and more increasing, from new disapointments, and
disfavours; and in fine, the Duke however seemed to decline the Crown, it was
urged by the Bishop he might be Instrumental to do good to his Country, and
gain Immortal Fame by Uniting the Houses of York and Lancaster, in promoting a
Match between the Lady Elizabeth, Eldest Daughter to Edward the Fourth, and
Henry Earl of Richmond, Son and Heir to Margaret Countess of Richmond, Daughter
and Heir to John Duke of Sommerset his great Uncle, Son to John of Gaunt Duke
of Lancaster, Fourth Son to Edward the Third. This he attentively harkened to,
and thereupon the Bishop desired to go into the Isle of Ely, and there he would
raise Men and Money to forward this matter. But the Duke considering his
Absence would be charged on him, and be a means to discover the Intrigue, and
that also he should want his Counsel at need, refused to consent; however the
Bishop in disguise soon after got away, and escaped to the Earl of Richmond,
Counselling and Animating him to prosecute the Project laid in England.

King Richard hearing there were secret Cabbals held against him in Britany by
the Earl of Richmond and others, renewed his Brothers Stratagem to get him into
his hands: But though it cost him much Money, yet his Counsels being revealed, he
also was frustrated in his expectations: But by this time having notice of
Buckingham's discontents, he by Friendly invitations entreated him to come to
Court; but the Duke excused it, on pretense of Indisposition; but King Richard,
well informed to the contrary, knew it was rather an Indisposition of Mind than
Body, sent a second Summons, peremptorily commanding him to make his personal
appearance; which made him believe his design was discovered; and thereupon he
stoutly replied by the Messenger, That he reputed him a Monster, a Tyrant,
Murderer, and not his Lawful King; and therefore would not trust his Person in
his hands, who was cruelly unmerciful to his nearest Relations: And so with
many of his Friends, raised Forces in Wales, whilst Sir Edward Courtney did the
like in Devonshire and Cornwall, Sir Richard Guilford gathered many of the
Kentish Commons, and in Yorkshire the Marquess of Dorset leaving Sanctuary,
drew a great Number to him.

This Storm that threatened Ruin to the Usurper, roused him to Arms; so that
Levying a considerable Army, he Marched against the Duke, to give him Battle
ere he joined his Friends, supposing if he could rout him, the rest would soon
be Subdued: The Duke was as resolute as he, and intended to pass the Severn at
a low Ford near Gloucester, to meet him; but that Night and for Ten days after,
such abundance of Rain fell, that the River over-flowed its Banks, drowning all
the Meadows, so that he could not pass; and by lingering his Victuals growing
scanty, most of his Forces left him; which unexpected misfortune made him shift
for himself, when coming to the House of one Humphery Banister near Shrewsbury,
who had been his Steward, and got a good Estate under him, he was there
sheltered for a time; but King Richard Proscribing him, and setting a Thousand
Pounds on his Head, that Treacherous Servant discovered him to the Sherif of
Shropshire, who apprehended him in poor Apparel, digging in the Garden, and
conveyed him to the King at Salisbury, where in hopes of favor, he made an
ample confession, but it availed not; for without any Legal Proceedings he was
Beheaded, upon which the rest dispersed.

The Earl of Richmond knowing nothing of this disappointment, having gotten
some Forces of the Duke of Britany, put to Sea for England; but by contrary
winds was driven into Normandy, where the French King not only succored him
with Money and other Necessaries, but gave him safe conduct through his
Territories to Britany, where he found a great number of his Friends Arrived
before him; and there making a sollemn promise to Marry the Lady Elizabeth,
Daughter to Edward the Fourth, if his success answered his expectations, they
owned him in a manner as their King, vowing to adventure their Lives to settle
him on the Throne. King Richard in the mean while was busied in Fortifying the
Seaports, and cutting off by terrible Executions all that he thought favored
the Earls Interest, getting him and his adherents attainted in Parliament, so
that he seized their Lands and Effects, bestowing them on his Creatures, which
caused much murmuring among the People: And one Collingborn an Esquire of good
Estate, being in a Poetical strain, reflecting on Richard's three Favorites,
viz. Sir Richard Ratcliff, Sir William Catesby, and the Viscount Lovel, in this
Distich, The Rat, the Cat, and Lovel our Dog,
Rules all England under a Hogg:
Was Executed for it at Tyburn, the Judges construing the last word, to allude
to the King, because he had the White Boar for his Cognizance; and so in their
opinions the Scandal was wrested to Treason. And then he laid another Trap for
the Earl of Richmond, by Bribing Peter Landoys, the Duke of Britany's
Treasurer; but he escaped it on timely notice, and fled to the French King;
however King Richard made an Alliance with James King of Scots, by Marrying the
Lady Ann (one of his Neices) to the Duke of Rothsey, his Eldest Son; and with
large Presents and fair Promises so won on the infatuated Queen Dowager (his
Brothers Widow) as to deliver her Daughters into his hands, though she was
sensible he had Murthured her Sons: Then he caused it to be given out that
Queen Ann his Wife, who was Daughter to the great Earl of Warwick, and had been
Wife to Prince Edward, Son to Henry the Sixth, was suddenly Dead; and though
then very well, yet soon after she was found unexpectedly dead, not without
suspicion of Poison; which he so little regarded, that he immediately tendered
Courtship to Elizabeth his Brothers Daughter, who fearing her own and her
Sisters safety, put him off with delays, without any absolute denial, till the
Battle of Bosworth-Field ending his Life, set her at liberty to Marry the Earl
of Richmond; whom this News of Courtship hastened over with such Forces as the
French King and his own Friends furnished him with, to the Number of 2000; with
those he Landed at Milford Haven in Wales, and for a time few resorted to him;
yet no sooner the Welshmen understood he was of the Family of the Tuthers, and
of their own Blood, and might prove an especial Favouour of them, if he was
advanced to the Crown, but they flocked to his Standard from all parts, under
their Captains John Morgan, Rice ap Thomas, Richard Griffith, and others;
having by this means gotten a little Army, he Marched forward by Sir George
Talbot, Sir Walter Hungerford, Sir Thomas Bourcher, and others, with Forces
they had raised for King Richard.

This News soon flew to London, and much perplexed the King; insomuch that he
scarcely knew who to trust; yet he Levied an Army of 20000 Men, and with John
Duke of Norfolk and others, that he had Obliged by many great Gifts, Marched
against his Enemies, resolving to venture his Crown and Life on the fortune of
a Battle; and though many endeavors were used to withdraw the Duke of Norfolk
from his side, none could prevail to shake his fidelity; however the Night
before the Battle, to amuse him, and to weaken his hand, This Distich was fixed
on his Chamber Door, viz.

Jack of Norfolk be not too bold;
For Dickon thy Master is bought and sold.
On the 20th of August 1485, The two Armies faced each other near Bosworth in
Leicestershire: But when King Richard perceived the Lord Stanley who commanded
a part of his Forces, stand wavering at a distance, he sent to him to come
immediately and join with him; to which he Replied, He would do it when he saw
his time. This so enraged him, that he commanded the Son of that Lord, whom he
had as a Hostage of his Fidelity, to be instantly cut off; however he was
diswaded to defer it till the fortune of the Field had been tried; and so both
Armies joining, fought desperately, none knowing which would be victor, till by
the Lord Stanly's Revolting, and breaking in upon the Kings Battallion with
fresh Men, he turned the scale; when the King perceiving Fortune against him,
resolving to restore the Battle, or Dye, in a desperate mood he rushed into the
Earls Battle, and with his Sword made a free passage, till he encountered Sir
William Brandon, Standard bearer to the Earl, whom he slew, and then singled
out Sir John Cheney, whom he tumbled to the Ground, much Bruised and Wounded,
and thus gaining a passage to the Earl, they Encountered like enraged Lions;
and Richard in all appearance had slain him, had he not been beaten down by
others, and slain; though the Earl had it given out he slew him with his own
hands; for notwithstanding his many evil qualities, all Authors allow him to
have been Valiant, and of extraordinary Strength; so that had half his Army
imitated his example, it is concluded he had been Victor: But such was the will
of God, to punish him for his many Murders, that at once he lost his Kingdom
and Life. Upon his fall, his Army partly fled, and partly revolted; the Duke of
Norfolk likewise Fighting valiantly, was slain, and in all about 4000 others.

The Crown he brought into the Field, was found in a Hawthorn Bush, and placed
on the Earl of Richmond's Head by the Lord Stanley; whereupon he was saluted
King by the General Voice,

Among other dead Bodies, King Richard's was found, Stripped, and carried Naked
and Bloody on a Horse to Leicester; where it was two days exposed to the view
of the People, and then Buried in the Grey-Friers Monastery; when at the
dissolution of Religious Houses, the Stone Coffin wherein his Corpse lay, was
taken up, and said now to be a drinking Trough for Horses at a common Inn in
Leicester.

He began his Reign June 22, Anno Dom. 1483, and Reigned two Years and two
Months.

Remarks on Worcestershire, etc.
WOrcestershire produces store of Sheep, and large Cattle, much Corn, and rich
Pastures; It is pleasently Watered by the River Severn, branching in a manner
through all the County, affording store of Fish, as the Parks do Venison: It is
toward Staffordshire pretty Woody, with some rising Hills: It is Bounded with
Shropshire, Herefordshire, Glocestershire, Warwickshire, and Staffordshire: It
sends Members to Parliament 9, viz. Bewdly 1, Droitwich 2, Evesham 2, Worcester
City 2, and 2 Knights of the Shire.

Worcester is questionless the ancient Branconium of the Romans, called by the
ancient Britains Caer Wrangon, and held to be of Roman Foundation. In the
Cathedral of St. Mary, which is of stately Building, was Buried the Bodies of
King John, and Prince Arthur, Eldest Son to Henry the Seventh. It is memorable
for the Battles fought near it, in WORCESTER SHIRE
map of Worcestershire the late Civil Wars, and King Charles the Second's
Escape.

At Eversham King Kenry the Third gained a great Victory over the Barons:
Kiderminster is of great Antiquity, also Sturbridg: On the edge of this County,
at Eckington is a Medicinal Well whose Waters are Restorative. In this Shire
are Hartlebury, Holt, and Emsley Castles.

The Seats of the Nobility are Grafton, belonging to the Earl of Shrewsbury;
Lenwick, to the Earl of Craven; Feckenham Lodge, to the Lord Coventry; and
Hartelbury Castle, the Bishops Seat. This Shire contains 7 Hundreds, 152
Parishes, 1 City, which is a Bishops See, 12 Market Towns; and is Watered with
5 Rivers, over which and Branches are 15 Bridges: It has moreover 7 Castles, 1
Chase, 2 Forests, and 16 Parks.

The Reign of King HENRY the Seventh.
AFter the Battle of Bosworth, Henry hasted to London; and soon after his
arrival, was Crowned King: Then calling a Parliament, King Richard was
Attainted, and the Crown entailed on him and his Heirs; and the January
following, he Married the Lady Elizabeth, Eldest Daughter to Edward the Fourth,
by which means the long Warring Houses of York and Lancaster were joined in
one; and in the ensuing September, she was delivered of a Prince, who was
Christened Arthur; and the King published his Pardon to all that had born Arms
against him; conditionally if they would Swear Fealty and Allegiance to him;
which many refused, and had their Goods and Estates Confiscated. Then he chose
Grave and Wise Counselors of State, who by their prudent mannagment of
Affairs, thoroughly settled the Kingdom in Peace and Tranquillity; and so
proceeding to make large amends to the Duke of Britany and French King, for the
favors he received from them during his Exile.

But now whilst all things seemed quiet, and Trade began to flourish, a sudden
Rebellion broke out in the North, Headed by Sir Humphry Stafford, the Lord
Lovel, and others, who left their Sanctuaries, and drew great Numbers to side
with them. But King Henry raised an Army with much celerity, and coming swiftly
on them, the Ringleaders fled by Night, which so amazed the Plebeans, that the
next Morning they submitted to the Kings mercy: However Sir Humphry Stafford,
and his Brother Thomas, were taken out of Culuham Abbey in Oxfordshire, whither
they had fled for Sanctuary, and the first Beheaded; the latter being spared
because he Acted by the Dictates of his Brother.

This combustion was no sooner over, but another more dangerous ensued: For one
Richard Symond, a Priest, set up a Pupil of his, whom he had cunningly
Instructed to claim the Crown, by the Name of Edward Plantagenet, Eldest Son to
the Duke of Clarence; though it afterward appeared his true Name was Lambert
Symnel: His Age agreed with that of the Prince he represented, who was then a
Prisoner, and in likness he resembled him, and his carriage was extremely
Genteil and Taking; so that many flocked to him who were desirous of change, as
well of the Nobles and Gentry, as Commons; but not finding here a sufficient
Strength, he failed to Ireland; where Sir Thomas Garendine, the Lord Chancellor,
espoused his Quarrel, and drew many to take part with him; and to him the
Duchess Dowager, a mortal Enemy to King Henry, sent supplies of Money, Men and
Arms; and by her Encouragement many English espoused his Interest, so that he
became very Formidable: This constrained King Henry to bring the true Edward
out of the Tower, and carry him through the Streets of London, to satisfy the
People of the Imposture; where the Nobility were required to be present, and to
confer with him. But this did little, for the others Army increasing, The King
raised Forces to repel him, and a Battle was joined near Stoke in Lincolnshire,
which was maintained with great resolution; but the Irish who compossed the
greater part of Symnel's Army, being destitute of Warlike Weapons, though they
fought valiantly, were routed; whereupon the rest gave way: And in this Battle
the Earl of Lincoln, the Lord Lovel, Sir Thomas Garendine, Marian Swart, and
Sir Thomas Browghton, were Slain, Symnell was taken Prisoner, and after a
public Confession who he was, made Scullion in the Kings Kitchen, and after
that his Faulconer.

Peace now being settled, the Queen was Crowned, and Thomas Bourcher,
Archbishop of Canterbury, being dead, Bishop Morton was preferred to that
Archiepiscopal See, and made Lord Chancellor of England: soon after which
preferment, he was dignified with the Hat and Habit of a Cardinal, by Pope
Alexander the Sixth.

Whilst these things Passed, a Quarrel arose between Charles the French King,
and Francis Duke of Britany; whereupon the latter, too weak to oppose his
powerful Enemy, required Aid of King Henry; but he having in his necessities
been befriended by them both, rather labored to make an Accommodation; yet
underhand, the King winking at it, many English went over to the Duke's
Assistance; but were mostly slain in a fatal Overthrow the French gave near the
City of Nantz, with their chief Leader the Lord Woodvile. This made King Henry
openly assist the Duke with Men and Money; to furnish which, he raised by
Parliament a Tax of the Tenth Penny on all Moveable Goods, which caused a
Rebellion in the North, where the Earl of Northumberland enforcing the Kings
Orders for the strict Levying it, was Murdered by the Rout; but Thomas Earl of
Surry going against them with an Army, they dispersed and fled; yet several of
the Ringleaders were taken and Executed in sundry places.

During the War in Britany, That Duke dyed, and the Estates Marrying his
Daughter and Heiress to the French King, though she had before been contracted to
Maximillian the Emperor, a Peace ensued; and the Lady Margaret, Daughter to
the Emperor, whom the French King had taken as his Wife, was returned with
disgrace; which occasioned a War between them; and Henry being on both sides
solicited for Aid, he for many weighty Reasons adhered to the Emperor, and
Transported an Army under the Command of his Uncle Jasper Duke of Bedford, and
John Earl of Oxford; but the Emperor not being forward in his promised
Preparation, the King passed into France, and laid Siege to Bullen, which made
the French King for fear of Britany, of which by his Marriage he was become
Sovereign Prince, sue for Peace; which was concluded between him and King Henry
during their Lives: The French King, for defraying his Charges, paying 186200
l. and a Yearly Pension of 25000 Crowns, which was Paid during King Henry's
Life; whereupon he returned with his Army.

Not long after this, the Duchess Dowager of Burgundy set up another
Imposture, who though his true Name was Perkin Warbeck, was to pass for Richard
Plantagenet, the second Son of Edward the Fourth, and the better to further her
design, she used such Policy in England, that she gained many of the best Rank,
who were well affected to the House of York, to favor him. King Henry however,
to Countermine her Stratagem, bent to work him Mischief, secretly caused diverse
of his Friends seemingly to fly to this n^^ pretended Duke, and offer him their
Service; their Estates the mean while, the better to color the matter, being
seized in England: And by this means he gained private Intelligence of all the
Proceedings, and an Account of the Names of such as being in England held
correspondency with him; which brought many into Trouble, and some to
Execution. And finding the Emperor, disgusted at the Peace he had made with
France, secretly encouraged this design, he removed the English Mart from the
Low Countries to Callice; which proved greatly prejudicial to the Flemings,
especially upon a Prohibition of Flemish Wares being brought into England,
which made the Emperor publish the like Prohibition to hinder the Importation
of English Goods in any part of his Territories; which causing a decay of
Trade, incited the meaner sort of Handicrafts in London to commit diverse
Outrages on the Persons and Goods of the Flemings that Inhabited among them;
but about 80 of the Ringleaders being Taken, were Imprisoned, till by the Kings
Pardon they were Released, and the Flemings Banished.

Sir Robert Clifton, whom the King by Promises and Gifts had won to his Favor,
about this time came over; and the better to Apprehend such as he should
Accuse, without Blows, he appointed to meet him in the Tower; where among his
Great Courtiers, he singled out Stanley, who had been Instrumental in setting
the Crown on the Kings Head, and was now his Lord Chamberlain; who was
nevertheless committed to Prison, and the main Evidence on his Trial being,
That he had said, That if he was sure this Perkin was the True Duke of York, he
would not draw his Sword against him; he was thereupon Sentenced, and all his
great Services could not atone to save his Life, for he was very soon after
Beheaded. Yet with this the Storm blew not over, for the Native Irish declaring
for Perkin, though the King sent an Army thither under Sir Edward Poinings, yet
he could do little good there, they being too nimble for him in their Woods,
Bogs, and Mountains; and not being assisted by the Nobles and Gentry, as he
expected, the fault was charged by him on the Earl of Killdare, whom he brought
over Prisoner; but that Lord so well acquitted himself, that he was soon set at
Liberty, and sent back again with Honor and Rewards; and Perkin putting to
Sea, Landed in Kent; but he was beaten off, and a great many of his Men slain;
and such as were taken, Executed; which discouragement made him return to
Burgundy. Yet soon after he Sailed for Ireland, where he was received with
Promise of large Assistance; but not finding it according to his expectation,
he passed thence into Scotland, and was highly welcomed by James the Fourth,
who esteeming him (by reason of his Courtly Behavior) as the True Prince he
represented, Married him to Catharine Gourdon his Neice; and then with a
Puissant Army Invaded England, which miserably wasted the Northern Borders, and
compelled King Henry to set forward with all the Forces he on the sudden could
raise, under the Command of Giles Lord Dawbeny; but was soon recalled upon an
Insurrection in Cornwall, occasioned by the Levying a Tax to support the War:
They strongly charging the fault on John Morton Archbishop of Canterbury and
Sir Reynold Bray, who (as they said) to Enrich themselves had advised the King
to oppress his Subjects; desiring they might be removed from their Dignities
and Offices, and Punished as Enemies to the Common Weal; and chose for their
Captains Thomas Flammock a Lawyer, and one Joseph a Blacksmith; and gathering
as they Marched, brought a great Terror on the City of London, being joined by
the Lord Audley, and many Thousands he brought to their assistance; and found a
free passage till they came into Kent, where the Kentishmen opposed them; and
now the King thinking it his time to set upon them, gave them Battle at
Blackheath near Greenwich, and totally Routed them, slaying 2000, and taking
their Ringleaders with many others Prisoners, who were most of them Executed:
Joseph the Blacksmith glorying in his way to Execution, that for this deed he
should be Recorded in History; and indeed he missed not of his Expectation.

The King being now at leisure to revenge the wrongs the Scots had done in the
North, ordered the Earl of Surry and Richard Fox Bishop of Durham, to raise
such Forces as they could, and oppose their Ravages till he sent a greater
Strength; but these two active Men raised such a Power, that the Scots upon
their approach immediately retired into their own Country, and were followed by
the English, who retaliated in a fearful manner the injuries done within the
English Pale, winning and razing many strong Castles, Towns, and Fortresses;
and though the Scots King made show he would give Battle, and Challenged the
Field, yet in the Night he Decamped and gave his Army free leave to disperse it
self; so that for seven Days the English hunted them in Woods and Mountains,
though to little purpose; for Winter approaching, the Barrenness of the Country
constrained them to return to Berwick, to receive King Henry's Orders. But in
the mean while Peter Hyalus, Ambassador from Ferdinand King of Castile, arrived
to Mediate a Peace between England and Scotland; yet it came to no more than a
Truce for certain Years, on condition the Scots King Banished Perkin, and all
his Adherents out of his Dominions; and about the same time the French King
sent to Ratify the Peace that had been concluded between King Henry and
himself, which was Accorded; and Maximillian perceiving his Country of
Flanders, etc. much Impoverished for want of the English Trade, with many
Entreaties procured it to be Restored; and our Merchants coming to Antwerp,
were received by the Inhabitants with solemn Processions, Feastings, and all
demonstrations of Joy imaginable.

Perkin Warbeck by means of the Truce being Expelled Scotland, Sailed away with
four Ships and Landed in Cornwall, where the ordinary sort of People received
him with Joy and loud Acclamations, raising in a short time a great Multitude
to Aid him; though for Rebellion they had severely smarted but a little before;
and immediately with great Multitudes he Besieged the City of Exceter, but the
Citizens stoutly withstood them in their Attempts to Scale the Wales, slaying
very many of them. Whereupon they put Fire to the Gates and Burnt them, but
could not Enter by reason the Besieged Countermured them with Fire, and kept it
with continual supplies of Fuel, so fierce that they had time to raise Bulwarks
and Ramparts. Then the Rebels by Threats and fair Promises endeavored to
oblige them to submit; but these proved fruitless, for being encouraged by the
King, who promised to come to their Relief very speedily, with an Army, they
stoutly refused all Conditions of Surrender; and upon the Kings approach, the
Siege was raised, the Rebels Marching into Somersetshire, where they laid
Siege to Taunton Dean; but being close followed, Perkin with 60 Horse fled from
the rest, and finding the Seaports stopped, he took Sanctuary in Beauley Abbey
near Southampton; Registering his own, and the Names of some few of his
Companions, who had got thither with him; the greater part of his Train being
Taken by the King's Light-Horse-Men, who closely Pursued: And the Multitude
Submitting, and throwing down their Arms, were received into the Kings
Protection, unless some of the Chief, who being Taken were Executed in diverse
places.

The King after this coming to Exeter, highly commended the Citizens for their
Loyalty and Courage, rewarding the Meaner sort with Money, and those of Note
with Knighthood and profitable Places of Trust giving his own Sword to the
Mayor, with a Privilege that it should always be born before him. And the
Sanctuary where Perkin was, being encompassed with Armed Men, and he perceiving
their orders were to take him thence by force, he Surrendered himself to the
Abbor of Sheen, Entreating him to procure the Kings Pardon for him; whereupon
he was brought to Westminster, and publicly declared his mean Birth and
Parrentage, and that he had been persuaded to this Undertaking chiefly by the
Duchess Dowager of Burgundy; whereupon with a Paper of all the Intreague
Pinned on his Back, he was set upon a Scaffold, fastened in a pair of Stocks a
whole Day before the Palace at Westminster, and the following day in like
manner at Cheapside-Cross, and then made a close Prisoner in the Tower, where
Bribing the Keepers, and practicing to Escape into Flanders, though he had been
Pardoned before, he was for this Executed at Tyburn; and the King laying hold
on this to rid him of the fears he had of the True Earl of Warwick's being one
day advanced to the Throne, was not wanting of Evidence who Accused him to have
attempted his Escape with Perkin, and though having been kept in Prison from his
Infancy, so that he knew not a Goose from a Hen, that poor Prince was
wrongfully Condemned of High Treason, and Beheaded on the Tower Hill, whose
Innocent Blood fixed a stain on King Henry to all Posterity; his Death being
rather looked on as a State Policy, than any ways Just; and that in this he had
done that Crime, for which he had so vehemently accused Richard the Third; only
with this difference, That he made his Courts of Justice Guilty of a Crime not
inferior to what the other had imposed on private Assassins: For this Edward
Earl of Warwick was Son to George Duke of Clarence, second Brother to Edward
the Fourth, and the last of the Male Line of the Plantagenets, who had swayed
the Scepter from Henry the Second.

King Henry by this Bloodshed having more firmly Established his Throne, or at
least himself, from those fears that he apprehended from mutable Fortune,
whilst this Young Prince Lived, Married Arthur Prince of Wales, his Eldest Son,
to the Lady Catharine, Daughter to Ferdinand King of Spain, with great
Magnificence, in St. Paul's. But that Young Prince soon after Dying, she was
Married to Henry his Second Son, who Succeeded: But upon some pretended
scruples, Divorced; as will appear at large in the History of his Reign. And
James the Fourth, King of Scots, suing for the Lady Margaret the Kings Eldest
Daughter, the Match was concluded, though the French King and others had required
her, but could not obtain their Suits; for in this Henry wisely considered,
That if his Sons Issue should fail, it would be a means to unite Scotland to
England; when if he had Married her to a more Powerful Kingdom, this must have
been Subjected to that, which he concluded would prove very dishonorable to
the English Nation; and the Lady being sent to Edenbourough, was there Married
with great Solemnity.

The King in the latter end of his Reign growing exceeding Covetous, contrived
how he might extort Money from his Subjects; and for this, as his chief
Instrument, he used Sir Richard Empson and Edmund Dudley two Lawyers, whom he
appointed to put the Penal Laws in execution with great Rigor; which they
spared not to do, to the utmost, though in the next Reign it cost them their
Lives; nor was the complaints of the oppressed People minded, though exceeding
great and many, from all parts of England, which encouraged a whole swarm of
Locusts, as under Officers, to pill and pole them in every Shire, which caused
the King much hatred.

After this, Philip Duke of Austria, in Right of his Wife, coming to be King of
Spain was in his Voyage thither driven by a Tempest into Weymouth Harbor in
Dorsetshire, where with his Queen he was Entertained by Sir Thomas Trenchard,
and after Invited to the King's Court at Windsor; where, for the Entertainment
he gave him, he procured the Duke of Suffolk, fled into Austria, to be put into
his hands, on condition he should have no violence offered him; and indeed
during this Kings Reign he was only kept a Prisoner; but in the next lost his
Head. King Henry soon after falling Sick of a languishing Disease, which was
looked on as a Judgment for oppressing his Subjects, remitted all offenses
against his Penal Laws, enlarged all Prisoners, except for Treason and Murder,
restored Moneys to those that had been Ruined, relieved the Poor, and did many
good Acts. And having Reigned 23 Years and 8 Months, he Dyed, and was Buried at
Westminster, in the famous Chapel of his own founding, by Elizabeth his Queen,
(who Dyed not long before) in the 52d Year of his Age.

In this Kings Reign Wheat was Sold for Six Pence a Bushel, Nantwich Salt 6 d.
and Bay Salt 3 d. per Bushel, White Herings 6 s. per Barrel, Red Herrings 3 s.
per Cade, Sprats 6 d. per Cade, and Gascoign Wine at 6 l. per Tun.

Anno 1495 a mighty Storm of Hail fell, killing and wounding many Cattle and
People, several Stones being taken up at St. Neots in Huntingtonshire 18 Inches
about: And soon after a fearful Plague raged, which made the King and Queen for
a time remove their Court to Callice: And during his Reign about Nine Persons,
Men and Women, suffered the Flames for the profession of a good Faith: Several
did Penance by carrying Faggots on their Backs, and some were Burnt in the
Cheek, etc.

Remarks on Wiltshire, etc.
WIltshire is Renowned for the Frugal Industry of the Inhabitants: It produces
numerous Flocks of Sheep, of whose Wool Cloth is made, and many Thousands of
People set on Work; as also large Cattle, store of Corn, and Pastures, Venison,
Fish, Fowl, etc. It is Bounded with Barkshire, Hampshire, Dorsetshire,
Somersetshire, and Gloucestershire; It contains 29 Hundreds, in which are 304
Parishes, 23 Market Towns, 5 Rivers, 1 City, viz. Salisbury, which is a Bishops
See. 3 Bridges, 1 Castle, 1 Chase, and 2 Parks.

The River Avon branches its Southern parts, and Wilby-Bourn extends to the
West; as also does a part of Avon; and in other parts it is pleasantly Watered;
the Castle is that of Castlecomb.

It sends Members to Parliament 34, viz. Bedwin 2, Caln 2, Chipenham 2,
Cricklade 2, Devizes 2, Downton 2, Heitsbury 2, Hindon 2, Ludgarsale 2,
Malmsbury 2, Marleborough 2, New Sarum 2, Old Sarum 2, Westbury 2, Wilton 2,
Wooton Basset 2, and 2 Knights of the Shire.

At Willton, Egbert King of the West Saxons Overthrew and Slew Bernulf King of
Mercia, but afterward the Danes gave him there a great Overthrow: At Edington
King Alfred Defeated the Danes: At Bradford a great Battle was Fought among the
Saxon Competitors: At Wodensbury, Cheulin King of the West Saxons, Overthrew
the Britans. Old Sarum was a Station of the Romans, and here the Britains were
Overthrown by Kenrick the Saxon. At Caln, Dunstan opposed the Married Priests,
and the Controversy was ended by the fall of the WILTSHIRE
map of Wiltshire Floor, whilst his Chair remained fixed. Brokenbridge and
Cosham were seats of the Romans, and of some Saxon Kings. Creiclade is held to
be the first University, and thence removed to Oxford. At Malmsbury were Born
William, thence Surnamed Malmsbury, a famous Historian; and Thomas Hobbs of
this Age. It took its Name from Madulphus, who Erected a Monastery there. Caln
is noted for its fair Church. Salisbury for its stupendous Minster and
Cathedral.

On Salisbury Plain, is the memorable Wonder called Stone Henge, supposed to be
Erected as a Monument to Hingest the first Saxon Invader; its Stones are of a
prodigious bigness, some 28 Foot long, and 7 broad, Morticed one within
another; though wasted by time, some are falln. Near Sawerth are Cockle-stones,
and those called the Gray Weathers near Marlborough. On the Borders of this
County, between Great Bedwin and Lockington, are certain deep Holes called the
Giants Caves; The Water breaking out of certain Stones near Knet, is accounted
a presage of Dearth. At Luckington is a Well whose Virtue is to Cure Sore Eyes.
At Aubury is cast up a Ditch of a prodigious depth, near Circular, set round
with large Stones, supposed once a strong Encampment of the Romans, as
Yarnborough Castle on Salisbury Plain is supposed to have been one of their
Fortresses.

The Seats of the Nobility are Marleborough-House, and Allington-House,
belonging to the Duke of Somerset; Wilton and Falstone, alias Fallerdown, to
the Earl of Pembrook; Clarlton, to the Earl of Barkshire; Stourton-Castle, to
the Lord Stourton; Wardour-Castle, to the Lord Arundel of Wardour; Long Leats,
to the Viscount Weymouth, Baron of Warmister; the Bishops Seat in Salisbury.

The Reign of King HENRY the Eighth.
HENRY the Eighth, being Eighteen Years old, began his Reign the 22d of April,
Anno Dom. 1509. and was Crowned at Westminster by William Warham, Archbishop
of Canterbury. His first Policy was to wind himself into the Affections of his
Subjects; and soon found out a way to do it by issuing out Proclamations That
such as had been Injured by Extortions and Oppressions of evil Persons in his
Fathers Reign, should be favorably heard, and receive Satisfaction for the
wrongs done them: Whereupon great Numbers came with grievous Complaints; those
that had received the least Injury, being the most clamorous; and having
recompensed many, to please the rest, Empson and Dudley the two corrupt Judges,
were Convicted of High Treason, and Beheaded on Tower Hill; and diverse employed
under them were Disgraced by Pillories, Stocks, and Whipping-Posts, though these
Catterpillars had exceedingly Enriched the Kings Treasury, as well as their own
Coffers. For his Father left behind him the greatest Mass of Money that any
King of England before him had done.

Things being a little settled, Ferdinand the King's Father-in-Law, craved Aid
of him against the Moors, who infested his Kingdom, which he obtained, and
drove them by that means out of Spain; but the War ceasing, he sent home the
English poor and ill rewarded for their Service, which much offended the King;
and Wars arrising between Pope Julius the Second, and Lewis the French King, in
Italy, where the latter seized on the strong Towns of Bologna and La Gasse, and
became very Formidable, King Henry became a friendly Mediator between them. But
the French King refusing to yield to Proposals of Peace, pursuing his
Conquests, he required him by his Ambassadors to restore him the Peaceable
possession of Guyan and Normandy, with his Ancient Inheritance of Main and
Anjou, unjustly detained from his Ancestors and himself; which being refused,
he Proclaimed War; and for this, and Writing a Book in defense of the Roman
Pontificate, against Martin Luther, the Pope (on whose account this Quarrel was
espoused) styled him Defender of the Faith; which Title has ever since been
retained by the Kings and Queens of England.

The King was not slow in raising an Army, and King Ferdinand of Spain having
notice of his preparations, sent to offer his Service if he would Land his
Forces in Biscay, a part of his Country, and from thence March into Guyan,
which was agreed to, and done under the Leading of Thomas Crey Marquess of
Dorset: But the crafty Spaniard intending nothing but his own advantage by
this, after the English had suffered many hardships in his Country, he joined
them, and fell unexpectedly on the Kingdom of Navarre, which he seized in a
short time; the Natives being so amazed at the suddainness of the Invasion,
that they made little or no resistance. But after this success, he afforded
them no subsistence, or any part of the spoil; which made the Soldiers Disband
of their own accord, and come straglingly into England, Poor and almost Naked:
But Sir Edward Howard, Youngest Son to the Earl of Surry, being Lord Admiral of
England, many times Landed in the French Territories, and greatly endamaged
them, and at Sea overthrew their Navy; in which Fight Sir John Carew of
Devonshire, in the Regent, grapling with a great Carrick of Breast, both Ships
in the contest fell on Fire, and in them (on both sides) about 800 Men
perished. This distress on his Coast, made the French King augment his Fleet,
and Fortify his Harbors: However the Admiral entered that of Breast with Boats
and armed Barges, and assailed three great Galleys of Rhodes, brought to the
assistance of the French King, by Prior John, these they soon Boarded; but the
Boats and Barges then returning, and leaving them well Manned, to be brought
off at high Tide; by this oversight the French regained them; and in the
contest, the Admiral was born overboard by a Pike, and Drowned. But in few days
his Elder Brother was made Admiral, and two Land Armies prepared, one under the
Leading of George Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, and the other by Charles Somerset
Lord Herbert, Chamberlain to the King: These had not long been Landed but the
King leaving the public mannagement of Affairs to the Queen, and directing
the Earl of Surry to Guard the North against the Scots Incursion, he Sailed to
Callice and caused his Army to March to Terwyn, which he Besieged; and upon the
overthrow of the French Army that came to its Relief, had it put into his
possession, which he rased, and consumed by Fire, except the Cathedral and
Bishops Palace. During this Siege, Maximilian the Emperor, with 30 Nobles and
Gentlemen, repared to King Henry's Camp; where, to the Honor of England, they
Enrolled themselves in the King's Pay, and were Nobly entertained.

The next Place that opposed him in his intended Conquest, was Tournay, which
despairing of succor, after many fierce Assaults, yielded; and on condition of
their paying 10000 l. the Citizens were received into Henry's Protection, and
Wolsey his Almoner, took an Oath of Allegiance of them, to be True to him, as
his own Subjects. However, in his Absence the Scots Invaded England with 8000
Men, under the Command of the Lord Humes, and did great mischief; but as they
were returning with their Plunder, Sir William Bulmer who lay in wait with 1000
Archers, put them to the Rout in a sharp Fight, slew 500, and took 400
Prisoners, and recovered all the Booty; so that those who had the luck to
Escape returned Poor and Beggarly into Scotland. But King James the Fourth, to
revenge this disgrace, raised the Power of his Kingdom, and come before the
Castle of Norham, (some Historians say with 100000 Fighting Men) which he Took,
by reason the Captain being prodigal of his Powder, too soon spent it. But the
Earl of Surry Marching against the Scots with 26000 Fighting Men, Anno 1513 the
fatal Battle of Floden Field was Fought, September 9, in which the Victory fell
to the English; the Scots King, 2 Bishops, 12 Earls, 14 Lords, and 12000 others
of lesser note, being slain. For this good Service the Earl of Surry was
Created Duke of Norfolk, Charles Brandon Viscount Lysle, Duke of Suffolk, and
Woolsey was made Bishop of Lincoln, and after some Bickerings with the French
on the Coast of Normandy, King Lewis, stricken much in Years, sued for Peace;
and the better to confirm it, Married the Lady Mary, Second Sister to King
Henry, a Young and very Beautiful Lady, at whose Wedding and Coronation many
brave feats of Chivalry were performed by the English Nobility and Gentry, who
waited on her: But Lewis the 12th Dying three Months after this Marriage, she
returned again for England, and with the King's private consent was Married to
Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, who had a long time been her Lover.

Woolsey, who was a Butchers Son at Ipswich, now began to rise a pace; for
Doctor Bambridge dying, he was made Archbishop, (and after, by the Pope,
Cardinal) of York, which puffed him up with so much Pride, that he undertook to
Rule the King and Kingdom, doing for a time, without control, what he listed,
placing and displacing Officers, and meddling in all Affairs where there was
Advantage or Homage to be gained: Especially when made Lord Chancelour, and
Counselor of State; demanding Accounts of the Treasurers, Captains, and other
Officers that had been in the Wars; by which he got much Money out of some that
were Rich; and those that could not furnish him, he Punished and Imprisoned;
Erecting Courts of his own head, and by subtilty got himself to be made the
Popes Legate; and to Build two Colleges, by the Popes permission, suppressed
and seized on the Lands and Effects of many Religious Houses, which gave an
inlet to King Henry's suppressing the rest some time after; who concluded if it
were not Sacrilege in the Pope, but he could allow of it at pleasure, it would
be none in him. However, this Cardinal was sent on several Honorable
Embassies, wherein he behaved himself so Proudly, Naming the King but in the
Second place, as Ego et Rex meus, I and my King; That Foreigners admired how
such Arrogance could be suffered by any Prince in his Subject; but his Fall was
swifter than his Rise; so that what he chiefly aimed at, ( viz. to be Elected
Pope, in making Interest for which promotion at Rome, and in other Courts, it
had cost England vast sums of Money) he never attained to.

For King Henry growing into a dislike of the Marriage between him and the Lady
Catharine, of Spain, because she had been his Brother Arthur's Wife, though
indeed (as it after appeared) rather by a Divorce to make way for a fresh
Beauty, the Cardinals delays and crossing the Kings haste in this purpose, made
him fall into disgrace, which brought him to his End; as will by and by be
manifested.

The King by Riotous Living at home, and Expenses in Foreign Courts, where
Ambassadors (especially Woolsey) were attended with such State that they rather
seemed the King himself, than his Representatives; had now pretty well emptied
his Coffers, which put him into some discontent: But Woolsey, both to Enrich
the King and himself, laid hold of his Melancholy and Wants, as a favorable
opportunity, of his own Authotity granted out Commissions under the Great Seal
for Levying a Tax all over England and Wales, according to the true value of
every Man's Estate, viz. Of every Fifty Pound value, and upwards, Four Shillings
in the Pound; and for every Pound above Twenty, and under Fifty, two Shillings;
and all under Twenty, Twelve Pence in the Pound; and in London he appointed
himself chief Commissioner: And by another Commission the Clergy, without
exception, were Taxed Four Shillings in the Pound for their Livings.

This seemed so grievous to all sorts of People, so great a Tax never having
been laid on them before, and this done without Authority of Parliament, that
the Meaner sort grievously Cursed the Author and Contriver of their Miseries;
and those more discreet, labored for these Reasons to have the Commission
Revoked.

1. Because the Commissions were not established or grounded on the Laws of the
Kingdom.

2. Because the Execution of them would be a dangerous President against the
Liberty and Freedom of the People of England in time to come,

3. Because Men's Credits many times exceeded their Estates, and to bring them
upon Oath, or other ways to discover that, it would prove their Ruin.

And Lastly, That not one in ten had the value demanded in Plate or Ready
Money; and if they parted with so much, Trade must cease for want of Coin to
Trade with.

But these and many more Reasons prevailed not, till the King perceived the
Peoples discontents every where so great, that he feared a general
Insurrection; and then he sent his Letters to countermand the Commission,
dissembling that he knew any thing of those Commissions that had been given out
to Levy the Tax; and the Cardinal seeing his Project frustrated, and fawningly
to excuse himself to the People, he certified in all Counties by his Letters,
viz. That because he saw those Taxes were too grievous for them to bear, he had
in compassion to them, kneeled to the King, and prevailed with him to Revoke
the Commissions: Yet few believed him, for the greater part were satisfied that
it was done against his mind, and that he inwardly fretted at the
disappointment, it being the first rub that had checked his Arbitrary Will.
When to spend his Gaul on some body, and ease his Anger, he after he had given
the King Hampton Court, and all his fine Buildings there, in exchange for his
Palace of Richmond, prevailed to have the ordering the King's Household; which
was no sooner granted, but he turned out all worthy deserving Persons, and Sold
their Places and Offices to such as would be more obedient to him.

About this time the French King requested the Lady Mary, King Henry's
Daughter, to be given in Marriage to the Dauphin his Son; but whilst this Match
was solicited, and by some liked, and by others disapproved, a Scruple was cast
in the way (as most thought upon the secret intimation of Woolsey, in despite
to the Emperor, because by Strength he had not made him Pope, when by his
Money and Policy he had failed to obtain it) by the President of Paris, who
Questioned Whether the Lady was Legitimate, as Born in Lawful Matrimony, seeing
she was Begotten on the Body of the Lady Catharine, who had been his Brother
Arthur 's Wife. This made the Lawfulness of the King's Marriage be called in
Questian, and himself so averse to it, that (by the Counsel of Doctor Longland
his Confessor, who told him he had Lived Incestuously almost twenty Years) he
forsook the Queen's Bed, to her great grief and discontent: And however, though
upon this pretense the Match was broken off, yet Woolsey was sent over, who
concluded a Peace with the French King.

The Legality of the King's Marriage, after this, coming hotly to be Disputed,
to determine which, the Pope sent Campeius with a power Legantine, which he
also granted to Woolsey; and so the two Legates reparing to the Queen, to
Inform her of their Power and Authority, which she took very uneasy, sharply
telling Woolsey, He was the first causer of this scruple, to be Revenged on her
Nephew, because he had not made him Pope; and on her, because she had secretly
in a loving and gentle manner, often times Admonished him of his Coveteousness
and Tyrany, his Extortions and Oppressions, his Pride and Lechery. But with
protestations he labored to excuse it, as if he had been altogether Ignorant
of the matter, and proceeded to erect a stately Court for himself and his
Brother Cardinal, in the Black Friars in London, where the King and Queen were
Cited and Appeared: The King protested, That nothing but his trouble of
Conscience could make him part with so Tender and Loving a Wife; and if with
the removal of that scruple he could Cohabit with her, he should be exceeding
Joyful. But those that knew what little Scruples this King made in other
weighty matters, did not lean greatly on the truth of what he said; however the
Queen, advised by her Council, appealed to the Court of Rome. But her Appeal
was not allowed; and though the King desired a quick dispatch, the business was
delayed: Yet they proceeded to sit Weekly, and hear Learned Disputes on the
matter.

At length the King being informed, That after the Last day of July the Legates
would sit no more till the Fourth of October; in a great passion he sent the
Dukes of Norfolk, Suffolk, and other Lords, to demand a dispatch to the
Judicial Sentence, one way or the other. Campeius Answered, It could not be
done so soon, for by the Yearly Custom of the Court of Rome, they were bound to
Adjourn; and if any Sentence in the interim was given, it was utterly void in
Law. At this the Duke of Suffolk, in a Rage struck his Fist on the Table,
saying, That never Cardinal nor Legate did any good in England; and whilst the
King was expecting a final Determination, Campeius seeing a Storm likely to
arise, thought fit to be packing for Rome, pretending the Pope had sent for
him: Upon notice of this, the King was much perplexed, as knowing they designed
to fix it in the Court of Rome, to tire him out with vast Expenses and Delays;
so that from that time Cardinal Woolsey began to fall from his favor: For
having secretly promised a Divorce, yet fearing to displease the Court of Rome,
he had now refused it. And the next Term the King caused his Attorney General
to prefer an Indictment against him, on the Statute of Praemunire, on several
Articles, which being found by the Grand Jury, he Confessed all the material
points by his Attorney: And all his Promotions, except the Archbishopric of
York and the Bishopric of Winchester, were taken from him; and Sir Thomas Moor
was made Lord Chancellor. The King likewise seized his Mass of Plate, and Rich
Furniture, and confined him to his House at Asher near Kingstone.

A Parliament being Assembled, the Commons made great complaints against the
Clergy, exhibiting diverse Articles relating to their Pride, Luxurious way of
Living, Trading as Husbandmen, and Merchants, to the Injury of those brought up
to it, etc.

This was strongly opposed by Dr. Fisher Bishop of Rochester, who Reflecting on
the Commons (by saying, Now with our Commons is nothing but Down with the
Church; and all this is for lack of Faith only) they complained of it to the
King, by Sir Thomas Audley their Speaker, and others; but the Bishop excusing
himself by putting another Interpretation on the meaning of his Words, they
were contented with the King's sharply reprehending him; and then they
proceeded to Article against Woolsey under several Heads, Charging him with
Misleading and Abusing the King, wasting and purloining the Treasure; That in
his Letters he had Written I and my King, as if the King had been his
Inferior, and at his Command. To be brief, they loaded him with Pride,
Cruelty, Oppression, Lechery, Evil Counsel, etc. However the King, by reason of
his former Favor, permitted him to retire to the Archbishopric of York, and
there continue privately till further orders. But he tampering with the Pope,
and being encouraged by his Letters to oppose the King, and force him if he
would not otherways comply, to restore him to Favor, or else by virtue of a
Bull to Curse him, and take the power of the Clergy Government into his own
hands, as the Popes Vice Roy; whilst he was in his way to York, and preparing
for his Installment, he was Arrested by the Earl of Northumberland: whereupon
he showed the Meanness of his Spirit and Birth, as all Cruel, Proud Upstarts
usually do, when they fall into any affliction, though in their prosperity they
are regardless of others Calamities, but rather labor to promote than decrease
them: For however upon his first being seized, thinking to terrify the Earl,
who never bore any good will toward him, he told him He was a Member of the
College of Cardinals at Rome, and that neither the King, nor any other
Temporal Prince, could or ought to Intermeddle with him for any Cause or Matter
whatsoever. But this nothing availing, he fell into Tremblings and Frights, and
when the Kings Letter was produced to give him some beams of Comfort, that he
might not altogether despair of Mercy and Favor, with a sordid Meanness of
Spirit, he fell on his knees in a dirty place, and kissed it, shedding Tears
for Joy; when in the height of his State and Pride, he had accounted the King
as his Pupil, more than his Sovereign: For indeed his first Station in the
World was an ordinary Pedagogue, or Schoolmaster. But at the sight of Sir
William Kingstone, Constable of the Tower, with a Guard of Yeomen, to convey
him Prisoner thither, his fears so increased, that he fell Sick at Leicester
Abbey, and taking a strong Confection, which some suppose he did purposely to
Poison himself, he breathed his last; saying a little before he Dyed, If he had
Served his God so faithfully as he had done his King, he would not at that time
have cast him off. And thus fell that Pageant of sudden Greatness, unpitied by
all, Enriching some by his Death, though in his Lifetime he had Ruined many
more. He Built White Hall, a stately College at Oxford, another at Ipswich,
and many other stately Buildings; leaving much Money, Plate, and Rich
Furniture, which was seized to the Kings use, who distributed part of it, and
his Lands, among such as had well deserved.

The King by this time having gotten it under the Seals of most of the
Universities in Christendom, That his Marriage was Unlawful, procured a Divorce
without the Popes Dispensation; and soon after he Married Anna Bullen, whom he
had Created Marchioness of Pembrook, a Protestant Lady, Daughter to the Lord
Rochford, afterward Earl of Wiltshire.

Elizabeth Barton, styled the Holy Maid of Kent, for Prophesying That if King
Henry proceeded to the Divorce, and Married another, he should not be King of
England one Month after, was Hanged, together with Seven of her Desciples, at
Tyburn for Treason.

A Parliament being called, the Clergy therein totally submitted themselves to
the King touching their Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Affairs, and the Pope was
by Parliament utterly deprived of all Annates and First Fruits of Bishoprics,
and other Spiritual Promotions: The Marriage with Queen Catharine was Annulled,
and that with Queen Anna Confirmed; and by the same Act the Crown was entailed
to the King and the Heirs of his Body (out of which the Lady Mary was Excluded)
and to this all the Lords and Burgess present in Parliament were Sworn, except
Doctor Fisher Bishop of Rochester and Sir Thomas Moor, who refused to do it:
Wherefore they were marked out by the King for Destruction as a Terror to
others; for not only Refusing to Swear, but Contesting and Protesting against
the proceedings of the Parliament, they were sent to the Tower, where upon
denying the Kings Supremacy, Ordained by another Act, and atributing it to the
Pope, they were Accused, Tried, Convicted, and Beheaded: And by this Act the
King was Acknowledged to be Supreme Head of the Church in all Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical Things and Causes, and the Popes Bulls, Pardons, Indulgences,
and other Instruments of the like Nature, made void: For Grief of which, and
her own hard Usage, Queen Catharine who was styled Dowager, and Lived with a
small Attendance, Sickened and Dyed; nor did her Successor long survive her.

For some time after Queen Ann had been safely delivered of the Princess
Elizabeth, (who was afterward Queen of England) a Conspiracy was laid to take
away her Life, supposedly on the account of her Religion; for some of the
Romish party were not without supposition she swayed much in those Alterations;
and therefore being Accused of Incest by some of her Subborned
Bedchamber-Women, as if she had Layn with the Lord Rochford, her own Brother;
the furious King gave her up to be Tried by her Enemies; who found her Guilty
of High Treason, for that being a Queen, she had defiled her Marriage Bed; and
being Condemned, she was Beheaded on Tower Hill, protesting her Innocence to
the last, which most people believed. The Lord Rochford was likewise Executed,
and some of her Bedchamber Attendants; but the Kings hasty Marriage, makes
Historians apt to conclude he grew weary of her, and doated on a fresh Beauty;
for within Twenty Days he Wedded the Lady Jane Seymor, a Beautiful Young
Gentlewoman, who Dyed in Childbed of Prince Edward, afterward King Edward the
Sixth; and about this time the Lord Howard lost his Head for Marrying Margaret,
Daughter to Margaret Sister to the King, and Archibald Douglas Earl of Angus,
who Married the Queen Dowager of Scotland; and their Issue being so of the
Royal Blood, it was held Treason in the Lord Howard, for Marrying her without
King Henry's consent, to whom he was a Subject; and indeed, so Absolute was
this King over his Judges and Ministers of State, that they rarely denied him
any Head he required, for fear he should Quarrel with them for theirs. And now a
Book of Six Articles, called the Bloody Articles, from the much Blood shed on
that occasion, being made public, the People rose in Arms Tumultuously; but
upon the King's and his Generals Approach in Lincolnshire, and the North, they
were Dispersed, and many of the Ringleaders Taken, and Executed. The Articles
were these:

1. That after the speaking the Words of Consecration by the Priest, The Real
Natural Body and Blood of Christ, as he was Conceived and Crucified, was in the
Sacrament, and no other Substance.

2. That the Communion in both kinds, is not necessary to Salvation.

3. That Priests may not Marry.

4. That Vows of Chastity ought to be observed by the Laws of God.

5. That private Mass ought to be continued. And

6. That Auricular Confession is Expedient to be retained in the Church.

And upon the denial of these, many good Christians suffered the Flames; and
several Papests were Executed for denying the King's Supremacy, it being made
Treason.

The Lord Cromwell, a Blacksmiths Son of Putney in Surry, who had a long time
Served Wolsey and by the King raised upon the fall of that Favorite, was made
Vicar General of Ecclesastical Affairs, and soon after created Earl of Essex;
and to please the King by Enriching him, for complaining of the Lewd Lives of
the Monks, Friars, Nuns, and their Superiors, who Lived in Luxury and Ease, on
the spoil and labor of others, he was soon incited to harken to his Advice; so
that laying before him the great Sums that would accrue to his Treasury by the
suppression of those Houses, he considering what Wolsey had done by the Popes
Approbation and Authority, resolved to make havoc of the rest; and accordingly
calling a Parliament at Westminster, he procured them to be suppressed; and
though most of the Religious Houses were Demolished, yet at a Rate no doubt half
the value, the Account given in to the King was 183707 l. 13 s. per Annum. And
intending Posterity should not be enabled to Restore them again to their former
Uses, he liberally exchanged the Abby-Lands, etc. with the Gentry, for Lands of
a less value; so that at this day most of the principal Estate, or great part
of them, consist of possessions of that nature.

This was followed with a very bloody Execution, for the King being Jealous
that many dealt with Cardinal Pool, who was beyond Seas, to prevail with the
Pope and King of France, by Force to restore the Rights of the Roman Catholic
Church, it was improved so far by such Evidence as were produced, that the
Marquess of Exceter, Henry Pool, Lord Montacute, and Sir Nicholas Carry, Knight
of the Garter, and Master of the King's Horse, were Beheaded; and on the same
account, within a few Months after, the Lady Margaret Countess of Salisbury,
Mother to Cardinal Pool, and Daughter to the Duke of Clarence, Brother to
Edward the Fourth; also Gartrude Widow to the Marquess of Exceter, Sir Adrian
Fortescue, and diverse others, were Executed, insomuch that the Hangman of those
times is said to have complained, That he was weary of shedding Blood.

Soon after this, the Irish Rebelled under O Ne^i, O Donel, and others, but
were soon suppressed by the Lord Gray Deputy of Ireland. And now the Lord
Cromwell, being high in favor with the King, Enterprized a business that not
only tumbled him from the ticklish Pinnacle of Honor where he stood, but also
cost him his Life. The King by the Death of the Lady Jane Seymour was a
Widower; and that he might not lie pensive alone, Cromwell undertook to provide
him a Wife, and proposed the Lady Ann of Cleve, Alluring him with flattering
Pictures, and unmerited immoderate Commendations of her Beauty and Parts; but
indeed, though she was very Religious, and replenished with many Virtues, in
Person and Countenance she was neither well Composed, Fair, nor Lovely; yet on
Cromwell's Commendations, the Match was concluded; and the Lady brought over in
great State: But when the King met her on Black Heath, at the first sight he
took a dislike; insomuch that although he was Married to her four Years, he in
all that time had not (as he protested) any Carnal knowledge of her, nor ever
could have any desires that way when in private with her; whereupon in a
Convocation of the Clergy, by an Authentic Instrument under the Seals of the
two Archbishops, the Marriage was declared void, and that the Lady might take
another Husband when she pleased; and it was made Treason for any to Write or
Say the contrary; and the King being in haste, Married the Lady Catharine
Howard, Daughter to the Lord Edmund Howard, Brother to the Duke of Norfolk.

The Wedding was no sooner over, but the King gave way to the Enemies of the
Lord Cromwell, who Exhibited a Bill against him in Parliament for Treason,
Misprison of Treason, and Heresy; and so far they prevailed, by the King's
altogether withdrawing his Favor and Protection from him, that he with the
Lord Hungerford lost his Head on Tower Hill. And soon after the new Queen
Catharine was Accused for having been Familliar before her Marriage with one
Francis Dorham, and after with one Thomas Culpeper; but whether it be True or
False, the two Gentlemen lost their Lives, as did the Queen and Lady Rochford,
who was accused of Introducing Culpeper, at a time he stayed five Hours
privately with the Queen, on her Progress, and returned Gifted with a Chain and
Rich Cap. And in this Parliament the King was Proclaimed King of Ireland, which
Title his Predecessors never had, being only styled Lords of Ireland.

The King, unwilling yet to Lie alone, took to Wife the Lady Catharine Par,
Widow to the Lord Lattimer; who in the end of his Reign was in a fair
possibility to have lost her Head, if her Virtue, Modesty, and the King's
Death, had not reserved her to a better Fortune. However, the Lord Gray, Deputy
of Ireland, lost his Head, for winking (as it was alleged against him) at the
Irish entering within the English Pale, and not timely Repelling them.

Sir Edmund Knevet of Norfolk, having been Arraigned before the Green Cloth,
for Striking one Mr. Clear of Norfolk within the Tennis Court of the King's
House, and being found Guilty, he had Judgment to lose his Right Hand, and to
forfeit all his Lands and Goods, and all things being prepared for the
Execution of this Sentence, and Sir Edmund brought in, the Chief Justice
declared his Offense, which he Confessed, and humbly submitted himself to the
King's Mercy, only he desired the King would spare his Right Hand, and take his
Left; For, said he, if my Right Hand be spared, I may Live to do the King good
Services* Of which Submission and Saying when the King was informed, he ordered
he should lose neither of his Hands, and Pardoned him also as to his Lands and
Goods.

The Scots had lain still a long while; but now began under James the Fifth,
their Young King, to make great Disturbances; but after some Bickerings, and
much Spoil in either Country, they were Overthrown; and the Earls of Cassels
and Glencarn, the Lords Maxwell, Fleming, Sommervel, Oliphant, Gray and Car,
were made Prisoners, and many Slain. The News of this Overthrow so perplexed
King James, That falling into a deep Grief and Melancholy, he Dyed a week
after, leaving only a Daughter to Succeed him, who was then but newly Born, and
Christened Mary. Upon notice of whose Birth, when he lay Sick, he burst out in
this Prophetical Saying, It came with a Lass, (meaning the Crown) and it will
go with a Lass.

Soon after the King of Scots Death, the Lords that were Prisoners in England,
to curry favor, for their Liberty, proposed a Match between Prince Edward,
Henry's Son, and their Young Queen; which was kindly accepted. The Match being
proposed to the Parliament of Scotland, they seemed highly to approve it,
ratifying a Writing under the Hands and Seals of the Nobility, as also with
their Oaths, yet the French Faction so prevailed, that it came to nothing. But
King Henry enraged to be thus abused, sent a powerful Army into Scotland, which
spoiled the Country, taking several Towns and great Plunder; nor was the King
flow to pass over to France, where laying Siege to Bullen, he had it yielded to
him, and having Fortified it, returned into England to raise Money for a Supply
of the War which (though the Emperor without his consent had made a Peace with
France) he resolved vigorously to prosecute; and because Richard Read, an
Alderman, refused Sir Thomas Wryothsltey the Chancellor, the Supply he demanded
of him, he was compelled in Person to Serve the King in his Wars against the
Scots, by whom he was taken Prisoner, and paid a large Ransom. And soon after
the French were worsted by Sea, and Land, and the Scots Routed, who Invaded
England, and followed into their Country: Whereupon Peace ensued between
England and France. Soon after the King cavelling with the Duke of Norfolk and
his Son the Earl of Surry, for bearing in their Escutchion certain Arms
appropriated to the King and Prince only, though they had been born by his
Ancestors time out of mind unquestioned; being Indicted for High Treason, they
were both Condemned: The Son was Beheaded, and the Father escaped by the King's
Death, which soon ensued, viz. on Tuesday the 28th of January Anno Dom. 1546,
in the 56th Year of his Age, when he had Reigned 37 Years, 9 Months, and 6
Days. He was Buried with much pomp and Funeral solemnity in the Chapel at
Windsor.

In this King's time happened a great Famine, viz. 1527, upon the falling of a
violent Rain, November, December and January; and from the 12th of April every
day till the 3d of June.

Anno 1545, William Foxley Potmaker to the Mint, Slept in the Tower of London,
not being by any mean^ to be Waked, 14 Days and 15 Nights; and when he waked it
seemed to him but as one Night.

The Number of Religious Houses Suppressed were Monasteries 313, Priories 290,
Friaries 122, Nunneries 142, Colleges 152, Hospitals 129, and their
Inhabitants turned out to wander in the Fields, after long Ease and Luxury.

Remarks on Yorkshire in its three Ridings.
THis is the largest Shire in England, and not inferior to some of the biggest
Provinces in France. It is divided into three Parts or Ridings, viz. The North,
East, and West Ridings. It produces store of Horses, large Cattle, Sheep, and
in many places very good Corn and Pastures, great quantities of Woollen Cloth;
and very Subtle People. It is Bounded with the Bishopric of Du^ham, the German
Ocian, Lincolnshire, Derbyshire, Lancashire, and Westmoreland: It contains 26
Hundreds, 563 Parishes, 57 Marker Towns, 36 Rivers of which the Humber is the
chief, 1 City, which is an Archiepiscopal See, viz. York, 14 Castles, 62
Bridges, 4 Chases, ^ Forests, and 72 Parks. It sends Members to Parliament 30,
viz. Alborough 2, Beverly 2, Borrough-Bridge 2, Hildon 2, Hull 2, Knarseborough
2, Malton 2, North-Alerton 2, Pomfret 2, Richmond 2, Rippon 2, Scarborough 2,
Thrisk 2, York City 2, and 2 Knights of the Shire.

York is the Second City of England: Severus the Roman Emperor kept his Court
and Dyed in it; also Constantius Chlorus, Father to Constantine the Great,,
here the Learned Alcum, Tutor to the Emperor Charles the Great was Born; it
was made an Archiepiscopal See Anno 625, and is situate on the River Ouse,
which Waters a great part of the Shire. At Leeds, Oswey King of Northumberland
Overthrew Oswald, Ethelbert, and Penda, three Saxan Princes, slaying the two
latter; Selby gave Birth to King Henry the First; Wakefield is famed for its
Cloth Work, and the memorable Battle sought between the Houses of York and
Lancaster; and that in the Late Civil Wars between the Earl of Newcastle and
Sir Thomas Fairfax. Pomfret Castle was Builded by Hildebert Lacy a Norman; at
Rotheram was Born Thomas of Rotheram Archbishop of York. Stanford Bridge, in
the East Riding, from a Battle fought against the Danes, is called Battle
Bridge. Dryfield is noted for the Tomb of Alfrid, King of Northumberland.
Beverly as the Birthplace of John D' Beverly, Archbishop YORK SHIRE By I:
Seller
map of Yorkshire Bishop of York, Anno 721 Newborough Abbey is famed for the
Name it gives to our old English Historian William of Newborough; Kingston upon
Hull, was Founded by King Edward the First.

This Shire affoards store of Iron, Pit-Coal, and Sea-Coal; at Whitby are
Stones of a Serpentine figure; near Borough Bridge are 4 Piramidal Stones,
supposed some Roman Monument; on Rosemary Topping are Stones found like Sea
Wincles and Cockles; at Giglesworth are 3 Springs, one of which constantly Ebbs
and Flows four times an Hour; in the North are Ting-tong Wells, said to be
three Miles in the Earth; and near Knarsborough the Well Dripa, whose Water
distills from a Rock that hangs over it. The Castles of note are those of
Sheffield, Coningsborough, Tickil, Sandal, Harwood, Knasborough, Cawood,
Scarborough, Kilton, Skeleton, etc. On Wakefield Bridge stands a Chapel Founded
by Edward the Fourth, in memory of the Battle fought there; near
Flamborough-Head are Waters called Vipsies, which flow out of the Springs every
other Year, and fall violently into the Sea.

The Seats of the Nobility are Sheffeild-Mannor, belonging to the Duke of
Norfolk; Bishops-Hill and Hemsey Castle, to the late Duke of Buckingham;
Slingsby Castle, to the Honorable Family of New Castle; Snap, to the Earl of
Exceter; Markin-field, to the Earl of Bridgwater; Mulgrave Castle, to the Earl
of Mulgrave; Shipton Castle, to the Earl of Thanet; Nawort Castle, to the Earl
of Carlisle; Wharlton Castle and Javoux Abbey, to the Earl of Ailesbury;
Lounsborough, Bolton, and Braden Tower, to the Earl of Burlington; Hall and
Wimbledon, to the Duke of Leeds; Thorn-Hill, to the Earl of Macclesfield;
Hackforth, Anderly Le Miers, to the Earl of Holderness; Newborough Abbey,
Coxwold Hall, Oulston Hall, Aldwark and Murton, to the Lord Faulconberg;
Wressel Castle, to the Duke of Richmond; Easby Hall, to the Lord Eure, Baron of
Witton; Wheldrake, to the Lord Howard of Escrick; Holm in Spadingmore, and
Dalton, to the Lord Lexinton; Wilton Castle, to the Lord Cornwallis;
Bishopsthorp, to the Archbishop of the Province.

The Reign of King EDWARD the Sixth.
EDWARD the Sixth, the only Son of Henry the Eighth, was Crowned at
Westminster, January 28, Anno Dom. 1547, and Edward Seymour, Created Duke of
Somerset, Uncle to the King by the Mothers side, constituted Protector of the
King's Person and of the Realm, during his Minority; and was sent by the
Estates into Scotland, to require their Young Queen in Marriage with Edward, as
had been agreed between them and the King's Father; but they refusing, a Battle
was fought, in which the Scots were Routed, and 14000 of them Slain, among
which were diverse of the Nobility; whereupon a great many Towns and Castles
fell into the hands of the English. This Battle was fought at Musselburg the
10th of September, in which the whole Power of that Kingdom was so broken, that
in many Years they could not recover their former Strength. However the Winter
coming on, the English Army retired into the Northern Borders.

The next thing taken in hand was to reform Religion; and after some contests,
King Henry's disannuling the Pope's Supremacy, was confirmed, and whatsoever in
his time had been Enacted against the Authority of the Sea of Rome: Images and
Statues were cast out of the Churches; The Clergy allowed to Marry; The
Liturgy, or Common Prayer, turned into English; The Sacrament administered in
both kinds; Auricular Confession abrogated; The Scriptures permitted publicly
to be Read in English; Mass and Praying for the Dead silenced; and such of the
Popish Clergy as would not Conform to this, outed; as Gardner Bishop of
Winchester, Bonner of London, Tanstall of Durham, Day of Chichester, and some
others; Gardener for contempt was Imprisoned; and most of the Bishoprics
seized into the King's hands, and bestowed on such as would Conform, though the
Nobles much fleeced the Churches Patrimony to enrich themselves.

The Scots by this time having taken breath, surprised Humes and Fas-Castle,
Garisoned by the English, and slew most they found therein, through the
carelessness of the Sentinels; which made the Earl of Rutland demolish
Haddington, as a place not tenable, and so retired with the Garrison into
England. And a contention arising between the Duke of Somerset Protector, and
Sir Thomas Seymour his Younger Brother, who was Lord Admiral, upon a Quarrel
happening between their Wives, the latter having Married Queen Catharine Par,
Widow to Henry the Eighth, it went so far, that the Admiral was Accused in
Parliament of High Treason, in Conspiring to get the King into his hands, and
by Marrying the Lady Elizabeth, to whom indeed he formerly made Courtship, in
her Right, when the King should be made away, to Claim the Kingdom; and so
unheard, being Attainted, he was Executed on a Scaffold at Tower Hill,
protesting to the last his Innocence touching the matter laid to his charge;
and his Brother was by most blamed, for permitting him so easily to be cut off,
and found, in the end, that it was chiefly contrived by his secret Enemies, to
lay him the opener to Destruction, which he Escaped not.

In these times of Reformation, Bucer, Phagus, and Peter Martyr, three Learned
German Divines, came over, but the two former soon Dying, Martyr Disputed at
Oxford about the Sacraments, and other material Points; and caused a Book of
the Disputation to be Printed, which opened the Eyes of many to see God's
Truth, that by Popish Superstition, Error and Ignorance, had a long time been
darkened. However the Popish Clergy stirred up diverse to Rebel in Devonshire,
Cornwall, and other parts of the Kingdom; and especially to the City of Exceter,
which City for its Loyalty and stout Resistance, had not long after the Manner
of Exilond bestowed upon it by the King, and in memory of their deliverance
from a Sack that time, the Citizens keep the 6th of August, on which the Rebels
were Beaten off, yearly Holyday; and indeed they were so obstinate, that till
they had been four times worsted by the Lord Russel, they gave not over, though
the King offered them pardon; however many of the Ringleaders being Taken, were
Executed; and among others the Mayor of Bodmin was Hanged; also a Millers Man,
who took upon him his Masters Name and Cause, till seeing he was about to
Suffer, he recanted and cried out, He was not the Miller but his Man, and that
his Master Ordered him to do what he had done. To which Sir Anthony Kingston,
Marshal of the Field, told him, He could never do his Master better Service
than to Hang for him; and so not being credited, he was turned off.

Long these Western Troubles had not been alayed, but others broke out as
dangerous in the north, under pretense of throwing down Enclosures and Parks,
that had been taken from the Waste, which the Common sort of people claimed as
their Right. This was chiefly Headed by Robert Ket, who took the City of
Norwich. But the Lord Dudley put them to the Rout, caused Ket to be Hanged in
Chains on the top of the Castle, and 60 others in diverse places, 9 of them in
the Oak of Reformation, a Tree in which Ket used to sit to Judge and Determine
of their intended purposes and proceeding, as also to order Parties out to
Plunder the Houses of such as he judged not well affected to their Cause. In
Yorkshire others Rose under the Leading of William Omble, a Yeoman, Thomas
Dale, a Parish-Clerk, and one Stephens a Postmaster; but the King sending down
his Pardon, the common sort left their Leaders to be Lead to York, where they
were Executed.

The French taking the Advantage of these Tumults, Besieged Bullen, and sent a
Fleet to pillage the Islands of Jersey and Guernsey; from the Islands they were
beaten with the loss of 1000 Men, and few on our side; but on the Main Land
having won the outworks of Bullen, whilst they pretended to Parley with the
English, they forcibly entered the Town, and after that, soon reduced all the
Forts and Castles near it, except Guisness, which held out till the Winter made
them raise the Siege.

You have heard how the Lord Admiral was removed out of the way, and now the
Duke of Somerset his Brother is to go next: For his greatest Enemy, Budley Earl
of Warwick, delayed not to make a strong Party against him; upon secret notice
of which, he being with the King at Hampton Court, sent dispatches to the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen of London, immediately to send him 1000 Armed Men to defend
the King's Person, and himself, against the Treachery and Violence that
threatened them; and that Night removed with the King to Windsor Castle; upon
this, the Earl of Warwick Assembled the Privy Counselors, and other Nobles,
at London, making grievous complaints against the Duke, and amongst others,
That he had laid wait for his Head; and so Inveagled them, that they joined
with him to send their Letters to the Citizens to Levy Forces for their use, in
order to Rescue the King out of the hands of his Enemies; and as the chief of
them, they named the Protector; sending abroad Proclamations wherein they laid
many grievous Crimes to his charge, as his Male Administration of Government,
and the great Mischiefs that had thereby befallen the Kingdom; his converting
the Public Treasure to his Private Use, his endeavoring to set the Peers at
Variance, etc.

The Duke upon this, finding ^he Londoners denied him Aid, but on the contrary
had assisted his Adversary Warwick with 400 Armed Men, who had drawn most of
the Peers to his side, and that contrary to his expectation, he was left in a
manner alone; he now too late saw his Brothers Fall was contrived to usher in
his: However putting the best construction on the matter, he sent a Messenger
to them, desiring they would forbear all rough proceedings, and deal with him
according to Law and Right; which they promising to do, he yielded himself and
the King's Person into their hands; and was committed to the Tower, together
with Sir Thomas Stanhop, Sir Thomas Smith, and others, his Favorites; but
having been a Prisoner 3 Months, and nothing made out against him, upon
acknowledging himself worthy of the punishment he suffered, and begging the
King's Pardon, he was set at Liberty, but deposed from his Protectorship; and
by the more Peaceable Nobility, the Earl of Warwick and he were made Friends;
and to bind it the firmer, the Earls Eldest Son was Married to the Dukes
Daughter; and new Honors bestowed on persons that had well deserved, viz, John
Lord Russet, was created Earl of Bedford; William Lord St. John, Earl of
Wiltshire, Sir William Paget Lord Paget; and soon after the King called a
Parliament at Westminster, wherein was Enacted a Statute for the punishment of
Rebels and Riotous Assemblies; upon which ensuing Statute, the Duke was about
two Years after Condemned. The Parliament being ended, the Earl of Bedford and
Lord Paget were sent Ambassadors with other Assistants, to France, and the
Emperor; by whose means a Peace was concluded upon diverse Articles
advantageous to the English, and the Queen of Scots was included in it; and it
was Proclaimed with great Joy in the City of London. Now all the high Altars
being taken down in the Churches, Tables were placed in their stead, for
receiving the Communion; and Sir Andrew Jude Builded the Free School at
Tunbridge, and six Almshouses in St. Hellins within Bishopsgate: And the Book
of Common Prayer, which had in some part been Corrected and Amended, was
appointed by Parliament to be Read in all Churches and Chapels.

In April Anno 1551. An unaccountable Sweating Sickness happened, and held
till October; of which vast numbers of people dyed: Most that were taken with
it dying in 24 Hours, or sooner; it seizing mostly on lusty young Men, and very
little on Women, Children, or aged people; and of it dyed Henry Duke of
Suffolk, and his brother, Sons to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk; both of the
Royal Blood by the Mothers side, viz Mary younger Sister to Henry the 8th: So
that the Dukdome fell to Henry Gray Marquess of Dorset, who had married the
Lady Frances, Eldest Daughter to Brandon, and Mary his Wife.

And now the Duke of Northumberland growing powerful, and laboring to get the
King at his disposal, to bring his purposes about, found he could not do it
unless the Duke of Somerset were Removed: And the feud growing hot between
them, the Duke of Somerset (by the persuasion of some private Enemies, Employed
by his Adversary) went Armed to the Council under his Surcoat; where the Duke
of Northumberland feignedly pretending to Clasp him about, as in Friendship,
discovered his Coat of Male, and found Weapons about him. Whereupon
Northumberland laying hold on the opportunity, Charged him with an Intention to
have Murdered some of the Kings Privy Counselors, and afterward produced
Witnesses to aver, he had before come with Armed Men to attempt his Life, but
that his Courage failed him; and one of his followers, when he returned,
demanding if he had done it, and he saying No, replied, then you are undone:
Upon this, with diverse of his Favorites, he was sent to the Tower; and process
being drawn up against him, he was Tried by his Peers in Westminster Hall, on
two Articles.

1. For High Treason, viz. That he had not only Imprudently but Treacherously
administered the weighty affairs of Government.

2. For Conspiring the Death of Northumberland, who was a Privy Counselor,
which by the new Law was Felony;

Of the former he Acquitted himself; whereupon the Ax being taken away, such a
shout arose in the Hall among the Common People, that it was heard to Charing
Cross; but on the other Article he was found Guilty and Condemned; but it was a
considerable time before they could constrain the King to Sign the Warrant for
his Execution: which he did, not without Tears; Saying he was the unhappyest
Creature Living: For at his Birth he had been the Death of his Mother: And had
since (tho, against his Inclination) signed the Death of one of her Brothers;
and now they urged him to do the like for the Noble Duke his Uncle; and
therefore concluded, the Lord Judge between me and you, that Constrain me to do
this against my mind. However having got the Warrant signed, they hastened the
Duke's Execution; and diverted the Kings Melancholy (the mean while) with
Balls, Plays, and Music. And so infatuated was this Great Man, that according
to the opinion of diverse, had he thought upon demanding his Clergy, he might
have saved his Life, his Crime by the new Act being only Felony. However he
made a very Pennitent and Christian-like end, much bewailing he had forwarded
his Brothers Destruction, and now saw it brought his own upon himself, by
opening a way to his Enemies. He lost his Head on Tower Hill, and was much
Lamented by all sorts of people, except his enveterate Enemies, who Rejoiced at
his removal to another World; and in his fall many of his Favorites bo^e their
part, by Northumberland's contrivance, viz. Sir Ralph Vane and Sir Thomas
Arundel, Beheaded for Conspiring with Somerset to Kill Northumberland, the
latter of which declared his Blood should be a Bolster for the Duke of
Northumberland as long as he Lived, (intimating thereby he should have a
troubled Conscience) and all of them professed their Innocence to the last, as
to the Crimes they were charged with.

Doctor Ridley, Bishop of London, Preaching before the Young King of the
excellency of Charity and Almsdeeds, he was so affected with his Sermon, that
thinking he directly pointed at him, who was in the highest Station, after the
Sermon was ended, he held a private Conferrence with him how he might
effectually bestow his Charity; who advised him to send for the Mayor and
Aldermen of London, who would give him satisfaction in that matter, as being
most acquainted with the needs of the Poor; which he did; and after consulting
with them, allotted them Christ's Hospital (formerly the Gray Friars of St.
Francis Order) St. Thomas's Hospital, and Bridewel, dividing the Poor into
three Ranks, 1. Poor by Impotency. 2. The Poor by Casualty. 3. The Thriftless
Poor. And soon after this, the King fell Sick of a Languishing Disease, which
began with a Hectic Fever, and by degrees inclined to a Consumption: When
Northumberland who had gotten the power into his hands, was Plotting how (if
the King Dyed) he might get the Crown into his Family, and at last concluded to
lay his Project with the Duke of Suffolk, which was, That his Youngest Son
Dudley Lord Gilford, should Marry the Duke of Suffolk's Eldest Daughter, the
Lady Jane, who was of the Blood Royal; and that they would prevail with the
King to Disinherit his two Sisters, and by his Will appoint her Queen, if the
Duchess of Suffolk would be so contented, whose Right was before her Daughter.
And indeed, this Northumberland prevailed with the Languishing King to do,
under a specious pretense of securing the Reformed Religion; on which, to serve
his ends, he laid a mighty stress, though himself was not much concerned for any,
as will appear in the next Reign.

Upon this account diverse Marriages were contracted, and the Nuptials
celebrated, viz. The Pious and Virtuous Lady Jane, Eldest Daughter to the Duke
of Suffolk, in a fatal hour was Married to the Lord Guilford Dudley, Fourth Son
to the Earl of Northumberland; for all his other Sons were Matched before:
Catharine, another Daughter of the Earl of Suffolk's, was Married to the Earl
of Pembrooks eldest Son; and Mary a third Daughter, some what deformed, to
Caies, the Kings Master Porter; and the Duke of Northumberland gave Catharine,
his youngest Daughter, to the Lord Hastings, Son to the Earl of Huntington.

Whilst these things were doing, the Kings Sickness much increased; for
Northumberland had displaced his Physicians, and put him into the hands of a
Woman to cure, who it is thought hastened him to his Grave; for no sooner had
they procured him by his Will, which was read in the hearing of the Counselors,
Judges, etc. And confirmed by their Assents, to Disinherit Mary and Elizabeth
his Sisters, whose Interest (as Northumberland said) was so closely Joined,
that if the Crown fell to either of them, it must first come to the Lady Mary,
who was a professed Papist, and not by any entreaties to be brought over to the
Reformed Religion, and by his said Will to appoint the Lady Jane his Successor;
but plain Symptoms of Death appeared. And not above Three Hours before he Dyed,
thinking no body had been near he thus Piously Prayed.

Lord God deliver me out of this Miserable and Wretched Life; Take me amongst
thy Chosen; howbeit not my will, but thy will be done. Lord I Commit my Spirit
to Thee; O Lord, thou know how Happy it were for me to be with thee; yet for
thy Chosens sake, if it be thy will, send me Life and Health, that I may truly
Serve thee. O my Lord Bless thy People, and save thine Inheritance: O Lord God,
save thy Chosen People of England: O my Lord God, defend this Realm from
Popery, and maintain thy True Religion; that I and my People may Praise thy
Holy Name. Amen.

About three hours afterward, he said, I faint; Lord, have mercy upon me, and
receive my Spirit; and so yielded up the Ghost. The Conjectures how this
Sickness came upon the King, were various among the People; some that it was
caused by his smelling to an Impoisoned Nosegay, presented him for a
New-Years-Gift; others, That Northumberland's Woman purposely destroyed him;
and such indeed was then that Dukes power, that though the King's Physicians
shook their Heads, as much grieved, yet they durst not utter their Minds. He
was a Prince exceeding Pious, and Learned to a Miracle, considering his Years,
in Latin, Greek, French, Italian, Spanish; Music, Logic, etc. He Dyed the 6th
of July, Anno Dom. 1553, in the 7th Year of his Reign, and the 16th of his Age;
having Reigned 6 Years, 5 Months, and 8 Days; and was Buried without any great
Solemnity at Westminster.

In this Kings Reign one George Paris, a German, was Burnt in Smithfield for
Arianisme, in denying the Divinity of our Savior. Three Whales and diverse
Dolphins were taken in the Thames, and on the Coast. A Woman at Middleton near
Oxford brought forth a Monstrous Child with two Heads, and two Bodies joined
together, of the Female Sex, and all other Members proportionable, the Bodies
being as it were Head and Tail, one Head at one end, and the other at the other;
it Lived 14 Days, and was killed at last by Cold, in being too often exposed
naked, to satisfy Peoples curiosity. A great blow of Gunpowder was given in a
House near the Tower, which killed Fifteen Gunpowder-Makers, shattered diverse
Houses, and wounded many Persons in them.

Remarks on the Principallity of Wales.
THE Principallity of Wales does strictly contain but Twelve Counties, and is
commonly Divided into North Wales and South Wales; North Wales Contains
Flimshire, Merionethshire, Anglesey, Montgomeryshire, Carnarvanshire,
Denbeighshire.
South Wales Contains
Cardiganshire, Glamorganshire, Pembrookshire, Brecknockshire.
Caermarthenshire, Radnorshire.
Of each of which I shall give you a brief Account Alphabetically.

1. ANGLESETY Island, called Mam Cimbiae, or The Mother of Wales, for its
Fertility, Rich Pastures, breeding store of Cattle, etc. It is divided from
Carnarvanshire by the Water or River Mennay, the rest encompassed with the
Irish Sea. It contains 6 Hundreds, 74 Parishes, 2 Market Towns, 4 Rivers, 8
Bridges, and 2 Chases; It sends Members to Parliament 2, viz. Beaumaris 1, and
a Knight of the Shire. This Town was Built by King Edward the First, and stands
advantageous for a Passage to Ireland, Newborough is a place of Antiquity, and
once a Court of the British Princes; The chief Rivers are Llinnon, Guynt,
Keveny, Allow, and Brant:

2. BRECKNOCKSHIRE, though full of Hills, yet is accommodated with very fruitful
Plains, and Watered with pleasant Rivers, producing Cattle, Wild and Tame
Goats, some Venison, store of Fish, and Fowl. It is Bounded with Cardiganshire,
Carmardenshire, Glamorganshire, Monmouthshire, and Radnorshire: It contains 6
Hundreds, and 4 Market Towns. It sends 2 Members to Parliament, viz. Brecknock
1, and 1 Knight of the Shire. At Linsauathan is a Mere that is said to have
swallowed up a City that stood in the THE PRINCIPALITY OF WALES By John Seller.
map of Wales place of it, and through it runs the River Levenney, keeping its
own Stream unmixed; Hay was once a Memorable Place, but Ruined in the Rebellion
of Owen Glendour. Best is renouned for being the Seat of Aurelius Ambrosius.
The Seats of the Nobility are Crickhowel Castle and Tretonor Castle, belonging
to the Duke of Beaufort.

3. CARDIGANSHIRE lies (on its West part) commodious to the Irish Sea, and the
rest Bounded by Caermardenshire, Pembrookshire, Brecknockshire, Radnorshire,
Montgomery and Monmouthshire: It is very Hilly, though well Watered with Rivers,
and has in diverse places large Mears and Pools. It contains 5 Hundreds, 64
Parishes, 4 Market Towns; and has a Bishop belonging to it: Its principal River
is Tivy, which Waters its South Borders, and branches into the County, and in
it are 13 Bridges, and 1 Park. It sends Members to Parliament 2, viz. Cardegan
1, and 1 Knight of the Shire. Cardigan, the Shire Town, was Walled about and
Fortified with a Castle by Gilbert D' Clare, who was Lord of the whole County,
by the Gift of King Henry the First.

4. CARNARVANSHIRE has in it diverse Meers and Pools, some branching Rivers, and
a sprinkling of Hills: It affords some Corn, store of Pasture, and a
considerable quantity of Cattle. It is Bounded on the West by the Irish Sea and
the Isle of Anglesey, and the South has the Sea flowing to it, as likewise the
North; so that what remains to the Land-ward, is Bounded by Denbighshire, and
Merionethshire. It contains 7 Hundreds, 68 Parishes, 6 Market Towns, 17 Rivers,
and 3 Castles. Carnarvan was Built by Edward the First, on the Ruins of the
Ancient Segontium, where was said to be found the Body of Constantius, Father
to Constantine the Great, Anno 1285. And here Edward the Second was Born. It
sends Members to Parliament 2, viz. Carnarvan 1, and 1 Knight of the Shire. The
Seats of the Lord Vaughan, Baron of Emlyn, etc. are Golden Grove and Emlyn. The
Bishop of Bangor's Seat, Bangor Place.

5. CAERMARTHENSHIRE is Watered by the River Towy and others. It abounds in
Hills, though mostly of a moderate height; and in some places is Woody, and a
great many Cattle are bred up in it. It is Bounded with the Sea,
Glamorganshire, Brecknockshire, Cardiganshire, and Pembrookshire. Carmarden is
strongly Walled and Defended by a Castle. Here was Born Merlin, the famous
British Prophet, who foretold in the several Ages Changes of Government. On the
high Hills of this Shire are two Meers, in one of them is bred a Fish that has
but one Eye; and the other has in it a floating Island, in which one no sooner
sets his Foot, but it seems in all appearance to drive further off from Shore.
This Shire co^^ in^ 6 Hundreds, in which are 87 Parishes, 8 Market Town^, 28
Rivers great and small. It sends Members to Parliament 2, viz. Carmarden 1, and
1 Knight of the Shire. The Seat of the Bishop of St. David's, Abergwilly.

6. DENBIGHSHIRE is pretty well stored with Hills, tho it has Valleys that
produce good Pasture, and Corn, and breeds up store of Cattle. It is pleasantly
Watered with the Rivers Cluyd, Alen, and Dee; Bounded by Flintshire, Cheshire,
Shropshire, ^erion^thshire, Carnarvanshire, and the Sea; It contains 12
Hundreds, 57 Parishes, 4 Market Towns, and 24 great and small Rivers, 6
Bridges, 3 Castles, and 6 Parks. It sends Members to Parliament 2, viz. Denbigh
1, and 1 Knight of the Shire. Denbigh, the Shire Town, was Walled about and
Fortified with a Castle by Henry Lacy, Earl of Lincoln, in the Reign of Edward
the First. On the top of high Hills, called Moilealy Hills, are very large
Springs: Luth^^ and Wrexham are places of great Antiquity, and Memorable for
having been the Seats of British Princes.

7. FLINTSHIRE, though small, is yet a pretty pleasant County, Watered by the
flowing of Dee; Cluyan, and other Rivers. It produces Corn, Cattle, Fish, Fowl,
Wool, Butter, Cheese, etc. It is Bounded by Denbighshire, Shropshire,
Cheshire, the River Dee, and the Ocean. It contains 5 Hundreds, 28 Parishes, 3
Market Towns, 4 Castles, 2 Bridges, and 2 Parks. The Castle of Flint, Founded
by Henry the Second, and Finished by Edward the First, gave reception to King
Richard the Second when he came out of Ireland and lost his Crown. This County
is famous for St. Winifrid's Well, called Holy Well, formerly much frequented,
partly by way of Pilgrimage, and partly for the great Virtue its Waters was
reputed to have in the Cure of many Distempers. This Spring is held by some to
have risen upon the falling of the Virgin Winifrid's Blood, when to save her
Chastity she lost her Head, by a Pagan Prince; and that the Stones that look
^ed at the bottom, still bear a tincture of it. Many Miracles have been held to
have been done by this Water; but these I look on as Monkish Fables; yet
certain it is, that out of this Well runs a very pleasant Stream, and that the
Water is Medicinal. This Shire sends Members to Parliament 2, viz. Flint 1, and
1 Knight of the Shire. At Kilben in this Shire is a little Well that keeps a
constant Ebb and Flow like the Ocean. The Seat of the Bishop of the Diocese is
St. Asaph.

MONMOUTH SHIRE by John Seller
map of Monmouthshire

8. GLAMORGANSHI^^ (...) its South and West part open to the Sea, and the rest
(...) with Carmarden, Brecknock, and Monmouthshires. It is mostly accomodated
with hills and Valleys, branched with some pleasant Rivers. Llandaff in this
Shire is a Bishops See; Glamorganshire contains 10 Hundreds, 118 Parishes, 10
Market Towns, 16 Rivers, 5 Castles, 6 Bridges, and 5 Parks. It sends Members to
Parliament 2, viz. Cardiff 1, and 1 Knight of the Shire. The chief Town and
Episcopal See is Llandaff, though Cardiff is famous, as having been the residence
of the renowned Fitz Hamon, who with his Norman Knights, in the Reign of W.
Rufus, beat Rhesus Prince of Wales out of his Country, and kept his Court in
the strong Castle he built, in the Hall whereof are yet to be seen the Ensigns
of him and his Knights; and in this Castle is held the Audit for the Earl of
Pembrook's Estate in Wales. Llandaff contains a Castle and fi^e Cathedral. At
Ab^erbarry is a Cave at the bottom of a Hill, the Mouth whereof is a gaping
Cleft or Chink, into which the Wind entering, makes harmonious Music, like the
sound of Cymballs. And near Barry on the Cliffs is often a sound as if Smiths
were at work. The Seats of the Nobility are Swanzy Castle, belonging to the
Duke of Beaufort; Cardiff Castle, Caerplilly Castle, to the Earl of Pembrook;
Coyty Castle, to the Earl of Leicester; Llandaff Palace, to the Bishop, etc.

9. MERIONETHSHIRE, is partly Watered with the River Dee, which entering the
North-East point, falls into a Lake or Mere, at Bala; as does the River
Trowryn, Riauder proceeds from Dee. There are some very large Hills in this
Shire, yet the Plains afford Wood, Pasture, and a good sprinkling of Corn and
Cattle. It is divided into 6 Hundreds, containing 37 Parishes, 3 Market Towns,
26 Rivers small and great, 2 Castles, 7 Bridges; It is Bounded with Cardigan,
Carnarvan, Denbigh, and Montgomeryshires, and the Irish Sea. It sends to
Parliament only 1 Knight of the Shire. Harlech, the principal Town of this
Shire, is more noted for its stately Castle, than any other Ornament. The Pool
or Lake at Bala is never observed to be filled by Land Floods, though rising
never so high; yet in Tempestuous Weather swells above its Banks.

10. MONMOVTHSHIRE did formerly belong to the Principality of Wales, and is
therefore now brought in amongst them; though in the Reign of King Charles the
Second it was made an English County, the Judges keeping the Assizes there, as
in other English Counties. But being omitted in its proper place, I thought it
better to place it among the Welsh Counties, than to leave it quite out; For
being a pleasant County (...) having the advantage of the River Severn to Water
it, produces much Corn, Cattle, Pastures, Wool, etc. It is Bounded by Severn,
(a River to which Severus the Roman Emperor gave Name, on a memorable Battle
fought on its Banks) Brecknock, Hereford, Glamorgan, and Gloucestershires. It
is divided into 6 Hundreds, containing 127 Parishes, 15 Rivers, 7 Market Towns,
7 Castles, 14 Bridges, and 8 Parks. It sends Members to Parliament 2. viz.
Monmouth 1, and 1 Knight of the Shire. The Town of Monmouth is held to be the
place where King Arthur kept his Court; and that it has been an Accademy of
Philosophy and Arts, The Birthplace of Amphibalus, whose Disciple our Proto
Martyr St. Alban was; and here King Henry the Fifth was Born. Vsk is a place of
Antiquity, and considerable in this Shire. Abergavenny, etc. The Seats of the
Nobility are Troy House, Monmouth Castle, Ragland Castle, Chepstow Castle,
Tintorn Abbey, and Chepstow Grange, belonging to the Duke of Beaufort;
Abergavenny Castle, to the Lord Abergavenny; St. Julian, to the Lord Herbert,
Baron of Cherbury; Matherne Palace, to the Bishop.

11. MONTGOMERYSHIRE receives great advantage from the River Severn, over which
are diverse considerable Bridges, This River in many branches winds very
pleasantly among the Hills, Fertilizing the Valleys and Plains, so that the
Earth produces sufficient Plenty where the barren Hills are not Interposing. It
is Bounded with Cardiganshire, Radnorshire, Shropshire, Denbighshire, and
Merionethshire. It contains 7 Hundereds, in which are 47 Parishes, 6 Market
Towns, 25 Rivers, 3 Castles, 6 Bridges, and 1 Chase. It sends Members to
Parliament 2, viz. Montgomery 1, and 1 Knight of the Shire. Montgomery is
pleasantly Situated, and has a very strong Castle appertaining to it. Dolevere
is founded on large Antiquity, and some others. The Seats of the Nobility are
Powis Castle and Buttingto, belonging to the Marquess of Powis; ^limore Lodge
and Llyslin, to the Lord Herbert, Baron of Cherbury.

12. PEMBROOKSHIRE lies very advantageous to the Sea, St. David's being the
extreme point of Land, from which in the Sea are those dangerous Rocks called
The Bishop and his Clerks. This County is not much Mountanous unless to the
North-East part. It is Bounded by Cardiganshire, Carmardenshire, and the Sea.
Milford Haven opening with a large Stream to its Southward, and the River
Dougledy makes the other branches. It is thereby pretty Fruitful, and much
subject to Seafaring Trade; It contains 7 Hundreds, 145 Parishes, 9 Market
Towns, 6 Rivers, 1 Bishopric, 5 Castles, 7 Bridges, 2 Forests, (...). It
sends Members to Parliament 3, viz. Haverford-W^^^ Pembrook 1, and 1 Knight of
the Shire. And though here Pembrook is accounted the County Town, yet St. David's
is more remarkable, as having been an Archiepiscopal See, translated from Is^a
Legionum, by the great Archbishop Devi, now styled St. David; whose Day is kept
by the Native ^ritains the First of March, in memory of a great Battle he
gained over the Saxons; and the wearing the Leek comes from his ordering the
Soldiers on his part, the better to be distinguished in Battle, every one to
place a Leek in his Cap. The Isle of S^laney in this County is almost all
overgrown with Wild Thime.

13. RADNORSHIRE has many pleasant Valleys in the Mid-land parts, producing
Corn, and breeds plenty of Cattle, unless where the Hills hinder; It is
pleasantly Watered by the River Wye, which winds on the Southern side of it,
and spreads branching into it, receiving other Rivers as Ithon, Weverly, D^las,
etc. It abounds in Fish, and particularly store of Salmon. This Shire is
Bounded by Montgomeryshire, Shropshire, Herefordshire, Breknockshire, and
Cardiganshire. It contains 6 Hundreds, 52 Parishes, 4 Market Towns, 1^ Rivers,
5 Castles, 5 Bridges, and 3 Forests. It sends Members to Parliament 2, viz.
Radnor 1, and 1 Knight of the Shire. Radnor is the Ancient Magnus of Antonie,
and the station of the Roman Regiment called the Pacentine, though in Beauty and
Building it is Inferior to Prestain.

And thus much shall suffice to be said of the Principality of Wales.

The Reign of Queen MARY the First.
KING Edward was no sooner Dead, but the Lords of the Duke of Northumberland's
party hasted to Proclaim the Lady Jane Queen; and in order to do it, sent for
the Lord Mayor of London, six Aldermen, and six of the Common Council, to
Greenwich, where the King lay dead; and declared to them his death, which
before was kept as secret as possible. Moreover showing them his Will, and the
Letters Pattents with the Great Seal made fourteen Days before, causing them to
Swear Allegiance to the Lady Jane as their Sovereign Lady; and now the Policy
was to surprise the Lady Mary, whom they thought knew nothing of the King's
Death, or their Proceedings; for it had been carried on very closely. But she
having secret Intelligence from her Friends at Court, left St. Edmunds Bury on
pretense she feared the Infection, one of her Servants being dead of the
Plague, and Riding forty Miles, came to Fremingh^m Castle in Suffolk, about
Eighty Miles from London; considering that being near the Sea, if ^ortune
turned against her, she might Escape into France. And here taking upon her the
style of Queen, (for King Henry at his Death repenting his Illegitimating his
two Daughters, Mary and Elizabeth, had by his last Will appointed they should
Successively Reign in default of Issue) she dispatched Letters to her Friends
and Allies, that they should hasten to come to her.

This was no sooner known by the Lords at London, but the Lady Jane was
immediately Proclaimed Queen: Yet she received the Regalia unwillingly, not
without some Sighs and Tears, which Presaged the Misfortune she was violently
thrust upon; so that it plainly appeared to all present, it was much against
her will she ascended this height of Honor; and indeed as she passed through
the City, though there were crowds of Gazers, yet very few Shouts or Acclamations
of Joy, as in such cases are usual, were heard: Which gave courage to the
contrary Party, who heitherto had kept silence; but now began to grow bold in
their discourses; and the Council sitting, a Letter was presented from the Lady
Mary, wherein she commanded the Lords to repair to her, acknowledge her the
Right Heir to the Crown, and their Lawful Princess, and do their Duties and
Services, as became Loyal Subjects. Many that envyed Northumberland's
Greatness, hereupon began to incline to her Party; but then they found it could
not be well contrived to bring her to London, as Queen, whilst Northumberland's
Presence hindered; whereupon hearing that the Suffolk-Men, and a great part of
Norfolk, had promised her their Aid, upon condition of enjoying the freedom of
Religion, they concluded it was convenient to send Forces against her, that she
might be suppressed before she became Strong; and though the Duke of
Northumberland would have shifted it, Forces were raised, and he appointed
General; and so on the 13th of June he set out from London; but was much
daunted when he heard none of the Multitude that crowded to see him pass along,
bid him good speed: Which he noted to the Lord Gray as an Omen of bad success.
However he Marched slowly toward Cambridge, and in the mean while the Lady
Mary's Party greatly increased by the coming over of the Earls of Bath and
Sussex, Sir Thomas Cornwallis, Sir Henry Jernington, Sir Robert Drury, Sir John
Williams, Sir Robert Waldgrave, and others; and soon after Sir Edward Hastings,
Brother to the Earl of Huntington, Revolted from the Duke of Northumberland,
with 4000 Foot he had Raised by his order; for which he was after created Earl
of Lowborough.

Soon after this, six Ships with Stores, Ammunition and Provision, which the
Duke had caused to Watch the Coast, and Intercept Mary, if she should fly, fell
into her hands, as driven by stress of Weather into Yarmouth, when a great part
of her Forces were there, by whom they were seized. And Sir Henry Jerningham
consigned them to her use. Having by this means got a Train of Artillery, she
Marched toward Northumberland, Snow-Ball like, gathering as she proceeded;
which made the Duke send to the Lords at London to supply him with more Forces,
for on the Muster he found many were Deserted, and till their coming he
resolved to stay at Cambridge; but they hearing how things went, and finding
the People unwilling to engage, began more to consult their own safety, than
any other matter; and leaving the Tower, they met at Bainard's Castle; and
there contrary to their sollemn promises, they consulted to Depose the Lady
Jane, whom they had so lately advanced to the Throne; and the Earl of Arrundel
being Spokesman, boldly declared the necessity of it, enveighing bitterly
against the Duke of Northumberland, recounting many things that have been
already mentioned of him, urging the unlawfulness of what they had done; and
that there was no better Cure of Error, than mature and timely Repentance; and
therefore he besought them all present, with one Heart and Mind to endeavor to
the utmost that Mary (the undoubted Lawful Heir of the Crown) might presently
be Proclaimed Queen. See in this the wonderful Conversion Fear can work in Men's
minds, for until he perceived the Lady Mary Powerful, and likely to come in by
Force, except Northumberland, he was the most violent against her.

Upon this Advice, and some other Debates, it was agreed the Lady Mary should
be Proclaimed Queen; for the Earl of Pembrook saying he heartily agreed with
Arrundel, and laying his Hand on his Sword, Swore He would try it with any one
that should presume to maintain the contrary, most became willing, and the rest
were carried away in the stream of Power; and so sending for the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen, they went to Cheap Cross, and there, to the great wonderment of the
People, Proclaimed Mary Queen; and passing to St. Paul's, Te Deum was Sung,
sending some to take possession of the Tower, and others to Summon the Duke of
Suffolk, laying all Excuses aside, to appear at the Council Board.

The Duke perceiving Ruin threatened him and his Family, by laying too great a
stress on Treacherous Friends, and drawn into a Snare by Northumberland's
subtilty, he yet concluded to use such means as he hoped might avert the coming
Storm; wherefore upon this notice he went to his Daughters Chamber of State,
causing her to lay aside her Princely Ornaments, Advising her not to take it
grievously that she was to return home, and live a Private Life: To which, with
a composed Countenance, she Replied, Most loving Father, I with more Joy and
Gladness entertain the Message you now bring me, than that, when sore against
my will, you placed me in the Throne. I then displeased my self that I might
show my Obedience to you and my Mother. I believe I have greatly Offended in
what I have done, but now I willingly Obey you, and am well contented to
renounce the Crown and to confess my fault; if at last so great an offense may
be wiped away by an acknowledgment of my Error. After this, she retired to her
Closet, and the Ladies that waited on her, were discharged from that Office,
and desired to retire to their respective Habitations; which they did, though not
without Tears, to see Innocence precipitated into so great a misfortune as was
likely to follow.

The Duke of Suffolk after this, went to the Council of Lords, and subscribed
the last Proclamation; and thereupon the Earl of Arrundel and diverse others,
posted to Queen Mary (for so now I must style her) with a great Train, and
procured their Pardons. The Duke of Northumberland somewhat late, hearing of
these Proceedings, in much perturbation of mind, showed his meanness of Spirit,
in running into the Street at Cambridge, and Proclaiming Queen Mary, throwing
up his Cap, and capering amongst the crowd, as if he had done it with all the
sincerity and alacrity imaginable; when every body knew Fear, and hope of
Pardon, compelled him to it. Yet a few days after, he and diverse others, whilst
they were preparing for Flight, as doubting the worst, were Arrested by the
Lord Arrundel, and conveyed to the Tower of London, and the Army he commanded
Disbanded, and ordered on pain of being reputed Rebels to repair immediately to
their several Houses; and the Virtuous Lady Jane (after ten Days Acting the
Queen as on a Stage) by special order confined to the Tower, The Marquess of
Northampton was Imprisoned, and diverse others of Note, who they suggested were
any way concerned in this business; and the Lady Elizabeth, upon her Sisters
coming toward London, went to meet her Sister, and Congratulated her Success,
highly commending her for so undauntedly pursuing her Right to the Crown; and
upon her entrance into London she caused the Duke of Norfolk, and Edward
Courtney, Son to the Marquess of Exceter Beheaded in Henry the Eighth's time,
to be set at Liberty, as also Stephen Gardener, and all the Romish Clergy were
released from their confinement, with many others; Constituting Gardener Lord
Chancellor of England, restoring the deprived Popish Bishops to their Offices
and Dignities, outing those of the Reformed Religion that had by King Edward
been preferred to those Bishoprics, as London, Winches^^^, Durham, Worcester,
Chichester, etc. But for all this Dr. Bourn Preaching at St. Paul's Cross, and
bitterly inveighing against the Reformed Religion, had a Dagger flung at him,
whose mortal Point narrowly missed his Breast, though the party that did it (upon
the narrowest search and scrutinie) could not be discovered.

Things being a little settled, the Queen by Advice of her Council chosen for
the purpose, proceeded to Revenge herself on her opposers, and procured the
Duke of Northumberland, the Earl of Warwick, his Eldest Son, and the Marquess
of Northampton to be Tried and Condemned for High Treason, and soon after the
Duke was brought to the Scaffold on Tower Hill, where he declared himself (in
hopes of Life) a Roman Catholic; Advising all present to return to the Mother
Church, and not to embrace a new uncertain Religion that had worked so many
Mischiefs and Disorders in the Kingdom: And that for his own part he always
embraced and loved the Religion he received from his Ancestors, with much more
to the same purpose. But by the way pray hear what he said to King Edward when
he persuaded him to exclude his Sisters from the Crown, which I should not have
mentioned had he by his Ambition brought none but himself to this kind of
Misfortune.

He told him, The Lady Mary his Eldest Sister was a professed Roman Catholic,
and if she came to the Crown, would destroy the Reformed Religion, and
therefore it was the Duty of a good and Religious Prince to set light by all
natural ties and respects of Blood, in regard of the Glory of God and the
benefit of his Subjects Salvation: That vengeance awaited those that should do
otherwise; for when this Life was ended, they must appear before Gods high
Tribunal, there to give an Account of all their Actions, either to receive the
Reward of Eternal Life, or the Doom of Eternal Death. But this was then to
serve his ends. And I pray God too many in our days do not make Religion a
pretense to advantage themselves. One thing more is remarkable in this great
Man's fall, of which it is said he took exceeding notice, viz. As he passed to
the Tower when first committed, a Woman out of a Balcony shook a bloody
Handkerchief, saying, Look you here is the Blood of a right Noble Man and the
Kings Uncle, which was shed through your wicked Treachery; and now cries for
Revenge against you. But his profession of the Popish Religion saved not his
Life; though it is supposed Dr. Heath his Confessor, had on this account put him
in great hopes of Pardon, which was conjectured from the unwillingness that
appeared in him to submit to the stroke: Near the same time Sir John Gates, and
Sir Thomas Palmer, two of the Dukes Favorites, were Beheaded for accompanying
him to Cambridge, which by the Judges was construed Rebellion, and consequently
Treason against the Queen: And diverse Protestant Bishops, as Dr. Hooper of
Gloucester, Dr. Coverdale of Exceter, Dr. Farrar of St. David's, etc. and all
Ecclesiastical Persons, were deprived of their Livings, who would not comply
with the Romish Religion.

Soon after these Proceedings, the Lords Ambrose and Guilford Dudley, two Sons
to the Duke of Northumberland, with the Virtuous Lady Jane, Wife to the latter,
were Tried and found Guilty of High Treason, and Condemned: Arch Bishop Cranmer
was Imprisoned; but nothing of Treason appearing against him, he was at that
time Released, but afterward Condemned to the Flames for Heresy, as in the
Martyrology annexed to this Reign, will appear; wherefore by the way, take
notice that to avoid breaking the thread of History, by so many occasions as
must in his, and other cases of that nature, occur; for the better
understanding of the Reader, I shall omit them here, to place them by
themselves. However they agreed to send Peter Martyr under safe conduct to
Antwerp, supposing he would there fall into rougher hands, but he escaped into
Germany.

The Queens Coronation had been hitherto deferred, but now was performed with
much Pomp and Solemnity. And a Parliament was called, in which almost all the
Laws Enacted in the Reigns of Henry the 8th and Edward the 6th against Popery,
were Repealed; and in a Synod at London, Disputations were held concerning the
Real Presence in the Sacrament, in which the Popish Doctors were nonpluss'd;
yet as their saying was, They had the Sword, though we had the Word; so that by
outclamouring some, and over-awing others, they gave sentence That it was
necessary the Roman Catholic Religion should be Restored. And the Queen
exhibited a General Pardon, so called, but with so many Exceptions and
Exclusions, That those of the Clergy and Laity that stood in most need of it,
could reap no benefit by it; and soon after this, the Queen enclining to Marry,
Phillip King of Spain, among many others proposed, was thought the most
agreeable Match; for as much as it was laid before her, That an unsettled
Kingdom ought to have a potent Prince to defend it, if Troubles should arise,
as well Abroad as at Home; which upon Gardener Bishop of Wincbester's moving
Oration to the Lords, was approved, and the Spanish Ambassadars coming over
with full Power to Treat about it, the Marriage was concluded on, and Articles
signed, very advantageous to the English, as to Trade, and disencumberance from
Wars Abroad; she being to Rule Absolute, and he not to intermeddle with the
Affairs of the Kingdom, unless by way of Advice; and that such Children as
should proceed from this Marriage, should be here brought up, and not carried
out of the Kingdom. Yet many disliked it, as fearing when the Queen was
Married, her Husband would do as he pleased, by easily prevailing on her to
have the disposal of Offices, Treasure, and Armies; and under this pretense Sir
Thomas Wiat raised a Rebellion in Kent, and attempted to enter the City of
London; but being forcibly resisted at London Bridge, fetching a compass to
pass the Thames at Kingston, in the mean while such Forces were prepared, as
routed his Followers, and obliged him to surrender himself Prisoner; and being
Committed to the Tower, he soon after lost his Head.

This Rebellion (in which her Father had underhand sided) hastened the Death of
the Lady Jane and her Husband; for Dr. Fecknam being sent to her to persuade
her to the Romish Religion; but she being constant and unmovable, the Warrant
was signed for her Execution; and the Lord Guilford being first Beheaded, she
unconcerned beheld his Body brought all Bloody into the Tower, exposed to her
view, the more to terrify her, and with a settled Constancy of Mind (though she
did not much exceed Sixteen Years) mounted the Scaffold, and Embracing the
Divine that had attended her, Desired God to reward him for his Pious
endeavors, in Counselling and Advising her about the weighty Concern of an
Immortal State; and then turning to the bystanders with a composed
Countenance, Lovely in Sorrow, she thus spoke her Mind.

If I am Guilty (said she) it is not because I affected the Kingdom, but that I
refused it not, being cast upon me; and must leave a memorable Example and
Monition to all Posterity, That Innocence cannot excuse those grievous Actions
which tend to the Public Damage; for it seems they commit wickedness enough,
that serve the Ambitious Designs of others, though it be much against their own
will.

Having Spoken these words, she Prayed fervently; then desiring her Gentlewoman
to help her off with her Gown, she veiled her Eyes, and submitting to the
Block, denied the Executioner to do what the Law had appointed as her bitter
Portion; whereupon her Head being stricken off, caused many Tears even in those
that favored not her Religion. And thus a worthy Author speaks of her:

She was, says he, Religious, Wise, and Learned, above her Age or Sex; who for
taking the fatal Title of a Queen, unsought-for, and forced upon her by others,
was snatched from a Throne to a Prison, and from thence to the place of
Execution; where she suffered Patiently for the Offenses of others, and yet
overcame the many blows of Adversity with Constancy and Innocence.

A while after, the Duke of Suffolk being Imprisoned, was Condemned for having
a hand in Wiat's Rebellion, and attempting to raise others, as it was Charged
against him on his Trial; though on very slender proof. Being brought to the
Scaffold he thrust from him the Popish Priests, who were busy and troublesome
in endeavoring to persuade him to change his Religion, and Praying fervently,
he among other Expressions Desired the Queen to forgive him as he forgave all
that had offended him: At which Dr. Weston, who had been earnest with him to
change his Religion, said aloud to the people, The Queen had forgiven him:
Whereupon some Replied, such forgiveness God send you. And then preparing for
the Stroke, he underwent it with much constancy and courage, not varying from
what the series of his Life had expressed him.

Diverse taken in Wiat's Rebellion being about this time Executed, and some
Pardoned, Wiat (in hopes of Life) was wrought on to Accuse the Marquess of
Exceter, and the Lady Elizabeth, the Queens Sister; but being nevertheless
brought to Execution, he heartily begged both their pardons with Tears,
excusing them from having any hand in his Rebellion; for which, though he dyed by
the Ax, his Body was Quartered, and set upon several Gates in the City; and
within a while, Thomas Lord Gray, Brother to the Duke of Suffolk, was Beheaded:
For this Queen seemed to have learned her Fathers way, viz. To spare none that
stood in her way, or from whom she apprehended any danger.

The Queen calling a Parliament, propounded to the Houses her Intended
Marriage, and the desire she had of restoring the Popes Supremacy; but to the
latter at this time she could not get their Consents, the Nobles imagining they
must restore the Church Lands, if the Pope once came to assume a power over the
Ecclesiastical State. But the former, upon several advantagous additional
Articles, they allowed; and King Philip with a great Train of the Nobility of
Spain, and other Nations, came to Winchester where the Queen stayed to receive
him; and on St. James's Day they were Married there, with great pomp and
solemnity, and their Styles pronounced in Latin, French, and English: Whereupon
John Figuora, the Emperors Ambassador, resigned to them (in his Masters name)
the Kingdom of Naples; and the rejoicing being a little over, they came to
London; where they were received in much splendour; and going to Windsor, the
King was Installed Knight of the Garter, and Cardinal Pool sent for over to
settle the affairs of the Church, being appointed the Popes Legate; and in
Parliament his Attainder was taken off, and he restored to all his Honors and
Dignities; and making a moving Oration to both Houses, won upon them to be
Absolved by him, as in Form he did after the whole Kingdom; and in the end
procured Popery to be restored; but not the Lands of the Church: For though they
set light by Religion, those were too sweet morsels to be parted with.

The Queen after this labored to have King Philip Crowned; but the Parliament
refused their consent; and soon after that, she fancied herself to be with
Child; and by her Error led many to believe it, so that the Infant was Prayed
for. Some in the Pulpets undertook to describe its featurs when it should be
born, others to direct how it should be brought up; abundance of Cradles,
Rockers, Nurses, and such like, were provided, and at last it was spread abroad
with uncertain Rumor, she was Delivered of a Prince; then he was described
again in the Pulpits, the English Merchants at Antwerp fired their Guns, and
made great Rejoicing; but at length it was discovered the Queen had never been
with Child. But if any thing was in it, she had been deceived by a Mole, which
though without Life, some times stirrs as if it were Quickened. However it
occasioned various Conjectures of the Queen, but time blew over the Censures.

Many Persons now were advanced to Dignities, to balance in the House of
Peers; and the Earl of Savoy and Piedmont coming to see England, was highly
welcomed, and Lodged at White Hall; but after a short stay he departed to his
own Country; and the Prisons being in a manner filled many were Pardoned,
others without it set at Liberty; and Sir Nicholas Throckmorton's Head being
aimed at, the Jury for Acquitting him upon Trial, were severely Fined, and
Punished, to the Ruin of the greatest part of them.

The Lady Elizabeth, Sister to the Queen, (after a long Imprisonment in the
Tower and other places, being often put in danger of her Life, by Firing the
Boards under her Lodgings, Ruffians enterprising to Murder her, and many
hardships undergon, so that she wished her self a Milk-Maid, when she heard the
merry contented Life of one singing in a Park near her Prison) was set at
Liberty, as also the Lord Courtney Marquess of Exceter, who had been a Prisoner
from the time of his Fathers being Beheaded in Henry the Eighth's Reign.

The Lord Stourton, a great stickler for Popery, having Murdered one Hargil
and his Son, relying on his Pardon, found he was deceived; for himself was
Hanged in a Silken Cord, and four of his Servants (who assisted him) in Hemp.
It seems there had been Lawsuits and other Variances between him and the
Murdered Person, and the sooner to end them he and his Servants knocked them
down with Clubbs, cut their Throats, and Buried them Fifteen Foot deep; but
such was the will of God, the Murder should be discovered by such as went to
digg Gravel, and the Murderers punished.

Thomas Stafford, second Son to the Lord Stafford, getting a few Ships Landed
in the North, and surprised Scarborough Castle, Proclaiming Queen Mary held the
Crown without Right, and had betrayed the Kingdom to the Spaniards; but six
Days after his Landing he was Taken by the Earl of Westmoreland, and at London
lost his Head, Three of his Followers being Executed at Tyburn. And King Philip
being in War with France, upon the account of his Father Charles the Emperor,
notwithstanding by Articles of Marriage it was agreed upon that the English
should not Intermeddle, the Queen labored to Quarrel that she might come in
with a colorable pretext to Assist her Husband; and therefore made diverse
Complaints of Injuries done, especially, That the French King had fitted out
Stafford with Men and Money, and encouraged diverse others to molest her
Kingdom; and was about to Proclaim War: But Pope Paul the Fourth Envying the
Emperor, and taking part with the French, hereupon (to cross Queen Mary's
purposes) took Cardinal Pool's Authority Legantine from him, and appointed one
Peter Petou, a Monk of the Order of St. Francis, to Succeed him, naming him
Bishop of Salisbury; but the Queen forbad his Landing; and by submitting to the
Pope got Pool restored.

Whilst these things passed King Philip raised an Army in Flanders, and other
Countries, of 25000 Foot and 12000 Horse; and the Queen underhand, sent to his
Aid 1000 Horse and 4000 Foot under the Earl of Pembrook, and other experienced
Generals, which overthrew the French Army, and took the Town of St. Quintins;
and because the English had thus assisted, contrary to the Truce between the
two Nations, the Duke of Guise set down before Callice and battered it
furiously, of which the Queen having notice, ordered Supplies to be immediately
sent of Men, Ammunition, and Provision; but so outrageous was the sea, that no
Ships could put out; so that the Lord Wentworth Governor of the Town, found
himself constrained to surrender it on Articles when it had been held by the
English 211 Years, for the Taking of which such joy was made in France as if
England was falln into their hands. After that they Invaided Flanders,
pillaging the Country, but were Fought with and Overthrown; and soon after a
great Fleet being set-forth, the English Landed near Breast in Britany, and
Sacked Conquet a considerable Port-Town in that Tract, which they afterward
Burnt: When the French, to strengthen their Interest, Married Mary the Young
Queen of Scots, to Francis the then Dauphin, she having been (in King Edward
the Sixth's Reign) conveyed into France to that end. But whilst Queen Mary was
making great preparation, she fell Sick, some say of Melancholy for the
Absence of King Philip, who now seemed little to regard her; but herself
affirmed, when that was alleged to her in her Sickness, It was not his
Unkindness troubled her, but if she Dyed they might open her, and find the loss
of Callis written upon her Heart; and of that Sickness she Dyed, on the 17th of
November, Anno 1558, when she had Reigned 5 Years, 4 Months, and 11 Days, and
in the 40th Year of her Age; and was Interred among her Royal Ancestors, in
Westminster.

In this Queens Reign a Tempest happened, accompanied with prodigious Thunder
and Lightening, and in Notinghamshire it threw down many Churches and Houses,
tore up huge Trees, threw the Bells out of Steeples, and took off Sheets of
Lead, writhed them together like a Glove, and threw them 400 Foot from their
place: A Child was taken by the force of the Tempest, out of a Man's Arms a
great height, and Dyed by the fall. Five or Six People were Killed, and many
Cattle, by Hailstones Fifteen Inches in Circumference.

A great Mortality happened at the time of the Queens Death, which fell mostly
on the Clergy; and of that burning Fever 13 Bishops dyed, besides a great
Number of Priests, and others; also Cardinal Poole.

A Brief Chronology of Martyrs, and famous Men and Women that have Suffered the
Flames, and other Tortures and Persecutions under Popery in England, before and
since the happy Reformation: With the Exhortations and Dying Words of the most
Eminent of them.
ACcording to my Promise (though this History by reason of many things occuring,
swells to more Sheets than my intended Brevery designed it) I shall in this
place set down together, a Summary Account of the Persons who have Suffered in
England for the sake of a good Conscience; and could think it no where more
fitly to be placed, than after a Reign, wherein the Blood of those of the
Reformed Church, was shed like Water; yet Dyed with such Constancy as amazed
and startled their cruel Persecutors. I have already spoke something of our
English Martyrs, after the Kings Reigns wherein they were Persecuted, but for
Brevity having omitted many, I now come to place them closer together, that a
better view may be taken, and the Method by its plainness, more easily
understood.

Know then, That when the Purity of the Primitive Churches was Clouded, and
almost Obscured by the Romish Traditions, Errors, and Superstitions, to make
Godliness in the Litteral worldly sense, a Gain, by leading People into
Ignorance and blind Devotion in keeping the Word of God from their Knowledge,
and in its stead, imposing the Doctrine of Men, not agreeable with it, God in
his great Mercy was pleased to raise up such Instruments, as labored to
rekindle that Light, wicked and designing Rome had near extinguished; who for
the sake of Gods Holy Truth, exposed themselves to the fury of the Adversary;
and as in other Nations there were many, so in England faithful Witnesses were
not wanting, very early to lay down their Lives. I shall not look back so far
as the Persecutions under the Heathen Roman Emperors, Saxons, and Danes, for
though they were very grievous, yet more Cruel ensued under the Tyranny of that
which calls it self Christian Rome, or the Roman Catholic Church. For after
John Wickliff, William Wickham Bishop of Winchester, and many other Learned
Men, had Lighted the Candle, as I may term it, and opened the Eyes of many in
this and the Neighboring Nations, to discern Truth from Falsehood (and of this
we have just cause to Glory, since the Reformation in all Churches was grounded
on it) True Religion soon raised her Head; and though Cruel Adversaries made her
Proselites few for a time, their Constancy and Zeal was very great.

In the Year 1380 Vter Bolton and John Asherly were severly Persecuted; and
soon after Walter Bruce, John Ashton, John Patescul, and diverse more, some of
which are mentioned in the History; but as yet it began not to grow up to
Flames, but by degrees it did; for William Swinderly was Burnt in Smithfield;
also William Thorp, and diverse others, Stigmatized, Banished, Whipped, and
Starved in Goals; the Popes in whose time they Lived, Inciting and Encouraging
their Clergy here, to pursue them with all Violence and utmost Rigor. So that
in the Year 1417, the Lord Cobham was Burnt Hanging on a Gallows, in St Gilse's
Fields, and soon after William White, John Purrey and Richard White, confessing
their Faith, and Dying with Courage and Christian bravery, for the sake of a
good Conscience; and Peter Clark being forced to fly for maintaining Wickliff's
Doctrine, from Scripture and Fathers, was taken beyond the Seas and put to
Death by exquisit Torments, viz. His Tongue cut out, then Hanged by the Heels,
and a slow Fire made under him till he Dyed. Roger Overly, for speaking against
the Mass, and other Superstitions, and offering to prove them not consonant to
the Word of God, was Executed. And to put a Scandal on the Professors of the
Truth, they Nicknamed them Lollards, and their common Prison was called the
Lollards Tower. But Persecution rather increased than diminished their Number,
as appears by the largness of their Assemblies, some to Teach and others to
Hear: For one of these Meetings being surprised in St. Gilses Fields, Anno
1415, by Armed Force, and wrongfully charged as a Riotous or Tumultuous
Meeting, tending to Insurrection and Rebellion, it was by Popish Judges
construed a Treasonable Act; and hereupon Roger Acton, John Beverly, John
Brown, and about 36 more, were Drawn, Hanged and Quartered, in the Place where
they met; and John Claydon and Benidict Vlman Burned; and about 100 others
Languished in Prison, till most of them Dyed.

In Henry the Sixth's time, William Tailor, for embracing the Doctrine Wickliff
had Taught, was Burnt in Smithfield; Henry Web and Henry Florence Scourged
unmercifully, and 120 Imprisoned and Tortured diverse ways; and some suffered
the Flames, among whom William White and Richard Hovelden were Burnt. Soon
after this, Thomas Baly and Richard Wiche, both Ministers, were burnt, one in
Smithfield, and the other on Tower Hill.

In Edward the Fourth's Reign, John Huss, or Goose, was burnt; and in Henry the
Seventh's, Jane Boughton, a Woman of Fourscore Years of Age, was burnt in
Norfolk, another in Smithfield, several Branded, and others did Penance, going
in their Shirts, with Ropes about their Necks, and carrying Faggots on their
Backs; and Will. T^lsworth, being Condemned as a Heretic for owning the
Scriptures for the true Rule of Faith and saving Knowlidge, and denying the
Romish Traditions, and Image Worship, etc. to make the flaming Scene more
dreadful, being bound to a Stake in Amersham, and the Wood placed about him,
they compelled his own Daughter with a Torch to Light his Funeral Pile; whilst
he was Singing and Rejoicing in his Martyrdom till the Flames stopped his
Breath, and his Soul mounted on Fiery Wings to Everlasting Rest. And about two
Years after, in Buckinghamshire, were Burned John Melton, Tho. Bernard, and one
Roberts, taking that cruel Death with admirable Patience and Cherfulness.
Thomas Norrice Suffered in the like manner at Norwich, and Tho. Guest at
Salisbury; and a Woman at Chiping Sudbury; and in this Reign several other
Persons in diverse Places, some against whom there were no colorable
Accusations, after severe Rackings and Torturings, were found Murdered in
Goals, and Hundreds fled into Germany, etc.

Cardinal Wolsey in the beginning of Henry the Eighth's Reign, doing all under
him, or rather above him, (for he did only what he pleased) to ingratiate
himself with the Court of Rome, as aiming at the Pontificate, loosed the Reins
of Persecution against those that had separated themselves from the Romish
Churches; for indeed about this time two things mainly increased the Gospel
Professors in England and other Nations, viz. One, The appearance of Martin
Luther in Germany, who openly with all his might opposed it, and had gained
some Princes to his side; and the other, the Noble Mystery of Printing, which
began to be much used, whereby good Books were more easily Promulgated, and
Dispersed through diverse Nations, in their proper Languages. These alarmed the
Pope and his Clergy, fearful of their Diana, Profit, to raise dreadful
Persecutions against the Professors of the Gospel, raging against them even to
Madness; and of this England now had a smarting share. For in the Year 1511,
John Brewster and William Sweeting were Burnt in Smithfield, and also Robert
Harrison, William Carder, and Agnese Greble, the Husband and Daughter being
forced in as Witnesses to take away the Life of the latter; and one Mr. Stye,
for having the Book of Revelations in English, was Burnt with that and other
good Books hanging about his Neck in a String, in the ^ashion of Popish Beads;
and five Persons for Reading the four Evangelists in English, were Accused for
having in their possession and Reading Heretical Books, containing many
Damnable Opinions; and in the Year 1514, Richard Hun was found Murdered in the
Lollards Castle, after many Torments and much Cruelty had been excercised
toward him. However, their Malice extended to his dead Body, for it was
committed to the Flames; and about this time John Style, John Brown and Thomas
Man, were Burnt in Smithfield; Robert Cousens at Buckingham, Christopher
Shoemaker at Newbury, Robert and Richard Bartlet and John Scrivener likewise
suffered the Flames after all ways had been in vain used to make them Renounce
their Profession; and thinking to terrify the latter, his Children were
compelled to set Fire to the pile that burnt him.

In the Year 1519, Six Persons were Burnt at Coventry, and soon after them
Thomas Harding and Robert Silkeb. And the Body of William Tracy Esquire in
Gloucestershire, because his Executors refused to Pay for Singing his Soul out
of Purgatory, was dug up and burnt, being Charged (for the forementioned
reason) to have dyed a Heretic: One Richard Brayfield who had been a Monk at
Bury in Suffolk, but left it, upon seeing the Debauched and Dissolute Lives of
the other Monasticks, was accused of Heresy, hurried to a Dungeon, Bound,
Gagged, and Whipped, and then standing to his Profession of that Truth Recorded
in Holy Writ, opposite to the Romish Tenants, he was Degraded and Condemned;
when being Burnt in London, the Fire was on purpose made so scanty that he
continued in it half an Hour Alive, without Complaining; and his Left Arm being
burnt, he cherfully rubbed it with his Right Hand, so that it fell into the
Fire; and so in Prayers, without moving his Body, he cherfully ended his days
in a bed of flames.

Some that were Imprisoned they fed with Sawdust, some were kept continually in
the Stocks with great Waights on their Legs, some with Manacles and bars of
Iron fixed about their Necks, and many Racked till they were Lamed and
Distorted in Body. James Bainham, John Tewsbury, Valentine Sheaf, and his Wife,
John Bent, and Mr. Trapnel suffered the Flames; three Persons were Hanged in
Chains, and Starved to Death, for burning a Wooden Image called the Rood, at
Dover Court; Andrew Honor, John Frith, Thomas Bennet, John Lambert, William
Tindal, William Leighton and Mr. Collier, a Lawyer, suffered the Flames,
accused for Lutherans; for so now they termed the Professors of the Gospel
Truths. And a little while after, Dr. Barns, William Hieron, Thomas Garret,
made their passage from this to a better World, through the Fire in Smithfield.
Anthony Parker, Henry Filmer, and Robert Testwood, were Burnt at Windsor, and
many Dyed in Prison, some Natural Deaths, others suspected to be Murdered. In
the Year 1541, Kerby and Clarke were Burnt at Ipswich, and Bury, and Anno 1546
Mrs. Ann Askew (a Gentlewoman belonging to Queen Catharine Par, because she
would not accuse the Queen and other great Ladies, of favoring the Lutheran
Tenants) was put upon the Rack: Wriothsley the Chancellor playing the part of
the Hangman, in Torturing and Stretching her Limbs; but though he Sweat at this
barbarous Work, she bore it wi^^out a Sigh, or Groan, till the Bloodthirsty
Wretch was weary with Tormenting her; yet being Condemned for Heresy, she was
burnt in Smithfield; where she Dyed with such Constancy, Courage, and
composedness of Mind, that by her Death many, who saw her suffer, were
Converted; and at the same time and place suffered in the ^^ames Nicholas
Bellerian, a Minister, John Addams a Tailor, and John Lassets, a Gentleman
belonging to the Court; who were much encouraged to undergo their Sufferings,
as having beheld the Constancy and Patience of Mrs. Askew: And Sir. John Blage
a Gentleman of the Kings Privy-Chamber, was by the Romish Bishops Condemned for
Speaking against the Efficacy of the Mass; but by the Earl of Bedford's
Intercession Pardoned; when the King soon after meeting him, said, Ah my Pigg
how do thou? Truly, replied the Knight (feelingly) If your Majesty had not
been kinder to me than your Bishops, your Pigg had been Roasted long ere now.

Soon after this Bishop Gardener procured the King to put out a Proclamation
for taking away the use of the Scriptures, and all other Books in English, that
might Enlighten the People in the ways of Truth, or that showed them the
Absurdities of the Romish Practices; which much rejoiced the Popish Clergy, who
supposed by this they had gained a main Point, to Exterpate those of the New
upstart Religion, as they called them; though indeed what they sincerely
Professed, was as Ancient as Christ and his Apostles being upon Earth; but God
blasted this design, by putting an end to this King, in the expiration of his
Life, when he had waded through a Sea (for the most part) of Innocent Blood,
incited thereto by the cruel Principles and sinister Designs of the Popish
Clergy. And so on King Edward the Sixth's coming to the Crown, a happy
Reformation ensued; but whether God was angry with us for not making a right
use of his Favors and Indulgence so mercifully extended toward us, or
intended to try the Faith, Constancy, and Patience of those he designed for
Vessels of Honor, I determine not; but that Good Prince being taken to a
better Life after a short Reign, Mary his Eldest Sister Succeeding him, set
open again the floodgates of Persecution, by restoring the Popes Supremacy,
and by severe Laws made by a Popish Parliament, strictly Prohibiting the
exercise of the Protestant Religion; for so now it was called, from some
Cities and Provinces in Germany, Protesting against the Romish Errors and
Superstitions; yet so mightily were the Professors of it strengthened by the
Divine assistance, that neither Flames nor other Tortures, could bring about
her purposes. But after she had put diverse of the Nobility to Death, who stood
in the way to hinder the introducing Popery, under pretense of their opposing
her coming to the Crown, etc. which see at large in her Reign, she and her
Counselors singled out the most Eminent of the Reformed Clergy, dooming them
beforehand to Death, thinking thereby to terrify those of a meaner Rank into
any compliance that should be required; whereupon they were dispossessed of
their Bishoprics, and Popish Bishops Officiated. Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop
of Canterbury, was sent to the Tower; and to put a more colorable gloss on
this Design, a Disputation was appointed at Oxford between the Reformed and
Romish Clergy, which was willingly undertaken against all Opponents by
Archbishop Cranmer, Nicholas Ridley Bishop of London, and Hugh Latimer who had
been Bishop of Worcester.

The chief Points to be Disputed on was about the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper; and though they were shut up in Prisons, had no Books, nor Friends to
Conferr with, and a short warning; yet on their several Days, notwithstanding
the Noise, Clammour, Reproaches, and great Numbers of their Opposers, one by
one, suffering the violence of many at once, without Order, Measure, or
Modesty, Confuted their Adversaries to that degree, with found Reasons, and
Arguments from Scripture, Fathers, and the Use of the Primitive Church, That
being non plussed, all they in a Rage could retort was, viz. You have the Word,
and we have the Sword; see which is likeliest to prevail. And indeed the
Disputation finished, they passed Sentence of Death upon those venerable
Prelates, That they should be Burnt as Heretics; which Sentence they received
with great Alacrity and Constancy of Mind; Lattimer expressing much Joy that
the pleasure of God was such, that being near Fourscore Years of Age, he should
have so happy a Period as Martyrdom; and so they were remanded to Prison to
expect it at the leisure of their Enemies; and indeed their Execution was
delayed a considerable time, in hopes they would have Recanted; but at length
Ridley and Lattimer were brought to the Town Ditch in Oxford, and bound to the
Stake, Exhorting the People to a constant perseverance in the True Religion,
and recommending their Souls into the hands of Almighty God, Sung even in the
Flames, and so made an exchange of Earth for Heaven. Whilst Cranmer from his
Prison beheld the dismal Spectacle, and on his Knees was Praying that their
Faith and Constancy might not fail in this their Firey Trial.

The Archbishops Death was deferred for a time, but the Pope sending an Express
Order to Degrade him, and deliver him over to the Secular Power, to be burnt
within Ten Days, committing the Degrading part to Thurlby Bishop of Ely, and
Bonner Bishop of London, who succeeded Ridley; which done the Aged Prelate was
so cunningly dealt-with by one Friar John, a Spaniard, That he prevailed over
his Humane-Frailty in desiring Life, upon promising a Pardon and Advancement,
to Recant his former Tenants, and be reconciled to the Church of Rome;
whereupon he Subscribed a Writing to that purpose; but Cardinal ^ool (^or
^ardener was Dead, who had designed it for himself) wanting the ^rchb^shoprick,
The old Popish Maxim of No Faith to be kept with Here^^ke, was turned upon him;
and in the height of expectation of ^ire, he was brought to Execution; and though
they certified him there was no hopes of Pardon, but he must instantly suffer
the Flames, yet they used many Persuasions to induce him to a Public
Recantation before he went to the Stake; showing him the Writing he had Signed,
at the sight of which he burst out into Tears: Then in a composed Temper,
addressing himself to the People, after he had Exhorted them in moving words to
amend their Lives, and bring forth Fruits worthy of a Christian Profession, he
repeated the principal Articles of the Christian Religion, Explained his own
Opinion, and professed the Kingdom of Antichrist was contained in the Papacy,
and upheld by the Popes Authority: And Lastly, he showed how greatly he had
offended God by his Recantation; Professing that his Right Hand, which had
rashly Signed it, should first feel the Punishment But here he was so
Interrupted by the Clamours and Railings of the Popish Priests, that he could
be heard but little more; and then being clad in very vile Garments, and
hurried to the Stake, with many Taunts and bitter Scoffs, when the Fire was
lighted, he stretched his Right Hand into the Flame, and drew it not back,
unless once seeming to wipe his Beard, till it droped off; and the Flames
raging high, he lift up his Eyes and left and toward Heaven, crying out, Lord
receive my Soul, and Dyed; not moving his Body whilst he had Life. And when the
whole Frame was consumed, his Heart was found whole and unsinged by the Fire,
in which God himself, by a Miracle, gave testimony that his Heart was upright
with him: And this in any of the Popish Faction, would have been sufficient for
a Canonization, and crowded for a place in the Calender among their Adored
Saints. And soon after the Bodies of two Learned Men, viz. Martin Bucer and
Paulus Phagius, were (a long time after they had been buried) dug up, accused
of Heresy, and burnt in the Marketplace in Cambridge; and Peter Martyr's Wife
dug up likewise, and buried in a Dunghill; so it appears their Rage and Malice
extended as well to the Dead, as the Living. And Cardinal Pool immediately
entered upon the Archbishopric, which before was only sequestered.

Whilst these Great Men fell, those of a lower Rank escaped not; for Mr. John
Rogers (who in King Henry the Eighth's Reign, had fled, and associated himself
with the famous Tindal, after his Death returned into England, in the Reign of
King Edward the Sixth, and was made a Prebend of St. Paul's by Bishop Ridley)
being taken and cast in Prison, Sentence of Death passed upon him to be burnt,
which pain he endured with great Constancy and undauntedness of Spirit,
Exhorting his Wife and Ten Children, who weeping came to take their leave of
him, to part with him Joyfully, and Trust in God, who would be a better Husband
and Father to them.

Doctor John Hooper Bishop of Gloucester, came in for a Crown among the number
of these Martyrs, and they having Condemned him, he was sent down to Gloucester
to be burnt; where (as they said) he had done the greatest mischief, in sowing
the Seeds of Heresy; and there in malice, because he earnestly Exhorted the
People to be Constant in a steadfast Faith, and not to adheare to the
destructive Tenants of the Church of Rome, they Burnt him with Green Wood, so
that his Legs and part of his Thighs were consumed whilst he continued Praying
and Exhorting the People, yet in these Torments he declared he was as Easy as
in a Bed of Roses.

Dr. Robert Ferrar Bishop of Carmarden, was likewise brought on the stage, for
thwarting Bishop Gardener's Humor; and being Condemned as a Heretic by Dr.
Morgan, who had been thrust into his Bishopric, there happened but a short
space between that and his suffering the Flames in Carmarden-Market-Place,
expressing a firmness of Mind, and much resolution in undergoing his Torments,
accusing Gardener of his Death, and Citing him to Answer it before God's High
Tribunal.

Rowland Tailor, an Eminent Minister of Hadley, being accused as the former,
was sent to that Parish to be Burnt, where he was Lamented by all sorts of
People, especially the Poor, to whom he had been very Charitable, calling out
the Almes-People by Name, and giving them then what Money he had, Exhorting
them to follow the Doctrine he had Taught them; and coming to the Stake, he
Merrily said, Now many would be deceived; whereat a Popish Priest supposing he
would have Recanted, urged him to it with promises and hopes of longer Life;
but he smilingly Replied, You mistake my meaning, I do not intend by the Grace
of God any that I have Preached his Word to, shall find me Contradict what I
have Taught, for Life or any other thing; but once supposing to have been
Buried in Hadly- Churchyard, the Worms will be deceived, because my Corpulent
Body that might have fed them, must now be Burnt to Ashes.

Besides these, diverse others of Note were Burnt, as Lawrence Saunders, a
famous Preacher at Coventry, John Cardmaker, Chancellor of Wells and Bath. At
London, John Bradford, a Man Eminent for his Learning and Sanctity, in
Smithfield; At which place also suffered in the Flames that Eminent and Holy
Martyr Mr. John Philpot, saying at his Martyrdom, I will pay my Vows in thee O
Smithfield. And with him suffered a little Youth, praising God and Rejoyceing
in the Flames. Yet this Issue of Blood staid not; for Tho. Tompkins, whose Hand
Bonner Bishop of London burnt in Prison, to try his Constancy, which he endured
with much Patience, was burnt in Smithfield; also William Hawtree; And in
Essex, Stephen Knight, William Pigot, and John Lawrence; Rawlins White at
Cardiff, William Flower and George Marshal at Westminster, and John Warn in
Smithfield.

And now the Go^ls being full, and complaint made by the Pope to the King and
Queen, That Heretics were not so severely dealt-with as beyond the Seas, they
sent to Bonner (prone enough of himself to Cruelty) that he should disincumber
the Prisons in his Diocese, by sending such as were Condemned to Execution, and
proceed to the Trials of the rest. In obedience to this bloody Command, he
Condemned John Ardely and John Sympson, who were burnt in Essex, and Thomas
Wats, Tho. Hawks, Tho. Osmond, William Bamford, Tho. Osburn, Inhabitants of
Cogshal in Essex, being Committed for not Receiving the Easter Sacrament, were
Condemned and Burnt in several places of that County.

John Bland, Nic^olas Shetterden, John Frakesh and Humphery Middleton, also
suffered the Flames; and a while after, by the same Cruelty, fell Nicholas
Hall, John Harpole, Christopher Wade, and Margery Boley. In Kent, John Launder,
Derick Carver, Tho. Iveson, John Denby, James Abbes, John Newman, Patrick
Packingham, and Richard Hook, suffered the Flames. Robert Samuel a Minister,
was Burnt at Norwich, two more at Ipswich, five in the Diocese of Canterbury;
for Bonner especially took as much pleasure in Condemning these Good People,
and sending them to the Flames, as Domitian did in Torturing Flys. Seven were
Burnt in one Fire in Smithfield, four in Canterbury; A Woman as she was Burning
in the Isle of Guernsey, had a Child sprung out of her Womb, which the Cruel
Torturers threw again into the Flames. To be brief and not tire your Patience,
in drawing so Tragical a Scene too wide, There were in this short Reign
consumed in the Flames, for the Confession of a Good Faith, 277 of all Ages and
Sexes, viz. Five Bishops, 21 Divines, 8 Gentlemen, 4 Tradesmen, 100 Husbandmen,
Servants and Laborers, 26 Wives, 20 Widows and Virgins, 2 Boys, and 1 Infant.
Besides these, 7 were Whipped, one to Death; 16 perished in Prisons, 12 were
Buried in Dunghills, and many lay Condemned in Expectation of the Firey Trial,
and some Hundreds fled beyond the Seas; but the death of this Queen, who gave
way to so much Cruelty, put an end to the Persecution, the stream of Blood
being thereby stopped. And before this time, and soon after, most of the
Persecutors were overtaken by Gods Judgments, and came to Miserable and
Detested Ends. Some were Executed for several heinious Crimes, others wandered
beyond the Seas, till they Perished; and some were Eaten up by Vermin.

And thus, Reader, have I heitherto made good my Promise; and now passing over
this Acaldama, or Field of Blood, I lead you to a more diverting Theme.

The Reign of Queen ELIZABETH.
ELIZABETH Youngest Daughter to Henry the Eighth, after her many Sufferings in
close Confinement, and attempts made to take away her Life, happily Succeeded
to the Throne, and put a stop to the cruel Persecutions her Sister had raised,
on the 17th of November 1558.

And the first public Testimony she gave of her Princly Discretion, and
Knowledge in the weighty Affairs of State, was to choose a Wise and Learned
Council, causing new Commissions and Instructions to be sent to the several
Ambassadors in Foreign Courts; and desired by Sir Edward Hern, her Agent, who
had resided in Queen Mary's Time at the Court of Rome, That mutual Good Offices
might pass between her and the Pope in matters that concerned Public Affairs,
seeing she had happily Succeeded her Sister on the Throne: But the haughty Old
Man would not Answer but in his usual Dialect, viz. That the Kingdom of England
was held in Fee of the Sea Apostolic; That she could not Succeed, being
Illegitimate; That he could not contradict the Declarations of Clement the
Seventh, and Paul the Third; That it was a great presumption to assume the Name
of Queen, and Government, without his consent; yet, being desirous to show a
Fatherly Affection, if she would renounce her pretentions to the Crown, and
refer herself wholly to his free disposition, he would do whatever might be
done with the Honor of the Apostolic See.

The Queen, who was well assured of her Title to the Crown by her Right, and by
the Estates in Parliament, little expecting such an Answer, was very much
displeased, called home her Agent; and from that time resolved never more to
hold any Correspondency with the Sea of Rome. But having refused the King of
Spain's offers of Marriage with her, counting the Dispensation he promised to
procure at the Popes hands Unlawful and Wicked, she set her mind to contrive
the most easy and inofensive ways how to restore the Protestant Religion,
consulting with those of the greatest understanding in Affairs of Church and
State: and coming to some result, she placed in the Courts of Judicature, and
Offices of greatest Trust, such Persons as were of that Profession, or well
inclined to it: And having wisely weighed all circumstances, she made provision
against the encouragement and growth of Popery, by restraining the Nobles and
others from sending their Children to be Educated beyond the Seas; and caused
many Ceremonies in Divine Worship, used in the former Reign, to be laid aside.
And so, after the Funeral of her Sister, prepared for her Coronation; and was
in order to it, conducted (with extraordinary Pomp and Triumph) from the Tower,
through the City, to Westminster, where she was Invested with the Regal
Ornaments; and was Crowned by the Bishop of Carlisle, the other Bishops refusing
to perform that Office, as fearing the Popes displeasure, or rather the fall of
the Romish Religion in this Kingdom, to which Alteration if they consented not,
they foresaw they must lose their Bishoprics.

And now People differing much in Points of Religion, it was ordered by
Proclamation, That none should unreverently speak of the Sacrament; and it was
allowed to be received in both kinds; yet a Conferrence was appointed to be held
at Westminster between the Papists and the Protestants, upon these
Considerations, viz.

1. Concerning Prayer, and the Administration of the Sacrament, in the
Vulgar-Tongue.

2. Concerning the Authority of the Church, in Constituting and Abrogating
Ceremonies to Edification.

3. Concerning the Sacrifice of the Mass.

But the Papists in this would come to nothing without the Popes License; and
some of the Bishops threatening the Queen and her Nobles with Excommunication if
they proceeded to make alterations; for their male-pertness some of them were
committed to Prison. The Queen appointed a Form of Common Prayer in English,
and settled the Reformed Religion, entirely throwing off the Roman Yoke, and
began to apply herself to other weighty Affairs, sending to demand the
Restitution of Callice, Lost in the preceding Reign; and after many Debates it
was agreed, That the French King should Enjoy it for the Term of Eight Years,
and that then it should be restored to the Queen of England, or in refusal be
Paid 500000 Crowns; and hereupon a Peace was Agreed and Proclaimed between the
two Nations, as also between the Dauphin and the Queen of Scots his Wife;
whereby Scotland was Included.

Whilst these things were transacting, the Parliament Advised the Queen to
Marry, leaving her entirely therein to her own Choice that Children might be
Born to Succeed her. To which the Queen made this reply, That she was already
Wedded, which was, to her Kingdom and People; and having promised to take a
Husband, if so the good of the State should require it, she dismissed those
that were sent to her by both Houses, on this Message: And soon after came an
Ambassador from the King of Sweden, to propose a Marriage between her and
Prince Ericus the Kings Eldest Son; but after he had been sumptuously Treated,
he was dismissed with a modest Denial; and though the Duke of Anjou, the Arch
Duke of Austria, and others, sued for her Favor, she only gave them her
Esteem, instead of her Love; and put them off with fair words. In the meantime
the Scots destroyed in most parts of that Kingdom, the Religious Houses,
Altars, Images, etc. declaring for a Reformation, which was against their
Queens mind: Whereupon the French, on her Husbands and her part, raised Forces
to oppose them, which made them send their Complaints to Queen Elizabeth, and
implore her assistance for the speedy driving out the Frenchmen, whom they said
(through their Queens favor) had engrossed all the Places of Trust, Honor,
and Profit, into their Hands. This Queen Elizabeth communicating to her
Council, after many Debates, to prevent the French getting an inlet into
England by the way of Scotland, it was agreed Assistance should be given to the
Reformers: And the Duke of Norfolk was appointed Lieutenant General of the
North, to secure the Borders; and on certain Articles agreed, an Army was sent
into Scotland under the Command of the Lord Gray, and Ships to Edenborough
Frith, who dislodged the French Men of War that lay there. This made the French
King sue for Peace to the Queen; but his suit was rejected on many weighty
Considerations, though he promised at this time to deliver up Callice in lieu
thereof. However a Treaty was held at Edenborough; but it came to little, upon
the French King's declining to Sign the Articles agreed on. And now the Pope a
Second time labored to persuade the Queen to own his Supremacy, and not
separate England from the Body of the Roman Catholic Church, but the Queen
refusing to harken to the Popes Letters, resolved firmly to adhere to the
Protestant Religion.

And now the Queen of Scots returning into that Kingdom, her Husband being
Dead, sent a Letter to Queen Elizabeth, full of kind expressions, to desire
that a sincere Friendship might be maintained between them; and the Envoy that
brought it, had Commission to deal with the Queen to declare her Heir Apparent
to the Kingdom; which was insinuated as the safest way to continue Peace
between the two Crowns. But the Queen Answered, She would do nothing to the
prejudice of her Title, but as to this matter, she would refer it to the
Personal Conferrence that was to be held shortly at York. But that Interview
was broken off by the Papists contrivance, least it might be a means toward
creating the Queen of Scots an inclination to the Reformed Religion; whereupon
the Queen, the better to strengthen her Hands, built several Sail of stout
Ships, cast a great many Ordnance, and the Art of Gun-powder-making in England,
was first by her Encouragement found out; so that having a great Fleet always
at Sea, she was by Foreigners styled The Queen of the North Seas, causing the
Militia readily to be provided with Arms, and frequently Exercised. And the
Guisean Faction laboring to destroy the Hugonots, or Protestant Party in
France, constrained them for the safety of their Lives to fall into a Civil
War. The Queen assisted the latter, and had Haverdegrace and New Haven put into
her Hands as Cautionary Towns for the reimbursment of her Charges, when things
should be settled; and to keep them firm to her Interest, so that they should
not make a Peace without her consent; and hereupon she sent them 6000 Men under
the Command of the Lord Ambrose Dudley, and kept the Seas with a considerable
Navy.

Whilst matters went thus Abroad, Designs were carrying on against the Queen at
Home; whereupon diverse of Note, especially those descended of the Blood Royal
by the two Daughters of Henry the Seventh, were Imprisoned. And she calling a
Parliament, an Act passed for Assurance of the Queens Royal Power and Authority
over all Estates and Subjects within her Dominions: And further Enacted, That
the Oath of Supremacy should be administered to all Persons, for the better
discovery of such as sided with the Pope against her; which much startled the
Papists, and made them quiet for a time. In the mean while the Prince of Conde,
one of the chief Leaders of the French Protestants, being Overthrown at the
Battle of Derux, was taken Prisoner; as likewise Sir Nicholas Trockmorton, who
paying his Ransom was set at Liberty. But the Admiral Chastillion took so many
Places, as startled the Guises, insomuch that they consented to an Edict of
Pacification; whereby the Princes were to be restored to the French Kings
Favor. Conde, alured with the hopes of the Lieutenancy of France, and a
Marriage with the Queen of Scots, the Hugonets to enjoy the freedom of their
Religion, etc. The Agreement was suddenly made, and the English not only
treacherously Abandoned, but they Joined with the Papists to drive them out of
the places they held, and straightly Besieged New Haven, which by reason of the
Plague raged grievously in it, they had Surrendered to them.

But the Spanish Greatness threatening England, and the French offering
reasonable Terms, a Peace was concluded between the two Crowns, and Ratified
upon their delivering Hostages to pay the Queen at a set time a large Sum of
Money; upon which the French King was Invested with the Order of the Garter:
Hereupon the Spaniard in a fret prohibited all Commerce between the English and
his Subjects, which made the Queen remove the Wooll-Mart from Antwerp to Ems in
Frizland, but the Low Countries being much Impoverished thereby, the Edict was
Repealed; and now the Queen made her great Favorite Sir Robert Dudley Lord
Denbigh, Earl of Leicester, Knight of the Garter, Chancellor of Oxford, and
Master of the Horse, and this she seemed to do the better to qualify him for a
Husband for the Queen of Scots; but it swelled him to that Ambition that he
soon aspired to make pretentions to herself; and the Queen of Scots soon after
Married the Lord Darnly Son to the Duke of Lenox of the Royal Blood, and of
this Marriage was born James the Sixth of Scotland, and first of England. This
not only displeased Queen Elizabeth, but the greater part of the Scots
Nobility, because he was scarce 20 Years of Age, and easy to be swayed any
way. However he was sollemnly Crowned King, but by the contrivance of Murray
the Queen of Scots Bastard Brother, and others, he some time after was Blown-up
in his Lodging, and his mangled Body thrown by the force of the Powder into the
Garden.

The Parliament of England meeting again, humbly besought the Queen to Marry,
but she still declined it. Shortly after the Queen of Scots falling into a
Languishing condition, Recommended her Son to the Protection of Queen
Elizabeth; yet Recovering, Earl Bothwell, suspected to be one with Murray in
destroying Darnley, was forced to fly the Kingdom, and Murray raised a Party
against the Queen to Depose her; when after some contesting, being
overpowered, she fled into England, and craved Queen Elizabeth's Protection;
but by the Advice of some Counselours bribed by Murray's Faction, in stead of
allowing her (though near in Blood) that favor, she was committed a Prisoner in
the custody of the Earl of Shrewsbury, and after 20 Years Confinement, lost her
Head, for holding Correspondencies with the Papists, to take away the Life of
the Queen.

A Passage having been discovered by the English to Russia, and great
Privileges granted to the Merchants, The Czar or Emperor of Moscovy and Russia
sent his Ambassadors to Queen Elizabeth, with Rich presents of Furrs, and such
other Commodities as his Country yielded; and with them one Anthony Jenkinson,
an Englishman, who had first Sailed the Caspian Sea; his demands was to make a
League Offensive and Defensive with her; but by reason of the distance of the
place, the Queen agreed not to the former, but left the latter indifferent; and
so the Ambassadors having been highly Treated, were dismissed with a return of
Presents.

In Ireland, Shan O Neal fell into Rebellion, but being defeated by the
English, and throwing himself on the Hebridians, he was by them Slain after a
seeming kind reception, and the Earl of Desmond was seized and sent Prisoner to
England, and Sir John Hawkins being in America with some Ships, and contrary to
the Capitulation, set-upon by the Spaniard, his Goods rifled, and some of his
Men slain, the English Nation was so exasperated with the Treachery, that they
demanded a War with Spain, which however at that time was not granted, for the
Queen having taken the French Protestants who were cruelly Persecuted under
Charles the Ninth, was employed to support them with Money and Ammunition; and
in providing for such a fled hither, though they had basely abandoned her at New
Haven. But the Duke of Alva, the King of Spains General, making fierce War in
the Low Countries, he brought in the Inquisition to Extirpate the Protestant
Religion. There, there happened an Accident that opened a Breach between
England and Spain, viz. Vast Sums of Money being sent in a Spanish Ship by
Italian Merchants, to be Employed in the Bank in the Low Countries for the ruin
of the Protestants there, those Vessels were Chased upon the English Coast by
some French Men of War, and the Money being brought on Shore, the Queen was
Advised by her Privy Council to stay it, and give the Merchants Owners Security
for the Repaiment of it: Whereupon the Duke of Alva caused all the Goods and
Effects of the English in the Low Countries to be seized, and the Queen caused
the same to be done by the Dutch Merchants in England, which were of greater
Value; and Commerce being Prohibited, the English removed the Staple to Hamb
rough; and the Privatie^s set out so greatly Endamaged the Spaniard, that the
Queen was forced to restrain them; yet the Duke of Alva secretly practiced to
raise Rebellion in England and Ireland; and the Earls of Northumberland,
Westmorland, and others, did make an Insurrection in the North, being
Instigated to it by Morton a Popish Priest, and by their Declaration Invited
all the Roman Catholics to join them; and at Durham To^e in pieces all the
English Bibles and Common Prayer Books they could find in the Churches; but
being Procl^imed Traitors, upon the approach of the Queens Forces, they Fled
with a small company into Scotland, from whence the Earl of Westmoreland fled
into the Low Countries, and there Lived in a poor condition till he Dyed; and
diverse being taken were Executed. Soon after this, a Rebellion broke forth in
Cumberland, but the Rebels were routed and dispersed by the Lord Huns^on; and
another in Ireland, but quieted by the Lord Deputy. And one Felton by the Popes
Command f^stned in the Night time a Bull Declaratory to the Bishop of Londons
Palace Gate, wherein he Absolved all the Queens Subjects from their Oath of
Allegiance; but Felton being taken, Confessing and Justifying the Fact, he was
Condemned and Executed near the place where he fixed the Bull, it being at that
time hung about his Neck. And the Duke of Norfolk having been Imprisoned for
designing a Marriage with the Que n of Scots, and endeavoring her Escape, upon
his humble Submission, and a Writing ^igned, wherein he promised never to think
of the Marriage, or any thing derogatory to Queen Elizabeth's Authority, he was
discharged. And a great many of the English for sundry crimes being fled into
Scotland, upon refusal of delivering them up, the Earl of Sussex and the Lord
Scroop entered that Kingdom with an Army, and compelled the Scots of the Queens
party to abstain from Hostility, and utterly forsake the English Rebels. And a
Rebellion being raised in Ireland by the Earl of Thumond and his adherents, the
Earl fled into France, for fear of being delivered to the Lord Deputy by his
Friends, but upon his humble submission was restored to his Estate and Dignity;
and the Duke of Norfolk being again Imprisoned was brought to his Trial for
High Treason; and was thereupon Condemned and lost his Head; and soon after Dr.
John Storey a great Persecutor in Queen Mary's Reign, who was decoyed on Board
an English Ship under pretense of seazing Prohibited Goods, as being made the
Duke of Alva's chief Searcher, being Tried for Treason, was found Guilty, and
Executed at Tyburn. And Matthew Stewart Earl of Lenox the Young King of
Scotland's Grandfather, and Regent of Scotland, being surprised by the
contrary Faction, was Murdered, and the Earl of Mar chosen Regent, who Dyed
within 13 Months after. And diverse about this time suffered for conspiring the
Queens Death. And a League was concluded with France; and soon after at the
celebration of the Marriage between the King of Navar and the Lady Margaret,
the French Kings Sister, happened the cruel Massacre at Paris, and by the
French King's command the Protestants were Massacred in all the Provinces of
that Kingdom to the Number of 300000; among them fell the Admiral Chastillion,
and diverse other Nobles; yet God delayed not to Revenge their Innocent Blood;
for the King Dyed a while after with Blood issuing from all his Vents: The Duke
of Guise, who had contrived at one blow to cut off all the Protestants in
France, was Murdered in his Palace by the Succeeding King's command, and most
of the rest that had contrived this Tragedy came to untimely Ends.

The Earl of Northumberland, who since his Rebellion had sheltered in Scotland,
was by the Earl of Morton delivered to the Lord Hunsdon for a Sum of Money, and
soon after Beheaded at York. And Walter Devereux Earl of Essex, whom the Queen
held in high favor, being sent with Forces into Ireland to depress the
Rebellion, and being envied by some Great Men at Court, in his Absence they
made Parties against him. Charging many Miscarriages in his Conduct, so that
the Queen was constrained to call him home with a command to resign up his
Authority in Vlster; but the Earl of Leicester being Jealous of his presence at
Court, as imagining he was not indifferent to the Queen, soon procured him to
be sent back again with the empty Title of Marshal of Ireland, which he took so
much to Heart, that in a short time he Dyed.

The Prince of Orange Heading the Flemings, and they supplicating the Queen for
Aid, after mature deliberation with her Council, and the States of the Low
Countries putting Cautionary Towns into her Hands for Security, she sent over
Forces and permitted as many Volunteers as would to go, and Casimire Son to the
Elector Palatine, at the Queens charge brought in a considerable Number of
Horse and Foot. These Forces were unexpectedly Attacked by Don John of Austria
and the Prince of Parma with a Numerous Army of the Spaniards best Forces, but
so fiercely Encountered, that after an obstinate Fight they were forced to
retreat, leaving some Thousands Slain; which Victory was attributed to the
Valor of the English and Scots.

The Duke of Alanzon, the French Kings Younger Brother, now made earnest Suit
to the Queen, and though by the means of one Simier a French Courtier, he so far
insinuated into the Queens favor as to be admitted to come over Incognito, and
hold a private Conference with her, yet by reason of his Youth, and some other
Obstacles, this Treaty of Marriage (as well as the rest had done) came to
nothing; yet the Earl of Leicester, for enveighing against it, so far as to
reflect on the Queen, was for a time confined to Greenwich-Castle, and the
Queen being on the Thames in her Barge, a young Fellow fired a Piece which Shot
one of the Rowers through the Arm; for which being Sentenced to be Hanged, the
Queen then understanding it was done Accidentally, and not out of any Design
against her, Pardoned him. And the Queen having procured of the Grand Signior a
liberty of free Trade in all his Dominions, a Company of Turkey Merchants was
first set up. The Pope having bestowed Ireland on the King of Spain, a
Rebellion was raised there, but the Lord Gray being made Deputy, the Irish,
Spanish and Itallians were totally routed and put to the Sword.

Captain Francis Drake, a Native of Plymouth in Devonshire, adventuring to
America with a few Ships, Discovered diverse Coasts before unknown, and is
reputed to Sail about the World, because he shot the Gulf of Magelan, returning
brought home great Riches; and after being Knighted, he made several
advantageous Voyages with greater Force, and became such a Terror to the
Spaniards, in those parts, that they started to hear him Named. Also Hawkins,
Forbusher and others, pursuing that Voyage, not only greatly endamaged the
Spaniard, but greatly enriched England with Gold and Silver; so that the Queen
having called in the bad Money, the Land soon abounded with plenty of her own
Coin.

The Earl of Desmond being routed in Ireland, was after a great Search made for
him, found, and slain by a common Soldier, which gave much quiet to that
Kingdom: And now the Papists using secret Practices against the Queen, among
other Expedients to prevent the threatened mischief, a number of Persons Headed
by the Earl of Leicester, of all Ranks, bound themselves mutually to each
other, by their Oaths and Subscriptions, to pursue all those to Death and final
Destruction that should attempt any thing against the Queens Life, and this
Combining was called the Association. And one Parry a Member of the House of
Commons, was Accused by Edward Nevel for having held Secret Consultations about
taking away the Queens Life; which he confessing, was condemned and executed;
and the Earls of Aurundel and Northumberland were committed to the Tower on
suspicion of the like Practice; and in a little time the Latter was found Shot
in his Head with three Bullets, which was concluded to be done by himself,
because the Chamber Door was barred on the inside, and so the Corroners Inquest
found it.

And now the States of Holland being brought very Low, sued to the Queen to
take them into Protection, yielding the Sovereignty of the Provinces into her
Hands; whereupon taking Sluice as a Cautionary Town, she sent the Earl of
Leicester with 5000 Foot and 1000 Horse, to whom, for the Queens use, the
absolute Authority over the Provinces was committed, by an Instrument in
Writing, and he Invested with the Title of Governor and Captain General of
Holland, Zealand, the United and Confederate Provinces, which he Accepted, as
also the Style of Excellency; which much offended the Queen, though he appeased
her Anger with Submissive Letters: But he Governing with a high Hand, and
Imposing unusual Customs on the Merchants, they soon grew weary of him; However
to create in those people a better oppinion of his Actions, he undertook to
Relieve the Greve, a Town in Brabant, Besieged by the Prince of Parma; but the
Cowardice of the Governor prevented it, by too sudden a Surrender; for which
he was Executed. Yet several small places were taken in by the Valor of the
English, and Princes of the House of Nassaw; but in a Rencounter before
Zutphen, Sir Philip Sidney received a Mortal Wound of which he Dyed, being for
Learning and Valor the Honor of his Time; but the Earl not able to win this
place, left it Blocked up, and came to the Hague; where he was entertained with
complaints of his Conduct, and the ill circomstances it had brought their State
into, which so Angered him, that he took away the Jurisdiction of the States
Council and Presidents of Provinces, and thereupon came for England to excuse
his proceedings to the Queen.

The Spaniard having received much damage from Drake, Hawkins, Cavendish,
Forbusher, and other English Adventurers in the West Indies, was now studying
how to revenge it, and although there was a seeming Treaty carried on, he was
making all imaginable preparations in the Netherlands, and in his own Ports, of
which the French King gave the Queen Secret notice; whereupon with all
diligence a Fleet was set out, some by the Queen, others by Private Persons,
though much inferior in Number and Bigness to the Invaders: For besides the
Popes Blessing and promise of Success, for their Fleet, called the Invincible
Armado, which consisted of 130 Sail, wherein were 19209 Land Soldiers, 8050
Mariners, 2080 Galley-Slaves, and 2630 pieces of Canon, with small Arms and
proportionable Stores; besides they were to be Joined by Forces the Prince of
Parma was providing in Flanders.

The Fleet being ready to put to Sea, the Queen appointed the Lord Howard of
Effingham Admiral, Sir Francis Drake Vice Admiral, and the Lord Seymour, with
an English and Dutch Squadron, to lie on the Flemish Coast, and hinder Parma's
sending the intended Succors, and by Land having made the Earl of Leicester,
who had resigned his Authority in the Low Countries, General; he ordered an
Encampment at Tilbury of 1000 Horse, and 22000 Foot, and raised another Army
for the Guard of her Person; but the Spaniards were so handled at Sea by the
Admiral, That after several Days Fighting, they were utterly Defeated; so that
what were Taken, Sunk, Stranded, and Perished in their return, they lost the
greater part of their Fleet with about 13500 Men; and scarce a Noble Family in
Spain, but lost in this Expedition one Relation or other; which blow Spain has
not Recovered to this day: For which Success, the Queen caused public Thanks
to be given; and afterward greatly molested the Spaniard, by Warring in
Portugal, and sending Adventurers to the West Indies; in one of which
Expeditions the famous Sir Francis Drake Dyed. But Sir Walter Rawleigh took a
great Carrick, the Prize being valued at 150000 l, and others did very famous
Exploits.

Whilst these things were doing, Lopez a Jew, and Physician to the Queen, was
hired to Poison her; as also one Patrick Cullen, an Irishman, to Stab her; but
these Designs being timely discovered, diverse Conspirators were Condemned and
Executed. This being found to be a Spanish Intreague, so incensed the Queen,
that she sent the Earl of Essex, Sir Walter Rawleigh, and other brave
Commanders, to Anoy his Coast Towns, who putting in at Cales, Took and Sacked
that Rich Town, and Burnt a Fleet of Merchants and Men of War, Valued at Twenty
Millions of Ducats. And now the Earl of Essex, who had done many great and
brave things in Ireland, the Low Countries, Spain, Portugal, and France, and
had all along stood high in favor with the Queen, was much Disgusted at the
Advancement of some Upstarts, which made them his Enemies, and labor all they
could for his Destruction; so that being sent into Ireland against the Earl of
Tirowen who was in Rebellion, they procured him to be Recalled, and laid diverse
Miscarriages to his charge; so that he was brought to a private Trial; but upon
his Submission, Acquitted by the Queens favor, and set at Liberty. However,
being a Man of a high Spirit, he so resented the Affront, That he concluded to
remove his Enemies from the Queen by force; whereupon, being Assisted by the
Earl of Southampton, and others, he Fortified his House, Imprisoned her
Counselors sent to him to Advise him to submit, and going into London thought
to have made an Insurrection in favor of him; but though he was very Popular,
they at this time failed him; and at last Surrendering himself, he with the
Earl of Southampton and others was found Guilty of High Treason, and the Queen
(over-perswaded) Signed the Warrant for his Death, and he was Beheaded, but
Southampton Reprieved; Sir Charles Dorves, Sir Christopher Blunt, one Cuff, and
Merrick, likewise suffered Death, on this account. But the Earls Death so
grieved the Queen, that she laid a bitter Curse on those that advised her to
consent to it; and growing Melancholy, she soon after retired to Richmond,
where on the 24th of March 1602, she died; when she had Reigned 44 Years, 4
Months, and 7 Days, in the 67th Year of her Age, and was buried at Westminster,
being the last of the Name of the Teudors of the Royal Race.

In this Queens Reign a Mare brought forth a Foal with two Heads, and a long
Tail growing between them. A Sow furrowed Piggs with Arms and Hands, fingered
as a Child, instead of Legs. And many other Creatures produced Monstrous
Births. A Plague likewise happened, whereof Dyed in 8 Months 23660. The Thames
was so hard Frozen that Waines and Carts passed it, Markets and diverse sorts of
Exercises were kept and used on it. Great Floods and Tempests happened,
spoiling much Corn, and demolishing many Buildings. In Yorkshire a Tempest
over-threw a Church called Patrick Burton, and laid many Villages in Ruins. And
many fearful Sights appeared in the Air.

The Reign of King JAMES the First.
QUeen Elizabeth, a little before she died, having declared King James the
Sixth of Scotland her Successor, as indeed he was the next Allied to the Crown
of England, as being great Grandson to the Lady Margaret, Eldest Daughter to
Henry the Seventh; he was, upon that Queens death, Proclaimed by Secretary
Cecill and others, and solemnly Invited to fill the vacant Throne; when having
disposed Affairs in Scotland, for the preserving the Peace of that Kingdom, he
set forward with a very splendid Equipage: And his first Act was to Establish
and Continue Religion as it had been Settled by the deceased Queen; causing the
Old and New Testaments to be Translated from the Original; and set many at
liberty who were Imprisoned on sundry occasions by the Queen deceased. But
whilst these things were doing, there wanted not some who envied his Accession
to the Throne; and secret contrivances were laid to Depose him, and set up the
Lady Arabella, a Branch sprung from the same Stem by another Branch; but it
being timely discovered, diverse were Apprehended, Tried and Condemned; yet only
George Brook, Brother to the Lord Cobham, and two Popish Priests, suffered
Death, Sir Walter Rawleigh and diverse others, being Pardoned; and on the 25th
of July 1603, the King and Ann his Queen were Crowned at Westminster in the
Marble Chair brought out of Scotland by Edward the First, which fullfilled the
Prophecy Inscribed on it, and mentioned in that Kings Reign; and Prince Henry
the Kings Eldest Son, was made Knight of the Garter, and styled Prince of
Wales; and Honors were conferred on diverse Persons.

The next thing the King proceeded to do, was to decide the Controversy between
the Church of England and the Party that then styled themselves Puritans, and a
Conference to that purpose was appointed at Hampton Court, where the King so
Learnedly Argued, that the former carried the day. And the Jesuits proving
over-hot, in stirring up the People to change in opinions (thereby to work
their own ends) were Banished the Kingdom, and a Proclamation put out for
Uniformity in the Church.

Soon after this the King Assembled a Parliament, recommending to them the care
of the Nation, and a lasting settlement of Peace and Tranquillity, and thereupon
restored the Ancient Name of this Island, causing himself to be Proclaimed King
of Great Britain. And whilst he and the Parliament happily accorded, a private
design was carried on to destroy them both, for the Popish Party being denied
the Tolleration they had petitioned for, contrived one of the most Stupendous
Mischiefs that ever entered into the Hearts of Men, for their heat of Malice
would not be quenched with the Royal Blood, but that of the Nobility and
Gentry, the representative body of the whole Kingdom united at Westminster, was
to have been shattered in pieces and dismembered by a blast of 36 Barrells of
Gunpowder, which they had placed in a Cellar under the Parliament House; but it
was Discovered by a Letter to the Lord Monteagle the Morning before it was to
have been put in execution. The principal Conspirators were Robert Catesby,
Thomas Piercy, Robert Winter, Thomas Winter, John Garnet, Ambrose Rookwood,
John Wright, Francis Fresham, Sir Everard Dighby, and Guido Faux. This Latter
was to have set Fire to the Train, and was taken with his Dark-Lanthorn at the
Entrance of the Cellar, on the 5th of November, 1605. Which day by Parliament
was appointed Annually a Day of Thanksgiving for that memorable Deliverance.

Upon this Discovery, the Conspirators that escaped by flying, were diverse of
them slain by Forces raised by the High Sheriff of Warwickshire; Faux upon
Examination before the Council, confessed the whole matter, saying, God would
have had it prosper, but the Devil Discovered it; expressing himself sorry that
it had not taken effect. Garnet the Jesuit, and others, were Executed on this
account, and some Lords who were absent from Parliament, and were suspected to
have notice of the Design, were committed to the Tower, but after some
confinement were released again, and soon after this a rumor was spread,
without any certain Author, That the King was Stabbed and Slain with an
Impoisoned Knife, as he was Hunting near Ockingham, which for a time much
troubled the People; nor could their fears be allayed, before a Proclamation
came out to satisfy them of the contrary; and the King of Denmark, the Queens
Brother, coming to White Hall, was Magnificently Entertained; and having stayed
about a Month, departed highly satisfied.

The Kingdoms of England and Scotland, that had long continued in bloody Wars,
were now United by both their consents in their Representatives, on a
foundation advantageous to either Nation, and so it has ever since continued.

The Duke of Juliers about this time dying, the Dukes of Newburg and
Brandenburg strove for that Dutchey, but whilst they weakly contended, Spain
(more powerful) resolved to take it from them both, seizing on the City of
Juliers, the principal place of the Province; which obliged King James at the
States of the Netherlands supplication, to send 4000 English under the Command
of Sir Edward Cecill and Sir Hatton Cheek, by whose Valor it was chiefly
Reduced. Soon after Henry the Fourth of France was Stabbed in his Coach by one
Ravilliack, passing the Ironmongers-street in Paris, for which the Murderer
was pulled to pieces with Burning Pincers, yet could not be compelled to tell
who set him on that wicked Enterprise; and King James startled with this
untimely Death, put out a Second Proclamation to Banish the Jesuits out of the
Kingdom, and all Popish Recusants Ten Miles from the Court.

The Lord Sanquire, a Scottish Baron, having his Eye put out by one Turner, a
Fencing-master in White-Fryars, in revenge hired two Persons to Murder him;
for which he was Hanged before Westminster-Hall-Gate, in the Palace-Yard, and
Dyed very penitently, though great intercession was made to save him. And the
Queen of Scots, (Beheaded in the foregoing Reign) was by the Kings order
removed from Peterborough to Westminster, and there magnificently Interred; and
soon after the Elector Palatine of the Rhin^ came into England, and Married the
Lady Elizabeth, the Kings Daughter.

But the splendor of the Nuptials were Eclipsed by the Death of Prince Henry
the Kings Eldest Son; which happened a little before the Weding, not without
suspicion of Poison, as some have it, by the Scent of Perfumed Gloves, others
by eating a Bunch of Grapes; but the Disease affecting mostly the Brain, it
carried him off in Five Days, though the Physicians gave out he dyed of a
Malignant Fever. Whatever his Disease was, it carried him off on the 6th of
November, 1610. in the blossom of his Youth, he being 18 Years, 8 Months and 17
Days Old: He was a Prince of Extraordinary Wisdom and Piety much above his
Years: Of strength and ability of Body equal to most Men, of a Noble and
Heroic Disposition; and an hater of Flattery and Flatterers: He had an high
Esteem of Sir Walter Rawleigh, and used to say, No other King but his Father
would keep such a Man as Sir Walter in such a Cage, meaning the Tower. He kept
his Court at St. James's, which was much frequented by the most sober of both
the Nobility and Gentry. Something of the gravity of the Prince's temper, may
be known by the following story: Once when the Prince was hunting the Stagg, it
chanced that the Stagg being spent, crossed the Road where a Butcher and his
Dog were traveling, and the Butchers Dog killed the Stag, which was so great,
that the Butcher could not carry him off: When the Huntsmen and Company came
up, they fell at odds with the Butcher, and endeavored to incense the Prince
against him; to whom the Prince soberly Answered, What if the Butcher's Dog
killed the Stagg, what could the Butcher help it? They Replied, If his Father
had been served so, he would have Sworn at that rate, That no Man could have
endured it. Away, replied the Prince, All the Pleasure in the World is not
worth an Oath. In the time of his Sickness, a Person whom he loved, and who had
been the Companion of his Diversions, coming to see him, and asking him how he
did, the Prince among many other sober Expressions answered him thus, Ah Tom! I
in vain wish for that time I lost with thee and others, in vain Recreations.
But England was not worthy of so great a Blessing as the Life of this Excellent
Prince. For whom, notwithstanding the Court was not long in Mourning, because
of the Nuptials that ensued; and the Elector Palatine having been highly
Feasted and Entertained, departed with his Bride.

The King having raised one Sir Robert Carr, who had been his Page, high in his
Favor, creating him Viscount Rochester, so that he Acted as it were all in
all, and the Earl of Essex's Lady falling in Love with him, and complaining of
her Husbands inability in performing his Nocturnal Duties, the King gave order
to the Archbishop, that a Divorce might be sued out, which accordingly was
done, and she Married the Viscount. But Sir Thomas Overbury, who had been his
great Favorite, inveighing much against this Marriage, and laboring to
dissuade him from it, because the Lady lay under much scandal of Lust and
Incontinency, was by his and her procurement committed to the Tower, and there
by tampering with Sir Gervis Ellows the Lieutenant of that Garrison, and one
Weslon and others, they procured him to be Poisoned, and the Earl of
Northampton, who was privy to it, the better to color the business, gave out
he dyed of the Pox; and that strange noisome Sores were found on his Body; but
this did not long conceal so wicked a practice; for it proved their Ruin:
Northampton dyed soon after in a Melancholy disordered condition; and a little
after, the Apothecaries Man, who was hired to give Sir Thomas Overbury a
Glister, that had been poisoned, falling Sick at Flushing, revealed what he
knew, as to the Poisoning; and who was concerned in it. This News coming over
by the means of Sir Ralph Winwood, who had been Ambassador in Holland, made a
great noise, and more and more suspicion appearing, the King sent for the
Judges to search narrowly into the Truth of it; Imprecating a Curse on them and
their Posterity, if they were negligent in it; and the like on himself and
Posterity, if he favored any Guilty Person; so that the Viscount made Earl of
Somerset in consideration of his Marriage with the Lady Catharine Howard,
Daughter to the Duke of Suffolk, and Niece to the Earl of Northampton, who had
been Divorced from the Earl of Essex, when he had got his Pardon signed, as
being charged before with Imbezling the Crown Jewels, etc. had it stopped
under the Broad Seal; and the Lord Chief Justice Cook sending for him, he went
to the King, to complain of the Indignity put upon him, looking on it as a
great presumption in the Man that had done it. But the King, much to his
dissatisfaction, replied, Thou must go then, for if Cook sends for me, I must
go too; and when he parted with him, turning his back, he smiling said, I shall
never see thy Face more; and the same Day the Earl and his Countess were made
Prisoners, and diverse others, as Weston, Mrs. Turner, a great confident of the
Countesses, Sir Jarvis Ellows, and one Frankling: The Four last being first
Tried, were found Guilty, received Sentence of Death, and were Executed,
confessing the fact; and soon after, the Earl and his Countess were Tried and
Condemned; but the King Pardoned them, or rather Reprieved them, giving them
only a Lease of their Lives for Term of Years, utterly Banishing them the Court
and his Favor: So that deprived of all Honors, places of Trust, and Fortunes,
they led mean and despicable Lives, the dying very miserably, her Privy Parts
Rotting; and he of Discontent and Melancholy: So punctual is God in his
Providence, to revenge Innocent Blood on the shedders of it, and bring them to
shame, even in this Life.

The fall of this Favorite made way to the rise of George Villers, Son to Sir
George Villers of Lancashire, by a second venture; who being a comely Person,
and his Parts improved by Travel, the King upon his first arrival at Court cast
his Eyes on him, made him his Cupbearer at large, and in the End created him
Duke of Buckingham, growing in a little time as high in favor as the former,
doing all with the King as he pleased, and continued so to do till he was
Stabbed by one Felton at Portsmouth, as will appear in the next Reign.

Sir Thomas Mason being Arraigned, as concerned in the Murder of Overbury, had
his Trial set aside, and the Lord Chief Justice chequed for venturing to
insinuate, That in this there might be the Discovery of more than a Private
Person; intimating, though not plainly, That Overbury's untimely remove, had
something in it of retaliation, as if he had been guilty of the same crime
against Prince Henry; and glancing some what that the Earl of Northampton had
(but how truly I determine not) assured the Lieutenant of the Tower, That the
making away of Sir Thomas Overbury, would be acceptable to the King, he had his
wings ever after clipped.

Soon after this the Lady Arabella Dyed in the Tower, which set Men's Tongues
and Fears on work, that she followed the same fate, but nothing public
appeared in it. She was Daughter to Charles Stewart, Younger Brother to the
King's Father, and Elizabeth Cavendish; she Married Sir William Seymour, Son to
the Lord Beaucham, and both at a distance being Allied to the Crown, made the
Marriage distasted; but her Husband escaped out of the Tower, whether he had
been Committed for this conjunction, and fled beyond Sea; and she escaping from
her House at Highgate, to follow him, was intercepted, and Dyed in the place
aforesaid.

There being a Peace confirmed with all Nations, the King treated with Spain
about a Marriage between his Son Charles, now Prince of Wales, and Heir
apparent to the Crown, and the Infanta, but Ambassadors being sent, many delays
were made about difference in Religion and some other Objections; which the
Earl of Salisbury, who Negotiated the matter, perceiving would come to no good
effect, the Treaty of Marriage was laid aside, and overtures at the same time
made in the Court of France; but that, as the former, then succeeded not, by
the means of the Duke of Savoy.

The King having been some Years out of Scotland, went thither with a splended
Retinue; and unluckily about this time the Book of Sports was Published,
allowing, on the Sabbath Day, for the Recreation of the Younger sort, after
Evening-Service, Dancing about May-Poles, Church-Ales, and such like; which
much displeased sober People to behold that Sacred Day so Profaned; however,
notwithstanding many complaints, it continued, and some were punished for
opposing it, by Writing or otherways.

Sir Walter Rawleigh making overtures to the King to find out a Rich Mine of
Gold-Ore in Gunia, by the directions of Captain Kentish, once his Servant, he
was dismissed with some Ships and Men, but Gondemar, the Spanish Ambassador,
getting notice of this design, writ to Spain about it with such Expedition,
that Letters from thence arrived in the West Indies, to Advertize of his
preparations long before he came; so that finding almost all places Fortified,
except St. Thomes, they took that, and attempted the River, but in passing,
found such opposition as constrained them to retire, without attchieving their
ends; which so perplexed Kentish, that he Shot himself in his Cabin; and Sir
Walter, upon his Return, was seized by Sir Lewis Stukley his Kinsman; and being
brought to London, was at the earnest instance and clamor of the Spanish
Ambassador, sent to the Tower, and many grievous complaints laid to his charge,
of Imposing on the King, and indangering a War with Spain; That it would
likewise break off the Treaty of Marrying again, renewed between the Prince and
Infanta of Spain; with such aggravations, that the King gave way; he was
brought to the King's Bench Bar at Westminster, where the Records of his former
Arraignment were Read, and he demanded, why Execution should not be done upon
him, according to the Judgment that had been pronounced against him; and he
going about to Justify himself on the account of his Voyage, was told it was
not in question; but that he stood there upon his former Judgment, which the
King would have Executed upon him; and though he urged much against it, as the
King's Trust by a new Commission, which he looked upon as a Pardon, etc. his
Execution was appointed, and he Beheaded in the Old Palace-Yard at Westminster,
in the 60th Year of his Age, which pacified the Spaniard for the Loss sustained
by the West India Voyage.

Soon after this, Queen Ann dyed of a Dropsy at Hampton Court, a prodigeous
Blazing Star ushering her to another World: And briefly thus stands her
Character, She was in her great Condition a good Woman, not tempted from the
height she stood on to Embroil things below her, only giving herself content
in her own House, with such Recreations as might not make Time tedious to her;
so that nothing can be fixed on her, but that she may have Engraven on her
Monument a Character of Virtue.

The Bohemians having chosen Frederick, Elector Palatine of the Rhine, who
Married the Lady Elizabeth, King James's Daughter, their King, Revolted from
the Emperor Ferdinand; but being Overthrown by the Duke of Bavaria, the
Imperial General, and all Bohemia recovered, upon his return home, he found his
Palatinate Invaded by the Spaniards, who with other Aides beat him out of it,
though King James sent about 6000 English to his Assistance, who did many brave
things; but being worsted by great Numbers, the poor remains of them in the
conclusion of the War returned home.

This made the King call a Parliament to Refund his Treasure wasted in this
War, and on chargable Embasseys; but they would not hearken to it before sundry
Grievances were redressed; and hereupon diverse who had oppressed the People,
and misspent the public Treasure, were Questioned and Disgraced; and among
others the Lord Chancellor Bacon, for Bribery and Extortion, a thing he had
always condemned in others, and for it lost his Peerage, and the Great Seal,
spending his days very melancholy afterward, carrying only the empty title of
Viscount St Albans to his Grave. And after many contendings between the King
and Parliament, they not answering his expectations in giving the Sums
required, he Dissolved it, and put out a Proclamation to restrain the peoples
Talking to his prejudice, but it little availed; and the Earl of Oxford having
been accused on that account by one White a Papist, and the Earl of Southampton
by others, they were committed and continued a considerable time Prisoners.

The Kings Ambassadors found but slender success in their Negotiations, being
delayed in the Courts of the Empire, Spain, and with the Duke of Bavaria, which
much troubled and vexed him. And there being many strange Opinions creeping up,
the King sent his Letter to the Archbishops for Regulating the Ministry, and
Reforming Abuses therein; but the Jesuits and other restless People, underhand
labored to Embroil the Factions, and caused many disturbances, which, with
other dissatisfactions from abroad, cast the King into a Melancholy Temper,
especially the slights that were put upon the Prince his Son, who went thither
to Court in Person, attended by Buckingham and others, they endeavoring to
pervert him in change of his Religion, etc. so that he was Indisposed and so
much out of order a long time, that his Favorites durst scarcely speak to him.
Then hearing the Spaniards still trifled, his care was to get the Prince home
again, least having so wealthy a Prize, they should detain it, and sent him
secret notice to return: Whereupon taking leave of the Queen of Spain and
Infanta, and the other Ladies and Grandees, he was attended to the Sea Coast;
and in his return being in a Barge some distance from the Ships, by a sudden
Tempest he narrowly escaped being castaway, for a time neither being able to
reach the Ships, or Shore; but at length he arrived safe, to the high
satisfaction of the King his Father; but this Match after vast Expense and
Trouble, came to nothing, though the Lady had a long time had Tutors to Teach her
English, and pleased enough she appeared at it; but this was at last found only
a device to retard the King from meddling in the Affairs of the Palatinate, and
the design of this Marriage was his chief aim to restore it; whereupon he gave
orders to the Earl of Bristol, his Ambassador, positively to declare to the
King of Spain That unless that was restored to the Elector, the Treaty should
proceed no further; and that being refused, the Prince grew cold in his Love,
and so all was dashed, upon his thoughts with a Match with the Youngest
Daughter of Henry the Fourth of France, whom he had seen in his passage that
way to Spain, and to whom (after his Fathers death) he was Married.

Upon this the King called another Parliament, and missing the Duke of Richmond
his old Friend, and sending to his Lodging, he was found dead in his Bed,
without any Wound or sign of force upon him, which put the King into such grief
and consternation, that he would not go to the House in his Robes; and so put
them off for some Days longer. This Parliament greatly inveighed against the
Duke of Buckingham, for persuading the Prince to take such a hazardous Journey
out of the Land, and advised the King, since so many Delays and Tricks had been
put upon the Honor of the Nation, to break the Treaty with Spain, protesting
to assist him for the regaining the Palatinate, with their Lives and Fortunes,
etc. They insisting on a Religious War, that might be Aiding to the afflicted
Protestants in Germany and France; but the King however seemed more to incline
to Peace, as appeared by his Letters and Speeches on this occasion; for fearing
that when the War was begun, he should not find wherewithal to maintain it; and
therefore thanking them for their proffers and advice, he told them he would
consider better of it; however the Treaty with Spain was utterly dissolved.
This, and some forwardness for War, so fretted the Spanish Ambassador, that
whether out of Truth and Knowledge (as he pretended) or Malice only, cannot be
determined, he sent to the King to let him know, that Buckingham had some
dangerous Design against him, tending to his destruction; and that it would be
the safest to confine him to some Country House for his Life; however, though it
was generally thought to proceed from spite, because the Duke set himself
against the Spanish Interest, it put the King into such fears, being now grown
Old, that all the Duke's protestations could not a long time remove them, nor
till the Duke's Friends gave upon Oath their knowledge of the Duke's sincere
intentions, and that this was contrived with the Ambassador by the Advice of a
Jesuit; and this Parliament, the Earl of Middlesex, by Buckingham's
procurement, was Questioned, but there came no great matter of it; for the
Parliament knowing it was done by the Duke's means, upon his Questioning for
the Money excessively spent in Spain, they had no great mind to back him in it.

Whilst these things passed, a melancholy Account came from the East Indies,
where the English had five several Factories, two at Hitto and Lerico, and two
at Latro and Cambello, in the Island of Seran; but the Principal of them was at
Amboyna, which is the chief Place in all the East Indies, where Nutmegs, Mace,
Cinnamon, Cloves, and other Spices grow; and from these Factories the English
supplied not only England, and all Europe with Spice; but Persia, Japan, and
other Countries in the East Indies. This made the Dutch to Envy the English,
and therefore resolved to dispossess them of the Spice-Trade, which is the best
in all the East Indies. The English in all these Islands were better beloved
than the Dutch, and had built a Fortress in Amboyna for the safety of their
Trade; but the Dutch having two hundred Soldiers on that Island, forced this
Fortress from the English, and then pretending a Plot between the English and
the Natives of Amboyna, for the Recovering of the said Fort from the Dutch to
the English; the Dutch by horrid Torments, burning them under the Soles of
their Feet, and under their Armpits, and pouring Water down their Throats when
stretched on a Rack, till they were ready to burst, and by other barbarous ways
Massacred the English there, and seized upon the English Factories, to the
value of Four Hundred Thousand Pounds; making the rest of the English (that had
escaped their Massacre) Slaves, and sent them into other Islands which the
Dutch had possessed themselves of: This was in the Year 1622; when but three
Years before the Dutch had concluded a Treaty of Trade between the English and
Dutch in the East Indies.

This News extremely troubled the East India Company, who humbly petitioned the
King to demand satisfaction of the States General: But the King cared not for
War; and though the Dutch refused to make any satisfaction for this Unheard Of
Villainy, the King only told the Dutch Ambassador, That he never heard nor read
of a more Cruel and Impious Act than that of Amboyna; yet, said he, I do
forgive them, and I hope God will; but my Sons Son shall revenge this Blood,
and punish this horrid Massacre. And so left the Dutch in the quiet Possession
of what they had so basely gotten from the English, without offering to draw
his Sword against them: Which perhaps occasioned his being pictured with his
Sword in his Scabbard, and two Men pulling at it, but could not get it out.

And now the King having permitted the Count Mansfield, General for the Elector
Palatine to raise some Forces here, he soon after fell sick of a Tertian Fever;
a little before his Death he called for the Prince, and rowsed himself as
desirous to speak to him; but being too weak, sunk down in his Bed again, and
Dyed at Theobalds, on the 27th of March, 1625. when he had Reigned over all
Britain 22 Years and three Days, being the Twenty Third of his Reign and Fifty
Ninth of his Age. He was buried at Westminster.

He was of a Stature inclining to tallness, being somewhat higher than
Ordinary; his Body very well compacted, his Hair of an Aubourn Color, and of a
Pleasing Countenance; and toward his latter End somewhat fat and burly. He had
the repute of a Wise Prince; but his Reign did not show it: He indeed Writ
several Books against the Jesuite's King-Killing Doctrine, but that showed his
Fear more than his Learning; and that he was therein acted by a Principle of
Self-Preservation: For the Gunpowder-Plot in England, and the Assassination of
Henry the Fourth by Ravilliac in France, were enough to make him afraid of the
Jesuits. He was wholly ruled in all things by his Favorites, to whom he was
excessively bountiful, and thereby squandered away the Treasure of the Nation.
At his coming to the Crown he found the Exchequer Rich, but at his Death (which
was a great Unhappiness to his Son) he left it very poor; and well he might,
giving so profusely as he did to his Flatterers and Favorites. It is reported
of him, That having given Sir Robert Carr Twenty Thousand Pounds, the Lord
Treasurer Salisbury, that he might make the King sensible of what he had done,
invited him to an Entertainment, and so ordered it, that he should pass to it
through a Room wherein he had placed four Tables, and on each Table Five
Thousand Pounds in Silver; when the King came into the Passage, he started, as
amazed at the sight, (having never before seen such a Sum) and asking the
Treasurer the meaning of it? The Treasurer told the King, It was the Boon he
bad given to Sir Robert Carr: Swounds Man, says the King (which was the Oath he
usually swore) but Five Thousand Pounds shall serve his Turn. By which means
the Lord Treasurer saved the King Fifteen Thousand Pounds. This showed how
easy he was to be imposed upon, giving his Favorites what they pleased to
ask, without knowing what it was. His letting the Dutch redeem their Cautinary
Towns upon their own terms, and letting them also dispossess the English of
their Factory at Amboyna in the East Indies, by the most horrid Massacre that
any Age had heard of, without any reparation or satisfaction for it; however it
might Entitle him to be Rex Pacificus, it could never be an Argument of his
Wisdom, nor make him appear a Second Solomon, which his Flatterers usually
styled him.

In the beginning of this King's Reign a Plague raged, of which in London and
the Liberties, in one Year Dyed Thirty Thousand Five Hundred Seventy Eight
Persons.

A terrible Blazing Star appeared before the Queens death, and the breaking out
of the Wars in Hungary.

Anno 1603 John Lepton Rode Five times between York and London in Five Days,
beginning his Journey on Monday, finishing it the Friday after.

Anno 1605 William Calverly of York, Esquire Murdered two of his own Children in
his House, Stabbed his Wife, and went out with intentions to have Killed his
Child at Nurse, but was prevented; and was Pressed to death for refusing to
Plead.

The Reign of King CHARLES the First.
KING James dying at Theobalds, on the 27th of March, 1625. The same Day his
only Surviving Son, Prince Charles, was Proclaimed King of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland. On the 7th of May following were Celebrated the Funerals
of the Deceased King; whose Body being brought from Sommerset-House, was
Interred in the Abbey at Westminster with great Magnificence, the King himself
being the chief Mourner. The next thing after the Celebration of the Funeral,
was to hasten the coming over of the Queen, Henrietta Maria, youngest Daughter
of Henry the Fourth of France Deceased, and Sister to Lewis the 13th, then
Reigning, who had by the King's Proxy, the Duke of Chevereux, been Espoused to
him on the first of May, at our Ladies Church in Paris. Upon Trinity-Sunday at
Night, she arrived at Dover, where being met by the King the next Morning, they
went from thence to Canterbury, where they were Married, which the third Day
after was Declared at White Hall with great Rejoicing.

On the 18th of June following, the King Summoned a Parliament to meet at
Westminster, where he urged them for Supplies for the carrying on the War
against Spain, for the Recovery of the Palatinate; upon which the Commons gave
two Subsidies, and the Clergy three. In this Parliament Dr. Mountague, the
King's Chaplain, was Questioned for certain Tenants, in his Answer to a Book
called the Romish Gagger, and his Defense thereof, Entitled, Apello ad
Caesarem; and he being brought before the Bar of the House, the Speaker
declared their Pleasure, That they would refer his Censure till their next
Meeting; and in the mean time he should stand Committed to the Serjeant's-Ward,
till Two Thousand Pounds Bail could be procured for his Appearance next
Sessions. And though the King (by Bishop Laud's means) took him into his
Protection, as his Servant, yet his Bond remained Uncancell'd. Diverse Laws were
Enacted in this Parliament; and a Bill for Tunnage and Poundage passed the
House of Commons, but it Miscarried in the Lords House, because it was Limited
to a Year; whereas it had been Granted to the King's Predecessors during their
Lives. And then (the Plague greatly increasing) the Parliament was Adjourned to
Oxford; where the King again Soliciting for more Money, in order to the setting
out the Fleet, the Commons entered into a Debate about Grievances, and were
about drawing up a Remonstrance to present to the King; but it bearing hard
upon Buckingham, the King's great Favorite, they were immediately Dissolved:
And soon after a Fleet was fitted out, and sent against Spain; but having staid
Considering what to do, till they lost the Opportunity of Destroying the
Spanish Fleet in Cadiz, which at first might have been easily done, they Sailed
to the Southern Gape, in expectation of meeting their Plate-Fleet, but the
Contagion having got into the Fleet, they made an Untimely return without doing
any thing, but four Days before the Fleet came. This unprosperous Success of
the Fleet, very much Displeased the King, who prohibited Wimbleton (the
General) for some time from his Presence, but he excusing himself, laid a great
part of the Miscarriage on the Stubbornness of the Earl of Essex: But though all
were Blamed, yet none were Punished for the ill Conduct of this Expedition.

And now the War growing very Chargeable, since Parliamentary Aids failed, the
King (as advised by his Council) resolved upon raising Money by way of Loan, by
Letters of Privy Seal, sent to the Ablest Persons in the Kingdom, in each of
which Letters the King promised in the Name of Him, and his Heirs and
Successors; to re-pay the Money in Eighteen Months after the Payment thereof to
the Collector, and the Collectors were Ordered to pay the Sums received into
the Exchequer, and to return the Names of such as went about to Delay, or
Excuse the Payment of the Money required of them. This manner of Proceedings
was by all Wise Men thought very improper; for, by the Law no Man was bound to
lend the King Money; so this, instead of Supplying the King, only tended to
Alienate the Affections of his Subjects from him, and render things more
Difficult in the next Parliament. Which after the Coronation was over, met the
6th of February; but with no better Success than the last; For the House of
Commons began (where they left off at Oxford) with matters of Religion, and
public Grievances; viz. The Miscarriage of the Fleet to Cadiz; the
Evil-Counsellors about the King; Mis-government, and Mis-imployment of the
King's Revenues, and an Account of the three Subsidies, and three Fifteenths
Granted the 21th of King James: That new Impositions and Monopolies were
multiplied, and settled to continue by Grants, Customs inhanced by the new Book
of Rates; and that Tonnage and Poundage was Levied, though by no Act of
Parliament, and the Guard of the Seas neglected. In this Parliament also, five
particular Articles were drawn up against Mr. Richard Mountague, wherein he had
broken the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, and disturbed the Peace both of the
Church and Commonwealth. Upon all which, the House of Commons Ordered he
should be brought to Exemplary Punishment, and all his Books Burnt. Nor do I
hear that ever he made any Defense or Answer to those Articles that were
brought against him. It is affirmed, That Dr. Laud, (who was a mighty stickler
for Arminianism and Ceremonies, and who first of all set up this Mountague)
understanding from the D. of Buckingham that the King intended to leave Mr.
Mountague to a Trial, was heard to say, I seem to see a Cloud arising, and
threatening the Church of England; God in his Mercy dissipate it.

After this, the Commons Questioned several Persons who were of the Council of
War, in the Affairs of the Palatinate, concerning the management of that
Business. But the King understanding that the House of Commons were very busy
in searching the Original of a Letter under the Signet, written to the Mayor of
York, for Reprieving diverse Jesuits, Priests, and Popish Recusants, interrupted
their Proceedings therein by a Message sent by Sir Richard Weston, Chancellor
of the Exchequer, demanding a Supply for the English and Irish Forces; this was
so highly resented by the House, that Mr. Clement Cook, one of the Members,
openly Protested, That it was better to Dye by a Forrign Enemy, than to be
Destroyed at Home. And Dr. Turner (another Member of the House) seconded him
with these Quaeries, 1. Whether the King had not lost the Regality of the
Narrow Seas, since the D. of Buckingham was Admiral? 2. Whether his not going
as Admiral in this last Fleet, was not the Cause of the ill Success? 3. Whether
the King's Revenues has not been Impaired through his Immense Liberality? 4.
Whether he has not Engrossed all Offices, and preferred his Kindred to unfit
Places? 5. Whether he has not made Sale of places of Judicature? 6. Whether
Popish Recusants have not Dependence upon his Mother and Father in Law? These
bold Expressions so provoked the King, that he immediately sent Sir Richard
Weston to Demand Satisfaction; whereupon Dr. Turner made a Speech in his own
Vindication, alleging, That what he had said was for the Good of the Kingdom,
and not Reflecting upon any one in particular, with much more to the same
Purpose: And the further Debate of the matter being referred till another time,
Dr. Turner in the mean time withdrew himself, and sent a Letter to the Speaker
to excuse his Absence. Sir William Walter speaking his Opinion about
Grievances, said, That the true cause of them was because (as was said of Lewis
the 11th) all the King's Council rode upon one Horse. (Thereby alluding to the
D. of Buckingham's sole Management of all Affairs.) But for all these
Discourses, the Commons taking the King's Necessities into Consideration, Voted
three Subsidies, and three Fifteens; and that the Bill should be brought in,
as soon as the Grievances represented were redressed. They likewise Considered
of the matter of the D. of Buckingham, and the mis-employing of the Revenue.
But the King observing they did not make such haste as he Expected, in
answering his last Message, Summons both Houses together; and by the
Lord Keeper complains to them for not Punishing Dr. Turner and Mr. Cook, and
likewise for searching his Signet-Office; and justified the D. of Buckingham to
have acted nothing of public Concernment without his special Warrant; and
therefore forbid them to Concern themseves any farther therein, and Blamed them
for being too sparing in the matter of Supply, and for Ordering the Bill not to
be brought in, till their Grievances were heard and Answered, which he would
not Admit of. To which the King himself added, He must also put them in Mind,
That his Father, moved by their Counsel, and won by their Persuasion, broke the
Treaties, and that be himself was their Instrument toward his Father, and was
Glad to be Instrumental in any thing which might please the whole Body of the
Realm; nor was there any in greater Favor then, than the Duke, whom they now
Traduced; but that now finding him so far entangled in a War, that he could
make no Honorable nor safe Retreat, they made Necessity their Privilege, and
set what Rate they pleased upon their Supplies; a Practice not very Obliging
toward Kings: And whereas Mr. Cook told them, It was better for them to Dye by
a Foreign Enemy, than to be Destroyed at Home; indeed he thought it more
Honorable for a King to be Invaded, and almost Destroyed by a Foreign Enemy,
than to be Despised at Home The Commons in Answer to this, presented the King
with a very Dutiful Remonstrance, acquainting him, That they gratefully
Acknowledged his Majesty's Expressions of Affection to his People and
Parliaments; that they had taken. Mr. Cook's and Dr. Turner's Words into
Consideration, and might have given a good Account thereof by this time, if His
Majesty's Message had not Interrupted them; That they had the Presidents of
former Parliaments for Searching Letters of his Majesty, and his Secretary of
State, the Signet-Office, and other Records upon the like Occasions: That it
was the unquestionable Privilege of Parliaments to Complain of any Person of
any Degree; and their Proceedings in Relation to the Duke should not Prejudice
either Crown or Kingdom. That they were willing to Supply his Necessities
Liberally and Faithfully, if Additions might be made of other things which
concerned his Service, and were now in Consultation amongst them. The King
having received this Remonstrance, returned this Answer to it, That he would
have them in the first place Consult about matters of the greatest Importance,
and they should have time enough for other things afterward.

Not long after this, the Earl of Bristol (being Ordered by the King to be
Examined by a Committee of Lords, about his Negotiations in Spain, and having
been in Prison, and prohibitted access to his Majesty ever since his Return)
Petitioned the House of Lords for his Liberty, or to come to a Trial; who
applying themselves to the King, he granted a Writ for the Earl's coming to
Parliament, but with a Proviso, That his Personal attendance should be forborne:
Whereupon the Earl sent another Petition to the Lords, that he might be heard,
both as to his Restraint, and of what he had to say against the Duke. At this
the King was much concerned, and let the Lords know, That it was his Royal
Pleasure that the Earl of Bristol might be sent for as a Delinquent, to answer
his Offenses to the House, and his Scandalizing the Duke of Buckingham, and the
King likewise, by Reflection. Upon this the Earl was brought to the Bar, and
being ready to be Impeached of High Treason by the Attorney General, the Earl
said, My Lords, I am a Freeman and Peer of the Realm Unattained; I have
something to say of high Consequence to His Majesty's Service, and I beseech
your Lordships give me leave to Speak. The Lords thereupon bid him go on. Then,
said he, I accuse that Man, the Duke of Buckingham, of High Treason. And
immediately he presented Twelve Articles against him. This unexpected procedure
of the Earl's, caused the Attorney General to draw up a Charge against him,
consisting of Eleven Articles of matters of diverse Natures. And beside these
Articles against the Duke, the Earl of Bristol, exhibited Eleven others against
the Lord Conway. The Earl likewise gave in his Answer to each particular
Article of his Impeachment. And now whilst these two Peers were thus
Contesting, the House of Commons presented an Impeachment against the Duke,
consisting of twelve Articles, to each of which the Duke made Replies: But that
not Satisfying the Commons, they drew up another Declaration of Grievances
against the Duke, whom they resolved by all means to bring down; which
Declaration was read before the Bill of Subsidies: Which so Incensed the King,
that he Dissolved the Parliament the very next Day, and thereby lost Four
Subsidies and Three Fifteenths, rather than the Duke should be farther
Questioned by the Parliament, though one of the Articles against the Duke, was
for a strong Presumption of his having Poisoned the King's Father. And thus
ended this King's Second Parliament. After this Dissolution, the King Committed
the Earl of Bristol to the Tower, and Published first a Proclamation for
Burning all Copies of the Commons Declaration, and then a Declaration showing
the Grounds and Reasons of his Dissolving this and the former Parliament.

There were several Occasions at this time which required considerable Sums of
Money; for besides the Palatinate, there was great Likelihood of a War with
France, upon occasion of the French King's using the Vaunt-Guard (one of the
King's Men of War, lent to the French King to go against Genoa) with six other
Merchants Ships, (turned into Men of War) against the French Protestants in
Rochel, expressly contrary to Agreement; and the King being extremely Troubled
at it, demanded Satisfaction of the French King; who Deferring to give it, the
King seized a rich French Ship, and the French King Arrested the Goods of the
English Merchants in France, to the Value of about 300000 l. though afterward
Restoration was made on both sides. But the Insolent Practices of the Priests
and Jesuits belonging to the Queen, especially her Confessor, soon caused
another Rupture, for he imposed upon her as a Penance, to wait upon his
Servants at their Dinner, and to walk on Foot in a rainy Morning from
Sommerset-House to St. James's, and from thence to Tyburn, to offer up her
Prayers for the Souls of the Romish Martyrs, i. e. Traitors, or Jesuits, that
had been Executed there, himself the mean while riding by her in his Coach. But
these Arrogancies being unsufferable, the Queens French Domestics were paid
off, and sent Home. Hereupon the French King (though this was no more than what
himself had done before, in sending back all the Spanish Courtiers that came
with his Queen) Arrested all the English Merchants Ships that lay in the River
of Bourdeaux; this was so ill resented by the King, that the Peace so lately
patched up, was now turned into an open War: And the King thereupon made use of
those Forces against the French which were designed against the Spaniard;
complying now with the Desires of the Rochelers, who had humbly Sued to him for
Aid and Protection. But the Fleet designed for their Relief, not going out till
after Michaelmas, (a very improper Season to send out a Fleet of great Ships to
Sea) encountered only with Storms and Tempests, and returned Home again without
doing any thing, leaving the poor Rochellers in a worse Condition than they
were before.

The Assessment of the Loan (again set on Foot since the Parliaments
Dissolution) being generally Opposed, the People of lower Rank were Ordered to
appear in the Military-Yar near St. Martins in the Fields, to be Listed for
Soldiers; it being thought fit, that those who could not with their Pur^es,
should assist the King with their Persons. But several Gentlemen and others of
Ability, for refusing the Loan, were Committed Prisoners, to the Fleet,
Mar^^^sea, Gate House, and other Prisons: Sir John Elliot, who Petitioned his
Majesty, declaring that he could prove by many Presidents, That all manner of
Aids and Taxes in former Kings Reigns, were never Levied but the general
Consent of the Nobility and Commons Assembled in Parliament: Notwithstanding
which, he was Committed to the Gate House.

Dr. Sybthorp, and Manwaring, two Eminent Preachers at Court, instead of
Preaching the Gospel, Preached up the Necessity and Duty of the Loan; one of
them Asserting, That the Prince has power to Direct his Counsel, and make
Laws; and that Subjects, if they cannot exhibit Active Obedience, in case the
thing Commanded should be against the Law of God or Nature, yet ought to yield
Passive Obedience; and in all other Cases they were bound to Active Obedience.
The other was more express to the Purpose, and affirmed, That the King's Royal
Command in imposing of Loans and Taxes, though without Consent in Parliament,
did Oblige the Subjects Conscience, upon pain of Eternal Damnation. Which
Position being highly Applauded at Court, the Sermon of Dr. Sybthorp, called,
Apostolic Obedience, was approved by Dr. Laud, (then Bishop of London) and an
Express sent from the King to Archbishop Abbot to License it, which he
refusing, the King suspended him from his Archiepiscopal See, and a Commission
was Granted to five Bishops, to execute his Office.

And now the D. of Buckingham to clear his Reputation and show his Diligence in
his Admiral-ship, with some difficulty completed his Naval Forces, consisting
of 6000 Horse and Foot, in Ten Royal Ships, and Ninety Merchantmen, with which
he set Sail from Portsmouth, June 27th, 1627. and Published a Manifesto of the
King's Affection to the Reformed Churches in France, and his Displeasure for
the last Mis-employing of his Ships against the Rochellers. But after all,
through the Duke's ill Conduct, or Obstinacy (in going before St. Martin's
Castle, in the Isle of Rhee, against which his Council dissuaded him, rather
than against the Mede, another Castle in that Island, which they might in all
likelihood have carried, and would have been a safe place of Retreat in case of
Necessity) this great Design Miscarried, with the Death of near Two Thousand
common Soldiers, Thirty Prisoners of Note, and Forty four Colors taken. Yet
to make some Amends for this Miscarriage, a great French Ship was taken upon
the Coasts of Holland, Laden with all sorts of Ammunition to a great Value.
Also Sir John Pennington took 34 rich French Merchantmen homeward-bound, and
brought 'em all safe into England.

The lowness of the Exchequer, the late Miscarriage at the Isle of Rhee, and
the present distressed Condition of the Rochellers, being laid before the Lords
of the Council, it was thereupon resolved to call another Parliament, and Writs
were forthwith issued out accordingly. And the Parliament met the 27th of
March, and the King tells them, That the greatness of the Danger requires a
speedy Supply, and hopes they will prove such true Patriots, as not to deceive
his Expectations. The first thing the Commons went upon, was the Grievances of
the Nation; and therein the chief thing insisted on, was the Case of those
Gentlemen imprisoned for refusing the Loan; and who, notwithstanding their
Habeas Corpus, were remanded to Prison: After the Debating whereof, the Commons
resolved, Nemine Contradicente, 1. That no Man ought to be Restrained by the
Command of the King or Privy Council, without some Cause of the Commitment. 2.
That the Writ of Habeas Corpus ought to be granted upon request to every Man
that is Restrained, though by the Command of the King, the Privy Council, or any
other. 3. That if a Freeman be Imprisoned by the Command of the King, the
Privy Council, or any other, and no cause of such Commitment expressed, and the
same be returned upon an Habeas Corpus granted for the said Party, then he
ought to be Delivered or Bailed. After which the Parliament drew up a Petition
against Popish Recusants, to which the King gave a full and Satisfactory
Answer; and then the Commons granted the King Five Subsidies; at which he was
so pleased, that he sent them Word He would deny them nothing of their
Liberties which any of his Predecessors had Granted. And thereupon the Commons
drew up that Memorable Bill called Petition of Right, which, after many Debates
about it, passed both Houses, and was Presented to the King, to which the King
answered, The King wills that Right be done according to the Law, and Customs
of the Realm, and that the Statutes be put in due Execution, that his Subjects
may have no cause to complain of any Wrong or Oppressions, contrary to their
just Rights and Liberties; to the Preservation whereof, he holds himself in
Conscience as well Obliged, as to that of his Prerogative. But this Answer not
being thought Satisfactory, upon their further Application to the King, he sent
them this short but full Answer, Soit Droit Fait come il est desire: i. e. Let
it be done according to your Desire. Which Answer was received with great Joy
by both Houses, and the Citizens of London, who expressed it by making of
Bonfires, and ringing of Bells: And the King for further Satisfaction, received
again into his Favor Dr. Abbot, A. B. of Canterbury, Bishop Williams, and
others, and likewise caused the Commission of Loan and Excise to be Cancelled
in his Presence. But the Commons after this drawing up a Remonstrance against
the Duke, and calling in Question the King's taking of Tunnage and Poundage,
were Adjourned to the 20th of October, several Acts being first passed by them.

Much about this time Dr. Lamb (that had been formerly twice Arraigned, once
for Necromancy, and another time for a Rape) was Killed by the Rabble in
Lothbury, for which the City was Fined 6000 l. He was a great Favorite of the
Duke of Buckingham's, and commonly called the Duke's Devil, which made him the
more Hated.

After the Duke's late Expedition to the Isle of Rhee, the Earl of Denbeigh
Sailed with Fifty Ships for the Relief of Rochel, but being repelled with much
Loss, he returned back to Plymouth, despairing of Success: Whereupon the Duke
of Buckingham himself resolved to go again with a more considerable Navy; but
whilst he was at Portsmouth hastening the fitting out of the Fleet, one John
Felton, a Lieutenant, Stabbed him to the Heart with a Knife, which he left
sticking in his Body till the Duke himself pulled it out, and Died immediately
after; Felton was soon Apprehended by the Servants, and laden with Irons; and
being asked what induced him to commit so bloody a Fact, he boldly answered, He
Killed him for the Cause of God and his Country: He had likewise fastened a
Paper in the Crown of his Hat, to tell the World (in case he had miscarried in
the Action) That his only motive to this Fact, was the Remonstrance of the
Commons against the Duke; and that he could not Sacrifice his Life in a Nobler
Cause, than by delivering his Country from so great an Enemy. For this Fact
Felton was Condemned and Hanged at Tyburn, and his Body hanged in Chains upon a
Gibbet at Portsmouth.

However the designed Fleet set Sail under the Command of the Earl of Lindsey,
and came to Rochel-Haven, where there was a Barricado of 1400 Yards cross the
Channel; notwithstanding which, the Earl adventured in, passing the Forts and
Outworks; but the Wind changing, drove the Ships foul upon each other: Which
unhappy Accident made the Rochellers despair of Relief, and presently
Surrendered the Town. And the Earl of Lindsey brought the Fleet safe home again.

The Parliament after some Adjournments sitting again, the Merchants, who for
refusing to Pay Customs, had had their Effects seized, made grievous
Complaints, this made the King send for the two Houses to attend him in the
Banqueting House, requiring them to pass the Bill for Tunnage and Poundage,
for the better and more speedy ending all Differences. But they replied, God's
Cause was to be preferred before the King's, and in the first place therefore
they would consult about the Establishment of Religion; and so returning, they
appointed a Committee for that Purpose, and another for Civil matters; and many
were Censured for reflecting on their Proceedings, and for Levying Tunnage and
Poundage; but the King excused the latter as done by his express Command, in a
time when the Nation was in Danger to be Invaded by Foreigners: And that such
things had been often done in the Reigns of his Predecessors, when Money could
not be speedily raised on urgent Necessities, in a Parliamentary way. However
this and other Misunderstandings raised great Heats and Jealousies, which were
Fomented to that Degree, that the Parliament was quickly after Dissolved,
without passing the Bill of Tunnage and Poundage. Soon after which the King
published a Declaration of the Cause thereof, and eleven of the Members were
Summoned before the Council Table, and all committed to diverse Prisons,
contrary to the Petition of Right, so lately confirmed by the King.

Soon after this a Paper was dispersed, containing some Projects how the King
might increase his Revenue without the help of a Parliament; and upon
Information that the Earls of Bedford, Clare, Sommerset, and others, had
dispersed some Copies of them, they were Committed: But Sir David Fowlis making
it appear it was a Project of Sir Robert Dudley's, Son to to the Earl of
Leicester, in Italy, sixteen Years since, and no ways intended at this time to
create any Difference between the King and Parliament, they were released.

And now diverse Threatening Libels against the chief Ministers of State were
scattered abroad, and particularly one against Bishop Land, assuring him his
Life was sought for, he being the Fountain of Wickedness, etc. This made the
great Men fear the sitting of another Parliament: And it is said Weston the
Treasurer advised the King never to call any again. And a Book of Projects for
Governing and raising Money without Parliaments, was presented to the King. In
January an Ambassador from Spain arrived at London, whose business was to treat
of Peace, which was soon Concluded, as had been with France before. On the 29th
of May, 1630. the Queen was delivered of a Son, who was Christened Charles; and
Succeeded in the Kingdom: At whose Birth, it is Remarkable, a very bright Star
appeared at Noonday; which being showed the King as he came from his Devotion,
he greatly Rejoiced thereat, as taking it for a fortunate Presage: Soon after
Dr. Leighton Writing and Publishing a Book Entitled, Sion's Plea, was Censured
for it, and Sentenced to have his Nose slit, his Ears cropp'd, and a Mark or
Brand in his Forehead, which was inflicted on him.

Anno 1631, Mervin, Lord Audley, Earl of Castle-Haven, was tried by his Peers,
on the Petition of his Son and Heir, for a Rape and Sodomy, and being found
Guilty, lost his Head on Tower Hill.

The King hearing of some Murmurrings and Discontents in Scotland, went thither
in Person, hoping to give his People of that Kingdom Satisfaction; and being
solemnly Crowned at Edenborough, he called a Parliament: But they fearing the
bringing in of Episcopacy, and the Form of Prayer, and other Services in
England, seemed more and more to be Disgusted. However the King having
Confirmed and Ratified some Laws, which the Scots construed to the worst Sense;
And which was indeed in order to the establishing Episcopacy there, which King
James the First had introduced Anno 1616. and which was apparent by the King's
giving Order to the Dean of his Royal Chapel in Edenborough, to have Prayer
read therein, according to the English Liturgy, etc.

In the Year 1632, the King (incited thereto by Bishop Laud) set out a
Declaration for Tollerating of Sports on the Lord's Day; which gave great
Offense to all sober Men; and for refusing to Publish it, many of the best
Ministers were Suspended, and deprived of their Benefices.

October. 13. 1633. The Queen was delivered of her second Son, named James,
afterward Duke of York, and after his Brother Charles his Death, King of
England, etc. And at that time the Archbishop of Canterbury dying, Bishop Laud
was made Archbishop in his place.

After this a Fleet was set out by the Supply of a Tax, called Ship Money,
which removed the Hollanders who had Confederated with the French, from before
Dunkirk; and the Flandrians, with the assistance of the Spaniard, soon Routed
the French Army by Land. The King Considering the good success of this Fleet,
sent out an other which Sailing Northward scoured the Seas of the Dutch Busses,
and spoiled their Fishing-trade, so that they were constrained to purchase
their leave to Fish on our Coast, on Valuable Considerations: Several Gentlemen
being Dissatisfied with the raising of Ship Money, and being done without
consent of Parliament, refused to pay it; upon which the King referred it to
his Judges, of whom Ten were for the Legality of it, and subcribed their Names
to be Enrolled in the Courts of Westminster; (but Hutton and Crook refused) and
thereupon Mr. Hamden of Buckinghamshire, refusing to pay it, had Judgment given
against him, which occasioned murmurings among the people; of which Dr.
Bastwick, Prin and Burton taking the Advantage, writ Books reflecting on the
Bishops and Government, for which they were sentenced to pay 5000 l. Fine, lose
their Ears in the Pillory, and Imprisoned during the King's pleasure. And Dr.
Williams Bishop of Lincoln was fined 10000 l. and Imprisoned in the Tower
During pleasure; and left to the Censure of the High Commission Court, as to
what concerned them; wherein the Bishop had very hard Measure, his Offense
being chiefly that he approved not of Archbishop Laud's Exorbitant Actions.

And now new Troubles arising about the Book of Common Prayer in Scotland the
King marched thither with an Army, and the Scots met him near Berwick: But a
Treaty being began, by means of the Scots Nobility, a Peace was soon Concluded;
but they kept it no longer than the King's return to London; which occasioned
him to make a second Expedition; but by this time they had entered into a solemn
League and Covenant for the Extirpation of Episcopacy, and Establishing of
Presbytery.

On the 13th of April, 1640. After twelve Years interval, a Parliament met at
Westminster, to whom the King promised, That if they would Supply him to
maintain the War against the Scots, he would quit his claim of ship money. And
the Parliament seemed to have a great Disposition to comply with the King's
desires; but it being demanded in the House of Commons, what supply the King
expected? It was answered by Mr. Secretary Vane, Twelve Subsidies: (whereas at
that time, the King only desired Six) This large Demand put the House into such
a Ferment, made things look so ill, that the King Dissolved the Parliament the
next Day, having only sat 22 Days.

The Scots not yet quieted, enter into England with an Army, and having
defeated the King's Forces at Newborn, seized upon New Castle and Durham; upon
which the King is willing to hear their Grievances, and receives a Petition
from them, wherein they require a Parliament to be called in England, without
which they could have no Redress: Declaring their Intention not to lay down
Arms, till the Reformed Religion was settled in both Nations upon sure Grounds,
and the Causers and Abetters of their present Troubles, Laud and Strafford were
brought to public Justice in Parliament. After which several Peers, the City
of London, and diverse other places, Petitioned the King for the sitting of a
Parliament, whereupon the King Summoned another Parliament to meet Nov. 3.
1640. when the People were every where in a Ferment and Prejudice, inveighing
if not against the King, yet against his Ministers of State.

In this Parliament all Ceremonies in the Church were suppressed, except those
used in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; and the Earl of Strafford, Archbishop
Laud, and Bishop Wren, were Impeached of High Treason and committed to the
Tower: Diverse of the Judges that had declared for Ship Money were Voted
Delinquents; and Judge Berkley Arrested by the Usher of the Black Rod for
High Treason, as he sat in the King's-Bench-Court.

The King being vexed at the proceeding of the Commons complained to the Peers,
who promised to Labor for a Moderation and good Understanding between the King
and his two Houses. But matters yet running high, he removed diverse Ministers
of State and Officers in Trust, appointing a new Lieutenant of the Tower* which
greatly displeased the Commons, insomuch that t^^^ Articled against the new
Lieutenant to be Peers, w^^ refused to meddle in it, it being the King's
Prerogative to ^^nt in whom he pleased. But not long after a multitude of
^^prentices and others came to the Peers House, clamouri^^ ^o have the
Lieutenant removed, and Threatening on refusa^ to turn all Topsy-turvey; they
also demanded that the Bishops might be excluded the House of Peers: And then
going into Westminster-Abbey, in their unadvised Fury, spoiled the Vestments,
Organs, Sepulchers, and what else was comely and decent. And as they returned
by White Hall, uttered very opprobrious Threatenings against the King and his
Counselors; which made him Fortify his Palace, and accept of a Guard of the
Inns of Court Gentlemen, who offered their Service to defend his Person from
any Insults. The Parliament hereupon apprehending a fear of Danger that
threatened them, assumed a Guard for their Defense, constituting the Earl of
Essex Captain of it, and appointed an extraordinary Assembly in the City of
London; and soon after committed twelve Pishops Prisoners to the Tower, which
scared most, if not all the rest, from giving their Attendance; and many
Ministers of State were Accused and Censured: And the Earl of Strafford, upon
his Trial, being accused of many things, and plainly answering all that by
Articles was laid to his Charge, and the Court Adjourning without prefixing any
time of meeting, the Commons proceeded to draw up and dispatch a Bill of
Attainder against him, which the King with great difficulty, and some
reluctance of Mind, Signed; but the Warrant for his Execution he labored much
to defer, saying, He had heard the Cause, and believed in his Conscience the
Earl was not guilty of Treason, and yet he could not clear him of Misdemeanour;
but hoped a way might be found out to satisfy Justice, and their Fears,
without oppressing his Conscience: and had consulted about it with his Judges
and Bishops before he had Signed the Bill; as also a Bill for the sitting of
the Parliament during the pleasure of both Houses; which last was occasioned
for satisfying the Scots, who required vast Sums of Money. However the Earl was
Executed, though the King labored much to save him, proposing his perpetual
Imprisonment, and many other things.

He was attended at his Execution on Tower Hill by the Archbishop of Armagh,
and to this Effect addressed him to the People; viz. That he was come thither
to pay the last Debt he owed to Sin, with a good Hope of rising to
Righteousness; that he Dyed willingly, Forgave all, and patiently submitted,
declaring himself Innocent of the Crimes charged against him; wishing
Prosperity to the King and People: He advised his Adversaries to repent of
their violent Proceedings against him, saying, He thought it a strange way to
write in Blood the beginning of Reformation, and Settlement of the Kingdom:
however, he wished his Blood might rest, and not cry against them; declaring he
Dyed in the Communion of the Church of England, for whose Prosperity he Prayed;
and concluded with a Desire that the Spectators would pray for him. And then
had his Head stricken off.

There having been about this time some Tumults made about White Hall and
Westminster, and the King being informed they were encouraged by the Lord
Kimbolton and five Members of the House of Commons, the King demanded those
five Members, whom he accused of High Treason, as also the Lord Kimbolton, a
Member of the House of Peers; but they were refused to be delivered: Whereupon
he came with about 500 armed Men to the House of Commons, where the Speaker
resigned the Chair to him; but looking about, and not seeing those he expected,
(for upon Notice, they were withdrawn) he declared his good Intentions to the
Parliament, saying, He hoped they would send him those Members against whom he
had matters of high Concern. But they were so far from doing it, that they put
the City of London in Arms, and Adjourned their sitting for five days;
forbidding the Citizens to help the King to find out any of the accused
Members; and so far were they from it; that the Parliament sitting again, they
carried them in Triumph, and placed them in their Seats, shouting and
threatening as they passed by White Hall; and to lessen the King's Power, the
Parliament sent Letters to the adjacent Counties, commanding the Militia to
draw up in Arms: Whereupon they found that upon occasion, more than 20000 Men
could be got in a Readiness. These proceedings made the King withdraw to
Hampton Court, whose absence much increased the Parliaments Authority among the
People; and to endear them to the Citizens, they adjourned from Westminster to
London; and sent their Mandates to the Governors of Seaport Towns, strictly
forbidding them to Obey any of the King's Orders unless they were confirmed by
them. This more weakened his Power than all their former Proceedings; which the
King, by an early precaution in Garisoning those parts, might have prevented.

The King considering that things were likely to go ill, and that he had given
away his Power, and could not dissolve this Parliament, he endeavored by mild
Terms to win them to his Interest, and Writ from Windsor, protesting his good
meaning towar^s both Houses, and that he would be ready to any thing that might
be for the good of his People: whereupon they sent Messengers to desire him to
return to London; but for some Reasons he refused it. Hereupon the Commons drew
up an humble Remonstrance, which seemed so unreasonable to the Peers, as to
what therein they proposed, that they rejected it, till they saw the Commons
uniting against them, and then Messengers were sent to the King with it, who
with some Reservation yielded to part of it, and denied the rest; which not
satisfying them, they proceeded to Petition the King, That the accused Members
might be freed from all imputation of Guilt, which was Granted.

During the King's being busy in Scotland, a horrid Conspiracy and Rebellion
broke out in Ireland, which was discovered but the Night before it began to the
Lords-Justices, by Owen O Conally; by which means Dublin, and some other
places, were secured, and diverse of the Conspirators apprehended: However it
was carried on with such a Rage and Fury, by the Encouragement of the Popish
Priests, Monks, and Friars, that nothing for a time but Slaughter and miserable
Cruelties on the English and Scots were to be seen in most of the Provinces;
the Romish Priests loudly declaring that they were Heretics, and ought to be
Extirpated from the Earth; that it it was no more Sin to kill them, than Dogs,
and a mortal one to Relieve and Protect them; giving the Sacrament to diverse,
on condition that they should spare neither Man, Woman, nor Child, saying, It
did them a great deal of Good to wash their Hands in their Blood; and they were
told, If any of the Murderers in this Attempt were slain, they should
immediately go to Heaven; so that nothing but Bloodshed and piteous Cries were
to be seen and heard in most parts of that Kingdom. The King to Redress this,
Solicited the Scots Parliament to send ov^r Forces; but they refused,
Alleging, It was a dependant Kingdom on England; and if the English Parliament
would make use of, and pay any of their Men, they might raise them; or
otherwise they would not intermeddle: And the Parliament of England being slow
in sending over Succors, about 200000 of all sorts fell in this unparrallel'd
Massacre; but Forces going over, the Cutthroats were every where Routed, many
Slain, and the rest betook themselves to their Fastnesses; and the state of
Affairs were restored to some good Order.

The Contendings between the King and Parliament in England, continuing to
increase, many that feared the sad Events, left the Land; others retired to
lead private Lives. Mary, the King's Eldest Daughter, being Married to the
Prince of Orange, by Approbation of Parliament, the Queen went over with her,
and the King caused all Popish Priests to be banished the Kingdom, and the
Penal Statutes to be put in Execution against Papists. Yet the Parliament
proceeded to Tax the King about harkning to the Change of Religion, and that he
had given cause to the Rebellion in Ireland, casting many Reflections on the
Queen, which constrained him to publish his Declaration to wipe off these
Imputations; but this doing little good, he retired with Prince Charles his
Son, the Palsgrave of the Rhine, the Duke of Richmond, and others, to York;
Summoning the Nobles, Knights of the Garter, and all such as held Tenure of the
Crown, by Lands or Service. But the Parliament strictly forbid it: Yet many
went, and among them several Members of Parliament.

The King seeing no good by fair means to be done, he Commanded all the
Yorkshire Men to meet him at Howard-Moor near York, where there appeared about
60000; and with about 20000 he returned to York, Commanding the rest to return
to their Respective Homes. In the mean while the Parliament was borrowing Money
of the Londoners on the Public Faith; and raising 10000 Foot, and 2000 Horse,
they sent them toward York; of which the King had no sooner Notice, but with a
slender Force he repaired to Hull, and demanded entrance; but Sir John Hotham,
the Governor, appearing on the Walls, fell on his Knees, and entreated his
Majesty not to desire that of him which he could not Grant, by reason of the
Trust imposed in him by the Parliament, whereupon he was proclaimed Traitor;
and the King sent to the Parliament to complain of this Affront, and require a
Treaty tending to a Reconciliation, promising to repair to them if they would
leave London, and make choice of some other fitting place; but they refused it.
Whereupon he Proclaimed all those Guilty of Treason that assisted them either
with Money or Supplies; and threatened to deprive the Londoners of their
Charter, if they offended herein. Then he Fortified Newark and Barwick, and
sought to gain Hull by Force, but failed in the Attempt: And the Parliament
having proclaimed the Earl of Essex their General, the King repaired to
Notingham, and there set up his Standard, and gathered a considerable Army; so
that now to the great Trouble of most People, War was prepared for on both
sides, with much Vigor and Resolution; in which many Gallant Men lost their
Lives. And Prince Charles seeing his Father's Affairs in a desperate Condition,
Sailed for the Scillys, from whence he was Invited by the Parliament to return
for London; but not thinking it safe, he went to the Hague, and continued with
his Sister the Princess of Orange till he heard the sad News of his Father's
Death. In the mean while Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice, the King's Nephews,
Sons to his Sister the Queen of Bohemia, came over, and were Graced with
Commands in the Army.

After several Skirmishes, and the taking some Towns on both sides, the two
Armies drew near each other, and the King perceiving himself Strong, upon the
Earl of Worcester's coming in with a considerable Force of Welsh, resolved to
out-march Essex, and reach London, and to that end got a days March before him;
but Scorning to be pursued by a Subject, he changed his Measures, Faced about,
and both Parties Facing, between Keinton and Edgehill in Warwickshire, on the
23d of October. 1642, a sharp Battle was Fought between them, in which on both
sides were slain between 5 and 6000 Men; and the Slaughter had been much
greater, had not Night come on and parted them. After this the King took in the
Town and Castle of Banbury, and some other places. The Parliament to strengthen
their Army, Voted, That all Apprentices that would List, should be Free from
their Masters, and afterward received into Service again; whereupon they gained
considerable Recruits. Then solemnly invited the Scots to their Assistance;
which the King by his Letters to the Privy Council of Scotland, labored to
prevent, but in vain: Yet several of the Lords and Commons presented a Petition
to him at Cole-brook, and had answer, He would expect them at Windsor Castle,
and desired them to hasten the Treaty: But this they did to gain time till
Essex was Recruited, which made the King hasten to Secure Brainford, where
happened a sharp Encounter, though at last he forced his way; but upon Essex's
hastening with his Regular Forces, and the London-Militia, he retired, for fear
of being hemmed in, to Oxford; and because this happened in a time of Treaty,
the Parliament Voted to have no Accommodation; yet after allowed it, if he
would leave his Army and come to them: But this was Rejected, and the War waxed
fierce, so that with various Success Towns were taken, and Parties routed on
both sides, by turns, whilst the Counties of Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, Hartford,
Cambridge, Isle of Ely, and the City of Norwich, were Authorized by the
Parliament to Associate under the Lord Gray of Wark. And the Queen arriving
with Officers, Ammunition, and Money from Holland, was received at York by the
Earls of New castle and Cumberland. And these Disturbances at Home, gave the
Irish an Opportunity to Rebel again at the Instigation of the Pope, who to that
Purpose sent two Letters, one to Owen O Neal, and the other to all the
Archbishops, Bishops, Nobles, and People of the Kingdom; Commanding those who
had already appeared in the Quarrel, and Exhorting others to take Arms;
wickedly approving the Massacre, and bestowing on them his Benediction, with
plenary Pardons and Absolutions for whatever they should act; so that much
Blood was again shed, which caused (by the Mediation of those that were
Peaceably inclined) several new Treaties to be set on Foot between the King and
Parliament; but they came to nothing, being still crossed by those that hoped
for Advantages by the Distractions of the times. And the Lord Brook besieging
Litchfield-Close, was there Slain; but his Soldiers took it, and the Earl of
Chester Prisoner. And now they proceeded to draw up Articles of high Treason
against the Queen, some of which were, That she pawned the Crown-Jewels in
Holland; That she endeavored to raise a Party in Scotland against the
Parliament; and that she was in the Head of a Popish Army in England. This was
carried to the Lords by Pym, who seemed at first to be Surprised, but after
agreed to it.

About this time Robert Yeomans and George Boucher, were Hanged at Bristol, on
pretense they designed to betray the City to the King; and on the like pretense
Mr. Tomkins and Mr. Challonor were Executed on the Account of London- And
during these Heats, Archbishop Laud was Attainted of High Treason, and lost
his Head. And the Queen meeting the King at Edgehill, went with him to Oxford,
where having Recruited his Army, he marched to Gloucester, which he Besieged.
And Prince Rupert having taken Bristol, and gained some other advantages, came
to him. In the mean while Essex hasted away with the City Trained-Bands, and
Auxiliaries added to his Army, and between the King and him a great Battle was
Fought on Newbury-heath soon after; for upon his coming, having raised the
Siege, he followed the King; and having viewed his Army, presently Engaged; and
after a sharp Fight, the King's Party had the worst: And now the Parliament
getting the Fleet from Sir John Pennington, made the Earl of Warwick Admiral,
and watched the Coast to prevent the Landing of Foreign Forces: and Sir John
Hotham and h^s Son being Tried for intending to deliver Hull to the King, on
some Disgust taken, were Condemned and Beheaded; and the Parliament proclaimed
all Traitors that should assist the King against them with Horse, Arms, or
Money; and Treason for any Member of their House to Desert them, and go to him.
And soon after, the second Newbury Fight ensued, in which the King was worsted,
and between 4 or 5000 Men Slain on both sides; after which the Vxbridge Treaty
began: But the Parliaments Demands were such, that it broke off without coming
to any Agreement.

Whilst these and other matters happened in England, the Marquess of Mont^os^
with a handful of Men performed Wonders in Scotland, overthrowing the Lord
Burleigh, and diverse others; but not being Succored as he expected, it on^^
diverted the Sc^ts for a time from entering England. And upon the Parliaments
passing the Self-denying Ordinance, the Earls of Essex, Manchester, and
Denbeigh, Surrendered their Commissions in the Lords House, and 10000 l. per
Annum was Voted to Essex out of Delinquents Estates. And now Sir Thomas Fairfax
was made General of their Army, and Oliver Cromwell Lieutenant General of the
Horse, and most of the Commission-Officers were Changed; and Col. Mitton
Surprised Shrewsbury, one of the King's head Garrisons.

York being Relieved by Prince Rupert, the bloody Fight at Marston-Moor ensued;
in which 9000 were Slain, which occasioned the Surrendering that City; and Col.
Massey Defeated the Prince at Lebury. But that which most Ruined the King, was
Naseby Battle; where besides the slain, the greater part of his Soldiers and
Officers were taken Prisoners; also diverse of his menial Servants, his Coach,
and Cabinet of Letters. This Battle was Fought in a Fallow-Field, on the
North-West-side of Naseby, a mile broad; which Ground was wholly taken up by
the Armies; so that the Battle was exceeding bloody, both sides being v^ry
Courageous and Numerous, not being 500 Odds: And here the King, besides his
Men, lost 12 pieces of Cannon, 8000 Arms, 40 Barrels of Powder, 200 Carriages,
and his baggage, besides his Treasure that should have paid his Army, or raised
Recruits, and was never after able to recover the Blow, but faintly Strugled,
whilst the Parliament Forces swept away almost all his Garrisons, Oxford being
the last of any Note, in which the King was closely Besieged; and that City
made a very stout Resistance, but there being no Army in the Field, that could
relieve it, the King fearing a Storm, resolved to go thence privately, and cast
himself for Protection on the Scots Army, that was advanced as far as Southwel;
and thence to New Castle. The Scots promised him Protection, and appeared very
Joyful of his Presence among them, yet all waa but Dissimulation; for the
English Parliament demanded his Delivery, and they wanting their Pay, which
they could not by any other means foresee they should have, in consideration of
200000 l. they Surrendered him Prisoner, and immediately marched back over the
Tweed; in the mean while Oxford, Litchfield, Worcester, Pendennis, the Island
and Castle of Scilly, and many others, Surrendered; and the few Parties of
Royalists that made Head were frequently routed. But briefly to pass over this
Bloody Scene, which cannot be very Grateful to Englishmen, I come to a close
of this unhappy Reign.

Having got the King in their Hands, they sent him Prisoner to Holmby-Castle,
whilst many earnestly Labored for an Accommodation; the Surry-men Petitioned,
but were set upon by the Soldiers, some Slain, and many Wounded; nor fared the
Kentish-men better. At length a Treaty was set on Foot; but Letters were
purposely scattered to fright the King away, intimating Designs against his
Life; for then he had a kind of Liberty, being brought to Hampton Court in
order to the Treaty. When escaping into the Isle of Wight, he was there made
Prisoner by Coll. Hammond in Carisbrook-Castle; and it was Voted, No further
Address be made to the King. But that was afterward Annulled, and the King's
Concessions Voted Satisfactory; and things were in a fair way to an Agreement.
But the Army Officers knowing their Commissions lasted but with the War,
dealing underhand with some designing Men in the Parliament House, who under
pretense of a Public Good, had all along along aimed at Self-interest, the
Soldiers being by Interest and Promises made of their Party; all such Members
as were for the Accommodation, were by Military Force excluded the House, and
the King brought to Hurst-Castle, and afterward to Windsor; and his Party went
extremely to wreck at Maidstone, Ponifract, Bow, Stratford, Kingston; and
Colchester, after a brave Resistance, being taken, Sir Charles Lucas and Sir
George Lisle were shot to Death, though Quarter had been given them.

And now those Members that were left in the House of Commons, contrary to the
Consent of the Lords, being backed by the Army, made an Act [as they called it]
for the Trial of the King; and Erected a Tribunal, called by them a High-Court
of Justice, to that end, of which John Bradshaw, a Sergeant at Law, was
President, and 56 others as Judges; and the King being called before them, and
accused of several Crimes, as that he gave cause for the Cruel Bloodshed in
England and Ireland; that he had Proclaimed War, in setting up his Standard
against the Parliament; That he had commissioned his Son and others, to wage
War; and therefore was pronounced a Traitor, a Tyrant, and an Enemy to the
Commonwealth of England: To this Charge the King refused to Answer, or to
acknowledge the Authority of the Court, offering his Reasons; but they were not
admitted; and being several times brought before them, and urged thereunto, on
his refusal, on the the 27th of Jan. 1648. the Sentence was pronounced against
him, viz. That he the said Charles Steuart, was fallen from all Dignity, was
Guilty of High Treason, and to be put to Death, by Severing his Head from his
Body, for being a Tyrant, a Murderer, and an Enemy to the Commonwealth. The
Sentence being read, the Court stood up in Confirmation of it, as an Act and
Resolution of them all; and the King offering to speak, was Violently Hurried
away by the Guard: And though the Dutch Ambassador, the Scots and most of the
English Nobles, interceeded to stay Execution, he was on the 30th of Jan. 1648.
brought from St. James's to White Hall, and there being attended (on a Scaffold
before the Banqueting House) by Dr. Juxon Bishop of London, he made a
Profession of his Innocence, and of his Faith, forgiving his Enemies, and
praying to God not to lay his Blood to their Charge, seeming troubled that he
had consented to the Sentence against the Earl of Strafford; and after this and
much more to the like Purpose, he kneeling down, gave the Sign to the
Executioner, by stretching out his Arms, and at one Blow had his Head separated
from his Body; which being put in a Coffin covered with Velvet, was carried to
Windsor, and buried in a Vault in St. George's Chapel.

Thus, without President, fell King Charles, when he had Reigned 23 Years, 10
Months, and 3 Days, being the 24th Year of his Reign, and 49th of his Age. Put
to Death by the Hands of his own Subjects, contrary to all Law and Justice;
universally Pitied, (but unable to be helped) by his People. He was one of the
Chastest Princes that ever sat upon the Throne, being all along so true to his
Queen, that he never Defiled his Marriage Bed. And had he not given too much
heed to Buckingham, Laud, and some other f^attering Parasites and Courtiers,
who were continually Buzzing into his Ears nothing but Absolute and unlimitted
Power, putting him upon Dissolving his Parliaments, and then raising Money, and
Ruling without them, as appeared by his Twelve Years interval of Parliaments,
viz. from Anno 1628, to 1640. whereby he lost the Love of his People; he had
never been brought to that dismal Catastrophe, but might have Lived and Died a
Happy Prince. And this may be observed from this King's Reign, as well as from
several before, That never any Prince fell out with his Parliament, and went
about to Establish an Arbitrary Power, but he not only found himself Mistaken,
but also thereby made himself Miserable.

Before the breaking out of this unnatural War, amazing Sights were seen in the
Air, of Firey Men and Horses, running at each other with Lances, encountering
with great Blasts of Lightning, and noise of Thunder. In Gloucester-shire
Specter were seen in a large Field not far from that City, drawn up in
Battalia, furiously Engaging and then Vanishing, to the Amazement of the
Beholders.

The Reign of King CHARLES The Second.
KING Charles the First being put to Death, the Relics of the Parliament began
to take out of the way such Nobles and others as they supposed would obstruct
their Proceedings; and particularly Duke Hamilton, the Earl of Holland, and the
Lord Capel were Beheaded for Treason, pretended against them. And now to make
their Power the Stronger, they combined with the Army Officers: And though
Charles, Son to the preceding King, had an undoubted Right to the Kingdom, they
proceeded to bar him, and all the Royal Line, as they hoped, from the Crown, or
any other from being King or chief Magistrate, unless by Public Act of
Parliament so appointed; and that it should be Treason in any to attempt to
further King Charles the Second (by them generally called Charles Stewart) in
his Designs to possess the Crown, by Proclaiming him, or any Assistance given
to him; taking great care not to admit the Secluded Members, lest they should
put a stop to the Current of their Proceedings; taking down every where the
King's- Arms, and placing the Harp and Cross in their places, called the States
Arms, and having taken down the late King's Effigies from the Royal Exchange,
they caused to be inscribed in the place where it stood, in Letters of Gold,
Exit Tyranus Regum ultimus, Anno Libertatis Angliae, Restitutiae Primo Anno
1648. Jan. 30. All Titles in Processes of Law were altered; and instead of
Carolus Dei Gratia, etc. was put in Custodes Libertatis Angliae, etc. The
King's Bench was called the Vpper-Bench; and a new Stamp was made for Money,
having on the one side the Cross, and on the other the Cross and Harp;
inscribed, The Commonwealth of England, on the one side, and God with Us, on
the other; also a new Great Seal was prepared, with the Cross and Harp on the
one side, with this Inscription, The Great Seal of England; and on the other
side, the Picture of the House of Commons, with these Words, In the first Year
of Freedom, by God's Blessing restored, 1648.

Things being thus Moddelled, whilst King Charles was in France, Soliciting
for Aid to possess him of his Kingdoms, Fairfax out of some dislike to the
Patliaments proceedings, laid down his Commission, which was given to Oliver
Cromwell, who from this time laid the Projection of his future Greatness: And
indeed, in his attempts on Ireland and Scotland he was so Successful as to
reduce them to the English Obedience, with incredible Slaughter of the Natives.
However King Charles was proclaimed by his Friends in England, and Ireland, and
soon after in Scotland.

And now Money being wanting to maintain the Parliaments Armies, etc. the
Crown Lands, Dean and Chapter, and Bishops Lands, were Sold, with many stately
Houses, and most of the Castles in England Demolished; and all Persons expelled
from Places of Trust in Church and State, that Subscribed not to be Conformable
to the New-modelled Government.

The Scots all this while were Debating how to Restore the King, who was in the
Isle of Jersey, and coming to a Result, sent the Lord Libberton and Mr.
Windram to him with Proposals, the Heads being these; 1. That he should Sign
the Solemn League and Covenant. 2. That he should Pass diverse Acts concluded on
in the two last Sessions of Parliament in Scotland. 3. That he should recall
the Commissions given to Montross. 4. That he should put from him all Papists,
and appoint some place in Holland to treat with their Commissioners and give
them a speedy Answer: And Sir William Fleming being sent by the King to the
Estates of Scotland, Breda was appointed for the place of Treaty, and
Commissioners were sent to represent the Kirk and State, who delivered what
they had in Charge to the same Effect as has been mentioned. But whilst the
Treaty held, the Marquess of Montross making new Attempts, was Surprised in
Scotland; where with much Indignity he was brought to Execution, and Hanged on
a Gibbet of extraordinary height, Dying with a Courage and Bravery suitable to
that wherein he had Lived, and Quarters were set up in diverse places. This
being done in a full Treaty, greatly Displeased the King, because he had his
Commission, and had acted in his Cause; but the necessity of his affairs, made
him pass it over, and he Condescended to most of the Proposals.

The Parliament of England soon heard of their Treaty, and to prevent its
taking effect, sent an Army under Cromwell into Scotland, and manning out a
Fleet, Admiral Blake fell in with Prince Rupert's Squadron, sinking and burning
most of the Ships he Commanded for the King; however matters being agreed on,
the King hastened to Scotland, and Landed at Spey, where several Lords came to
him; and the Town of Aberdeen presented him with 1500 l. which so angered the
Estates, that they strictly forbid all other Towns under great Penalties to do
the like. And coming to Edenburg, he was a second time Proclaimed King, July
16. Anno 1650. But the English overthrowing the Scots Army commanded by
Montgomery at Muscleborough, his Coronation was put off till January; when with
much Solemnity he was Crowned at Scone; and setting up his Standard at
Aberdeen, made him self Generallissimo of the Scots Army, and Fortifying
Sterling, he removed his Court thither.

Whilst these things passed, the English Parliament (as they pretended) found
out several Plots against them, for which Sir Henry Hyde, and Capt. Brown
Bushel were Beheaded; and soon after, Mr. Gibbons, and Mr. Love, a Presbyterian
Minister.

Cromwell perceiving he could not draw the Scots to a Battle, Transported 1600
Foot, and 4 Troops of Horse, over the Fife, who assisted by Lambert and Okey,
routed Sir John Brown's Forces, killing about 2000 on the place, taking him and
about 200 more Prisoners, and the King perceiving his Enemies prevail so fast
in Scotland, calling a Council, it was agreed he should March into England, to
try what Friends he had to assist him. But they came in very slowly, the
Parliament having taken care before to prevent it, so that in a long March very
few joined him except the Lord Escreek's Son with a Troop of Horse, and the
Earl of Derby with 250 Foot and 6 Horse; but whilst the King lingered by the
way, Lambert being Guided over the Moors and Dales in Yorkshire, got before
him, and Cromwell pursued hard after; yet after a sharp Dispute with Lambert, he
gained the Pass of Warington-bridge, and sent to Coll. Mackworth to Surrender
Shrewsbury, but he refused it; whereupon he marched to Worcester, and was
recieved with much Joy into that place; but whilst he was Fortifying this
Place, news came that the Earl of Derby who went to raise Forces in Lancashire,
was overthrown by Lilburn, and most of his chief Commanders slain or taken
Prisoners; and now the Trained-Bands from all parts gathering about Worcester,
Cromwell and others came up with the Regular Forces, and Lambert gained the Pass
at Vpton, where the Bridge was broke down, by swimming the River, and rescuing
a Party of their Men besieged by Massey in a Church, and by this means beat the
King's Party, and entirely gained the Pass; and Cromwell laid a Bridge of Boats
over the River, but the King scorning to be cooped up with his Army, on the
third of Sept. 1651, sallyed out of Worcester, and gave the Enemy Battle; but
having Charged several times, and two Horses shot under him, over-powred by
Numbers, he was forced to Retreat, but was closely pursued by the Parliament
Forces, who thrust with his into the Town; and then the Cry being to Save the
King, he had the good Luck to get away, with the Lord Wilmot; and coming to a
Farmer's House on the edge of Staffordshire, disguised himself, cutting off
his long black Hair with a Knife, for want of Scissars; and after that was
Secured a while in Boscobel-house by the Pendrills, Hudstone a Priest, and some
few others, that were thought fit to be made acquainted with his being there;
but 1000 l. being set upon him, and Search almost every where made, he narrowly
Escaped one Evening, by getting out at the Backdoor, into the Wood, whilst the
Searchers were entering at the Fore-door; and there he made an Oak-Tree his
Palace, which sheltered him till the heat of the Search was over. And at
length, by the means of Mrs. Jane Lane, for whose Servant he went, and passed
by some of Oliver's Troopers as such. After having escaped many Dangers, and
passed through many Difficulties, he Landed at New Haven in France, from whence
he went to his Mother then at the French Court. In this Battle about 3000 were
Slain, but a far greater Number were taken Prisoners; and most of the Scots
sold as Slaves here, and to the Plantations. Their Colors taken, were hung up
in Triumph in Westminster Hall; and the Earl of Derby who was taken at his
Overthrow, was Beheaded at Bolton in Lancashire.

The Marquess of Ormond, and Lord Inchiqueen standing out in Ireland, levied
considerable Forces for the King's Service, and the former Besieged Dublin with
a Formidable Army, but being Negligent, and many of them raw Soldiers, Colonel
Jones the Governor, Sallying first with a few, and then with the whole
Garrison, raised the Siege, and took almost all the Plunder of the Camp; afer
which several other Towns were taken; and Cromwell coming over with a sufficient
Force, took Drogheda, and diverse other places; in many of which the bloody
Irish were put to the Sword, unless such as by hiding, found means to Escape
his Fury; and in three Years time Ireland was Quieted and Reduced.

Scotland and Ireland being thus Reduced to the Obedience of the Commonwealth
of England, (as it was then styled) the Parliament Resolved that Scotland shall
be United to England, and Monarchy Abol^shed also in that Kingdom; and that
Scotland shoul send up Deputies, in such a Proportion as the Parliament should
think meet, to represent them in the Parliament of England; which though the Kirk
party opposed, was notwithstanding done. After which followed an Act of Grace
to all the People of England, pardoning whatever they had done, and all
Hostilities committed against the Parliament, provided they take the
Engagement, which was, To be true and Faithful to the Commonwealth of England,
as then Established, without King or House of Lords.

No sooner were these things over, and all things seemed Quiet at Home, but our
Young Commonwealth found new Occasion for the exercise of their Arms abroad:
There had been for some time a Grudge between them and the Senior Commonwealth
of Holland, occasioned by the Assassination of their Agent Dr. Dorislaus there;
and afterward by the Affronts put upon their Ambassadors, Oliver St. John, and
Walter Strickland, by the common People in Holland, insomuch that these
Ambassadors not thinking themselves sufficiently Vindicated by the States, came
away in great Discontent; and afterward when the States sent Ambassadors here
to Excuse themselves, and to desire a Pacification, they were answered with
Demands of Reparation for their Herring-Fishing, and Questioned about the
Business of Amboyna, and other things of that Nature, which made them go back
re infecta. Upon this, the Hollanders resolving to be as Stout as they, set out
a great Fleet for the Security of their Trade, under the Command of Van Trump:
with instructions not to strike his Flag to the English Admiral, etc. Upon
which, on the 17th of May, 1652. Van Trump came into Dover-road with 42 Sail of
Men of War, and Blake the English Admiral encountered them with a far less
Number, and though there was no great matter done on neither side, yet Van Trump
had the worst of it, having had one Ship s^nk, and another taken, and about 150
men Slain; whereas the English had not any Ship disabled, and very few Men
killed. But this bad beginning did not so much Dishearten the Dutch, but in a
little time, Van Trump was again at Sea, with 120 Men of War. But for all his
haste, Blake was out before him with 70 Men of War, and Sailed Northward to
interrupt the Dutch Fishing-Trade, and to look after five Dutch East India
Ships about that time expected Home: and in the mean time Sir George Ascough
arriving in the Downs with the Barbados Fleet, brought ten Dutch Merchants
Ships, and four Dutch Men of War along with him, whom he had taken in his way.
Of which Trump having Notice, endeavored to get between Sir George and the
River, but by the changing of the Wind was Disappointed. Whereupon be returned
to Holland to convey their East-Land Ships to the Sound; and in his way
received advice that Blake had dispersed their Herring-Fishing, and taken 12
Men of War that Guarded them; upon which Trump sent part of his Ships to Guard
the Merchantmen, and with the rest Sailed to find out Blake, who was about the
Isles of Orkne^: But a terrible Storm arising, Trump's Fleet was so scattered
that he came home but with 42 Sail; though most of the rest came in afterward:
But Blake came safe to Yarmouth with all his Fleet, and six of Trump's Frigates
that he had met with, and 900 Prisoners. In the Month of August following, Sir
George Ayscough and De Ruyter Engaged each other; Sir George had several of his
Captains wounded, and some Ships damaged, but not one Ship lost. What Loss the
Dutch had, was not known. In October following was another Engagement on the
side of the North-Foreland, between the Dutch Admiral De W^^, and Admiral
Blake, wherein great Courage was shown on both sides; the Rear-Admiral of the
Dutch was Boarded and Taken, and two more of their Ships were Sunk, and one
Blo^n up: So that the Dutch made what haste they could to get off; and were
pursued by the English Fleet within 12 Leagues of the Maeze. After which, the
English having preserved all their Ships, though some were much Damaged, returned
into the Downs in Triumph. The Hogen-Mogeans finding that if they went on at
this Rate, they were like to be reduced to poor distressed States again,
resolve to reinforce their Fleet considerably, the King of Denmark (whom they
had Solicited to take their Part) promising to assist them with 20 Ships of
War, provided they restore Van Trump to his place of Admiral again. Which they
readily agreed to, and prevailed with Trump again to accept it. With this
Reinforcement, Van Trump being restored to his office of Admiral, got together
a Fleet of 80 Men of War, and 10 Fireships, with which he Sailed to the
backside of the Goodwin,; and Blake was in the Downs with few more than 40 Men
of War; who hearing that Van Trump was coming to Fight him, resolved not to
refuse the Engagement, and therefore Hoised up his Sails to find out Trump, and
sent out seven Ships to discover his Fleet, which were met by nine of the
Dutch, sent out upon the same Errand: These meeting, first began the Fight; and
the two Admirals hearing the Cannon, quickly advanced at the head of their
Squadrons, the Fight being very furious, and lasting from two in the Morning
till six in the Evening, on the 29th of November. Though this Battle was fought
with much Fury on both sides, yet the Dutch carried the Day by their Numbers:
In this Fight the English had two Ships taken, one Burnt, and three Sunk; the
Dutch (who had no great cause to boast) had a Flag-ship blown up, and all the
Mariners and Soldiers therein Lost, but two; and several of their Ships very
much Damaged. It is said, That upon this Defeat, Van Trump in a Triumphant
manner, Sailed through the Channel with a Broom on his Main-Top-Mast, as if he
had swept the Channel of all English Ships. But it was not long before they
were even with him again; for the Parliament having added General Monk and
General Dean to Admiral Blake; in February following with 60 Men of War, fell
upon the Dutch who were 76 Men of War, and had the Charge of 300 Merchants
Ships to convey homewards, and a furious Fight for three days Successively,
ensued; in which the Dutch lost eleven Men of War, and 30 Merchants Ships; and
no less than 1500 Men killed: But of the English, many Ships were ^^atter'd,
there was but one Sunk (the Sampson) but the Captain and most of the Men Saved:
The number of the English slain in the Fight, were very near as many as those
of the Enemy.

About this time the Duke of Glouoester was sent by the Parliament (who had
kept him in the Isle of Wight, ever since his Father was Beheaded) to Dunkirk,
whence he was Conducted to the Princess of Orange his Sister at Breda; and
after he had been there a little time, he went to Paris to his Brother and his
Mother.

On the 20th of April following, General Cromwell, with M. G. Lambert, and M. G.
Harrison, and some few more of the Officers of the Army, went to Westminster,
and entered the Parliament House while they were sitting, and after a short
Speech made by Cromwell, declaring the Necessity there was for Dissolving them,
he declared them to be Dissolved, and required them to Depart; but the Speaker
was unwilling to leave the Chair, till Harrison took him out by the Arm, and
Cromwell commanded the Mace to be taken away, and not to be carried before him
any more; and caused the Doors of the Parliament House to be Locked, and a good
Guard to be placed there, to prevent the Assembling of any of the Members. And
then in the room of this Rump-Parliament thus Dissolved, a Council of State was
Constituted, consisting of the chief Officers of the Army, and such of the
Members of the late Parliament as they had a Kindness for; and in this Council
of State the Supreme Authority of the Nation was said to Consist, and Obedience
thereunto required, as fully as to the Parliament, when Sitting, and Judges,
Sheriffs, Justices, etc. and all other Civil Officers, to act in their
respective Offices as before, till a new Representative should be chosen.

The Dutch thought this Change might be to their Advantage; but they found
themselves mistaken; for the new Governors omitted nothing that might advance
their Maritime Preparations, and fitted out the Fleet with great application,
and with such Success, that though one of the English Generals (Dean) was slain
in the Fight, yet the Dutch were again Defeated, six of their best Ships being
Burnt, and two bl^wn up, and eleven Ships and two Hoys taken; and 1350
Prisoners, whereof Six were Captains of very good Note; and of the Ships that
were taken, one was a Vice Admiral, and two were Rear-admirals. The English had
not one Ship lost or disabled; and (except General Dean) but one Captain slain.

And now a new Parliament was Summoned, chosen by Cromwell out of the Several
Counties of England, of the most Religious and Sanctified Persons he could
Nominate: This was called the Little-Parliament; and indeed they did Little,
exept it were making an Act against Tithes, and an Act for Marriages by a
Justice of Peace; and then being weary of their Power, they gave it up to
Oliver who had given it to them. And now another sort of Government comes next:
For the Officers of the Army had drawn up a new System, and presented it to
Oliver, desiring him to take the Government upon him, under the Title of
Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland: He at first
made a show of refusing it, (though every one believed there was nothing that he
desired more) but being further pressed to it, he accepted of it, and was that
afternoon installed at Westminster.

Though the Dutch had been already severely beaten, and were extremely Solicitous
for a Peace, yet that they might get the better Terms, they resolved to try the
Fortune of War once more; which yet proved more in-auspicious to them than the
former, for in the next Battle, which was on the 29th of July, 1653. Admiral
Van Trump was Slain, and 33 Sail of Ships sunk to the bottom of the Ocean, out
of which 1200 men were Saved by the English, taken up out of Boats, and
swimming in the Sea. This was so great a Mortification to the Dutch, that the
States were afraid of a general Revolt: And therefore they forthwith applied
themselves to Oliver for a Peace, which in the Infancy of his new Government,
he was willing to Grant upon reasonable Terms; though they were reduced to so low
a Condition that he might have made what Terms he pleased. The Success the
English had against the Dutch, made other Nations fear Cromwell. The Spanish
Ambassador coming early to Congratulate his Authority, and the Portugals came
in a Splendid Embassy to sue for Peace: Nor were the French backward to own his
Power. So that he had now no apprehension of Trouble, but only from the
Royalists; to suppress whom, a Plot was soon after found out of several Persons
for an intended Assassination of the Protector, and several Persons Executed
for it. The King about this time went into Germany, and Solicited several of
the Princes there for assistance, but with little Success. Ireland being wholly
reduced to Obedience, the Marquess of Ormond, and the Lord Inchiqueen having
timely withdrawn themselves and Embarked for France, an Itinerant High Court
of Justice was set up, and several of the chief Rebels that began the Massacre
in Forty-One, were Tried and Executed for the same, among which, that notorious
Villain Sir Philem O Neal, was Hanged and Quartered, and his Head placed upon
Dublin-bridge. Some attempts for a rising having been made by several of the
Nobility of Scotland, they were utterly Defeated by General Monk, who was made
Commander in chief of that Kingdom. And now the Protector having (according to
the Articles of Government) called a Parliament, who beginning to Question the
Power by which they were called, they were soon dissolved again, and several of
the Royalists taken up about a new Conspiracy. The Protector about this time
having a mind to some of the Spaniards Indian-Gold, sent a Fleet and Army to
surprise Hispaniola, in the West Indies, but sailing in that attempt by the ill
Conduct of General Venablers, they went from thence to the Island of Jamaica,
which they took, and which has continued ever since in the Power of the
English, being now a very rich and flourishing Plantation. And General Blake
being with his Fleet in the Streights, and coming before Tunis, and sending to
the Governor to demand Satisfaction for the Wrongs done by their People to the
English, and that the English Captives there might be delivered to him, had
returned for answer, That their Castles of Guletto and Porta Ferina were both
well Manned and furnished with Ordnance, and therefore they did not fear him:
Whereupon Blake with his great Ships, and their Seconds, came into the Bay of
Porta Ferina, within Musket Shot of the Castle, and fired with such fury upon
them, notwithstanding the frequent Discharges of sixty Great Guns upon his
Ships, that in two Hours the Castle was made Defenseless, and all their Guns
dismounted; at the same time Burning Nine of their Ships which he found in the
Road. This Noble Action struck such a Terror not only upon Tunis, (who were
willing then to Submit to Blakes Proposals) but also upon Algeirs and Tri^ol^,
that they quickly came to a Treaty, and a Peace was made very much to the
Advantage of the English. About this time there having been an horrible
Massacre made upon the Poor Protestants of Piedmont, by the Command of the Duke
of Savoy, (...) the instigation of the Popish Priests and Jesuits; the
Protector espoused their Quarrel, and not only sent to the Duke on their
behalf, causing his Edict against them to be recalled, but likewise caused a
solemn Day of Humiliation to be kept, and vast Sums of Money Collected
throughout all England for their Relief, and sent it (or at least part of it)
by Sir Samuel Moreland to them; which made Oliver be looked upon abroad as the
great Patron of the Reformed Religion. Upon the War made with Spain, by the
attempt upon H^spaniola and Jamaica, beforementioned, a Peace ensued with
France; by which (among other Articles, the King and his Royal Brothers were
excluded that Kingdom.) After which, Rear-Admiral Stayner with a part of the
English Fleet, set upon eight Spanish Ships within four Leagues of the Bay of
Cadiz, the Admirals Ship, in which was General Don Marco del Porto with 600000
pieces o^ Eight, ran ashore in the Bay, the Vice Admiral Commanded by Don
Francisco de Esquevel, and having in he^ 1200000 pieces of Eight was taken, as
was also another Ship Commanded by Don Rodiques Calderon; both the^ were set on
Fire, one by the Spaniards themselves, to prevent their being made Prisoners,
and the other by accident* Two other very rich Ships were taken and kept; and
sever^ of the Spanish Nobles being taken, were brought up t^ London; but Oliver
being satisfied with the Treasure tak^ in the Ships, dealt very Generously with
the Spanish Noble^ and after a small time of detaining them here, sent the^^
home without Ransom. The next Year General Bla^^ lying with some Ships near
Cadiz, to watch for they turn of the Spanish Plate-Fleet, had intelligence that
they were put into the Bay of Santa-Cruz, and sailing thither, he discerned the
Spanish Fleet, to the number of sixteen, barricado'd in the Bay; but this did
not hinder Blake, but that the next Morning he sailed into the Bay, and whilst
some of his Ships poured their Broad-sides into the Castles and Forts, he and
Stayner fought the Spanish Fleet, and obtained an entire Victory; but
perceiving he could not bring away the Spoil, set them all on Fire, but one
that was Sunk. But that which is most wonderful in this Noble Action was, That
the Wind which blew strong into the Bay, after the Fight was over veer'd
suddenly about to the West, and brought out all our Ships safe to Se^. This
News was so grateful to Oliver, that he sent Blake a Jewel of 500 l. with
Gratuities to the rest of the Officers. After this Cromwell called another
Parliament, which would fain have had him taken the Title of King upon him; but
he declining it, he was by the Parliament solemnly invested in th Protectorial
Dignity in Westminster Hall. But the Royalists yet gave him some farther
Disturbance by their Endeavors to restore the King; though they were unhappily
betrayed, and several of them Executed, among whom were Sir Henry Slingsby, and
Dr. Hewet, with several others of less Note. In pursuance of the Peace formerly
concluded with France, the English and French Forces laid Siege to Dunkirk,
which the Spaniards endeavoring to relieve, were totally routed, and Dunkirk
soon after taken, and put into the possession of the English. And now on the
fatal third of September, in the Year 1658. Oliver Cromwell Dyed, in the
Sixty-third Year of his Age, and the Fifth of his Protector-ship: He was Born
in Huntington, and was the Son of a second Brother of Sir Oliver Cromwell, of
Huntington-shire; his Mother was the Daughter of Sir Richard Stewart of the
Isle of Ely; and his Wife was Elizabeth the Daughter of Sir James Bourchier: By
whom he had Issue three Sons, of which one Died ^oung, and four Daughters. By
his Reputation in Arms, he was Courted or Feared by most of the Princes of
Europe; he was a Man of singular Courage and Resolution, attended with very
great Success; and kept his Army under him in so exact and strict a Discipline,
that they seemed rather a Body of well-governed Citizens, than an Army of
Soldiers: Swearing, Drunkenness, and Profaneness, the common Vices of other
Camps, were not to be found in his. His desire of Glory excited him to make
attempts in other Countries, by which a great Renown accrued to our Nation in
all parts of the World. In short, had he not been a Usurper, he might have been
compared with the best of our Princes: but his Usurpation, and the indirect
means he used to obtain his Power, spoiled all his Good Qualities.

After his Death, his Son Richard was Proclaimed Protector, but he enjoyed his
Power but a short time, the Army calling again the Rump Parliament, which
strait-way put an end to his Protector-ship; and now the Stone began to roll,
it stayed not there, for Sir George ^oth having raised some Forces for the King
in Cheshire, and being subdued by Lambert, Lambert turned the Rump out again,
and set up a Committee of Safety in Order to the setting up himself; to prevent
which, General Monk in Scotland declares for the Rump, and comes with his Army
into England to restore them; and having effected that, brought in again those
Members that had been Secluded by the Army before the Trial of the late King:
These Members being restored, issued out Writs for the Calling of a New
Parliament, to meet the 25th of April following, and so dissolved themselves.
The King, who had Notice of all these Proceedings, with drew himself out of the
Spanish Territories, and went to Breda, from whence (at the opening of
Parliament) he sent over a Declaration, promising Liberty of Conscience, Pardon
to all Offenders, and Satisfaction to all Interests. Upon the reading whereof,
the Parliament unanimously Voted, That a Message be sent to his Majesty, to
thank him for his Gacious Declaration, and to desire him to return to his
Kingdom; which he did upon the 29th of May following, being received with the
Universal Joy and Acclamations of his People. Soon after which, several of
those that had sat in the High Court of Justice for the Trial of his Father,
were themselves Tried and Executed: Of which Number were Thomas Harrison, Hugh
Peter's, Daniel Axtell, John Cook, Thomas Scot, Gregory Clemont, John Jones,
John Carew, and Adrian Scroop, who Suffered, some at Charing Cross, and some at
Tyburn. The Bishops were also now restored to their Diocesses, and the
Common Prayer Ordered again to be Read in Churches.

But now an over-cast of Sorrow happened; for the Virtuous Princess, Mary,
Princess of Orange, coming over to see her Brother now settled in his Throne,
fell Sick of the Smallpox and Dyed. And in January after the King's Return,
one Venner a Wine-Cooper, with diverse other Desperate Persons, fell upon the
City of London, being opposed, many on both sides were Slain, and the rest
being taken or dispersed, Venner, with eleven more, were Tried, Condemned, and
Executed in diverse places of the City. And on the 30th of January, the
Carcasses of Cromwell, Bradshaw, and Ireton, were taken out of their Graves,
conveyed to Tyburn, and Hanged up for several Hours, then their Bodies buried
under the Gallows, and their Heads set on Westminster Hall. And soon after the
Duke of Gloucester, the King's youngest Brother, a Prince of great Hopes, and a
firm Protestant, Dyed; and on the 23d. of April 1661, being St. George's Day,
the King was Crowned at Westminster with much Solemnity and Splendour, having
the Day before made a magnificent Cavalcade from the Tower of London to
White Hall. The Army hereupon was Disbanded, and the Parliament in Ireland
Dissolved, every thing appearing in a tendency to a lasting Settlement, by a
good Understanding between Prince and People: For the Parliament that had been
Assembled, being Dissolved, and another called, the Peers were restored to
their Ancient Privileges, and the Militia declared to be Vested in the King as
his right. The like was also declared by the Parliament of Scotland, who
resigned the solemn League and Covenant, and passed an Act for the Attainder of
the Marquess of Argyle, upon diverse Crimes laid to his Charge, whereupon being
brought to his Trial and Condemned, he lost his Head, much Lamented by the
greater part of that Kingdom.

About this time a Convocation in England was assembled to adjust and settle
matters of Religion; and soon after the solemn League and Covenant, which the
KING had taken in Scotland, was burnt by the common Hangman in London and
Westminster, and then all over the Nation; and a pretended Act for the Trial of
King Charles the first; used in the same manner in Westminster Hall.

The French and Spanish Ambassadors being at Court, upon Notice of the arrival
of the Broh Ambassador, extraordinary from Sweeden with their Coaches went to
receive him at his public Entry on Tower Hill, and contending for precedence,
a sharp Encounter happened; some were killed and diverse Wounded; The Spaniard
obtaining the better, by the help of some English, who for good Rewards (though
the King expressly by his Proclamation forbid any of his Subjects to
intermeddle) dressed themselves in Spanish Habits; which Encounter, had not the
King interceeded as Mediator, had at that time in all Likelihood created a War
between the two Nations, as being highly Resented at either Court. James, Duke
of Ormond, being made Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and another Parliament called
there, that long harassed Kingdom, was brought to a good Settlement. And now a
Match being Negotiated in the Court of Portugal between the King and Donna
Catharina, Infanta of that Kingdom, her Dowry was settled, and in Lieu thereof,
the English had Tangier, which became afterward a great Charge to the Nation,
without any Profit: So that the Earl of Peterborough having taken Possession of
that place on the Continent of Africa for the King, the Lady came over Royally
attended, and the King going to Portsmouth, was there Married to her with much
Pomp by the Bishop of London; and afterward came to White Hall, and was
Joyfully received.

Sir Henry Vane, and John Lambert being Tried and found Guilty of Treason, for
things done before the Restoration, being excepted out of the Act of Indemnity,
the former was Beheaded, but the latter Reprieved, and kept in Prison till he
Died: and Archibald Johnson, Lord Warrestone being taken beyond the Sea, and
brought over, was Sentenced as a Traitor by the Parliament of Scotland, and
Executed on a Gibbit at Edenborough 22 Foot high. A Conspiracy being timely
Discovered in Ireland, diverse were Imprisoned, and some Executed, which
altogether dashed their further Intentions and kept the Kingdom in Quiet a
considerable time. And in the North of England, another much about the same
time being discovered, one Gibbons, and Baker were Tried, found Guilty, and
Executed, whereupon the rest Dispersed.

The Commons in Parliament having Voted the King a Supply of 2500000 l, great
Naval Preparations were made, which caused our Neighbors the Dutch to fear a
Storm, and therefore they thought it convenient to provide for their Safety;
and indeed, a Misunderstanding happening between both Nations, an Order of
Council was made, giving Letters of Reprisal against them, and about 112 Sail
were taken by our Frigates, Men of War, etc. most of them being adjudged Lawful
Prizes; and hereupon the King set out his Declaration, touching his Proceedings
for Reparation from the Subjects of the States: Whilst these things were doing,
a Dutchman, under the Disguise of a Sweed, coming from Guinea, publicly
reported De Ruytter the Dutch Commander, had Destroyed all the English in the
Factories on that Coast, which for a time caused much Consternation among the
Merchants trading thither, but it proving False, he was Sentenced and Whipped
through London. However, the Parliament being Prorogued, War was Proclaimed on
the 2d of March 1664, and a General Fast succeeded, for a Blessing on the
King's Forces to be employed against them; and De Ruyter attempting with his
Fleet to Plunder the English Plantation of Barbados in the West Indies, was
beaten off; but whilst many Encounters happened at Sea, a worse Calamity befell
at Land; for by reason of the great Heat in the Spring, and but little cool
breathing Winds to purge and purify the Air, about the beginning of May, 1665,
a Plague began fearfully to Rage, so that in London that Year 97306 Persons of
all Degrees dyed; and of these were accounted 68596, of the Plague. However the
War was carried on with great Vigor, and on the 3d of June, the Duke of York
being Admiral of the English Navy, the two Fleets engaged, and after a long and
obstinate Fight which continued many Hours, bloody and doubtful, the Dutch gave
way, and such as got off stood to their own Coast: The English having taken,
burnt, sunk, and shattered about thirty of their Ships, and slain and taken
Prisoners about 8000; though not without Loss considerable on our own part, which
was chiefly occasioned by most of the great Ships crouding about the Admiral,
to screen him from the Fury of the Enemy, and prevent his being laid on Board
by Fireships: Those English of Note who lost their Lives in this Engagement
were the Earls of Falmouth, Portland, Marlborough, and the Lord Muskery, Sir
John Lawson dyed of his Wounds soon after, and 2063 Dutch Prisoners were
brought to Colchester, whereof 13 were Commanders. Hereupon a public
Thanksgiving was performed for this Victory: the King likewise Conferred the
Honor of Knighthood on such Sea-Commanders as had eminently Signalized their
Courage and Conduct in the Action.

The Plague still continuing to Rage, a Fast was Proclaimed solemnly to be held
every first Wednesday in the Month* till it should cease; and Fires were
continued in the Streets of London and Westminster for three Days and Nights,
to purify the Air; whilst the King etc made his progress through the greater
part of England, the two Houses of Parliament attending him at Christ-Church in
Oxford; and upon his laying before them them the necessity of a supply to
maintain the charges of the War, the Commons Voted him 1250000 l. And
Michaelmas Term by Proclamation was Adjournd from Westminster to that City: But
the Plague abating, the Parliament and Courts of Judicature returned to
Westminster, as did the King and Queen.

The French King envying the growing greatness of the English, more than any
love he had for the Dutch [as it afterward plainly appeared] Joined with them
and was soon answered in the same Language at the Instigation of others.

The Fleets being abroad, Prince Rupert, and the Duke of Albermarle, then
Joynt-Admirals of the English, the latter with a Squadron of fifty Ships, the
former being to the Westward with the rest, engaged 80 of the Dutch on the
Coast of Flanders, and maintained the Fight two Days; when on the third, Prince
Rupert coming in, the Fight continued very Bloody, till the Evening, with much
Loss on both sides; and then the Dutch stood away to their own Coast. In this
Fight the Royal Prince was stranded on the Galloper, and burnt by the Dutch:
Sir George Ascough, who Commanded her, being taken Prisoner and carried into
Holland. About six or seven Weeks after, there happened another Sea Fight, and
the English chased the Dutch to their own Coasts, and on the 7th of August, Sir
Robert Holms burnt diverse Dutch Merchants Ships in the Fly, and the Town of
Baudaris upon the Island of Scheling, and four French Men of War salling in
with our Fleet, mistaking it in Foggy-weather for the Dutch, one of them of 54
Guns was taken.

On the Second of September, 1666, being Sunday, began the dreadful Fire of
London, at one Faringdons, a Baker's House in Pudding-Lane, the backside of
Fish-street-hill: It continued Burning until Wednesday Night following, and
that time destroyed the greatest part of the City. But the best Account of it
being Engraven on the North-side of the Monument Erected in the perpetual
Remembrance thereof, take as follows;

In the Year of Christ 1666, the second Day of September, Eastward from hence,
at the Distance of Two hundred and two foot (the height of this Column) a
terrible Fire broke out about Midnight; which driven on by a high Wind, not
only wasted the adjacent Parts, but also very remote Places, with incredible
noise and fury. It consumed eighty nine Churches, the City-Gates, Guildhall,
many public Structures, Hospitals, Schools, Libraries, a vast Number of
stately Edifices, Thirteen thousand two hundred Dwelling-houses, four hundred
Streets. Of the six and twenty Wards it utterly destroyed fifteen, and left
eight other shattered and half burnt. The Ruins of the City were four hundred
thirty six Acres, from the Tower by the Thames side to the Temple-Church, and
the North-East Gate along the City-Wall to Holbourn-Bridge. To the Estates and
Fortunes of the Citizens it was merciless, but to their Lives very favorable,
that it might in all things resemble the last Conflagration of the World. The
Destruction was sudden, for in a small space of time the same City was seen
most flourishing, and reduced to nothing. Three days after, when this fatal
Fire had baffled all humane Counsels and Endeavors in the Opinion of all, it
stopped as it were by a Command from Heaven, and was on every side extinguished.

This Dreadful Fire was both begun and carried on by Papists, as appeared by
Hubert's own Confession, who was Executed at Tyburn for the same; and also by
several Depositions given in to the Parliament: Whereupon the following
Inscription was Engraven round about the Pedestal of the Monument, viz.

This Pillar was set depiction of a pillar up in perpetual Remembrance of the
most dreadful Burning of this Protestant City, begun and carried on by the
Treachery and Malice of the Popish Faction, in the beginning of September in
the Year of our Lord, 1666, in Order to the carrying on their horrid Plot, for
Extirpating the Protestant Religion, and Old English Liberty, and in^^oducing
Popery and Slavery.

Which Inscription being Razed out in K. James's Reign, was set up again since
the late Revolution.

And now large Supplies were Voted the King by the Parliament, and War declared
against Denmark, and a ship of 52 Guns belonging to that Crown, taken on the
Coast of Scotland, whilst Capt. Robinson took and destroyed three Dutch Men of
War near the Tex^l.

A Rebellion breaking out in Scotland, Forces were sent thither, which put 1500
of the Rebels to Rout, and some of the Ringleaders being taken were Executed,
which put an end to that Disturbance; and an Act passed for the speedy
Re-building the City of London. The Dutch attempting Burnt-Island in Scotland
were beaten off, but their whole Fleet coming to an Anchor in the Gun-fleet,
and finding us altogether unprepared, several of their Frigates entered Chatham,
and the Thames River, and burnt several Ships, though with the Loss of two of
their own: But Sir John Harman with 16 Sail engaged 30 French Men of War near
Martinego, and burnt and Sunk the greater part of them. Whereupon at a Treaty
held at Breda, all sides grown weary of War, a Peace was Concluded with France,
Denmark, and the States General, which was Solemnly Proclaimed, and soon after
with Spain And upon the Address of the Commons, the Laws were put in Execution
against Recusants, and Assemblies of Nonconformists, with much Heats for a
considerable time.

In the beginning of 1668, Great Tumults happened in the Suburbs of London, by
an Insurrection of Apprentices, and ill Persons joining with them, so that much
mischief was done under pretense of pulling down Bawdy-H^^ses, upon which eight
were Condemned for High Treason and four of them Executed. The Duke of
Albemar^^ dying, the King undertook the Charge of his Funeral which was very
Magnificent, being Interred in Westminster-Abbey. And the same Year Dyed Mary,
the Quee^ Mo^^er of England, at Columb^ in France; and (...) Duchess of
Orleance, the King's Sister, coming over to V^sit him, after a short stay, she
upon her Return dyed at S^ Cl^^s in ^rance.

There being now Peace near Home, the King resolve to Chastize the Algerines
for their Insolency, and in O^der to it sent Sir Thomas Allen with a strong
Squadron of Men of War, who took and sunk diverse of their Ships, and compelled
them to renew the Peace they had lately broken, and to deliver up a great
Number of the English Captives. And much about the same time Coll. Blood, with
other Accomplices Gagged the Keeper of the Jewel-House in the Tower, took away
the Crown, and had carried it off, had not speedy pursuit been made; and being
Imprisoned for this, whilst the People were expecting what Punishment would be
inflicted on him for so unpresidented a Crime, the King freely pardoned him.
And now Orders were given out, upon view, for the Repairing and better
Fortifying all the Seaports; for the King very much resenting some new
Affronts put upon him by the States General of the United Netherlands, a second
War began to Threaten; but Money being wanting, which is the main Engine and
Sinews of War, the Exchequer was shut up, which caused a general Murmurring,
and much Loss to many People. To palliate this, the King declared, That nothing
could have moved him to it, but only the looking upon his Government under the
Threatening of the States General and other Neighboring Princes, without his
appearing in the same Posture; but seeing the Necessity was inevitable, It was
needful that some extraordinary Course should be taken till Money could be
otherways procured. After this, the King published a Declaration of Indulgence,
to such as Dissented from the Established Religion. And now the War being fully
resolved on, Sir Robert Holms, who was cruising with five Frigates, about the
Isle of Wight, fell in with the Dutch Smyrna-Fleet, and other Ships coming from
the Streights under the Convoy of six Men of War, between whom there happened a
smart Engagement, upon their refusing to strike and lower their Flags, which
continued till Night, and (...) the next Morning renewed, and five rich Dutch
Merchantmen were taken, and their Rear-Admiral (for want of more Assistance)
sunk; and the rest got home. This first blow given, War was Declared, the
French King joining with us in it, being Obliged by the Treaty to send a
Squadron of his best Ships, which was Commanded by the Count d' Estree^ as were
the English by the Duke of York; and standing over to the Coast of Holland, a
fierce Engagement soon happened, with much Effusion of Blood on both sides; for
either part being Emulous of Honor, fought with extraordinary Eagerness, till
at last the Dutch stood away to their own Coast, and the English after them as
near as they could for the Shallows; but under the shelter of a Fogg they got
into their Harbors. In this Fight the English lost the Noble Earl of Sandwich,
and the Royal James; and long they had not lain on the Flemish Coast, but the
Dutch Recruited and came out again; but after two other Engagements, with much
Loss on either side, a Peace was concluded; and the King hereupon became
Mediator for the like Accommodation between the Crowns of France and Spain,
laboring by his Ambassadors, to compose the Differences between them,
Commanding at the same time his Subjects not to enter into the Service of any
Foreign Prince without his Leave.

The Parliament now sitting, gave the King 584900 l. for the speedy Building
thirty Ships of War; whereupon he resolved to enter into an Alliance with some
Princes abroad, that they might be able to put a stop to the Torrent of the
French King's Conquests in Flanders. And to render the Union stricter, he
Married the Lady Mary, his Neice, and eldest Daughter to his brother, to the
Prince of Orange, and proceeded to raise Forces; so that in a short time he had
a considerable Army on Foot, and the Parliament promised, That if the King
would enter into an actual War with the French King, they would stand by him
with their Lives and Fortunes. So that finding the French King still went on
with his Conquests, King Charles delayed not to send several Regiments to the
Aid of the Confederates in Flanders, and laid a Prohibition on Fr^^ch Goods.
Hereat the French King being somewhat Startled, hoping to break the Measures of
England, made Proposals of Peace to the Dutch; and they Understanding that the
Parliament had taken up a Resolution to give no more Money till Satisfaction
was first had, and their Fears and Jealousies removed; and not thinking for
this Cause fit to rely on England, since the Misunderstandings rendered it no
longer it self, did clap up a Peace in a very short time; and the rest of the
Confederates followed their Example. However, before the Peace could be
Ratified, the French took several Towns, and at last Besieged Mons, this made
the King Command the Duke of Monmouth, and Earl of Ossory, to join the English
Forces under their Command with the Prince of Orange, who so bravely Behaved
themselves, that they forced the Duke of Luxemburg's Camp, and raised the
Siege, with the Slaughter of some Thousands of French, and had done greater
things if all Hostilities had not thereupon been stopped.

Things being thus settled Abroad, greater Disturbances threatened at Home; for
about this time a wicked design was discovered to take away the King's Life,
and involve the whole Nation in Blood and Ruin, which was carried on for a
considerable time by the Papists. The first Discoverer was Titus Oats, but his
Evidence was little Credited till such time as Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, who had
taken Oats's Depositions, was found Murdered at Primrose-Hill with a Sword run
through his Body, though by a visible Mark about his Neck, it appeared he had
been Strangled: So that this giving a sufficient Ground of Belief, ( Oats's
Evidence being also further Corroborated, by Letters found in the Custody of
Edw. Coleman, Secretary to the Duke of York) the Parliament proceeded strictly
to Enquire into the matter; so that the Commons often sat from Morning till
Night, to Consult how to Prevent the Danger, and make a through Discovery; and
having Voted and entered into their Journal, That it was their Opinions, that
there had been and was an Execrable and Hellish Design carried on by the
Papists, for Assassinating the King, Subverting of the Government, and
Destroying the Protestant Religion. A Proclamation was ^ssued out for Banishing
Papists and reputed Papists ten Miles from the City of London and Westminster;
and all Roman Catholics were turned out of the Guards, and the Parliament
Addressed the King, That the Duke of York might be removed from his Presence,
and Counsels. But the last was not Granted.

And now diverse Persons being taken up and Imprisoned, on the account of this
Plot, one Staly a Goldsmith's Son in Convent-Garden, was first Executed for
saying, He would kill the King; then Edw. Coleman, the Duke of York's
Secretary; then Ireland, Pickering, Grove, Whitebread, ^enwick, Gawen,
Langhurn, and others, as Concerned in the Plot; and Green, Berry, and Hill
being accused by Prance and Bedlow, for the Murder of Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey,
were Tried at the King's- Bench-bar, Condemned and Executed. And then the
Commons called the Lord Treasurer to an Account, who had been accused by Mr.
Mountague sometimes the King's Ambassador at the French Court, for holding a
private Correspondence with France, but he relying on the King's Pardon, the
Business ^nded in a long Imprisonment in the Tower, after much stir had been
made about it. And the King in Hopes the better to please the Commons, and
satisfy the Nation in General, new modeled his Council, making it to consist
of 30 Persons, Fifteen of them to be Certain, and the rest to be Elective at
pleasure, ten out of the Nobility, and five Commoners, besides a
Lord-President, a Secretary of Scotland, and such of the Princes of the
Blood Royal as should be at Court; with which the next Day he acquainted the
Parliament; and of this Council the Earl of Shaftsbury was made President.

But notwirh^^anding this Alteration in the Council, it had not the desired
effect which the King intended; for the Parliament were still solicitous in
searching to the bottom of the Popish Plot and the more effectually to do it,
voted, That the Duke of York's being a Papist, and the hopes of his coming as
such to the Crown, have given the greatest countenance and encouragement to the
designs of the Papists, etc. And therefore ordered a Bill of Exclusion of the
Duke of York from the Sucession of the Crown, to be brought in. But the King
and the Dukes party were for offering Expedients for securing the Protestant
Religion, though the Duke should come a Papist to the Crown. But this would not
content the Commons. And there arising some heats between the Lords and Commons
about the Bishops Voting in Capital Cases, the King thinking he could expect
but little from them, Prorogued them to a more convenient season; but in a
little time after dissolved them, and called another, which he hoped to find
more to his purpose. But during the interval of the Parliament, Sir George
Wakeman was tried for the Popish Plot, and acquitted, before the Lord Chief
Justice Scroges, whose carriage was so different in this Trial from what it had
been in those before, that he was shrewdly suspected to have some very feeling
Reasons for it: For after this Trial, Scrogs was more violent against Oats and
the Whigs, than he had been before against the Papists. And now there was set
on foot a new Popish Plot to sham the old one, and put a Plot upon the
Presbyterians; which was called The Meal-Tub Plot; (the Papers relating to it
being found under Madam Celiers Meal-tub) the design whereof was, To leave
Papers and Libels of dangerous things against the Government in the Houses of
the most Eminent persons active in the Discovery of the Popish Plot, by them
called Presbyterians, and then to inform the Government that such persons where
these papers were left, were dangerous persons to the King and Government; upon
which their Houses being searched, and these papers found there, it should have
been sufficient evidence to condemn them. The Trial how this would do, was
first made upon Colonel Mansfel, a worthy Gentelman, who was Prosecuted for it,
but the examination of it being left to Sir William Jones the Attorney General,
his Report was, That Mansfel was innocent, and Dangerfield (at that time the
Papists Tool, and who had left the Papers in Mansfels Lodgings) was guilty:
Upon which Dangerfield was committed to Prison, where he mad ae through
discovery of this cursed intreague; and Sir Will. Jones was turned out of his
place, for his honest Report. And indeed from this time forward, the Duke of
York and his Creatures ruled all things under the King, so that now the whole
Design of the Government seemed to be to sham the Popish-Plot, and set up
another in it is room, against all the honest Gentlemen in the Nation. For the
Parliament having opposed the Duke's Succession, his Design was to destroy all
those Gentlemen that were active against Popery, and to bring Popery in, Per
fas and ne fas. And this appeared plainly, not only in Scotland, where the Duke
reigned as High-Commissioner, and by whose Means the Earl of Argyle was Tried,
Condemned and designed to be Executed, had he not Providentially made his
Escape, but in England also; as appeared by Dangerfield's Evidence first, and
afterward by Fitz-Harris his Plot: For after several Prorogations of the
Parliament before they sat, viz. from the 17th of October 1679. to the 21th of
October, 1680, they then sat; but found things had been carried on so high
against the Interest of the Nation, by a sort of Men that were called Tories,
and that joined with the Popish Party to stifle the Popish-Plot, and in
advancing Arbitrary Power, declaring their Abhorrence of Petitioning the King
for the sitting of the Parliament, that they resolved to make Examples of some
of them, Voting against Sir George Jefferies, Sir Francis Withens, and some
others; who were preferred by the Court, for being against the Interest of the
People: In this Parliament, after a full Hearing by the House of Lords, the
Lord Stafford, one of the Popish Lords in the Tower, was found Guilty of
High Treason, Condemned and Executed. But the Parliament being high for the
Bill of Exclusion, it having Passed the House of Commons, the King first
P^orogued, and soon after Dissolved them. But presently issues out Writs for
calling another at Oxford the 21th of March following, which was 1681. In the
mean time, one Fitz-Harris an Irishman, speaks to Everard his Countryman, and
one of the Discoverers of the Popish-plot, to write him a villainous Libel
against the King and the Duke; this Libel was to be Printed, and put into the
Pockets of the most Active Men in the Kingdom against Popery, both Lords and
Commons; who were thereupon to be taken up, and Tried for High Treason; Everard
writes this Libel, and brings Fitz-Harris to his Chamber to hear it Read; but
first Discovers the matter to Sir William Waller, and plants him in his Closet,
where he might hear the Libel Read, unknown to Fitz-Harris; after having heard
the Libel, Everard asks Fitz-Harris how he liked it, who told him very well.
Upon this, Sir William Waller goes to the King, and discovers the whole matter
to him; the King seemed to be very well pleased, and orders Fitz-Harris to be
taken up and Committed to Prison, which was accordingly done: Though Sir William
was afterward told, when he went from the King, that the King was highly
displeased with him for this piece of Service, and said he had broke all his
Measures. Fitz-Harris being taken and Committed Prisoner to Newgate; he was
Examined by Sir Robert Clayton, and Sheriff Cornish, and seemed willing to
discover the whole Design the next Day. But the next Day he was removed to the
Tower, and there kept a Close Prisoner.

And now the Parliament met at Oxford, where one of the first things they
Debated was the Business of Fitz-Harris, who was Impeached by the Commons; but
the Lords refused to join in the Impeachment; which the Commons looked upon as
a Denial of Justice; and finding the Design was to stifle Fitz-Harris's
Evidence, in whose Plot some Persons of the highest Rank were Concerned, they
Voted against the Trial of Fitz-Harris by any inferior Court whatsoever. This
being the Posture of Affairs, the King on the 28th of March Dissolves the
Parliament, and immediately took Coach and went to Windsor, leaving both Houses
in Amaze, and the City of Oxford in great Confusion, as was the whole Nation
soon after upon the News of it. This Dissolution was followed by a Declaration,
as his Father had done before him. This being done, the Business was to bring
in a new Plot to destroy the Protestants, but Fitz-Harris must first be taken
out of the way, being Tried before Pemberton (who was made Lord Chief Justice,
as was supposed for that Purpose) and soon after Executed at Tyburn, with
Oliver Plunket, the Titular Primate of Armagh, for the Popish-Plot.

About this time the City of London having chosen of their Sheriffs, Men of
Integrity, to wit, Henry Cornish, and Slingsby Bethel, Esquires, which was a
means of having Good and Upright Juries, the Enemies of the Government could
not so well carry on their Designs, which made them uneasy, and resolve to
have better for their purpose next Year; but were therein again Disappointed,
for the Citizens chose Thomas Pilkington, and Samuel Shute Esquires, two very
honest Gentlemen; and this was the Reason that when they designed to introduce
their Protestant Plot by the Trial of Stephen College, (a Joyner by Trade, but
an active Man in the Discovery of the Popish-plot, and therefore most commonly
known by Name of the Protestant Joyner) they were disappointed by the
Grand-Jury's bringing in the Bill against him Ignoramus, it being only sworn to
by some Witnesses of the Popish Plot in Ireland, who being Discountenanced were
reduced to extreme Poverty, and now were by the Tories hired to Swear for
Bread. But the Popish Faction, resolved to go on with their Show; and therefore
College was Committed Prisoner to the Tower, and soon after a Bill prefer''d
against him at Oxford, where they had a Jury to their Mind, who found it Billa
vera, whereupon he was had down to Oxford, and Tried for a Design to Seiz the
King there at the sitting of the Parliament; and though he made an excellent
Defense, notwithstanding all the Foul play that was offered him, yet he was
brought in Guilty, and soon after Executed, declaring his Innocence, and that
he was the first but should not be the last, that suffered for his Zeal against
Popery, in which he was a true Prophet. The Earl of Shaftsbury was next
Indicted of High Treason, but the Evidence against him being only some of those
Baffled Witnesses, and other Profligate Persons, whom the Grand Jury could not
believe, and therefore brought in the Bill Ignoramus. This was a great
Mortification to the Popish Party, who desired nothing more than to take off
this Noble Lord; and therefore finding the great Obstacle to their Designs were
Juries, it was resolved by the Faction to take away the City Charter, and
thereby their Power of choosing Sheriffs: And accordingly a Quo Warranto was
brought against the Charter of London, which was Prosecuted with that
Earnestness, that notwithstanding the Learned Pleading of the City Council in
the behalf of the Charter, Judgment was given against it, and their Liberties
and Franchises seized into the King's Hand. And the Mayor and Sheriffs were
appointed by the King, and acted by Commission from him, during his Pleasure.
About this time the Duke of York going by Sea (into Scotland, to fetch back his
Duchess whom he had left there) in the Gloucester Frigate, she was unhappily
cast away upon the Lemon-Sands, and many Worthy Gentlemen were Lost in her; but
the Duke, by the assistance of a Yacht come to help them, got off just as the
Ship was sinking, being, reserved by Divine Providence as a further Scourge to
these Nations. About this time also two Famous Ambassadors came into England
from Princes never known to have sent Ambassadors here before, the one from the
Emperor of Fez and Morocco, whose Business was to establish a Peace in relation
to Tangier, and the other was from the King of Bantam in the East Indies, who
presented the King with several Diamonds, and other things of great Value.

And now the World began to see the Cause of the City Charter's being taken
away; for the Duke of York and his Party, that now ruled all things at their
own Pleasure, were resolved to take off all those Gentlemen that were most
Zealous for the Protestant Religion, and that in Parliament had been most
forward for the Bill of Exclusion. And this was to be done by Pretense of a
Plot to take away the Life of the King and the Duke, and alter the Government;
and this was pretended to be executed at the Rye-House in Hartfor-shire, as the
King should come back from New Market, and was said to be prevented by a Fire
happening at New Market, which caused the King to come away sooner than he
intended, and so before the Conspirators were ready. This Plot was Sworn by one
Keeling, who had been conversant among the Dissenters. For this pretended Plot
the Earl of Essex, the Lord Russel, Lord Howard of Escrick, Colonel Sidney,
and Mr. Hambden of Buckingham-shire, were taken up; and several others of less
Note, among whom were Walcot, Rouse, and Hone; which were first Tried and found
Guilty; and soon after Executed at Tyburn; Walcot declared himself Innocent of
any design against the King, or his knowledge of any Plot; some Words he
Confessed had been spoken in his Company by those that were Witnesses against
him, and which he did not discover; Praying God to forgive those who had
Causlesly brought him to that undeserved Death. Rouse spoke much to the same
Purpose, that he had heard Words about the Feasibleness of seizing the Tower,
but knew of no such Design: But these were but Prologues to the more fatal
Tragedies that were after to be acted. For the Lord Russel was next brought to
his Trial; where the Lord Howard of Escrick and Coll. Rumsey were the principal
Witnesses against him, the Lord Howard told a story of a Counsel of Six for
carrying on the Design, consisting of himself, Coll. Sidney, Mr. Hambden, the
Lord Russel, the Earl of Essex, and the Duke of Monmouth; and Rumsey gave an
Account of a Declaration taken out of Ferguson's Bosom, and read at Shepherds:
The Lord Russel answered every Particular, and declared his own Inoocency; but
while he w^^ at his Trial, there was News brought that the Earl of Essex in the
Tower, struck with the Horror of a Guilty Conscience, had cut his own Throat;
and this was improved by the King's Counsel as an Argument of the Lord Russel's
Guilt, (as it is believed the Plot had been laid beforehand) and accordingly
the Jury brought him in Guilty; and he was thereupon Condemned, and soon after
Beheaded in Lincolns-Inn-Fields; whose excellent Speech and Behavior at his
Death, declaring his Innocence to the very last, made very few of the Numerous
Spectators, (unless it were those of the Duke of York's Faction) go away with
dry Eyes. This Noble Lord was the eldest surviving Son of William Earl of
Bedford; and was a Person of great Honor and Integrity, and Zeal for the
Protestant Religion; which (what ever was pretended) was his true Crime, he
being the Person that carried up the Hill of Exclusion to the House of Lords;
and saying in the House of Commons, when Popery began to be Rampant, If I cannot
Live a Protestant, I am resolved to Dye one. The Proceedings against him
appeared so Unjust, and his Innocence so clear, that the Parliament since this
last Revolution took off the Attainder against him; and his present Majesty
has, since his coming in, Created his Noble Father Duke of Bedford, as some
Compensation for the loss of so Incomparable a Son, as the very Words of the
Patent has it. Having told you how the News of the Earl of Essex's having cut
his Throat in the Tower, it will be convenient to give some Brief Account of
it. That Noble Lord was taken out of his own House at Caisho-Berry near
Watford, and Committed to the Tower upon this Plot, where he sent for his own
Servants to attend him, and his own Cook to dress his Meat (being Jealous
perhaps of Sir Tho. Overburies Fate) and also sent for his own Wine for his
Drinking; and hearing that the Lord Russel was to be Tried that Day, ordered
one of his Servants to go and take Notes of the Lord Russel's Trial, and bring
to him; but so it was, that that Morning that the Lord Russel was Tried, the
King and the Duke went to the Tower, where they had not been for several Years
before; whilst they were there, the Duke was for some time absent from the
King; and soon after he was come to the King again, there was News brought to
his Majesty whilst he was in the Tower with his Brother, that the Earl of Essex
had cut his own Throat; The King was extremely Surpised at the News, and
immediately gave Order to the Lord Allington the Constable of the Tower, that
his Lodgings should be shut up, and no one suffered to go in, till the Coroners
Inquest had sat upon the Body: But notwithstanding this Order of the King's by
the Direction of Some Body else, the Body was stripped and washed, and so was the
Room also, before the Coroners Inquest came, and his Clothes taken away, which
when the Coroners Inquest desired might be brought to them that they might see
them, were told, They were to sit upon the Body, and not upon the Clothes, and
so were denied the sight of them. And when they were about adjourning till the
next Day, before they gave in their Verdict, they were told, they must give it
in presently, and not stir till they had done it, because the King stayed for
it: And so they were hurried into a Verdict of the Earl's being Felo-de-se: And
when from some Information of a Rasor thrown out of the Window of the Earl's
Closet, and some other Concurrent Circumstances, one Mr. Lawrence Braddon went
about to Discover that the Earl was Murdered, and did not Kill himself, he was
prosecuted for it with the greatest Violence imaginable, as if the Discovery of
the Earl's Murder, had been the Arraignment of the Government: After this the
Honorable Algernoon Sidney was also Tried as one of the Council of Six, and
for Writing and Publishing a Libel, (though it was only found in Writing in his
own Closet) and not proved to be his own Writing neither, but by the Similitude
of Hands; which Writing (had it been proved his) was only an Answer to Sir
Robert Filmer's Treatise of Absolute Monarchy, (which had been the Design not
only of this, but of the two preceding Reigns) yet this Evidence (such as it
was) was sufficient with such Juries as then were packed for their Purpose, to
find the Colonel Guilty, notwithstanding the Learned Defense he made for
himself: So that he was Condemned and Beheaded, dying with a Greatness of Mind
worthy of himself. The Duke of Monmouth, (who was also one of the Lord Howard's
Council of Six) had for some time absconded, but now upon his Submission to his
Father and his Uncle, was admitted to Court; but being urged to make a fuller
Discovery and Confession of the Plot, which he affirmed he knew nothing of, he
fell again into his Unkle's Displeasure, and consequently into his Father's,
and so was Banished from the Royal Presence. Several others who were said to be
concerned in this Plot, fled beyond Seas, and were Outlawed for not appearing
here in Court; among whom was one Holloway a Bristol-Merchant, who was taken at
Nevis in the West Indies, and brought over hither: He was wrought upon by some
of the Duke's Creatures to make a Confession, and he should have his Pardon;
and when he had owned enough to Hang himself, he was offered the Benefit of a
Trial, which he refused, and flung himself upon the King's Mercy, and so was
Executed. And not long after Sir Thomas Armstrong, Master of Horse to the Duke
of Monmouth, (who upon the Proclamation put out for apprehending him) had fled
into Holland, was taken out of Leyden by Surprise, and brought to London, and
Committed to Newgate, and it being Term-time, was soon after carried to
Westminster; where that infamous Wretch, Sir George Jefferies, being at that
time Lord Chief Justice, ordered him to be Executed the Friday following, he
being already Outlawed. But Sir Thomas boldly Demanded the benefit of the Law,
which was on his side, for by a Statute of the 6th of Edw. 6. it was Enacted,
That if any Person Out-lawed for Treason being beyond the Sea, shall within one
Year after such Out-lawry render himself to the chief Justice of England, he
should Reverse his Out-lawry and take a Trial; which Sir Thomas then desired,
it being his Case. But the Chief Justice overruled it, and would not admit of
his Plea, nor let him have Counsel to Argue it: But gave a Rule of Court for
his Execution the Friday following; the Impudent Chief Justice charging
Richardson in a Jeering manner, to see that Sir Thomas had the full benefit of
the Law then: And accordingly he was drawn up on a Sledge to Tyburn, and there
Executed, Denying his Knowledge of any Plot whatsoever against the King. But
Sir Thomas's Death was Voted Murder by the Parliament since this happy
Revolution. The pretense of this Plot gave them a specious Ground to Persecute
the Dissenters, the Goals throughout England, being at this time filled with
them, and Multitudes Cited to, and Excommunicated by the Spiritual Courts, for
Nonconformity; Executing upon them all the Vengeance that was possible: Some
being punished as Rioters; some for Treasonable Words, and some upon Actions of
Scandalum Magnatum, and Fined Exorbitantly, beyond all Law or Reason; of which
last Sir Thomas Pilkington and Dr. Oats, were Severe instances, each being
Fined 100000 l. to the Duke.

But a little before this time, the Virtuous Lady Anne, youngest Daughter to
the Duke, was Married to Prince George, the King of Denmark's Brother; the
Match being generally liked by the People, he being a Protestant Prince. And
the Hamborough Company, in Gratitude for Favors received from the King in
Relation to their Charter, erected his Statue of gray Marble, in the midst of
the Royal Exchange, in the Habit of a Roman Caesar.

This was the State of the Nation, when upon Monday the second of February,
1684/5, the King was taken with an Apoplectick Fit, which if it carried him not
out of the World then, it is certain it did the Friday following; Dying in the
54th Year of his Age, having Reigned 36 Years, and some few Days.

He was a Prince that very much indulged himself in taking his Pleasure; and
was very unlike his Father in this, That he was a great Lover of Women, and
kept variety of them, as the Duchess of Cleaveland, Nell Gwynn, and the
Duchess of Portsmouth; the last of which was made use of by his Brother, to
make the King do whatever he had a mind to have done; for so much was the King
taken with her French Charms, that he could deny her nothing: And therefore
advancing of Favorites, was done by her Mediation; and even Parliaments
themselves Prorogued or Dissolved, if she had a Mind to have it so: He was not
a Prince Bloody or Cruel in his own Nature; yet by the Ascendant his Brother
had over him, many worthy Persons lost their Lives in his Reign. He was a
Prince of very good Natural Parts, had they not been Vitiated by giving himself
up so much to the satisfaction of his Lusts. His making War with the Dutch, and
joining with France against them, weakened the Protestant Interest, and has
made the French so Formidable to Europe. And having carried on his Brother's
Designs in Masquerade, as long as he thought Convenient, he dyed of a sudden;
but whether Naturally, or by some Foul Play, I will not determine, though the
latter was much Suspected. However, the Nation had a real Kindness for him, and
the News of his Death filled all Eyes with Tears, and all Hearts with Sadness,
(except those of the Papists, and some Tories that were worse than they) But
this proceeded chiefly from the Fears and dismal Apprehensions the People had
of the ensuing Reign.

In the Eleventh Year of this Kings Reign, a Prodigious Whale came up to
Greenwich, and run it self on shore there; soon after which Oliver Cromwell
(then Protector) died.

In his 17th Year 3 Blazing Stars appeared, of different shapes and colors,
which were looked on to be the Denuntiators of ensuing Judgments.

In his 18th Year, was a great Plague in London, of which died far more than
ever did in any Plague before, and in the next Year the greatest part of the
City of London was Consumed by Fire.

In the 33d Year of his Reign, on the 18th of May, 1680, a great storm of Hail
fell in London and the parts adjacent, the Hailstones being of an
extraordinary bigness, some of them nine inches about, and generally as big as
Pullets Eggs, with the figures of Stars, and other curious works upon them,
being also very hard: Several Rooks in the Temple-garden being killed by them;
and many Sky-lights in London broken to pieces by their violent failing upon
them. Soon after which a Prodigious Blazing-Star appeared in the West for
several Weeks together.

In the 37th Year of his Reign there was a great Frost, that continued from the
beginning of December to the end of February; in which time the Thames was
frozen so hard, that Booths were erected upon the Ice; and all sorts of
Commodities sold in them, insomuch that it was called Blanket-Fair: Also a Bull
was baited upon the Ice; and Coaches plied from the Temple stairs to
Westminster in Hillary Term.

The Reign of King JAMES the Second.
KING Charles the Second being Dead, on the same day in the afternoon, being
February the 6th. 1684/5. his Brother James Duke of York was Proclaimed King.
And upon his coming to the Council, He declared, that since it had pleased God
to place him in that station, to succed so good a King, as well as so kind a
Brother, he thought it fit to declare his Endeavors to follow his Brothers
Example, more especially in that of his great Clemency and Tenderness to his
People; and make it his Endavour to preserve the Government both in Church and
State, as it is by Law Established: And then comends the Church of England's
Principles and Members; telling them, He knows likewise that the Laws of
England are sufficient to make the King as Great a Monarch as he can wish: And
therefore as he will never depart from the just Rights and Prerogatives of the
Crown, so he will never invade any Man's Property.

This Speech of the Kings to his Council, was forthwith Printed and Published,
and received every where with great Applause; many hoping their fears were
greater than there was occasion for. But how he kept to this Declariation,
(which had he done, he might have been happy) the sequel of his Reign will show.

There was now no longer Occasion for the King to Dissemble what he was; and
therefore what his Brother King Charles had acted in Masquerade, King James
resolved to do barefaced; and accordingly the next Sunday after his accession
to the Crown, he went publicly to Mass; (which Convinced those, that before
would not believe him to be a Papist) and I have heard it Reported, That the
Duke of Norfolk carrying the Sword before him, resigned it at the Door; upon
which the King told him, His Father would have gone further with him: To which
the Duke smartly Replied But your Majesty's Father would not have gone so far:
And so went to the Protestant Chapel. In a few days after, the King Published
a Paper of his Brother's dying a Roman Catholic, and of his Receiving the
extreme Unction and other Ceremonies of the Roman-Church, before his Death,
attested by one Huddleston a Popish Priest: And also a Paper taken out of King
Charles's his Strong-Box, shevving that hovvever he appeared otherwise
outwardly, yet in his heart he was a Sincere true Roman Catholic. The
Customs and Excise dying with King Charles, being granted only for his Life,
the King puts out a Proclamation commanding the paying of them till they should
be granted by Parliament. Which was his first Specimen how well he intended
to preserve Men's Properties, when his very first Public Act of Government,
was a Notorious violation both of Men's Properties, and of the Laws of the
Kingdom.

Soon after this, his Brother (King Charles the Second) was Buried, but with
so little Pomp and Solemnity becoming the Majesty of a King, that he was as it
were thrown into his Grave in the dead time of the Night, accompanied by fevv
Persons; as if his Corpse had been in danger of being Arrested for Debt: He was
interred indeed in Henry the 7th's Chapel, but without any Stone to cover him:
So that never any King that died possessed of a Throne, was so meanly Buried. Yet
was it well enough for King Charles, whose latter part of his Reign was as Dark
as his Burial was Obscure. But this notes the Gratitude of the King to so kind
a Brother as he had always been to him.

A little before King Charles died, Dr. Oats was fined 100000 l. for Scandalum
Magnatum against the Duke of York, and to be kept a close Prisoner till the
Fine was paid; which mighty Scandal was, for saying, The Duke was reconciled to
the Church of Rome: Which now the King acknowledged. But this must not serve
Oats's turn; a Fine and Imprisonment was no sufficient Compensation for the
Lives of the Popish Martyrs that suffered in his Brother's Reign; and therefore
the King having him now within his Clutches, an Indictment for Perjury is
preferred against Oats; and the Perjury assigned is Double; first, That Ireland
(one of the Executed Jesuits) was not in London from the third of August, 1678,
till the 14th of Sept. next following; whereas Oats at the said Ireland's
Trial, Swore, That he was at a Consult about killing the King in the middle of
August. Secondly, That Oats was at St. Omers all April and May, 1678: Whereas
at the Trial of Harcourt and White-bread, etc. he Swore they were at a Consult
the 24th of April, concerning killing the King, and establishing the Popish
Religion. Ireland at his Trial, which was in 1678, urged the first Point, and
Harcourt, and Whitebread, etc. at their Trials in 1679, pleaded the second; but
Oats proved both so incontestably at their several Trials, that it was both to
the Satisfaction of Judge and Jury, and of the whole Nation. But now the Case
was altered, the Design was to invalidate the Popish Plot, and to punish Oats
for justifying it. And they were pretty sure to carry it, having such a Jury as
would be sure to find him Guilty upon any Evidence, and against the most
Substantial Evidence to the contrary; that Mirror of Injustice, Jefferies being
Judge. The Witnesses against him were the St. Omer's Youths, now better
instructed than they were before, who all remembered their Lesson to a T. and
swore Oats was at St. Omer's all April and May; and the Popish Staffordshire
Witnesses (at that Trial counted as good Witnesses as any in the World) Swore
Ireland was in Staffordshire, or thereabouts, in August and September. As to
this last, I find a Passage in Cook's Detection of the four last Reigns, that
justifies Oats's Evidence beyond all Peradventure, which I will here Insert,
and leave to Posterity to judge of: It is briefly this;

One Mr Benjamin Hinton, a Goldsmith in Lombardstreet, was Ireland 's Cashier;
and Mr. Hinton going out of Town at that time in August 1678. met Ireland (...)
or about Barnet, coming for London, where Ireland told him he had extraordinary
Occasions for Money, and urged Hinton to go back with him, but Hinton told him
his Man could do Ireland's Business as well as he, and his occasions would not
permit him to go back. I asked Mr. Hinton of the Truth of this, to which he
would not give me any Answer; but be this true or false, it is entered into
Hinton's Book of Accounts, Paid to Mr. Ireland's own Hands; whereas the other
Entries are, Paid by his Order. And it is said Mr. Hinton's Man would Depose he
Paid these Moneys to Ireland himself. Mr. Hinton afterward failing, a
Commission of Bankrupt was Sued against him, and his Book of Accounts was
delivered, and kept at the Widow Vernon's Coffee-house in St.
Bartholomew's-Lane, on the Backside of the Royal Exchange, where any one may
see the Truth of this Entry. I am assured Mr Hinton was in Court at Oats 's
Trial, to have testified this, but was terrified from it, for fear of being
Undone.

But how true soever Oats's Testimony was, he was found guilty of Perjury, upon
both Points, before Jefferies his Colleagues, and had Sentence to be Whipped from
Aldgate to Newgate on the Wednesday, and on the Friday from Newgate to Tyburn,
which was so severely Executed, that he received at his two Whippings 13000
Stripes; besides which he was to stand in the Pillory five times in the Year,
and to be a Prisoner during Life. And soon after Mr. Dangerfield was Sentenced
to undergo the like Punishment; (which yet had a more Fatal Issue) for
discovering the Meal-Tub-Plot, of which I have spoken in King Charles his
Reign. For Dangerfield returning back from his last Whipping, was run into the
Eye by one Francis, which touching his Brain, he died of the Wound in a few
Hours: For which Francis was afterward Hanged.

Soon after the King's coming to the Crown, care was taken to provide a
Parliament fit for the King's purpose (to which way had been made the latter
end of his Brother's Reign, by Quo Warranto's against Corporations, and by the
surrender of Charters) and they met the latter end of May: Where the King made
the same Speech to them for Substance, which he did at first to his Privy
Council; adding, That he expected they should settle his Revenue during his
Life, which he must not suffer to be Precarious. And the Parliament answered
his Ends, settling the Excise and Customs upon him during his Life, (which
indeed he took before, without their giving him) and gave him other Moneys
beside.

During the sitting of the Parliament, on the 11th of June, the Duke of
Monmouth arrived at Lime, in Dorset-shire, with three Ships, whereof one was a
Man of War of 32 Guns, and about 80 Men; and having Landed and taken possession
of the Town without any Opposition, he Published a Declaration, wherein he
Declared he came over to restore the Kingdom to it is Ancient Rights and
Privileges, which were all invaded by the Duke of York, and his Adherents, the
Instruments of his Tyranny, charging him with the Murder of the Earl of Essex,
and of the late King, etc. And inviting the Nobility, Gentry, and Commons, to
come in to him, and to assist him for the recovery of their lost Liberties, and
bringing the Duke of York to speedy Justice. Though at the Duke's Landing his
Complement wanted of an Hundred, yet upon Notice of his being Landed, he
quickly increased, so that in a few Days he was several Thousands strong; so
that leaving Lime he went to Taunton, increasing still as he went. King James
in the mean time having his Parliament by him, first puts out a Proclamation
for apprehending of Monmouth, and offers 5000 l. as a Reward for any that
should take him; and the Parliament to show their Loyalty ma^e an Act
attainting him of High Treason: And besides this, the King sent several of his
Forces down against him, under the Command of the Lord Feversham. The Duke of
Albermarle in Devonshire had raised the Militia of the County for the King, and
brought his Forces within a quarter of a Mile of the Duke, who prepared to
Fight him: But the Duke of Albermarle perceiving that his Forces were inclined
rather to Fight for Monmouth than against him; withdrew with s me
Precipitation, without doing any thing, being fearful of being pursued by
Monmouth; which if Monmouth had done, he had certainly put him to the Rout, and
taken all his Arms, which was the only thing that Monmouth wanted. The King's
Forces were now come into the West, and at Phillip's-Norton met with the Duke
of Monmouth, between whom and the King's Forces there was a brisk Rencounter;
wherein the King's Forces retreated with Loss, Monmouth's Men firing fiercely
upon them. Soon after the Duke marched to Cansham-bridge, intending to go for
Bristol, but hearing the Duke of Beaufort was with a Body of Men to oppose him
in his way, he turned about and went to Bridge-water, whither the King's Forces
followed him; and lay at a place called Sedge-moor; there in the dead time of
the Night, on Sunday the 5th of July, the Duke with a Guide Marches against the
King's Forces, with 3000 Foot and 1000 Horse; and falling upon them, a very
fierce Fight ensued, the Duke's Foot fighting incomparable well, but his Horse
hardly ever came up; and his Foot having spent all their Ammunition, and being
put in Disorder by the King's Horse, in the end were put to the Rout; the Duke
of Monmouth himself, with the Lord Gray, and some others, making their Escape,
and riding toward the Borders of Hampshire, where on the 8th of July the Duke
was taken, as also the Lord Gray, and a Noble Brandenburger that came over with
him. They were all brought to London with a strong Guard, on the 13th, and the
D. after having been Examined at Whitehall was Committed to the Tower, and
being already attainted by Parliament, a Warrant was signed by the King for his
Execution, and on the 15th of July he was Beheaded on Tower Hill, many pitying
of him, but none being able to help him. But this was one Specimen more of K.
James's Love to so good and kind a Brother as K. Charles the II. had been to
him, cutting off the Head of his beloved Son.

After the Duke's Defeat at Sedgmoor, many of his Followers were taken and put
in Prison; and then the Chief Justice Jefferies was sent down to keep the
Assizes there, where he acted so many barbarous things, that it is a shame to
Name them, and Posterity will scarce believe them: For in the Counties of
Dorset and Sommerset, above three Hundred Persons were Executed, and their
Heads and Quarters were set upon Poles, and placed both in all the chief Towns,
and in the Roads and Highways for many Miles together, both to the Terror and
Annoyance of Travelers as they past along. And thus it is that King James
performs his Word to his Privy Council, at his first coming to the Crown, of
his endeavoring to follow the Example of his dear Brother in all things,
especially in that of his great Tenderness and Clemency to his People.

But it is not all the Blood shed in the West that will Suffice; there are
still other Victims to be offered up; for upon Tuesday the 13th of October,
1685. Alderman Cornish was taken off of the Exchange, (where he was following
his Business without any apprehension of Danger toward him, thinking his own
Innocence a sufficient Defense) and committed close Prisoner to Newgate; and on
the Saturday night following had Notice to prepare for his Trial on Monday, at
which time he was Tried for High Treason, in promising to assist the Duke of
Monmonth, the Lord Russel, Sir Thomas Armstrong, etc. against King Charles the
Second, in the Year 1682. The chief Witness against him was Rumsey, who Swore,
That the Declaration for a Rising being read, Alderman Cornish being present,
and being asked how he liked it, he answered, Very well; and what poor Interest
he had, he would join in it. And yet this Fellow at the Lord Russel's Trial,
Swore Cornish was not there when the Declaration was read, nor knew nothing of
it. However, the Alderman's Death was resolved on, and both Judge and Jury
being agreed, he was found Guilty, Condemned, and on the 23th of the same Month
executed in Cheapside, over against the Guild Hall of the City, Declaring his
Innocence as to what he was Condemned for, to the very last: And indeed Heaven
it self attested it for him, for his Execution was followed with such a
dreadful Storm of Wind, attended with Thunder, Lightning, and Rain, as the like
has scarce happened at that time of the Year, in the Memory of Man. His true
Crime was, That he was a Zealous Protestant, that had served the City
Faithfully in his Shrievalty, and had Examined Fitz-Harris in Newgate, and had
like to have discovered the Depth of that cursed Design against the
Protestants. The same Day also one Mrs. Gaunt, a Woman of great Goodness and
Charity, was burned at Tyburn, for relieving a Lieutenant under Monmouth in the
West, himself being the Witness against her, for which he had his Pardon.

And now the Parliament met again, and the King tells them how he had Defeated
Monmouth, and that several Popish Officers had been very useful to him therein;
that he could not be without their Service; and that the Militia was not
sufficient, without keeping up a standing Army; and hopes they will help him to
Defray the Charge; but the Parliament address to him to Disband his Popish
Officers, and offers to pass an Act to Indempnify them from the Penalties they
had already incurred in serving without having taken the Test appointed by Law:
This Address of the Commons was very surprising to the King, who expected from
them absolute Obedience without Reserve: But the King was much more Surpised
when he understood that the Bishop of London had made a motion in the House of
Lords to take the King's Speech into Consideration, as fearing the Lords would
concur with the Commons in their Address. But the King was resolved to prevent
it, and therefore first Prorogued, and soon after Dissolved the Parliament; who
had been so large in their Supplies the first Session, that now (too late) they
saw he was able to live without them.

The Parliament's questioning of the Popish Officers, had put them all into a
Fright, but the Parliament being Dissolved, they were all at ease again, and
nothing but Popish Officers, and Priests and Jesuits are seen about the Court;
who were grown to an unparalleled degree of Impudence. And yet to find Fault
with them, was a Crime next to High Treason.

But the King finding the Penal Laws and Tests stand as a mighty Obstacle in
his way, was resolved to remove them: In order to which, the Lord Keeper North
dying, while Jefferies was keeping the Bloody Assizes in the West, at his
return back, he had the Seals given him, with the Title of Lord-Chancellor, as
a Reward for his good Service in destroying the Western Heretics; and as an
encouragement to him to destroy the Penal Laws and Tests, the great Bulwark
against Popery. And therefore dispensing Power in the King, is that which must
next be set up in order to effect it. And the Judges must be dealt with, to
give their Opinions for it. And I have been certainly told, That the King
Closetting Sir Thomas Jones about it, Sir Thomas was not enough through paced,
but boggled at it, and told the King He could not do it: to which the King
answering, He would have twelve Judges of his Opinion. Sir Thomas Replied, He
might have twelve Judges of his Opinion, but he would scarce find twelve
Lawyers of his Opinion. But the King was as good as his Word, and made such
Judges as gave their Opinions, That the King might dispense with the Penal Laws
and Tests out of Parliament.

The Papists having always looked upon the Church of England with an evil Eye,
did so now more than ever, they having writ several Elaborate and Learned
Books, in opposition to the principal Errors of Popery, which they were never
able to answer: But they were resolved if they could not deal with them one
way, they would another; and therefore the King granted a Commission for
Ecclesiastical Affairs, expressly contrary to Law, thereby to Curb them. This
Commission was Granted to the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Chancellor
Jefferies, the Earl of Rochester, the Earl of Sunderland, the Bishop of Durham,
the Bishop of Rochester, and the Lord-Chief-Justice of England: But the
Archbishop of Canterbury refusing to act in it, the Bishop of Chester was
added: Before these Commissioners the Bishop of London was Cited, and
Suspended, for not Suspending Dr. Sharp, for Preaching a Sermon against the
Corruptions and Frauds of the Church of Rome.

In Ireland the King having recalled the Duke of Ormond from his Lieutenancy,
made the Earl of Clarendon Lieutenant, and Sir Charles Porter Lord-Chancellor,
who after their arrival there, declared (according to their Instructions) that
the King would preserve the Acts of Settlement and Explanation, inviolable, as
the Magna-Charta of Ireland. But at the same time the King having given to
Colonel Richard Talbot (a Man not at all beloved by the Protestants) an
Independent Commission to reform the Army, and he turns out those Officers that
were firm to the Protestant Religion and the English Interest, and puts
Notorious Irish Papists in their Room, and serves not only the Officers, but
even the private Troopers and Soldiers that were Protestants, in the same
manner. So that one of the best principled Armies in the World, both with
respect to Loyalty, and a firm adherence to the Protestant Religion, was turned
out and Disbanded, and a parcel of Irish Popish Cutthroats entertained in
their places; which seemed strange to the English Protestants there, and not at
all agreeable to what my Lord Clarendon, and Sir Charles Porter had told them;
who were not themselves pleased with it, but knew not how to help it.

But in England the King having established his Dispensing Power, puts forth a
Declaration for Liberty of Conscience; pursuant to which, the Goals all over
England, that were filled with Protestant Dissenters, were cleared, and the
Dissenters set at Liberty: Who having been long oppressed and almost ruined by
severe Prosecutions for several Years together, were now glad of a little Ease;
though the most Judicious among them saw clearly enough it was not for their
Sakes, but to introduce Popery, that this Indulgence was principally Granted;
and therefore were always afraid of the Snake hid in the Grass. The Episcopal
Clergy, who in the late Reign, and the beginning of this also, had been very
severe to Dissenters, began now to see they had been only Tools in so doing to
the Papists, and had carried on their W^^k for them; and now that their Eyes
began to be (...) and t^^^ they would be so no more, they would fain have made
T^^s of the Dissenters to pull down the Church of England; by aggravating the
ill Usage they had received from them so many Years: And that now was their
time to call them to an Account, and be even with them for it; and several of
the Dissenters (who were very Honest, though mistaken Men) were by these specious
Pretenses drawn in to join with them.

The King was so fond or his Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, that he
Publishes it a second time, with an Injunction to have it read in all
Parish-Churches; and the Bishops of the respective Diocesses were to see it
done. But the Archbishop of Canterbury, and several of the Bishops, looking
upon this as a thing contrary to Law, not only refused to do it, but humbly
Petitioned the King to hear the Reasons why they could not comply with that
Order. But this was looked upon by Jefferies, then Lord-Chancellor, Father
Peter's, (then made one of the Privy Council) and others of the Popish Faction,
as a Crime next to High Treason; and therefore for their Contempt they were
Committed to the Tower.

It was now more than a Year that had passed since the King's Declaration for
Indulgence came forth; and the Prince and Prince^ of Orange having been
privately sounded how they stood affected to the Test and Penal Laws, they
being the next Heirs to the Crown; their Opinion seemed to be, That the Papists
should by Law have Liberty for the private Exercise of their Religion without
Disturbance, but that by no means the Tests should be taken off, to let them in
to have a share in the Government. This it was that touched the Papists to the
quick, for they saw that the King was well stricken in Years, and upon his
Death (which they knew not how soon might happen) a Protestant Princess was the
next Heir, who would soon pull down all that Babel, which they had been
Building; and therefore some other Provision must be made for another Popish
Successor.

And nothing could do this so well as a young Prince of Wales, during whose
Minority (if the Ki^^ should Die) they might Govern themselves, (...) Popery,
as in the days of Old.

This being resolved on, the old D^tchess of Modena, makes he Offering to the
Lady of Loretto, of whom she Implores, That the Queen of England may have a Son
(for a Daughter would signify nothing) to be Heir of the Crown of England. By
Virtue of these Prayers, and the Queen's going down to the Bath, and drinking
the Waters there, she was said to be Impregnated; and nothing was now to be
heard among the Popish Faction, but drinking the Young Prince's Health, even
before he was Born; for that it would be a Son, there was no body questioned,
as taking it for Granted that was the Design. And all things were carried on by
the Faction in order to it is Birth.

The Princess Ann of Denmark being not very well, was advised by her Physicians
to go down to the Bath, for the Recovery of her Health. And the Arch bishop of
Canterbury, and several others of the Bishops being in the Tower, and the
Bishop of London suspended from his Office, and other concurring Circumstances
being ready, it was now looked upon to be a good time for the Queen to cry out,
which was accordingly so well managed, that on Sunday the 11th of June, 1688, a
young Prince of Wales was said to be born: Which was published with so much
Joy, both throughout England, Scotland, and Ireland, and by their Ambassadors
in all Foreign Courts, that they abundantly overacted it.

The great Point of a Popish Heir being thus secured, the Popish Faction begun
to go on with a high Hand, turning out Dr. Hough (whom the Fellows of Magdalen
College in Oxford had chosen for their President) and all the Fellows too,
because they would not accept of a Papist, whom the King would have imposed
upon 'em by a Mandamus; in Sidney College in Cambridge, Father Francis was put
in; and in Vniversity-Colledge in Oxford, Obadiah Walker the Principal,
declared himself a Papist. The Head of Christ-Church, put in by the King, wa^
also of ^^e same Profession. Nor was any Preferment to (...) unless he were a
Roman Catholic.

In Scotland the ^ing had issued out a Proclamation for Tolleration in
Religion, recommending his Roman Catholic Subjects particularly, to the
Protection of the Government there, and tells them he expects his Will should
be Obeyed absolutely, and without Reserve.

But in Ireland the King would allow no Liberty of Conscience to the
Protestants; for they were turned out of all Offices and Places whatsoever: And
the Earl of Clarendon recalled from his Lieutenancy, and Talbot, who had
already reformed the Army there, and made it perfectly Popish, was for that
good Service made Earl of Tyrconnel, and Deputy of Ireland. Sir Charles Porter
also, the Lord Chancellor, was turned out, and one Alexander Fitton, a Papist,
who had been fetched out of Goal in England, and made a Knight, is now made
Lord-Chancellor in his place.

I have before told you of the Committing of the Seven Bishops to the Tower,
(which were the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of Bath and Wells, the
Bishop of Bristol, the Bishop of Peterborough, the Bishop of Chichester, the
Bishop of St. Asaph, and the Bishop of Ely) and of the Birth of the pretended
Prince of Wales while they were there; the Bishops having by their Habeas
Corpus been set at Liberty, were Tried for a high Misdemeanour in Trinity-Term
following; and notwithstanding the new Modelling of the Judges, and that one of
then (Judge All'bone) was a known Papist, yet Mr. Justice Powel, to his lasting
Honor, did both Learnedly and Zealously defend their Cause, so that the Jury
acquitted them. The public Rejoicing that was made for the acquittal of the
Bishops, was not Confined to the Cities of London and Westminster, but upon the
News thereof being brought to Hounsloe-Heath, where the Army lay, the King
being at that time treated by the Earl of Feversham (in his Tent) it was
received with a general Shout throughout the whole Army; the King not knowing
the Reason of that Shout, was very much Startled at it, and sent the Earl of
Feversham out to enquire the Cause, who upon his Return, told the King, 'T^^^
nothing (...) the Soldiers Joy for the acquittal of the Bishops: To whom the
King replied with some Discomposure, And call you that Nothing? This being
indeed enough to let him see how vain a Design he had undertaken, to set up
Popery by a Protestant Army.

The King was now busy in modelling all the Corporations in England that send
Burgesses to Parliament, to get a Parliament fitted to his own Turn, in order
to take off the Penal Laws and Tests, no other obstacle now lying in his way;
when on a sudden he was allarmed with the News of the great Preparations making
by the Dutch, both by Sea and Land: Upon which account, the King sends to his
Envoy at the Hague to put in a Memorial to the States General to know the
Reason. The French King also, who was concerned at it, orders his Ambassador
there to deliver in a Memorial upon that occasion, wherein he tells the States,
There are such Bonds of Friendship and Alliance between his Master and the King
of Great Britain, as will oblige him (the French King) not only to assist the
King of Great Britain, but to look on the first Act of Hostility committed
against him (the King of Great Britain) to be a Manifest Rupture of the Peace,
and a Breach with his Crown. This left no longer any doubt in the mind of the
Prince of Orange and the States General, of the private League between England
and France. Which was a sufficient Ground for the Prince of Orange to rescue
these Kingdoms (to which (in Right of his Princess) he was the next Heir) from
Popery and Arbitrary Power. For he saw plainly that the Supposititions Prince
was Introduced to wrong him and his Princess of their Right to the Succession,
and to subject these Kingdoms to Popery and Slavery, and by consequence all
Europe besides. The Dutch took no notice of the French King's Memorial, but
gave King James's Envoy this Answer, that they had Armed in Imitation of his
Britanick Majesty, and the other Princes; and that they had thereby given no
just occasion of Offense, in Arming when all other Princes where in motion; and
that they were long since convinced of the Alliance that the King his Master
had treated with France, and what had been mentioned to them by Monsier de
Count d' Avaux in his Memorial. After this Answer, King James expected no good
from the Dutch, and looked upon them, as if they had already declared War
against him.

And now the Eyes of all England were turned to Holland, and expected
Deliverance from thence; without which they saw themselves Ruined; nor did his
Royal Highness the Prince of Orange deceive them, but Landed with an Army of
about 14000 Men, at Torbay near Exeter, on the Fifth day of November, 1688. A
day deservedly Famous in England for two eminent Deliverances from Popery. Soon
after his Landing he went to Exceter, where he was received by the People with
Shouts and Acclamations of Joy as their Deliverer, as indeed he was: After some
little stay there, he came forwards toward the South; but King James to oppose
him, sent down his Army to Salisbury, whither he also went himself; but part of
the Army going over to the Prince, the King was so Sta^tled at it, that he
thought not himself there out of Danger, and so returned to London again; and
as the Prince came forward, he was in all places looked upon as a Blessing sent
from Heaven to rescue 'em from Popery and Slavery.

In the mean time King James to prevent (if it were possible) the impending and
growing danger, Restores all the Fellows of Magdalen College, and puts out his
Proclamation for vacating all New Charters, and restoring of old ones, and
Particularly the Charter of London was carried in great Pomp to Guild Hall by
Jefferies, and given the Citizens again. But for all these good things there
was no body now thanked him, as being the Effects of his Fear, and not of his
good will. The Prince's coming nearer and nearer to London, the Nobility and
Gentry at every Place Flocking to him, and Congratulating him; King James first
sends away his Queen and pretended Prince to France; and in a little time after
withdraws himself from White Hall, and goes to Feversham, where attempting to
go a-board, he was seiezed and rifled by the Country People, and after his
being known, he came back to London again, and was well received; but the
Prince being then at Windsor, and designing the next Day for London, King James
by a Message was desired to withdraw himself to Ham near Kingston, to avoid
those Inconveniences that might Ensue: But the King rather chose to go to
Rochester, having the Princes Guards with him to secure him from the Insults of
the People; there he staid two or three Days, and then Privately Embarked
himself for France; where he soon after ariv'd.

King James being thus gone away, upon the Prince's coming to London, he was
desired by the Nobility and Gentry to take the Government upon him, thereby to
suppress the Disorders of the common People, which was then very Great; but by
the Prince's Order soon brought to be quiet. The Mass-Houses were every where
pulled down, and the Priests and Jesuits, with the whole Popish Crew, put to
the Scamper. Jefferies being dropped by his Master, was shifting for himself, but
taken by the Mobb in a Seaman's Habit, was carried before the Lord Mayor, and
from thence sent to the Tower, attended by strong Guards to keep him from being
torn in Pieces by the incensed Mobb, who followed him with Threats, Curses, and
Execrations; where sometime after he drank himself to Death, and so saved the
Hangman a Labor.

The Prince of Orange having the Government put into his Hands, Summons such
Gentlemen as were Members of King Charles's last three Parliaments to meet at
Westminster, to consult what was fit to be done for the Nation; which they
accordingly did, and desired the Prince that Writs might be issued out for the
calling a Convention of the Estates (in the Nature of a Parliament) to meet in
January following: Which being done, the Convention met at the time appointed;
and entering into several Debates about the present States of Affairs, they
came to this Result, That King James by privately withdrawing himself out of
his Kingdoms, had Abdicated the Throne, whereby it was become Vacant.

And so ended the Four Years Reign of King James the Second.

An Account of what Remarkably Occurred since the Reign of King WILLIAM the III.
and Queen MARY the II. to the Year 1606.
KING James (as has been mentioned) having Left the Land, and that in
Parliament being taking for an Abdication, and the Throne declared Vacant,
William and Mary Prince and Princess of Orange, were Proclaimed King and Queen
of England, France, and Ireland, etc. before White Hall, and in the City of
London, with the Joy of the whole Nation, on the 13th of Feb. 1688, and with
Convenient speed they were Proclaimed with the like satisfaction in all the
Principal Places of their Dominions; and the King returned the Parliament a
Gracious answer to their Declaration, expressing himself highly satisfied with
what they had done, promising to the utmost his Care and Protection for the
Preservation of the Established Religion, Laws, and Liberties; and that he
should always be ready to Concur with them in any thing that should be for the
Good of the Kingdom; and to do all that in him lay to advance the Glory and
Welfare of it; and thereupon he proceeded to quiet disorders in all places of
England that had risen on this Revolution. But Ireland was in a dangerous
Condition; for the Earl of Tyrconnel had stopped almost all the Ports, and was
raising numerous Forces of Irish, for the Service of King James; so that those
who would have fled into England, or Scotland, were for the most part
restrained, and obliged to continue under the dreadful Apprehensions of another
Massacre, being every where in the Country Robbed and Spoiled of their
Substance, and a great many Imprisoned.

The State of which Kingdom the King earnestly recommended to his Parliament,
desiring them to hasten the raising such Supplies as was requisite in order to
redu^d it to Obedience. The Lord bishop of London, with about one Hundred of
the City Clergy, waiting on the King to tender their humble Duty, he gave them
an assurance of his Affection to the Church of England, and of all
Encouragement to them; concluding that they might depend upon his Word. And an
Act passed about Removing and Preventing all Questions and Disputes about the
Assembling and sitting of the Parliament; and the King issued out his
Proclamation (to leave the Irish without Excuse) That if they would lay down
their Arms, and Live quietly, they should have their Pardon for all things
past, and enjoy their Estates; but if they continued still in Arms, declaring
them Rebels and Traitors, and their Lands and Possessions Forfeited, etc. But
this Proclamation being not Published in Ireland, had little effect; though in
the North the Protestants secured Londonderry, Sligo, and other places, in
expectation of being Aided from England.

And now the King, to ease his Subjects, consented that the Duty of
Hearth-Money, that had long been a Burden to the Nation, might be taken off,
which was very pleasing to the People. Thomas Pilkington Esquire who in the late
Reign was Fined 100000 l. upon an Action of Scandalum Magnatum, brought against
him by the then Duke of York, was now chosen Lord Mayor of London, in which
Honorable station he continued near three Years.

And now the Coronation being appointed, on the 11th of April it was performed
with great Splendour and Magnificence, occasioning great Demonstrations of Joy
in the People: and soon after the Crown of Scotland, was by the Commissioners
of the Estates presented to the King and Queen, which was accepted, and the
usual Coronation Oath of that Kingdom taken.

And now Admiral Herbert standing with a considerable Squadron to the Coast of
Ireland, fought with about 40 French Men of War in Bantrey-Bay, in this
Engagement Capt. George Aylmer of the Portland, a Lieutenant, and 64 Seamen,
were Killed, and about 240 Wounded; the Enemy losing a greater Number. And then
at the humble Request of the Parliament, the King declared War with France.

In Scotland Duke Hamilton was made High-Commissioner; where the Duke of
Gourdon held the Castle of Edenborough for King James, and the Viscount. Dundee
had a considerable Force in the Field, to second him; and many hot Skirmishes
were Fought; till at last in an Obstinate Fight Dundee was killed, upon which
the Duke of Gourdon not finding himself longer able to hold the Castle,
delivered it up to Sir John Lanier, upon Articles. and though Colonel Cannon,
Buchanon, and others, kept up the Party in the Field for a while, at length
they were dispersed, and Scotland entirely Quieted.

On the 24th of July the Princess of Denmark was brought to Bed of a Son, and
on the 28th he was Christened William, by the Bishop of London; the King and
the Earl of Dorset standing Godfathers, and the Marchioness of Hallifax
God-Mother; and then the King declared the Young Prince Duke of Gloucester.

King James being Landed in Ireland, with some French Forces, and a
considerable number of Officers, Arms, and Ammunition, had with a numerous Army
besieged Londonderry, which was Defended by the Inhabitants and others, till
it was reduced to the last Extremity by Famine; but then Providence so ordered
it, that Major General Kirk sending in Shipping with Provision, the Siege was
raised.

The Besiegers in lying before it, and by the Besieged's falling on the Rear in
drawing off, having lost 2000 men; and Dr. Walker, a principal Man in Defending
that place, coming over, the King Ordered him 5000 l. as a mark of his Bounty,
with an Assurance of greater Advantages. And on the 13th of August, the Duke of
Schomberg Landed with the English Army at Carickfergus in Ireland, and soon
Reduced diverse Places, compelling the advanced Parties of the Irish to retreat
before him, and held a Winter-Camp on the Plains of Dundalk, which being
Moorish and Foggy, many Gallant Men dyed of the Flux, and other Sicknesses. But
the Iniskilling-men, who frequently went abroad in Parties, did considerable
Service, by cutting off the Irish Rapparees.

Whilst these things passed, the King for weighty Reasons dissolved his first
Parliament, and called another to sit at Westminster the 20th of March, 1690,
and the Commons choosing Sir John Trevor their Speaker, the King told both
Houses, among other things, That his Resolution was to go for Ireland, his
Presence being necessary there, for Reducing that Kingdom: Signifying it was
his Pleasure to leave the Government in the Queen's Hands during his Absence;
and accordingly before his Departure an Act was passed to that Purpose. And the
King of Denmark at this time assisted the King with 6000 Danish Soldiers, under
the Leading of the Duke of Wirtemburg, who did notable Service. Charlemont
having been straightly Blocked up, Capitulated; and other places were Reduced
by Force.

And now the King having settled Affairs in England, left White Hall on the 4th
June, and on the 14th Landed at Carickfergus in Ireland and hastened to order
the Army, and Marching to the Newry, had News that the Enemy having set Fire to
their Straw, had Decamped, and quitted that strong Post. This at first scarce
gained Credit, but Scouts being sent out, and the Report confirmed, the King
changed his March, and sent Orders to the Forces at Armagh and Fevergee to
march by the great Roads toward Dundalk, in which some of our Men fell into an
Ambush of the Enemy, but behaved themselves with that Courage and Bravery, that
most of them got off, having slain the Commander and brought away his Horse;
and the King marched toward Drogheda, where he found the Enemy Encamped along
the River Boyn, above the Town; and as he was viewing them, a Six-pounder
grazed on his Shoulder, which only rased the Skin; but as soon as it was
Dressed, he took Horse and Commanded Count Solmes to find out a Ford above the
Enemy, and pass the River, which he Successfully did; and obliged those that
Guarded it, after a hot Dispute to retire: And upon notice of this, the whole
Army passed at other Fords, the Foot wading, some to the Armpits, sustaining
all the Enemies Fire, and not returning it till they came close up with them,
and falling furiously on, soon gave them a general Rout; but in this Encounter
Duke Schomberg and Dr. Walker, late of Londonderry, were Killed, and about 300
of lesser Note, on our Part: The Enemy lost 3000, and were pursued 4 Miles; and
upon this Defeat Drogheda Surrendered, and K. James with part of his broken Army
hasted to Dublin, and from thence he went to Waterford, where soon after he
took Ship and Sailed for France; and the King of England coming to Dublin, was
received with all imaginable Demonstrations of Joy; and a great many
Protestants who had been Imprisoned, were set at Liberty, the Papists disarmed,
and the Affairs in those Parts settled, and many places that stood out,
Surrendered. The Brass and Copper Money K. James had Coined, as passable in that
Kingdom, was called in, or set at the Value of the Metal only: Sheriffs
appointed, and the Face of Justice restored.

Whilst these things were doing beyond the Seas, an Engagement happened between
the English and French off Beachy, viz. on June 30. in which the Dutch Squadron
being forward to gain the Weather-Gage of the Enemy, received great Loss, many
of them being Burnt, or so shattered that after the Fight they fell into the
Hands of the Enemy; the English red Squadron not coming up, as was expected;
for which Miscarriage our Admiral, the Earl of Torrington, was Tried, but
acquitted; and after the Fight, the French insulted our Coasts, burning
Tingmouth a Vi^^age of Fishers Cots, and doing some other Damage; after which
they retired to their own Coast; and one Godfrey Cross, an Innkeeper in Kent,
for going on Board the Enemy, and giving Intelligence, was afterward Tried,
Condemned, and Executed near St. Thomas's Waterings, in the Kentish-road from
London. And this Year the King besieged Lymerick in Ireland; but by reason of
the Strength of the Place, advancing of the Season, and great Rains that
over-flowed the River Shannon, on which it is seated, having in vain summoned
it, he drew off, and returned to England. But our Fleet standing to that Coast,
and the Earl of Marlborough on board it, with considerable Landforces, and
joined upon Landing by part of the Army already there, they took Cork and
Kinsale with little Loss; at the Siege of the first, the Noble Duke of Grafton,
amongst others, pressing too forwards on the Works, was Slain by a small Shot.

A Plot was soon after Discovered to have set the City of Dublin on Fire, and
in that Hurry to have fallen on the King' Forces in Garrison there, and by a
miserable Slaughter to have Surprised it; but some Letters intimating the
Intention, being found by the Care of the Lord Sidney and Conningsby, whom the
King had appointed Lords-Justices; the Mischief was prevented, by securing
Suspected Persons.

And now the Parliament of England waited on the King with their humble
Addresses of Thanks for the great Things he had done for these Kingdoms, and to
Congratulate his happy Return and Success; and the King was not slow by Marks
of Honor and Promotion, to Gratify those that had well-behaved themselves in
the Service; and among others, Coll. Cuts was Created Baron of Gowran in the
Kingdom of Ireland; he also appointed his Privy Council there, and all other
Officers of State, Judges, and Magistrates; restored such as had been outed,
and appointed some new Bishops, causing a Regulation of the Clergy in General.

The Winter thus passing on, the King prepared to pass the Seas, to be at the
Congress of Princes and Ambassadors, appointed at the Hague, to Concert the
Measures for carrying on the War against France; and after he had passed
several Acts, and Prorogued the Parliament, he Embarq'd with a splendid Train
of Nobility, and with great Difficulty, by reason of the Ice, it being January,
Landed near Maesland-sluys; and being Complemented by the Deputies of the
States, passed to the Hague, where the States General and Council of State,
with other Colleges, made their Complements to him; as also the Foreign
Ministers: and to make his Reception the more Magnificent, three Triumphal
Arches were Erected, one by the States General, and two by the Magistrates,
with sundry Motto's and Devices, Expressing the great things he had done and
what more Glorious were Promised from his Heroic Virtues, too many here to
Enumerate; and in the Evening the Cannon, Illuminations, Fireworks, and shouts
of the People, spoke more loudly the Welcome of a Prince that has so well
deserved of that Nation. And at his first appearing in the Assembly of the
States General, taking his Place at the upper-end of the Table, he with many
Obliging Expressions declared his Affections and good Inclinations to them, in
a most Elegant Speech; which being deliberated on, the Here Van Wickers
President of the Assembly, in the name of the rest, made a suitable Answer, and
the Duke of Brandenburg, and other Princes being met, a League and strict Amity
was agreed on, for restoring the Peace and Tranquillity of Europe, in reducing
(by Arms) the Grand Disturber of it to Reason, and a Restitution of what he had
wrongfully, either by Surprise, or Vioolence, taken from the Confederates: for
which War had been Proclaimed by them.

Whilst the King was thus busy beyond the Seas, some ill-affected Persons were
Designing at home to betray our Strengths into the Hands of the Common Enemy,
by giving account of the Ports, Shipping, and what else might facilitate an
Invasion, and on this account the Lord Preston, John Ashton and Edmund El^ot,
were seized in a Smack, as they were passing out of the River of Thames by
Captain Billop, and Papers of Dangerous Consequence found, with which they were
designed for France; for which the two first being Tried and found Guilty of
High Treason, Ashton was Executed.

The King having appointed the Baron D' Ginkle chief Commander of his Forces in
Ireland, having received Supplies and Stores from England, he besieged
Ballymore, which surrendered upon Discretion: And having Garisoned it, the Army
marched, and set down before Athlone, where they had put up French Colors to
make him believe the Garrison mostly consisted of that Nation: However a Breach
being made, and succeeded by a vigorous Attack, the Base Town was soon won, and
the other followed the same Fate in a short time, though their whole Army lay
behind it; and the Soldiers furiously entering, a great many were put to the
Sword.

This was no sooner Repaired and Garisoned, but the Army pursued the Retreating
Enemy, and in a long-Contested Battle at Aghrim, gave them a total Rout; so
that they never considerably appeared in the Field after it; St. Ruth the
French General, was slain with a Cannon-shot at the beginning of the Fight, and
all their Cannon, Baggage, Ammunition, and Plunder of the Camp, fell to the
share of our Men. And being Refreshed, they marched to Galloway, which place
after a considerable Battery, was Surrendered on Articles, and the Garrison
marched to Lymerick, which was the next place besieged; but holding out
Obstinately, and having in it a numerous Garrison, it was thought fit after a
considerable Siege, to grant advantageous Articles, and as many as would, had
leave to depart the Kingdom. And with this Town all Ireland was reduced; for
those few places that held out, Surrendered mostly of their own accord: And the
Lieutenant General having settled the Affairs there, and returning to England,
was by his Majesty Created Earl of Athlone, and highly Treated by the City of
London, etc. Whilst this time was taken up in Reducing Ireland, the
Confederates employed their Arms to recover the Towns the French had taken in
Flanders, etc. And the Duke of Brandenburg was successful in taking Keyserwart,
Mentz, and Bon, places of considerable Strength; and Prince Waldeck fought the
Marshall D' Humiers at Forg Village; where the English, under the Command of
the Lord Marlborough, did Wonders, in stopping of the Torrent of the Enemy, who
supposed to have Surprised the Confederate Camp, killing a great many of them,
and making them Retreat. But the French ravaging the Palatinate, cording to
their wonted Barbarity, they burnt Newstadt, Frankendale, Petersham, Lambesham,
Wachenheim, Darmstein, and afterward Spires, Worms, Heidleberg, were partly
burnt and demolished, which hastened the King to head the Army in Flanders. And
by this time the Duke of Savoy, took Carmagnole, and gave free Liberty to the
Vaudois to Live quietly under his Protection.

The King by diverse Marches and Encampments, endeavoring to draw the French to
a Battle, possessed himself of Beaumont in the sight of their Army, Commanded
by the Duke of Luxemburg, and demolished the Fortifications, but with the loss
of 400 men they took Montmelian; but were beat out by the Cannon of the Castle,
which they in vain for some time had assaulted, and Prince Lewis of Baden,
Commanding the Emperors Forces, gave the Turks a great overthrow in Hungary,
Killing about 23000 men, and taking the greater part of their Cannon and
Baggage. A Person hired by the Duke of Luxemburg to blow up the King's Bombs,
and fire the Ammunition Wagons, being apprehended, and Confessing the Attempt,
which only fired three Bombs, had his right Hand cut off, then being half
Strangled was burnt. And as the King was standing under a Tree, to view the
Enemy, a singular hand of Providence appeared in his Preservation, for he had
no s^on^r stepped aside to give some Orders, but a shot from a Cannon rent the
Tree in the Place, where a Minute before he had stood. And now the French Court
(which had so often aimed at his precious Life, and found it difficult to be
attempted in a fair Field) practiced with diverse Villains to compass the King's
Destruction by Treachery, to which end the Sieur Grandvalle, had received
several Sums of Money for encouragement, of the Marquess of Barbesieux, the
French King's Secretary; and brought two others, viz. Dumont, and Leafdale,
into the Conspiracy, and often they designed to shoot him as he Rode out to
view the Troops; and the Duke of Luxemburg had Orders to send a party of Horse
to fetch them off, when this wicked Deed should be done, but God prevented it
by a timely Discovery: for Grandvalle being Apprehended and Tried by a
Court-Marshal, was on plain Proof and his own Confession, found guilty of
Treason; and being Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered, his Head and Quarters were set
up on Poles without the Camp.

And now our Fleet under the Command of Admiral Russel, being sooner abroad
than the French expected, so that on the 19th of May, 1692, the Admiral got
sight of the Enemy about six Leagues from Cape Barfleur, who not thinking us so
strong, bore down upon him, having the Weather-Gage, the Wind at South-west;
and about Eleven in the Morning, Tourville, the French Admiral, engaged ours,
who bore upon him with the Red Squadron, and the Fight continued hot till about
three in the Afternoon, when the French being greatly Shattered, stood away
with all the Sail they could make, to their own Coast; and being closely
pursued, the Blew Squadron engaged them again, about six that Afternoon; which
continued till ten at Night, when they made a retreating Fight, wherein some of
their Ships blew up, and others sunk; and Vice Admiral Delaval, getting in
under Cape de Wick, with Light Frigates, Fireships, and Armed Boats, in spite
of the Fire the Enemy made from their Ships, run them on Ground. Capt. Heath
laid the Royal Sun of France on board with his Fire-Ship, being a French
Admiral of 104 Guns, and burnt her. Capt. Green burnt the Conquerant of 102
Guns, and another of 80 was burnt by the boats, in which a great many sick and
wounded men Perished. And Admiral Russel sending Sr George Rook into La Hogue
with light Frigates, Fireships, and Armed boats, he burnt 6 that Night, and 6
more the next morning, 3 of them being Three-Deck-ships, carrying from 60 to 70
Guns; and one of 56 Guns, was overset and lost; and others were destroyed in
other parts; so that about 21 of their biggest Men of War were burnt; and of
Crafts, Frigates, and Transport-ships, 30; and this without the loss of one Ship
on our part; and this was also done in the sight of their Land-Army, drawn down
on the Coast of Normandy, to assist K. James in his then Intended Invasion of
England. And of note on our side were only Killed Rear-Admiral Carter, and
Coll. Hastings of the Marine Regiment. This Victory, as it much amazed the
French, caused great Rejoicing in England; yet to repair the Disgrace, the Duke
of Luxemburg besieged Namur, to whose Relief the King prepared to March his
Army, but in the mean while it Capitulated and Surrendered; yet the Castle and
new Fort held out a great while longer; so that they Lost above 5000 men in the
Siege; and the King having often dared the French to Battle in open Field, and
they as often declining it by Counter-marches, and strong Encampments, he
agreed to Attack them in their Camp at Enghein, though by the narrowness of the
ways, the Passage to it was extreme difficult. This was vigorously attempted
and carried on by the English and Danes, with such Courage and Bravery, that
the French at first were beaten from Post to Post, and we were at the point of
forcing an entrance into their Camp, had they been timely succored by other
Parties that were appointed to sustain them, but did not; so that from the
Hedges, Outworks, and Cannon advantagiously plante^ on the Hills,
over-powering our Men, after a hot Dispute, they found a necessity of
retreating, leaving many Gallant Commanders dead behind them; though the Enemy
had little cause to boast, their whole Army narrowly escaping an entire Defeat;
and their number of Men and great Officers killed, wounded, and taken
Prisoners, much exceeding ours: for 10 or 12 of the old Regiments suffered
extremely, so that they owned to lose 500 Officers, and about 5000 private
Soldiers. And soon after the Prince D'Erichment fell on a French Party sent out
of Namur of 300 Foot and 200 Dragoons, totally routing them, and taking 400
Prisoners; among which were 30 Officers which were carried to Huy, and in this
Encounter the Marquess De H^c^uincourt was slain; and the Duke of Leinster
arriving wi^h fre^h Supplies from England, and being joined by a Detachment
from the King's Camp, under the Command of Lieutenant General Talmash, they
marched toward Newport, and 4 Regiments were sent to Possess themselves of
Furnes which successfuly they did, and 2000 Pioneers ordered to fortify it,
and soon after Dyxmude fell into our hands with the Villages and dependant
Territories, and several Skirmishes happened with various success to the end of
this Campaign. And on the 8th of September 1692 an Earthquake happened in
England giving 2 or 3 Quick Sho^ks yet with little harm, and was felt almost at
the same time in Ireland, France, Holland, Flanders, and other places; it
lasted about a minute. The King of England was then in his Camp at Grammen in
Flanders, Dining in an old decayed house, which shook very much, and every one
apprehend^ng it would fall, he was Persuaded to leave that
Ruin-threatening-Fabrick; but the Surprise was soon over, and no harm happened
there.

The Campaign now being ended, the King by the way of Holland returned to
England, and found all things peaceable and well Governed by the Queens prudent
mannagement, not only in England but in the other two Kingdoms, where War and
Tumults ceasing* Trade began to Flourish.

Whilst these things passed a very great Fle^t of Turkey and Streights
Merchants, Dutch and English, set Sail richly Laden under a Convoy of Men of
War Commanded by Sr. George Rook, and in the Streights unexpectedly fell in
with the French Fleet: But though our Ships fell into this Ambush, yet ours and
the Dutch Men of War, behaved themselves with such Conduct and Courage, as also
did the Merchantmen, that whilst the French were making up and the Dispute
lasted, most the latter by running along the Shore got into Harbors, and
others came back again with Sir George, who made a very good Retreat, so that
the French got but little; though had they not been over hasty in appearing, in
probability the greater part of them might have been Encompassed by their whole
Fleet.

The King, as is said, being returned, after Congratulations, a day of
Thanksgiving was appointed for Gods singular Providence that had protected him
in the greatest dangers to which he had exposed his Royal Person for our
Safety. The Winter was spent in making Levies by Land and great Preparations at
Sea. The Parliament cheerfully giving such Supplies as were necessary to carry
on the War.

Early in the Spring the Streights and Turkey Fleet put again to Sea, but
entering the Streighte mouth, such a violent Storm arose, as blew many of the
Ships cleaverly out of it, and diverse were Lost and much damaged, yet many got
safe to their proper Ports.

In March the King passed over to hasten an early Campaign and the Elector of
Bavaria, being appointed Governor of Flanders sent the Duke of Arco to
Complement him on his arrival; and Parties being abroad, diverse Skirmishes and
Bickerings happened with various Success in a village called Malterne 100
Newburghers took 80 French Prisoners of War and brought them with their Arms,
Horse, and Baggage to the general Rendesvouz. However they sent an Army to
Ravage the Palatinate, and burnt diverse places of note; and to divert the
Spanish Forces in Flanders, a vigorous War was pushed on in Catalonia, the Duke
D' Nouailles Commanding in chief; but met there with many Disapointments by our
main Fleet's appearing on the Coast, yet drawing off a part of the Army for
that Service. The Duke of Wirtemburg with a considerable Body of Horse and Foot
forced the Enemies Lines, and Entering French Flanders, for several Miles put
the Country under Contribution, raising a Million of Livres taking in diverse
small places, and much Booty. This Constrained the Duke of Luxemburg, General
for the French King, to Endeavor by one Exploit or other to draw him back, and
first with 50 Squadrons of Horse and ten Battallions of Foot, and some
Fieldpieces, he attempted to fall on a part of the Garrison of Liege and
Maestrich, being about 18 squadrons of Horse and some Regiments of Foot
Commanded by Count Tilly, but upon notice retired over the River Sare, Leaving
three Squadrons to secure his Retreat, which beat back the French advanced
parties. But this was only as a Forerunner to greater Action; for the King
Marching to relieve Huy, had notice in his way of it is surrender, and thereupon
Strengthening the Garrison of Liege Marched near Hespan, and halted to get
Intelligence of the Enemies further design; and some hours after had notice
they appeared from the high Grounds of St. Gertruden-Landen; so that upon
notice from the Scouts that it was the Vaunt-Guard of their Army, all things
were ordered to Receive them, if they adventured to make any attempt; which
they soon after did, and a terrible fight ensued, which lasted from Sunrising
to Sun setting; in this Battle the King was in all parts, giving the necessary
Orders, and acted the part not only of a brave General, but also of a
Courageous Captain; but in the Conclusion, the Confederate Army, being
overpowered by Numbers, the French being 80000 and the Confederate but 40000;
they were forced to retire, and left the French Masters of the Field, though
their loss was more than that of the Confederates.

Such another Encounter the French made in Savoy, where Monsieur Catinat
Commanded for France, in which the Duke of Schomberg fighting Valiantly at the
Head of his Battalion, was slain, and the Savoyards compelled to leave the
field; but the French notwithstanding this Success found themselves in so bad a
Condition, that being compelled to pass the Mountains very late, for Recruits
and Supplies of Necessaries, abundance of them were lost in the Snow and deep
Pits, with Carriages and Cannon.

Though the French on these Occasions boasted of some Success by Land, their
Naval Forces, since the last Overthrow, were but slenderly Recruited; and
Admiral Russel having notice by a Swede there was a great Fleet in Conquet-Bay,
Laden with Corn, and Naval Stores, sent Capt. Pickard with another Man of War,
and a Fire-ship, to get an account of them; which struck such a Terror, they
supposing these Ships the Vaunt-Guard of our main Fleet, that cutting their
Cables, they run on the Flats and Rocks, into our Hands, others sunk by the
Shot, so that there were computed about 50 Sail to have been Lost; and soon
after the Admiral had Orders to join the Spanish Fleet on the Coast of
Catalonia, to prevent the French Designs on that side; which brought such a
Terror on the French main Fleet under the Command of Monsieur Torville, that he
immediately got into Thoulon, and there lay penned up, not daring to stir till
the English Fleet returned. Being in those parts they brought a Terror on
Argeirs, and other Pyratical Governments, so that they sent their Submissions,
and appeared very desirous to be at Peace with England. However a sufficient
Squadron being left in the narrow Seas, Commanded by the Lord Berkly, he
attempted the French Coast, and Landed some Men at Cammaret-Bay, under
Lieutenant General Talmash, but they had drawn thither such great Bodies of
Horse and Foot strongly Entrenched, that the English with some Loss were
constrained to retire; in this Action the Lieutenant General received a Wound
in the Thigh with a Musket Shot, and Dyed of it at Plymouth greatly Lamented,
as being an expert and Generous Commander. But for this Disappointment not
giving over, they stood in before Diep, and laid that Famous Town in Ashes, and
then throwing in about 250 Bombs into Havre-de-Grace, fired a great part of it,
and afterward Bombed St. Maloes, and Callis, and sent in Machines to blow up
the Works, guarding the Entrance of Dunkirk Harbor: which had some, though not
the wished Effect: And so Sailing along the Coast of France, brought such a
Terror every where, that they were forced Night and Day to be on their Guard.

The King in this Year 169^, laboring by the often moving his Camp to bring
the French to battle, but not able to do it, caused Huy to be Besieged, which
with little resistance he took and Garisoned; and the Prince of ^aden with the
Saxon and German Troops passing the Rhine, cut off diverse in the Rear of the
French Army it retiring before him; so that he raised Contributions and
returned unopposed; and after this on all hands the French parties Scouting
abroad, were mostly de^ea^ed by the Confederates, killed and taken Prisoners,
bringing in great Booties of Cattle, etc. And whilst the French advanced
somewhat near the City of Liege; the Garrison Sallyed, and took between 7 and
800 Horse, entirely defeating two Squadrons of their forage Guards. These and
the like matters ending this Campaign, the King returned, and was Welcomed home
with the Universal joy of his People. But all their joy was soon turned into
Mourning: For the Queen fell sick at Kensington on the 22 of December 1694, and
in a little time her Distemper was known to be the small Pox, a distemper Fatal
to the Royal Family; of which on the 28th she Dyed, in the 33d Year of her Age,
and in the Flower of her Strength and Beauty, to the great affliction of the
King and three Kingdom ^ she lay a considerable time in State, and then was
Interred among her Roy^^ Ancestors in Henry the 7th's Chapel at Westminster
with a most Solemn Funeral Pomp, a Stately Mausoleum was Erected in the Abbey,
whereon very remarkably a Robin-Redbreast for many weeks usually sat Singing.
Not only the English Court, but most in Christendom, went into the deepest
Mourning, and Condoleances were made not only by the Parliament, but the
Foreign Ministers, etc.

The Clouds of sorrow being a little blown-over, the King considering of his
weighty affairs abroad, appointed 7 Able Ministers of State, Lords Justices in
his absence, to administer affairs of Government, and having settled all things
to the best advantage, passed to the Army in Flanders which drawing into the
Field very Numerous Marched toward the strong Town of Namure, Situate on the
Muse and Sambre, and after a Vigorous Seige, carried on by the King with all
Imaginable Bravery and Gallantry, though Marshal Bouflers had thrown himself into
the Town; and even in the fight of Vineroy, at the head of an Army of an
Hundred Thousand Men, first the Town, and afterward the Castle was compelled
to Surrender to the King.

This tedious Siege in a manner ended the Campaign, so that little else of
moment happened, the French altogether declining a Battle, and the King having
settled Affairs, upon his return made a Progress through most parts of England.
The Parliament being dissolved, a New one was called, and meeting among other
things, particularly upon the King's Recommending that Important affair to them
at the opening of the Sessions, took into Consideration the State and badness
of the Coin, and coming to a result, an Act passed for calling in the Clipped
Money, and Re-coyning it in Milled Money, according to the true Weight and
Standar^ and Mints were set up in diverse parts of the Kingdom for the better
ordering a speedy supply of it in every part of the Nation.

Whilst these things were doing, make things happy and easy to us, our Enemies
were contriving our utter destruction, diverse were sent from France, to join
with those already here, and one of the most wicked Conspiracies contrived, and
a long time secretly carried on, that any Age has known, or History made
mention of; for whilst a Design was laid in the French Court to invade the
Kingdom, their Emmissaries here were framing a Design to destroy the King's
Life, by a villainous Assassination, and Sir George Barclay brings over a
Commission to encourage them in it: The Conspirators, many in Number, had
diverse Meetings, sometimes at one Capt. Porter's Lodgings, and others at the
Nagg's-Head in Govent-Garden, and in Leaden-Ha^^-Street, at the Sun in the
Strand, the blew-posts in Old-Spring-Garden, in Pickadilly, and other places
and several Persons as a Committee from their Body, were appointed, as
Knightly, Porter, King, etc. to view the Ground, in the King's passage to
Richmond, a place he usually Frequented, to acquaint the rest which was the
most Convenient place to set upon him in his Coach, and cut him off; and
accordingly they viewed the Avennues about Brentford, Richmond, etc. and
concluded on the Narrow-lane between Brentford and Turnham-Green, was the most
convenient to do it in, where the Guards could pass but ^ew a Breast; and with
this, upon their return, they acquainted Sir George Barclay, Sir William
Parkyns, Robert Charnock, and others, who approved it.

The Design thus laid, they ^ex^ Consulted in what manner it should be done,
and came to a Result that one Party with 7 or 8 chosen Men should Assassinate
the King in his Coach, whilst two other Parties attacked the Guards, their
Number in all being upwards of Forty; and the 15th of February 1695, being
Saturday, a day the King usually went a Hunting that way, was the first
appointed time; and they prepared for it accordingly: But Providence so Ordered
it that he went not abroad that Day, of which they had notice from (...) two
Orderly Men, as they styled them, viz. Durance and Chambers, who ^^y at
Kensington concealed for that Purpose. Then they had other Meetings upon it,
and appointed to be in a Readiness the Saturday following, and met accordingly,
and were setting out, when again they had Notice the same hand of Providence
had Disappointed them. This startled them into new Fears that their wicked
Design had taken Air, especially upon notice the King's going abroad was
suddenly put off, and the Guards were come back in haste, their Horses Foaming,
and Keys, one of the Conspirators heard them Mutter something which gave him
and the rest a Jealousy to mistrust a Discovery was made, as indeed Providence
had Ordered it; whereupon they Dispersed and gave over the Design. For Capt.
Pendergrass being acquainted with this bloody Design from Capt. Porter, about
the 13th of February, at the Plew-Posts in Spring-Garden, and struck with
Horror at so Stupendous a Wickedness, acquainted the Earl of Portland with
it, entreating him to Discover it to the King, which he did; and Pendergrass
was thereupon introduced by him to the King in his Closet, where he opened the
nature of the Conspiracy, with the Circumstances, but was a long time pressed
to it before he would name the Conspirators, which at last he did, under
Promise he should not be brought in for a Witness, unless he would voluntarily
do it. This was seconded and confirmed by Monsieur De la Rue, who was
introduced to the King by Brigadier Lewson, who gave in the Names of those he
knew: And much about the same time came Expresses from the Duke of Wirtemburg,
that the French Forces to the number of 22000, were drawn down to Callis,
Dunkirk, and other Seaports, where there lay about 500 Transport-ships, and a
great many Men of War to conduct them for their Landing in England with the
first fair Wind, with the late K. James at the head of them. The Duke of
Berwick had been in England, and was returned with an account of what
Pre^arations their Friends were making here for their Reception, which made the
French King say, he never knew a Design more fairly laid, for assurance of
Success; and his Ministers bragged of it in Foreign Courts. And indeed a great
part of the Fleet did put to Sea, before we had Notice of them; but were driven
back by contrary Winds, and then lay expecting the Sign at ^^ver-Clifts that
King William was Assassinated; and it was given out in France, that he was
drawing toward his end, and that they wondered that they heard not of his
Death: At other timer times it was said he was Killed a Hunting, etc. which
makes it plain their intended Invasion depended chiefly on their intenced
Assassination; for K. William alive to face them at the Head of his victorious
Troops that had often beat them at their own Doors, they could have little
Hopes to prevail; but they on the other hand expected to find us all in
Confusion, as they gave it out we were, if the Assassination had taken; but
were strangely startled when they saw Admiral Russel with about 60 Men of War
blocking up their Harbors, and threatening to burn them with his Fireships,
which constrained the Landforces to Disimbark, and at length with Shame, Lo^s,
and excessive Charge, gave over their Enterprise, which the French thought
before so easy, that they said, K. James was not coming to invade England, but
to take the quiet possession of his Throne; and the (...) King had sent him
large Bundles of plausible Declarations to be dispersed at his Landing, with a
Promise to supply him with more Troops as he saw Occa^^o^ and Scotland as well
as E^gland was to have been invaded.

Whilst these things were doing beyond the Seas, diverse of the Conspirators
were Seized here, and imprison^^ before the King put out his Proclamation, as
Char^ock, Bartram, ^rime^, Anbury and others; and the King going to the House
of Peers, and sen^^i^g for the Commons, acquainted them with the Conspiracy and
intended invasion: Whereupon they Congratulated his Safety, and declared their
Abhorrance of the Villainous and Barbarous Design, Solemnly Promising to assist
him to the utmost against the Late King, and De^^^ his Royal Person against all
his Enemies; and if he should come by a Violent Death, (which God forbid) to
Revenge it upon the Papists, and soon after entered into an Association to the
same Purpose; as since all the Cities and Corporations, etc. in his Dominions
have done; Expresses were sent immediately away to Scotland, and Ireland, the
Sea ports stopped, and all Suspected Persons with their Horses and Arms
secured; and an Act passed for the continuing the sitting o^ the Parliament, if
the King should chance to Dye, till the next Heir in Succession should come to
the Crown to Dissolve it. Thus things being pretty well secured, and the King's
Proclamation out for the Apprehending diverse of the Con^pirators by Name, and
1000l. Reward with Pardon for such as should come in Voluntarily and make
Discovery, most of them that were known to be in it were Apprehended.

On the 11th of March, Robert Char^ock, Edward King, and Thomas Keys, were
Tried at the Old-Bailey on a special (...), and upon full Evidence being found
Guilty, they received Sentence as ^^ Case or High Treason, and on the 18th were
drawn to Tyburn and there Hanged and Quartered, Charnock and King boldly
Confessing it in the Papers they left, and Keys made no Denial of it.

The next was Sir John Friend, a Brewer in the Minories, he took his Trial for
High Treason at the Old-Bailey, and being found Guilty, as was also the next
Day Sir William Parkyns, both of them received Sentence as the foregoing; and
at their Execution, owned the Fact in General, and many Particulars, and were
nevertheless Absolved by three Non-jurant Parsons, for which Presumption two of
them were Committed, Tried, and Fined.

The next that came on the Stage for this Horrid Conspiracy, were Ambrose
Rookwood, Robert Lowick, and Charles Cranburn; who were Tried at the
King's-Bench-Bar at Westminster, April, 21, 22. for High Treason and the Fact
being plain, they were found Guilty, and received Sentence; and according to it
they were Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered: Cramburn and Rookwood Confessed what
was Sworn against them; and Lowick said, he would willingly have assisted King
James, had he Landed. The Heads and Quarters of these, and the others Executed,
were set on the Gates of the City, as terrible Examples of Offended Justice.

Two more were also brought to Justice on this Account, viz. Mr. Peter Cook,
and Capt. Knightly; the first found Guilty upon a long hearing, and the latter
Pleaded Guilty to the Indictment, and both receiving Sentence, have hitherto
found sparing Mercy.

Things being at this pass, the King having given Audience to the Venetian
Ambassadors, who passed through London in great State, and dismissed them;
Prorogued the Parliament, and leaving the management of Affairs in the hands of
the Lords Justices, went to the Army in Flanders, And the Duke of Savoy,
contrary to the Mind of the Confederates, clapped up a Peace with France: No
Memorable Transaction, except a Battle between the E^ector of Saxony, and the
Turks in Hungary, has hitherto happened as to this Campaign, and Peace more
than War, is at present the common Discourse.

And thus have I brought down this History to the Year of our LORD 1696, being
the Eighth Year of the Reign of his most Excellent Majesty, King WILLIAM the
Third, whom God grant Long to Reign.

FINIS.

