Solid Philosophy ASSERTED, Against the FANCIES of the IDEISTS: OR, THE METHOD
to SCIENCE Farther Illustrated.

WITH Reflections on Mr. LOCKE's ESSAY concerning Human Understanding.

By J. S.

LONDON, Printed for Roger Clavil at the Peacock, Abel Roper at the Black Boy,
both in Fleetstreet, and Thomas Metcalf, over against Earl's- Court in
Drury Lane, 1697.

To the Right Honorable ROBERT, Lord Viscount Dunbar.
My LORD,
HAD I thought that this Piece I here Dedicate to Your Lordship, was not above
Your, or any Man's, Patronage, I had shown less Respects to You in making You
so Mean a Present. Were You Monarch of the Universe, TRUTH (which it Defends)
could receive no Protection from Your Grandeur. Her Genius is so Sublime, and
Her self so Nobly-born, that, like Him from whom she descends, she is
Beneficial to all, and Incapable of receiving Advantage from any. All
Extrinsecal Supports, in stead of Honoring her, Debase her. Her Well-compacted
and Indissoluble Fabric is altogether Divine: Contrary to our Material
Structures, it is Built from the Top; and, its Foundation laid as high as
Heaven it self. The GOD of Truth has imprinted all Natural Truths in Created
Beings, as in the Footsteps of his Infinite Wisdom; from whence, by the
Vehicles of our Senses, they are Copied and Transcribed into our Mind; where,
without our Labor, they beget all our Natural Notions; and, as Speculation,
and even Experience, assures us, they do also, at the same time, give us some
Knowledge of the Things themselves; which steadily and distinctly Reflected on,
breed in us that best Natural Perfection of our Understanding, SCIENCE; of
which those Notions are, as it were, the Seeds.

Thus was Mankind put into a plain Road-way of gaining Clear Intellectual
Light, by the Common Providence of our Good Creator. To improve in which, and
to keep our Thoughts from wandering into Error, the same Goodness of our Maker
endowed us with a Faculty of Reflecting on the Operations of our own Minds;
and, on all the Gilded Train of our Spiritual Conceptions, and of the several
Natures and Manners of them; by which means those who were addicted to
Attentive Reflection, or Speculation, invented a Way, and settled Artificial
Rules, how to manage their Notions, Judgments and Discourses. Which Rules laid
orderly together, and found by Reason to be Agreeable to the Natures of Things
according to the Being they had in the Mind, and, therefore, Solid; did, in
time, compose that excellent and most useful Science called LOGIC.

But, my Lord, the Crooked Bias of Men's Wills perverted their Reason, and
made them disregard this Well-grounded and Regular Method, given them so freely
by the Author of Nature. The Heathen Philosophers of old, whose God was Vanity,
affected to set up several Sects, to pride themselves with the Empty Honor of
being esteemed their Heads. The Christian Schools succeeded; who, at first,
discoursed gravely on those Subjects which were of a higher Nature; but,
whether the Circumstances did not bend their Thoughts that way, or from what
other Reason, they settled no Scientifical Method to attain Philosophical
Knowledges. Yet, those who followed Aristotle's Principles, (as the great
Aquinas constantly endeavored) did generally discourse even in such Subjects,
when they had occasion, very solidly. But, afterward, when School-disputes
grew to be the only fashionable Learning, the Multitudes of Combatants
increased, and the Contests were maintained by several Great Bodies; each of
which thought it Creditable to their Party to set up and follow some Eminent
Man of their own. Hence this Naturetaught Method came to be much neglected; and
he was thought to win the Prize who was the subtilest and acutest Disputant,
and not he who could most solidly Demonstrate Truth. Hence, no Exact and
Rational Logic being settled and agreed on, they were apt to take up
oftentimes Wrong Principles; and the several Conceptions of our Mind were
mistaken to be so many several Things. Demonstration was rather talked of for
Form's sake, than pursued and practiced; and, the the Use of General Maxims,
which should establish our Discourses, was scarce once thought on; without
which, Demonstration was Impossible. New Questions in Philosophy, of little or
no use, were started; and bandy'd to and fro by Terms and Words not well
understood; nor their Sense agreed on, by the Contending Parties. The Heat of
Opposition fixed Men in their own Opinions. Innumerable Quaint and Nice, and
sometimes Impertinent, Distinctions were invented, to escape their being
Entangled by the Arguments of their Adversary. Every man affected to be a
Proteus, and took more Care to elude Opposition, than to settle and establish
Truth on Immovable Grounds. The true Sense of Aristotle's Doctrine, not being
taken from himself or his First Interpreters, but from some Modern
Misunderstanders, was lost; and his Text drawn into several Meanings, to abet
Contradictory Tenets. In a Word, nothing was decisively concl^^ed, nor likely
to be so, by this way of School-Term-Learning, as things were managed by
Unmethodiz'd Disputation.

Thus stood the Affair of Philosophy at the beginning of this present Century;
which having been fertile of many Excellent Wits, two of the Chiefest of them,
Cartesius in France, and our Ingenious Countryman Mr. Lock, having taken
Scandal at these Miscarriages, and an Aversion against that Miracle of Nature,
Aristotle, whose Doctrine Schoolmen had ill represented; and being withal Men
of Strong Brains, enabling them to carry their Conceptions through, and to make
them Coherent; they did, out of their Zeal for Truth, undertake to set up New
Systems of Philosophy; though Cartesius in some sort, furbish'd up, improved, and
refined upon the old Corpuscularian Way of Democritus and Epicurus; which I
have fully confuted in the Appendix to my Method; and, I hope, beyond all
possibility of Reply. But, these two Gentlemen, being better versed in the
Mathematics than in Metaphysics; and, thence, not apprehending how Corporeal
Natures could get into the Mind, or be there; nor, reflecting that a Spiritual
Nature, being incomparably Superior in the Rank of Beings to that of Corporeal
Things, must, consequently, have naturally and ncessarily a Power to
comprehend, after its manner, (or by way of Knowledge) that Inferior one; they
were forced, through their want of Higher Principles, to build all Knowledge, not
upon the Things themselves in their Knowing Power, but upon Ideas or
Similitudes of them; though neither of them set themselves to make out or
demonstrate how we could possibly have our Notions, or First Notices of the
Things by them. Now, these Spiritual Ideas being, most evidently, neither the
Things known, nor any Mode or Accident of those Objects; and, consequently,
nothing at all of the Thing in any sort, were manifestly convinced not to be
the Productions of Creative Wisdom, in which he had imprinted all Natural
Truths, but mere Fancies, coined by their Imagination. These Ideas or Fancies
then, and only these, they contemplated, and Grounded all Natural Truths,
(which could have no Foundation but only in the Things which the First Truth
had made) upon these Fantastic Resemblances: and, thence, they put all Formal
Truths to consist in the Agreement of those Empty Similitudes; till at length
(as Fancy let loose to fly at its full Random, and driven forward with a quick
Wit, does naturally and genuinly lead) they had introduced a kind of Fanaticism
into Philosophy; built, in the main, or in great part, on a pretended Inward
Light by means of those Imaginary and Visionary Ideas.

From this Introversion upon these unsolid Aerie Bubbles, and thence their
neglecting the Things themselves, and our Solid Natural Notions, Mr. Lock was
brought to Confound Corporeal and Spiritual Natures; and consequently, (these
two being the Adequate Object of all Philosophy) all Philosophical Knowledge
was rendered impossible. And Cartesius left us no means to know whether Man is
One Thing made up of Soul and Body, or Two Things, tacked together by virtue of
some Accident; which well consisted with their Substantial Distinction. Hence
also it came, that GOD was brought in at every Hard Pinch, to act contrary to
what the Natures of Things required; without which, they could not lay their
Principles, or make their Scheme cohere; that is, they would needs make GOD, as
he is the Author and Orderer of Nature, to work either Preternaturally or else
Supernaturally; which is a plain Contradiction. Nay, Mr. Lock finding no Fancy
in his Imaginative Power that suits with our Notion of [Thing,] would persuade
the World that no Man living knows what a Thing or Substance is; that is, that
none knows what the Word Thing means; which is so Evident to our Natural
Thoughts, that it is impossible for the rudest Person in the World to be
Ignorant of it. In a Word, their Fancy so inveigled their Reason, that they
came to deny Self-evident Truths; and held many other Propositions, which were
absolutely Impossible and Contradictory.

Wherefore, seeing Philosophy reduced to this lamentable Condition; and, that
Solid Rationality, and all Truth in Natural Objects, were thus in imminent
Danger to be overrun and born down by Imaginary Conceits; and apprehending that
GOD's Providence had fitted and enabled me to redress such great Mischiefs; I
thought it became me to re-instate Reason in her Sovereignty over Fancy; and,
to assert to her the Rightful Dominion Nature had given her over all our
Judgments and Discourses. I resolved therefore to disintricate Truth, (which
lay too deep for Superficial Fancy to fathom) from all those Labyrinths of
Error. I observed that Philosophy labored and languish'd under many
Complicated Distempers, (all springing from this way of Ideas) and that they
were grown Epidemical; nor could they be cured by the Application of Remedies
to this or that Particular Part, or by confuting this or that Particular
Error. Hereupon, having found out the true Cause of all these Maladies of
Human Understanding, I saw it was necessary to Stub up by the Roots that Way it
self; and, by Clos^ and Solid Reasons, (the most Decisive Weapons in Tru^^^
Armory,) to break in Pieces the brittle Glassy Essences of those Fantastic
Apparitions; which, if a Right Way of Reasoning be settled, and understood,
will disappear, and vanish out of the World, as their Elder Sisters, the
Fairies, have done in this last Half Century.

I know, my Lord, Reformation made by a Single Man, though but in Philosophy,
seldom gains Credit to him who attempts it. And, it must be confessed, that, to
pretend to reform where there is no Necessity, has an Ill Name; and is justly
held to spring from Policy, Interest, Pride, or some such other Sinister
Motive. But I am very confident, that whoever peruses this Treatise, nay, but
even the Preface, will see, that the Occasion of this Undertaking was not only
Expedient, but Cogent. Nor can any Man justly tax him of Arrogance, or of
Usurping a Dictature over other Men's Judgments, though he opposes Great
Multitudes of Speculaters, who offers his Reasons to convince theirs.

To this Necessity, now laid open, of Reforming Philosophy, I shall add
another, of a much more weighty Concern; and which may also rectify some
zealons well-meaning Friends; who, judging of Things by their own Short Reach,
think that the Advancing Truth in Philosophy is little better than Time and
Labor lost; whereas, I, on the Contrary, do really think, that the Supplying
what the World most wants, is the Greatest, and most Universal Good I can
possibly do. This other Necessity then, of my rectifying our Modern Philosophy,
(which will make others see, how great a Good it is,) is this: Those Truths
which are of a higher, and more Sacred Nature, can never be rightly Explicated,
nor consequently (such Men not valuing Authority) be duly recommended to those
who Dissent from them, unless True Principles of Philosophy be Settled, and
Unsound ones Confuted. For, since no Explication of Faith can be made by Faith
it self; all of them must necessarily be made by our Reason, showing the
Conformity they have to our Natural Notions, or to such Knowledges as we had
from the Things in Nature; especially, since Dissenters draw their Chief
Objections from the Repugnancy of those Points to our Natural Principles. It Is
a known Truth, that as every Definition must be the Self-same Notion with what
is defined, so must every right Explication too; it being, in reality, nothing
but the Unfolding what was before wrapped up Closer. Whence follows, that, when
he who has the ill Luck to have taken up False Principles, comes to explicate
the Trinity, the Incarnation, the Resurrection, or any High Point of Revealed
Faith; his Explication must always be Contrary to True Principles of Nature,
and perhaps may have twenty real Contradictions in it; and, so, Common Reason
(as was said) telling all Sensible Men, that the Explication must be the same
Sense with the Point which it Explicates; the Tenet of Faith will suffer in the
Opinion of Witty Men, by such an Untoward and Senseless Explication; be
Ridiculous to Adversaries; and be held perfect Nonsense and Contradiction.
Whereas, if the Philosophy, by which those Tenets are Explicated, be True and
Solid; then, since both Natural and Revealed Truths are Children of the same
Father, (the GOD and Author of All Truth,) who cannot contradict Himself, and
therefore those two Sorts of Truths cannot but agree; it will follow, that the
Explication of all Revealed Points, made according to True Philosophy, must
needs appear to Intelligent Men to be most Rational; and most Consonant, and
not Contradictory, to True Natural Principles: Which will Comfort Faith in
those who believe already; Recommend it to all Ingenuous and Indifferent
Seekers; help to Convert to Christianity those, whose Reason was formerly
Dissatisfied upon such Sinister Misconceits; and, Lastly, Confound Adversaries,
by putting them past Opposing it by any Principles of True Philosophy, and
leave nothing for them to object against it, but Idle and Illgrounded Fancies,
whose weak Attempts are easily defeated. Whence, I could heartily wish, that,
were True Philosophy in Fashion, all Sects (so the State thought fit) might
have Free Liberty to Print the best Reasons they can muster up against
Christianity; Resting confident, that (in that Happy State of Science, or True
Learning) nothing in the World could gain to Truth a greater Advantage. Till
that Desirable Time comes, all I can do, is, to declare here publicly, that I
shall take it for a great Favor, if any Learned Socinian, Deist, or Atheist,
would please to send me those Reasons they, or their Leaders, judge of most
Weight, why they cannot embrace the Doctrine of the Trinity, or Christianity;
which they may do privately, and Unnam'd, to the Stationer who publishes this
Treatise; and I do hereby promise them, I will give their Objections their Full
Force, and publish an Answer to them: Only, I will expect, that their
Arguments shall be Intrinsecal ones, or drawn from the Opposition such Revealed
Articles, as they mislike, are conceived by them to have to some Principles of
Logic, Physics, or Metaphysics, which are either Selfevident, or which they
will undertake to reduce to Evidence: These only being such Objections as
becomes a Christian Philosopher to speak to. For, if they be Extrinsecal ones,
and built on Histories, or on Groundless Fancies; or, if they consist in
Glossing Words, in whose Sense we are not Agreed; it belongs to a Critic, or a
Historian, and is not the Proper Employment of a Philosopher.

I would not be thought, by what is said lately, to cast any Reflections on
Cartesius or Mr. Lock, (whom I join here equally, and indifferently,) as
intending any Diskindness to Christianity by their New Methods of Philosophy:
It appears both by their Writings, and by their particular manner of handling
their Subjects, that they meant ingenuously and sincerely to follow what they
conceived to be True. Only I must say of both of them, that, if their Way of
Philosophizing, and, therefore, their Philosophy it self, be shown to be far
from True and Solid; then, in case any Chief Christian Tenet should come to be
Explicated by their Ways, those Sacred Points themselves must necessarily, for
the Reason now given, receive some Taint and Blemish by such Ill-grounded
Explications: And the same, for the same Reason, I must say of
School-Philosophy too, if it proceeds upon Principles that are not
Well-grounded, or Solid.

It remains, my Lord, to give my Reasons why this Common Duty I here perform to
the Learned Part of Mankind who are Candidates of Science, comes to be
particularly addressed to Your Self: Which, in short, are these. I was much in
Debt; and it was an Honest Man's Part to endeavor to discharge it. I owed much
to Your Lordship's Father, of Honorable and Pious Memory, who both encouraged
my first Endeavors, and favored me with a particular Friendship and
Correspondence to His Dying-Day: And, I make account, such kind Obligements,
writ in a Grateful Heart, ought to be as Lasting, and as Binding, as those
Obligations drawn on Paper; and, withal, ought to devolve, by a Hereditary
Right, to His Immediate Descendent, Your Self. I owed very much to Your
Lordship's own Person, for the Kind Respect with which You have been pleased to
honor me. I owed much to all Your Lordship's Nearest and Noblest Relations,
both in the Direct, and in all the Collateral Lines. And, lastly, since every
Man who writes for Truth, naturally loves to be Understood, I owed it to my
Self, to present this Treatise particularly to Your Lordship; than whom, I know
none of our English Nobility more Acutely Intelligent. It is of such a Nature,
by its laying the Foundation of Philosophy from the deepest Bottom-Principles,
that, to comprehend and penetrate it thoroughly, there was required a Judgment
both Solid, and Pointed; both which Perfections meet in Your Lordship's Great
Genius, in a High Perfection.

The Diligent Printer has overtaken my Lazy Pen, and stays for this hasty
Scribble; which forces me, with an Unmannerly Abruptness, to write my self,

My LORD, Your Lordship's Most Sincere Honourer, and most humbly devoted
Servant, J. S.

THE PREFACE, DIRECTED To those Learned Men of both our Universities who have a
Due Regard for TRUTH, and a Sincere Desire of KNOWLEDGE.
Gentlemen,
1. AFter I had Published my METHOD to SCIENCE, which I Dedicated to your
selves, I came to receive certain Information that very many Students in both
the Universities, and not a few of those also who were to instruct others, did
apply themselves to the Way of Ideas, in hopes to arrive by that means at
Philosophical Knowledge. My best Judgment, grounded on very Evident Reasons,
assured me, that that Method was far from Solid, and utterly Unable to give you
the True Knowledge of any thing in Nature; being it self altogether Groundless,
and merely Superficial. I saw clearly, that to addict your Thoughts to study
Similitudes and Resemblances, (which, as will be most evidently demonstrated,
could not possibly give you any True or Certain Light to know the Things
themselves,) was no better than (as it is in the Fable) Vitreum vas lambere,
pultem non attingere. It struck me with a very sensible Trouble, that the
precious Time and Pains of such great Numbers of Men, who were the Flower of
our Nation, who were hereafter to be Guides to others, and whose very
Profession, and State of Life, had addicted them wholly to the Pursuit of
Knowledge, should be imbued with such Principles as rendered the Attainment of
it absosolutely Impossible. I looked upon my self as one who, having spent near
half a Century in Speculative Studies, was capable to avert and redress so
great a Harm; and, thence, I esteemed my self bound in Duty to make you aware
of the Way you have either chosen, or light into for want of a better; that you
might consider seriously whether you ought not to retrieve your Steps ere you
had wandered too far in a Path which could never bring you to the End you aimed
at. This Consideration obliged me to strike at the Root, and to overthrow the
whole Way of proceeding upon Ideas, by whomsoever advanced; and to demonstrate
by many Clear, and, I hope, Unanswerable Arguments, and Multitudes of
Instances, that it was Superficial, Fruitless, Insignificant, and merely
Fantastical.

2. When I had near finished my METHOD, I gave a Cursory Look over Mr. Locke's
Essay concerning Humane Understanding; and I hap'd to light on some places,
which gave me a high Esteem for it; insomuch that I began to conceive some
Hopes that his Ingenious Thoughts might, with some few Alterations, be
reconciled to True Philosophy: For, I was at that time far from intending to
make any Reflections upon it, but highly extolled it wherever I came: judging
of the Whole, by the Scantlings I had seen of it (as it were) accidentally.
But, the last September, setting my self to take a nearer and fuller View of
the whole Book, I quite lost the Hopes, I had gladly entertained formerly, of
According it with Philosophical Principles; and became much concerned, that so
Excellent a Wit should be half lost to the Commonwealth of Learning, by
lighting unfortunately into such an Unaccountable Method. For, I saw evidently,
that (besides the Oddness of the Way he took) his Fancy, the Vivacity of which
was very Extraordinary, had, in very many Particulars, got such an Ascendent
over his Reason, that, as he was Skeptical in diverse Things which were Clearest
Truths; so he seemed in very many others to be Positive, the Contrary to which
was plainly Demonstrable, and in a manner Self-evident. I was heartily sorry, I
say, to see so considerable a Writer, whose Comprehensive Genius, and Clear
Expression, would have made Truth Irresistible, had he taken her part, misled
so strangely as to take Fancies for Realities; and to think that Philosophy,
which is the Knowledge of Things, consisted in a perpetual Contemplation of
Empty Ideas, or Resemblances.

3. This wrought up my Thoughts higher, and made me conceive a greater
Indignation against this New Way of Philosophizing; and that, very
particularly, for his sake; though I saw the Cartesians as much wanted Rectifying
in their Grounds, as he, or rather more. Wherefore, to gain such a powerful
Assistant over to Truth's side, (of which, his Sincere Professions of Ingenuity
would not let me despair,) I resolved to lay open those Blemishes of Errors I
had observed in his Essay, retaining still a due Esteem for the many Beauties
it contained: For, I do assure him, my Nature leads me, as willingly to
acknowledge and give their just Elogiums to his (...), as to discover the
(...), he may have fallen into at unawares, as I doubt not but my Readers will
see; and, that (though I declare Open War against the Way it self) I rather
incline to Excuse, than to Aggravate his Faults or Mistakes. Indeed, the Duty I
owed to Truth obliged me to note those Latter with such a Distinction, as I
conceived they did more or less injure that Sacred Concern. And, I was the more
willing to enter the Lists against such a Champion; because, if I hoped to gain
any Advantage over him, (I had rather say, if I had the good Fortune to win
him,) it is impossible Truth should ever obtain a more clear Victory; For, no
Man, who takes the just Dimensions of Mr. Lock 's Great Wit, can think, that
any thing but the Invincible Force of Truth can soil him.

4. I have good Reason to fear, that this Declaring against whole Bodies of
Ideists, at once, will be interpreted by some to savor of Singularity: It will
be deemed by others, a high Imprudence to make such a Bold Breach with a World
of Acute Speculaters; with whole Sects of Modern Philosophers, both in two
Neighboring Nations, and in our own Universities; and, in many Things, with
most of the Schoolmen too. Others will think, that I do very unwisely provoke
Opposition; and, by such a brisk Attack, in a manner Challenge all those Great
Men who are of a contrary Sentiment. But, what is all this to his purpose, who
has devoted himself wholly to promote and defend TRUTH; and, is sure he does,
upon Solid Reasons, judge that to be True which he maintains? This Objection
seems grounded on this False Maxim, which some Men have set up very politickly,
to establish their own Reputation with the Vulgar, as Sacred and Inviolable;
viz. that [The Opinion of a Multitude has the Force of a kind of Authority, to
bridle the Understandings of Private Men from Setting up a Contrary Doctrine.]
Now, whatever some Men may think of this Position, I must declare my Sentiment
of it, that it is the most pernicious Maxim that could be invented, to hinder
the Progress of Rational Nature in that which should most perfect it; that it
puts a stop to the farther Use of their Reason in all future Mankind; that it
makes all Improvement in Knowledge Impossible, and utterly obstructs the
Advancement of SCIENCE. No Reasoners, how many, or of how Great Name soever
they be, have any Authority at all but by Virtue of the Reasons they produce;
whence, that Single Man, whoever he be, that brings better Reasons, for the
Tenet he advances, than all the former World has done for theirs, ought to have
more of this (miscalled) Authority, than that whole World of Opposers.

5. But, this postponing the Consideration of the Multitude of Dissenting
Speculaters to Evident Reason, is ten times more Justifiable, in case that
Opposing Party does not so much as pretend to, much less produce Self-evident
Principles, nor Demonstration, to Ground, or Conclude their Tenets; but builds
on Voluntary Suppositions, and makes use of Wit, good Language, and other
merely plausible Ways, to recommend their Conclusions to the Approbation of
their Readers. Those who do not so much as pretend to Demonstration and Clear
Principles, being unable to offer any Thing that is Certain, ought not (in my
Opinion) meddle at all with Philosophy; nor appear before Learned Men with an
Expectation their Doctrine should be Embraced; nor can they, in reason, Assert
any thing, but only Propose.

6. But the main Consideration which takes off all Invidiousness from my
Carriage in this Particular, is, that in this whole Contest between the Ideists
and me, there is Nothing at all that is Personal. It Is not the Parts or
Abilities of the Contenders, but their METHOD which is in Dispute. The Slowest
and Lamest Traveller, who can but creep forward in a right Path, shall sooner
arrive at his Journey's End, than Another whose Legs are nimble, and his Pace
swift, if he takes a wrong Way at his first setting out. Rather his greater
Strength and Agility do, in such a ease, enable him only to run more widely
astray; as the strongest Bow shoots farthest from the Mark, if the Shast be
wrong levelled. Let the Talent of Wit in the Ideists be Incomparable, (as
doubtless that of Cartesius was, to whom I may, with Justice, join Mr. Lock)
if the Methods they take be not proper to attain true Science, their Errors,
when they mistake, (as I am sure they do in their Principles, and,
consequently, in most of their Conclusions) must be to the same Degree more
Enormous, as their Fancies are more Ingenious. It Is their METHOD then, or their
Way of Proceeding and Building upon Ideas, which I most blame and oppose. Or
rather I deplore the Detriment accruing hence to the Learned Part of the World,
that Men, endowed with such an Excellent Genius, did unluckily light into such
an Indirect and Perplexed Path; seeing what vast Advances Science might have
made, had such Men taken up Right Principles, hit upon the Right Way at first,
and applied their Strong Brains to pursue it. It Is not then their Endowments
which come into Competition, to which I deferr as much as is possible: For, I
much more admire the Skill of such Architects as can build a Castle in the Air,
and make it hang there by Geometry (as it were) than all those common sort of
Artists, who can raise such a Structure upon Firm Ground.

7. What our several Methods are, the Title of my Book tells my Reader in
short, viz. that, (as I have hinted in my Dedicatory) Theirs is to ground all
their Discourses on Ideas; that is, (as themselves express it, and as the Word
[Idea] declares,) on Similitudes or Resemblances; which Similitudes, (as is
abundantly demonstrated in my three first Preliminaries,) are mere Fancies:
Mine is to build them solely and entirely on the Things themselves, in which,
as the Footsteps or Effects of his Essential Verity, the Creative Wisdom of the
God of Truth, has planted and imprinted all Created Truths whatever. This
Method I observe so exactly throughout my whole METHOD, and this present
Treatise, that I disown and renounce any Discourse in either of these Books,
which is not built either upon the Things as they are in Nature, or according
to the Being they Naturally have in the Understanding: And, I shall owe much to
that Man, who will show me that I do any where decline from this solid and
well-grounded Method. As for Formal Truths, found in our Judgments or
Discourses, I build them on most Evident Principles, or strive to reduce them
thither; and on the Connection of the Terms found in Propositions, by which only
Truth can be expressed; keeping still an Attentive Regard to the Things
themselves. And I desire that the Differences between the Ideists and me may be
decided by the Impartial Umpirage of Rigorous Logic. A Test, which, as I am
sure their Cause cannot bear, so I am confident they will never accept of or
stand to. For, it may easily be discerned by any serious Reflecter, that their
Procedure and manner of Discoursing is not by way of laying Principles, and
drawing a Close and wellknit Train of Consequences, as I do in all the main
Points of my Method, and in this present Treatise on occasion; but, by Unproved
Suppositions, and Loose Discourses made up of well-express'd Wit, Ingenious
Remarks, Quaint Novelties, Plausible Explications, and such other Superficial
ways; which, though they take with Vulgar Readers, are (to speak plainly) more
fit for Flashy Rhetorical Declamation, than for Manly and Solid PHILOSOPHY. Nor
do I think it did ever so much as once enter into the Thoughts of the Ideists,
much less their Hope, that their Discourse could be reduced to Self-evidence,
or to that Artificial Form of Close Discourse called a Demonstrative Syllogism;
which is the Touchstone to distinguish what Ratiocinations are truly
Conclusive, what Inconclusive or Fallacious. Without which, what do we know?

8. I am very well aware what Prejudice I bring upon my self, by Addressing you
in this Confident manner at the very first Dash of my Pen; and some
well-meaning Friends have advertised me, that this Carriage of mine has been
reflected on, especially by some mere Schoolmen; who, though they in reality
know nothing, are more proud of their Probabilities, than the most Scientifical
Man living is of his Demonstrations; though their utmost Performances amount to
no more than that of the ridiculous Fortunetellers of old, -- Aut erit, aut non;
Divinare etenim magnus mihi donat Apollo.
Whence I do fully expect, that the Humor of our Modern Speculaters will judge
this Assuredness of mine to be a high Presumption of my own Performances; nay,
some will think it a proud Disregard of others even to talk of Demonstration.
Indeed, I must own I have a high Opinion of my Principles and my Method, which
Nature and GOD's good Providence have laid and established. But, as for my
Conclusions and Deductions, as I will not justify them all with the same
Firmness as I did the others; so, I must declare, that did I not really judge
them Demonstrative when I call them so, I should not think I ought to propose
them as such; nor at all to the Learned. The World has been sufficiently
pestered already with Books of Philosophy, nay, Volumes, blown up to a vast
Bulk with Windy and Frathy Probabilities, and petty Inconclusive Topics;
which, like Rank Weeds, have overrun that Rich Soil where Science ought to
have been Sown; and I esteem it too poor and mean a Vanity to plant
Briar-fields to enlarge a Wilderness. If I overween in calling my Proofs,
Demonstrations, I am willing to take the Shame to my self, if it deserves
Shame; though perhaps I had been more blameworthy, if, really judging them
Demonstrative, I had minced the Truth, and out of an Affected Modesty, or a
Diffidence for which I saw no Ground, I had diminished their Force in the
esteem of my Readers; and so hindered the Profit, which, startled at the
Uncouth Sound of Demonstration, they might otherwise have reaped by looking
into them. For, DEMONSTRATIONS are Strange Rarities in this Skeptical Age; and
when those who are to show them do proclaim to the World where they are to be
seen, Curious People will run in Flocks to view the Monster.

9. He that knows what Demonstration is, and verily judges his Argument is
such, and yet, out of Niaiserie and Shamefastness says at every turn, [I think,
or, perhaps this is true, or may be True] should, if I might advise him, wear a
Mask; for he does as good as tell his Readers, [Gentlemen, I offer you an
Argument, but I fear it is not worth your Acceptance.] A strange Complement from
one Philosopher to another! It was not out of my Natural Humor and
Inclination, but perfectly out of Deliberate Design to win my Readers to
Attentive Examination, and invite those who were dissatisfied to Opposition,
(which is the best means to clear Truth) that I delivered my self with that
Bold Assurance. And I did really intend that Skeptical Men should ask, -- Quid
profert dignum tanto promissor hiatu? That, setting themselves thence to Sift
the Nature of my Method, and the Force of my Arguments more narrowly, they
might better sink into their Understandings; as I am Confident they will, if
ever they have perused my Method to Science; and, by that or any other means,
do solidly know what is requisite to a true Demonstration.

10. Another Reason why I put on this Vizard of Confidence, so little suting
with my Natural Complexion, was this. The want of true Science, and the Despair
of finding any, had brought such a Lukewarm and Indifferent Humor into the
World, (and I wish it were not too common) that, though all Men affect to talk of
Truth, and seem in Ordinary Discourse to value and magnify her; yet, when it
comes to the Point, scarce one Man dares heartily profess himself her Champion,
and declare he will defend her Cause with Evident Reason, against all Opposers.
For, alas! how few Men are there, who will profess to Demonstrate in
Philosophy, or to reduce their Discourses to Evidence? Without doing which, and
abiding by the Trial, perhaps there is not one Word of Truth in all Philosophy,
nor any thing but Learned Romance in all the Universities of Europe. Many Men,
indeed, do make a Profession of Knowledge, because it is Honorable; and every
Scholar is engaged to do so, or he will quite lose his Credit. But, when it
should come to Performance, not one Man in ten thousand shows that Zeal for the
Advancement of Truth as answers to the Profession he made to love and esteem
it; but, though he sees Error and Ignorance, and Probable Talking overspread the
Face of Philosophy, and stifle Truth and Knowledge both, he sits still
Unconcerned. Now and then indeed there is a Writer who attempts to confute this
or that particular Error; some Casual Circumstance addicting him to that
Employment: But, what Man sets himself to lay the Ax at the Root, or writes
against Uncertain Methods and Groundless Babbling? What Man goes about to make
Mankind aware of the Mischief that comes to Rational Nature by the Sophisticate
Ways of talking prettily, neatly, and wittily; though, perhaps, not a Word
Groundedly and Solidly? Nay, what Man is not well-Appay'd and Pleased with a
well-penn'd Piece; though, were the Reason in it sifted to the Bottom, perhaps
there is not one Evident Ttuth in it to build that Discourse on; that is, not
one Word of Sense in it; but only such a way of Plausible Discourse or
Language-Learning, as may serve equally and indifferently to maintain either
side of the Contradiction?

11. Lastly, (which is the Chief Point,) Who is there that applies himself to
find out a CERTAIN METHOD to arrive at Truth, and attain Knowledge, without
which all our Studies are to no purpose? Logic is the Proper Art to give us
this Method; and I see Students do generally make use of any Logician, so he
but talks d^yly of the Operations of the Understanding; of Propositions,
Syllogisms, and Demonstration; though, perhaps, he gives not one Word of Reason
for his Unprov'd Sayings, to enlighten the Understanding of the Learner, or
inform him, (ex Natura rei,) whence and why this and the other Rudiment, or
Rule, must be so: Such an Author may indeed enable a Learner to say as he says,
and talk after him in imitation, as it were; but he can never instruct him to
understand what is True, and why it is True, or to demonstrate himself; which
was the main Design of my METHOD.

12. But my greatest Complaint against others, and my best Excuse for putting
my self forwards with such a Confident Air, is, that I see not that any Learned
Men do endeavor to make Head against Skepticism; which, through this Universal
Connivence, or rather Civil and Kind Toleration, and (in some sort)
Encouragement, creeps by insensible Degrees into even the most Learned
Societies, infects the best Wits of our Nation, threatens to bear down all true
Philosophy, to extinguish the Natural Light of Men's Understandings, and drown
their best Faculty [Reason] in a Deluge of Profound Ignorance. For, if this
Vogue should obtain still in the World to look upon any loose Discourse for
brave Sense, so it be but sprucely dressed up in neat Language, and Sauc'd with
a little Piquancy of brisk Wit; and let it pass current for True Learning and
Knowledge; Skepticism will not only insinuate it self slily into all sorts of
Men, but be recommended to the World by such an Universal Approbation of
well-clad gentile Ignorance. Nor does this mischievous Inundation stop its
Career in bereaving us of Natural Truths; but, having once darkened in us the
Knowledge of Nature, it disposes Men to doubt of, and too often to deny the
Existence of the Author of Nature himself; who is best made known to Mankind by
Science, or the Exact Knowledge of his Creatures; from which we glean all the
Notions, and, consequently, all the Knowledge, we, by Ordinary Means, have, or
ought to have. All these Mischiefs, (I may add, and all Immorality too,) are
owing to the Insensible Growth of this Lethargy of our Understanding,
SKEPTICISM; which benums and chills our Intellectual Faculties with a Cold
Despair of ever attaining Evident Knowledge of any thing; for which, as its
Natural Perfection, our Soul was fitted and ordained. I saw this Gloomy Evening
overcasting the Clear Sky of Science, and drawing on the Cimmerian Night of
Dark Ignorance, and Black Infidelity; and thence it was, that, to awaken Men's
Souls out of this drowzy Sleep and Torpor of their Mind, I did so often, boldly
and fearlessly (though as I judged, truly,) declare and proclaim aloud, that
Demonstration in Philosophy might be had, and that I had actually Demonstrated
in such and such Particulars.

13. Lastly, It Is for this Reason, and to rescue all Sincere Lovers of Truth
from this spreading Contagion of Skepticism, that with an unusual Boldness, I
did (as was said before) attempt to write a Demonstrative Logic; to comprehend
which, whoever shall bestow half that Pains as Men usually do who study the
Mathematics, (for such Connected Discourses are not to be perused, with hopes
of profiting by them, with a Cursory Application,) will, I am sure, be able to
set all his Natural Notions in a Right and Distinct Order; know how to connect
two of them with one another in a Solid Judgment; and both of them with a Third
to frame a Conclusive Discourse; and not only have the True Nature of
Demonstration knowingly fixed in his Mind, by comprehending the Reason of it;
but, by having it there, he himself will be enabled to work according to that
Nature, or to Demonstrate himself; without Ability to know or do which, none
ought to pretend to be a Philosopher. Lastly, To carry this Good Work forward
as far as was possible, I have here, as a Supplement to my METHOD, and an
Introduction to my Reflections, added Five Preliminary Discourses; showing the
true and solid Bottom-Ground on which all Exact Knowledge, or Philosophy, is
built; and, that the Things themselves, and not Ideas, Resemblances, or
Fancies, (which can never make us know the Things,) are and must be the only
Firm Foundation of Truth, and of our Knowledge of all Truths whatsoever.

14. I must not pass over another Complaint made of me by some of the Cartesian
School; viz. That in the Preface to my METHOD, I so deeply Censure Malbranche
as a Phanatick in Philosophy; nay, the whole Way it self as disposing to
Enthusiasm. To the First Part of my Charge, I reply, That I cited that Author's
own Words; which are such strong Proofs of a Fanatic Genius, that I cannot
believe any Arguments of mine can add Weight to the Full Evidence and Force
they carried with them, to manifest that his Philosophy is built upon
Inspiration; or, as himself expresses it, comes to him by Revelation. And, for
my pretending that the whole Cartesian Way of Philosophizing is of the same
Leven, I can need no other Compurgatour than that French Author, who with much
Exactness wrote the Life of Cartesius, and was his good Friend and Follower.
The Book is now made English; where in the 34th Page he tells us, that To get
rid of all his Prejudices, (that is, to Unlearn, amongst other Things, all that
the Clear Light of Nature had taught him) Cartesius did undergo no less than to
UNMAN himself. A pretty Self-denying Beginning! And Page 35, 36. that he
wearied out his Mind to that Degree in his Enquiry after this Happy Means,
(viz. that his Imagination should represent to him his Understanding quite
naked) that his Brain took Fire, and he fell into a Spice of Enthusiasm; which
disposed his Mind, already quite spent, in such a manner, that it was fit to
receive Impressions of Dreams and Visions. Where we see it confessed, that his
Method of Unknowing all that Nature had taught him, brought him to Enthusiasm,
and Enthusiasm to Visions and Revelations; so that Malbranche did but follow
his Masters Example, and copied his Method. The Author proceeds. He (Cartesius)
acquaints us, that on the 10th of November, 1619. laying himself down brimful
of Enthusiasm, (which is little better than stark mad) and wholly possessed
with the Thoughts of having found that day the Foundation of that Wonderful
Science, he had three Dreams presently one after another; yet, so
extraordinary, as to make him fancy they were sent him from Above. He supposed
he discerned through their Shadows, the Tracks of the Paths GOD had chalked out
to him, in his Enquiry after Truth. And is it not a powerful Motive to make all
Wits, (especially, if they be of a Melancholy Temper) who are inclined to
embrace his Doctrine, which was first sent from Heaven, to gape after
Revelations too, as well as Malbranche did? He goes on. But the Divine
Spiritual Air which he took a Pride to give to those Dreams, was so near akin
to that Enthusiasm wherewith he believed himself to be warmed, that a Man would
have believed he had been a little Crack'd-brain'd. And, lest any should wrong
the Original of his Doctrine, or degrade it from the Honor of being given him
by Divine Inspiration, this Author takes off any unfavourable Conjecture of
ours, that might make it spring from any Sublunary Cause, in these Words: One
would have believed he had drunk a Cup too much that Evening before he went to
Bed; but he assured us he had been very sober all that Day, and that Evening
too, and had not drunk a drop of Wine three Weeks together. This looks as if
Cartesius himself, who so cautiously informed him of this afterward, was fond
to have it thought that his Doctrine, and especially his Method, (which was the
Minerva of which his Brain was then in Labor,) had been given him from Above,
by Supernatural means.

15. Now, Gentlemen, I beseech you, tell me, in good Sober Sadness; Can you
think GOD ever intended that the only Method for Men to get Knowledge, should
be to lose their Wits first in looking after it? That, to Unman our selves, so
as to seem Crack'd-Brain'd, or Drunk, is the Way to become Soberly Rational?
That, to reduce our selves to perfect Ignorance of all that the Goodness of
Nature has taught us, (which is, in plain Terms, to make an Ass of one's self,)
is the only Certain Way to become a Philosopher? Certainly, unless we be all
infatuated with Enthusiastic Dreams and Visions, made up of Ideas, we should
rather think that it is a far more Solid, and more Natural Way, to begin our
Quest of Truth from those Knowledges which are Evident, and such Grounds as are
Magis Nota, and thence proceed by our Reason to Minus Nota, than it is to take
our Rise from Affected Ignorance, and Unknowing again all those (...), or
Common Notions, which Right Nature had given us to ground all other Knowledges
on. No wonder then, this Freakish Method, taken up by Whimsical Fancy, had for
its Genuin Effect, Fantastic Dreams, Visionary Madness, and Enthusiastic
Folly; which this Writer of his Life (who, doubtless, was himself a Zealous
Cartesian) calls here A Happy Means, the Foundation of that Wonderful Science,
the Path Chalked out by God; and the Descanting on them, to be done by A Divine
Spiritual Air; though he confesses, at the same time, they were Dreams, Visions,
and Fits of Enthusiasm: and that they made him that had them seem
Crack'd-Brain'd, or Drunk. All these wild Caprichio's of Cartesius, sprung
naturally from a Lively and Heightened Fancy, screwed up by frequent
Sollicitous and Melancholy Thoughtfulness; and were the Effects of his
Introversion upon his Ideas; which is quite Opposite to his Regarding the
Things in Nature, that are without us. Nor do I doubt, but that all his
Followers, did they (as they ought) imitate their Master, and follow his
Example, in laying aside first all their former Natural Knowledges, would also
(as any Man must who takes that Unnatural Method) fall into Fits of Enthusiasm,
Dreams, and Visions, and Run Mad for Company. For, IDEAS, which, being
Similitudes, are no more but Fancies, Appearances, and Representations, are,
consequently, far more Proper Materials for Dreams and Visions, and such Roving
Flights, than they are for Science, or Solid Philosophy.

16. Though I forestall what comes hereafter, I am tempted to annex here, to this
Character of the Cartesian Manner of Spirit in Philosophy, a short Passage
mentioned by Mr. Lock, Book 4. Chap. 7.. 17. viz. That he has discoursed with
very Rational Men, who have actually Denied they were Men. Now, certainly, this
is something beyond Enthusiasm, and Extravagant even to Madness, that any Man
should deny himself to be what he is: But, it is Prodigious, that Mr. Lock
should give such Men the Elogium of being very Rational. Whence, since he
cannot but sincerely judge, that the Way he proposes and maintains in his
Essay, is the most Rational of any other; we are to conclude, that those very
Rational Men did follow this Way of his, and were great Ideists; or else, that
Mr. Lock judges that those Men who actually denied themselves to be Men,
might, for all that, according to his Way of Ideas, be very Rational
notwithstanding. It Is worth our while to observe the Consonant Effect of the
Ideal Way, in the Followers of Cartesius and Mr. Lock, and (in some sort) in
both the Authors of those Philosophical Sects themselves: The One UNMANS
himself; and the Others Deny themselves to be Men, and yet are Charactered by
Mr. L. to be, notwithstanding, very Rational: Which are so perfectly Parallel,
that I am at a great Loss which to prefer. And, now, do you think, Gentlemen,
that, (besides the Regard we owe to Truth,) out of the Common Love we ought to
bear to Mankind, and to Rational Nature, that it is not high time to look to
our Wits, and to make head against this Way of Ideas; when we find two such
Great Men as Cartesius, and Mr. Lock, through this Fantastic Method they had
chosen, fall into such Incredible Extravagancies, as either (in a manner) to
Abdicate, by Unmanning one's self; or, to commend the Abdication of their own
Natures; at least, to think them very Rational that do so?

17. Far be it from me to judge, that all, or most of the Performances of those
two admirably-Ingenious Men, are of this Extravagant Nature. It Is my sincere
Judgment, that Few Men write Like them; and, None, Better, where their
Ill-grounded Methods do not intermingle, and pervert their Reason. And, I
freely acknowledge, that Mr. Lock 's ESSAY, on which I make so many
Reflections, contains many Excellent and Uncommon Truths in it: Though I do not
think he owes any of them to his Way of Ideas; but, that he proceeded in such
Occasions, upon his Natural Notions, in the same manner the Aristotelians do;
and, thence, made Right Judgments and Reflections upon them by his own Acute
Wit. This Unfortunate Choice of their Method did, as I conceive, proceed hence,
that such Active and Quick Fancies do not patiently brook the Rains of Logic
and Metaphysics; the former of which (much against the Grain) restrains them
from taking their Wild Carreer, by the Discipline of its Artificial Rules; the
other keeps them from Roving, by the Self-evident Maxims it sorces their
Understanding to accept of. Whence, if these two do not bridle and keep them
in, it is not to be expected in Nature that such High-mettl'd Fancies should be
held within strict Bounds, or kept to the Slow and Sober Pace of Solid Reason;
but, that they will take their Vagaries, and run over Hedge and Ditch,
whithersoever the Swift Career of that Nimble Faculty hurries them. This
Discourse I make the more willingly, that those Students who read this, may
clearly discern, that all their Application to gain Knowledge will be purely
Lost Labor, and Time thrown away, if their First and Chief Care be not to take
a Wise and Solid Method at the Beginning.

Having thus finished my long Address, for which I beg your Pardon, I shall now
apply my self to make some few Discourses, relating to my following Book.

18. MAN being One Thing, compounded of a Corporeal and a Spiritual Nature, and
every Thing acting as it is, it follows, that both those Natures must concur
to every Operation that flows from him, as he is Man; and, consequently, be
produced by some Faculty belonging properly to each of those respective
Natures: Nor can it be doubted, but that, as those Faculties, or Powers, which
are peculiar to both those Natures, are as different as are the Natures
themselves; so the Immediate Objects peculiar to those Different Faculties,
must likewise be as widely Different from one another, as are those Powers to
which they belong; and, consequently, be as vastly Opposite, as the Natures of
Body and Spirit can distance them. It being then agreed to by all Parties, that
the Faculties or Powers which join in our Production of Knowledge, are those we
call the Imagination and the Mind, or the Fancy and the Understanding, I cannot
doubt but it may be demonstratively concluded, from the known Nature and
Constitution of this Thing called MAN, that, to every Thought or Act of
Knowledge we have, (those being such Operations as properly and formally belong
to us as we are Men,) there must two sorts of Interior Objects concur;
whereof, the One is of a Corporeal, the Other of a Spiritual Nature; and that,
otherwise, those Acts could not be said to be Humane Acts, or the Acts of that
Suppositum, or Compound Thing, called Man; but of one of those Natures only,
a-parted from the other as to its Operation, and consequently, as to its Being.
Which Supposition is directly contradictory to the Natural Constitution of Man;
as he is distinguished, on one side, from a Brute, who has nothing but Material
Phantasms, or Ideas; on the other, from an Angel, or Intelligence; in whom
there is nothing of Matter or Fancy, but all in it is purely Spiritual.

19. The Distinction of these two Objects of the Fancy and of the Understanding
being granted, in some manner, by all Sides, I cannot but wonder how it hapt to
escape the Thoughts of all the Philosophers both Ancient and Modern, to
explicate fully and clearly the Exact Difference between those two Objects of
the Fancy and of the Understanding; there being scarcely any one Point in
Philosophy of half that Importance for the attaining of Truth, and avoiding of
Error: For both these being truly in us, whenever we have an Act of Knowledge;
and withal, being as far Removed from one another in their Natures as Body and
Spirit are; if Speculative Men, either through mistake, or through Inadvertence of
this vast difference between them, or out of Loathness to take Pains to look
deep into the Intrinsecal Natures of Things, imprinted in their Minds when they
have Notions of them, shall happen to mistake what they find Uppermost or most
Superficial, and therefore is easiest to their Fancy, (as Phantasms or Material
Representations are) for Notions; which, being of a Spiritual Nature, do not
make so obvious and familiar an Appearance as those Gay Florid Pictures did,
but are to be gathered by Reason, or made Understood by Reflection and Study;
such Speculaters, I say, will be at the same loss, and not much wiser than
those Birds were that peck'd at Xeuxis 's Grapes to seed themselves; mistaking
the Outward Pourtraiture or Idea for the Inward Nature of the Thing: For, no
Knowledge of the Things could ever be expected from Ideas, taken (as themselves
take them) for Similitudes; since those Terms or Words, which we use, and must
use, when we speak or discourse of any thing whatever, were intended, by the
Agreement of Mankind, to signify the Things themselves about which we are
Discoursing, and not to signify mere Likenesses or Similitudes of them.
However this has been neglected by others, I see it is my Duty to say something
of this Distinction of Phantasms from Notions. I have in my 19th Reflection, 9,
and 12. endeavored to show it. To which I have here thought fit to annex some
few (...), or Distinguishing Marks to know one from the other.

20. My first Criterion shall be the Sensibleness of the former, and
Insensibleness of the other. When we shut our Eyes, or walk in the Dark, we
experience we have Ideas or Images of our Way, or of other things we have seen,
in our Fancy; and this, without the least Labor of ours, or any Reflection: And
there is also beyond that, something else in the Mind, which tells us of what
Nature, or what Things those are, which appeared superficially to our Fancy;
which costs us Labor and Reflection to bring it into the view of the
Understanding, so that we cannot get perfect Acquaintance with it, unless we
define it. Nor is this Sensible, as the other was, but only Intelligible: Not
superficial or uppermost; but hidden, retruse, and (as we may say) stands
behind the Curtain of the Fancy: Nor easy to comprehend at the first Direct
Sight of our Inward Eye, but costs us some Reflection, or some Pains, to know it
expressly and distinctly. Which latter sort, in each of these regards, are
those we call Simple Apprehensions, Conceptions, or Notions.

21. The next Criterion shall be this: We find we have in us Meanings; now the
Meanings of Words, or (which is the same, taking that word objectively, what is
meant by those Words,) are most evidently the same Spiritual Objects as are our
Notions, and it is Impossible those Meanings should be the same with Ideas or
Similitudes, but of a quite different Nature. Let it be as Like the thing as
it is possible, it is not the Likeness of it which we aim at in our Language: For
we do not intend or mean when we speak of any thing, to talk or discourse of
what is Like that Thing, but of what is the same with it, or rather what that
thing it self is; which the mere Similitude of a thing cannot possibly be. For
a Similitude being Related to the Thing, is so far from being that Thing, or
the Same as It is, that it is relatively Opposite to it; that is, quite
Distinct from it. Now, that what is essentially and formally Distinct from a
Thing, nay Opposite to it, should of it self, and by it self alone, give us the
First Knowledge of It, (as they put their Ideas to do;) or that the Meaning of
the one should be the Meaning of the other, is utterly Unintelligible, and
against Common Sense. Wherefore the Meaning, which is the Immediate and Proper
Object of the Mind, and which gives us, or rather is the First Notice of the
Thing, must be of a quite different Nature from an Idea or Likeness of it; and
since there can be no Middle between Like and the Same; nor any nearer Approach
or Step, proceeding from Likeness, toward Unity with the Thing, but it falls
into Identity, it must necessarily be more than Like it; that is, the Same with
it; which an Idea or Likeness cannot possibly be, as was proved lately.

22. The Third Criterion which confirms the other, shall be this: None denies
but Brutes have Ideas or Similitudes in their Fancy; but they can have no
Meanings, because they have no Spiritual Part or Mind, only which can mean.
Hence, all the Sounds or Noises they make, express only Passion, or some
Corporeal Easiness or Uneasiness which they feel, and not their Thoughts or
Meaning: As appears by this; that they can never come to know what the Words we
use do mean or signify; nor can those of them that can speak, adapt the Words
they pronunce to our meaning, nor answer us pertinently; which Reflection serves
to show us farther the vast Difference between Ideas and Meanings, or between
Phantasms and Notions.

23. My Third Criterion is taken from the Evident Difference between an Idea or
Similitude of a Thing, and its Definition; of which see Method to Science, Book
1. Less. 2. 24. toward the End.

24. My Fourth Criterion is, That we are as certain we have General Notions, as
that we have Particular ones; nay, we can conceive them as General; that is, we
can conceive their Generality. If then we have an Idea or Likeness of
Universality, or Generality, What is it like? It must either be Like the Thing,
or must be like Nothing, and so is no Idea or Likeness at all. But it cannot be
like the Thing in any respect, because in the Thing there is nothing that is
General or Universal; but all that is there is Particular and Determined; which
is quite Unlike, nay, Opposite to Universality or Generality. It Is Evident
then, that we have no Idea or Likeness of an Universal in our Meaning or
Notion, when we use or hear the Words that signify it. On the other side, we
have a Notion of Homo, Animal, and Ens; and still a Clearer one according as
they are more General. Wherefore, it is likewise evident, that our Notions are
of a quite different Nature from Ideas or Similitudes.

25. I shall leave the pursuing this Point any farther, and give the Reader
some Taste beforehand of what (perhaps) he will be cloyed with in the following
Book; especially it will be proper to season his Understanding with some few
Notions concerning the main Question between the Ideists and me, viz. Whether
our Knowledge is made by the Things being in our Mind when we know it, or an
Idea or Similitude of it only. In order to which I ask the Ideists, Whether the
Modes or Accidents are Distinct Entities from the Substance or Thing? To which
I am sure Mr. Lock will say, They are not. Hence I argue, Therefore, if the
Modes or Accidents be not Distinct really from the Substance, the Substance or
Thing is not really, (or in re,) distinguished from the Modes or Accidents:
Therefore they are (as they are in Nature, or in re) the same Thing, or
Identify'd. Therefore they are only distinguished by the Understanding
conceiving the same Thing diversely; therefore it is only the Conceptions of our
Understandings which are Distinct. Therefore taking the word [Conception]
objectively; that is, for the Thing Conceived; all we conceive is still the
Thing. Therefore all our Notions, both of the Substance and of its Accidents or
Modes, that is, all the Notions we can have, (they being the same with our
Conceptions,) are nothing but the Thing conceived diversely. Therefore, if that
Thing be a Body, all our Notions of it are merely that Thing called Body
diversely conceived. Therefore the putting Space, Succession, etc. where there
neither is nor can be any Body, is to put Body where there is no Body; and, is
a mere Fancy, and Contradictory. Therefore those Philosophers who proceed upon
our Grounds, do still Conceive, Judge and Discourse of the Thing. Therefore the
Knowledge they gain by such Notions is the Knowledge of the Thing; the
Judgments they make by connecting those Notions, are Connexions of the
thusdistinguish'd Parts (as it were) of the Thing; and the Discourses they
make, Discourses concerning the very Thing. Therefore the Philosophy of such
Men is truly and entirely the Knowledge of the Things, or True Philosophy.
Wherefore those who have only in their Minds SIMILITUDES or IDEAS, and do only
Connect or Discourse of them, which Ideas are not the Thing, nor conceived to
be It either in whole, or in part, are convinced to build their Discourses
(thus grounded) upon Nothing. Therefore they have no Solid Knowledge of any
Thing. Therefore, in proper Speech, they know Nothing. Therefore all their
Philosophy (thus built) is purely Fantastic.

I infer farther, that, since this Distinction of the Thing into Substance
(precisely considered) and its Modes or Accidents, is performed only by the
Understanding; therefore it is made within the Understanding. Therefore since
this Act, that thus Distinguishes them, is not Transitive to the Thing which is
out of it, the Thing must be in the Understanding to be there Distinguished;
otherwise we should Distinguish we Know not what; which (it being done by a
Knowing Power) is impossible, and a perfect Contradiction. Therefore the Thing
it self must forcibly be intellectually in the Mind: Therefore, there can need
no Ideas or Similitudes to make us know it; for to be in a Knowing Power is to
be known, without more ado.

It Is incredibly Strange, and even Monstrous, that Mr. Lock 's Thoughts and
mine, like Antipodes, should move Diametrically Opposite to one another in this
Point. He tells us, B. 4. Chapter 23. in his Margin, that there is no Abstract Idea
of Substance; nor can we (as he there says) by the Sensible Qualities have any
Idea of the Substance of Body, more than if we knew nothing at all. And, the
Essences or Entities of Particular Substances (as clearest Reason
demonstrates,) are incomparably harder to be known, than Substance in the
Abstract; whence we must, consequently, know less than nothing of Them, if we
know nothing at all of the other: It being impossible to know what This Thing
or This Man is, if we be Ignorant what Thing or Man is. Nor have we any Innate
Ideas (as he confesses) to make [Substance] known. If, then neither Innate nor
Acquired Ideas can make us know any thing at all of it, and we can know nothing
but by Ideas; it is plain, we cannot know Thing or Substance at all, and so we
must rest contented with knowing Nothing. For, Substance being unknown, it is
impossible to know any Mode or Accident; they being essentially certain Manners
how a Thing is; and, so, including Substance and Thing in their Definition.
Again, Mr. L. holds we can frame no Idea of Substance, or at most but a most
blindly Obscure one; and I hold that the Notion of it is most Clear, nay, the
Clearest of any but that of Existence, expressed by the word [is.] He thinks that
the nature of Accidents is known by themselves, though the Substance ly in the
dark from us: And I judge it Demonstrable that, as they have no Entity of their
own, but by means of the Thing, Ens or Substance, so they can have no
Intelligibility (which is a Property of Ens) of their own, but merely by virtue
of the Substance or Thing with which they are Identify'd. In a word, He thinks
Substance is most Unknown, and I say, it is self-evidently Known. He says it
cannot be known Clearly; and I say it not only can, but must be known clearly;
nay, that nothing else can be known but It, or by being It.

By this Discourse it appears, that this Point being (of its own Nature) of
Universal Concern; and, therefore, drawing Great and most Important
Consequences after it, which, acting here as a Philosopher, I do not mention;
either He or I must be in a most Dangerous Error. Wherefore, being perfectly
assured that the Method I take will not permit me to err Enormously; and, very
certain that I follow very faithfully that Method; I humbly beg of Mr. Lock,
by that Candor and Ingenuity, of which (I doubt not, sincerely too) he has
made so frequent Professions, that he would please to apply his Thoughts anew
(for if Second Thoughts be Better, the Last may be Best of all) to review his
Way of Ideas; and, comparing it with what I have proposed and proved in my
Method to Science, my Preliminaries, and my several Reflections on his Essay, he
would unbyassedly consider, whether (since he cannot suspect his own Excellent
Parts) this New Way of Philosophizing be not the Sole Cause of all his
Mistakes, and misleads him into all these Great Errors; to entertain which
this Fantastic Method has inveigled his good Reason.

I have no more to Preface, but to beg Pardon for oftentimes repeating the same
thing over and over in the ensuing Book, Mr. Lock civilly Apologizes for doing
the same; and my chief Excuse is, that, being to trace and follow his
Discourses, I could not well avoid it; hoping withal, at the same time, to
clear the Point better; either by some New Thought, which then occurred, or by
giving a better Turn to my former Arguments. Besides, I must confess, that I
did now and then affect these Repetitions, to make some Particulars which were
of most Weight sink better into the Judgment of my Readers, by re-minding them
often of such Important Truths. I am forced to use the Word [Idea] often,
because Mr. Lock (with whom I am discoursing) does so always; though generally I
join Notions to it. But, this one Note will keep my true Sentiment from being
misunderstood; that I allow Ideas or Resemblances in the Fancy or Imagination;
but, I absolutely deny there are any Spiritual Ideas or Similitudes in the Mind
on which we ground any Truth, or which are the Materials of Knowledge; but
NOTIONS only, or the Things abstractedly or inadequately conceived by the
Understanding.

Your Well-wishing Friend and Faithful Servant,

J. S.

Solid Philosophy ASSERTED.
Preliminary Discourses.
Preliminary First.
Of the Impropriety and Equivocalness of of the word [IDEA.]

1. THE Author of the Essay concerning Human Understanding, having sincerely
levelled the aim of his Endeavors at the attainment of Truth in Philosophy,
which can only be had by clearing the way to Science; hence, this being the
sole End we have, both of us, prefixed to our selves, the best Method (in
common) which I can take in my Reflections on that Learned Treatise is, to keep
my Eye still directed to that end, and to take my measures from the Order and
Rapport which our respective Positions, or Discourses, may be conceived to bear
to that best Design.

2. This premised, my first Preliminary Reflection shall be upon his making use,
throughout his whole Work, of The using the word [Idea] in disparate Senses,
obstructs the way to Science.
the word (IDEAS) as the Chief, or rather only Materials, of which, according
to him, we are to frame immediately all our Knowledges. Which being so, it
follows that, if the sense of that word be not it self Clear, but Equivocal;
and if, as taken in one Sense, it be manifestly nothing at all to Science, nor
can be any Material of it; and, as taken in the other, it may and must conduce
to it, nay, be the Sole imediate Ground and Origin of all Science; I cannot but
think, that the promiscuous usage of that Word in such Disparate Senses, (it
being of so general Concern, and running through that whole Book) must
necessarily encumber and perplex in a high Measure the way to Scientifical
knowledge.

3. One of his Secondary Designs was (as he expresses himself in his Epistle
to the Reader) to remove the Rubbish Philosophical Words generally used, not to
be laid a side without great Necessity.
in order to the building up Science, and to beat down the Vanity and Ignorance
of those who have reduced Philosophy, which is nothing but the Knowledge of
Things, to insignificant School-Terms. This is certainly a very necessary and a
very laudable Design; it being evident to all ingenuous Lovers of Truth, that
never was there more need of a Reformation, than there has been of Philosophy
in these last Centuries; to second him in which I have not failed on my part to
contribute my endeavors. Yet, notwithstanding I do not think we ought, without
great and necessary occasion, alter those words which have been accepted and
used by the Learned World (such as it was) hitherto: Especially such words as
are proper and Univocal, such I take the word [Notion] to be; much less to
substitute another, which I must Much less changed for others less proper.
think is less proper, and withal highly Equivocal, or Ambiguous, I mean the
word (IDEA.) I know this ingenuous Author apologizes for his frequent using it;
and I am apt to think he did this out of Civility toward our Modern
Philosophers, who have brought it into fashion: For, he gives no reason why he
did not rather constantly use the word (Notion;) which, importing a part of
Cognition, does most certainly better suit with a Treatise about Human
Understanding.

4. As for the Sense in which he takes the word (IDEA) he professes that he
uses it to express whatever is meant by Mr. L's Acception of the word [Idea]
very Ambiguous.
Phantasm, Notion, Species, or whatever it is that the mind can be employed
about in thinking. Which manifests that he uses that word very Equivocally: For
a Phantasm, and a Notion, differ as widely, as Body and Spirit; the one being a
Corporeal, the other a Spiritual Resemblance; or rather, the one being a
Resemblance, or a kind of Image, or Picture; the other the thing Resembled, as
will be seen hereafter. Again, it is agreed to by all the World, that Brutes
have Phantasms, but they can have no Notions; for these are the Elements, or
Materials, whose agreeable Connection furnishes our Mind with Science; of which
Beasts, which have no Mind, are incapable; and therefore it were both
unnatural, and to no purpose, to put Notions (which are the Primary Affections
of the Mind) in those mere Animals. I am more at a loss to find, that, in the
last page but one in his Epistle to the Reader, he seems to contradistinguish
Notions to Ideas; which how it consists with the indifferency he grants the
word (Idea) here to signify Notions, I cannot at all comprehend.

5. I must confess, it is generally a fruitless contest to dispute about a
Word, which is nothing but a Sound, or The Ambiguity of it not cleared by him.
a Character, were but the determinate Meaning of it told us by the user of it:
Let it be A, or B, or what he pleases, provided the distinct Sense of it be
clearly manifested by the Writer, or Speaker, it were, in that case, Logomachy,
and impertinent Cavil, to except against it. But, when the Author's own
Explication of it does, (contrary to the Nature of Explications) declare it is
used ambiguously, it lays a force on me to remark it; lest it may lead the
Reader, (as it infallibly must) into great Errors, unless it is double Sense be
warily distinguished in the ensuing discourse; which I have not observed to be
done any where by this otherwise accurate Author.

6. From this undistinguished Ambiguity of the word (Idea) it follows
naturally, that even his own excellent Judgment, and consequently, his
Reader's, must necessarily sometimes deviate; and, though his general intention
was only to pursue the Knowledge of Things, yet he must needs be sometimes
mis^ed at unawares to entertain Fancies for Real Knowledges; as will
occasionally be shown hereafter. For the present I cannot omit one particular,
it being of such main importance.

7. The Author believes all sorts of Animals to have, in some degree,
Perception. Now Perception (as I conceive) The putting Brutes to have
Knowledge, associates them with Mankind.
signifies Knowledge; for, under what sort of material Action to rank it, I
confess my self at a loss: But, let it be only the first step and degree
toward Knowledge, and the inlet of all the Materials of it, still he says,
the dullness of the faculties of some Brutes, makes them remote from that
Knowledge which is to be found in some Men: So that it seems in other Men there
may possibly be no more Knowledge (at least in some things) than in Brutes; nor
does he any more than probably conjecture, that Beasts have not the power of
comparing, which may be observed in M^n, belonging to general Ideas, and useful
to abstract Reasonings. Now, this so jumbles together Spiritual Natures with
those which are merely Corporeal, that, if this be so, we shall be at some loss
to know our own Kind, to define what Man is, or to distinguish our selves from
our younger Brothers in knowledge, Brutes, or our Souls from theirs: For, if by
Ideas there be meant Notions, (as his Expressions leave it indifferent) and
that a Man's knowledge consists in having these Ideas in him, and Brutes have
also such Ideas; and, that, moreover, they may possibly have also, in some
sort, a power to compare those Notions, and both Method to Science, B. 2. Less
1.. 12.
judging and discoursing most evidently consist in comparing our Notions, I see
no Operations peculiar to a Man, but what Brutes may perform in a lower degree;
and since Degrees do not vary the Species (for otherwise dull Men would be of
another Species from those who have more wit) we could, consequently, never
know what Mankind meant; or who is a Man, who not, unless in outward
appearance; nor, lastly, how our Souls, or Minds, do differ from their Fancies,
or Imaginations. Again, M. L. affirms, B. 2. Chapter 11.. 11. that it seems as
evident to him that Beasts do reason, as that they have Sense; than which,
certainly, nothing in the world can be more evident, or undeniable. Now, if
this be so, all those who hold that (a Rational Animal) is a proper and
adequate Definition of (Man) ought to hold Brutes to be Men. Mr. L. will say,
that Brutes can only reason in Particulars, having no General Ideas, because
they cannot Abstract; nor do we see they make use of any General Signs to
express Universal Ideas: Indeed, they have no such Signs as Words, to notify
they have any such Ideas; but, if we may conclude from their Outward Actions
(on which only Mr. L. seems to ground his good Opinion of them that they have
Reason,) we may as well gather from the same ground that they have General
Ideas too. For example, when a Horse sees a Man a far off, he can only have an
Idea that it is something; for the Object cannot, at that distance, imprint a
more particular Idea of it self, but that most General one, and therefore it is
evident the Horse must either have a General Idea of it, or none at all;
whereas yet he must have some Idea of it, because he sees it, though
confusedly. Coming nearer, the Object imprints a more distinct Idea of a Man;
yet not so distinct, as to represent this Man in particular. At length coming
very near, the same Object is apt to imprint an Idea of this particular Man;
which shows plainly, that all those Ideas the Object gave him before were
General ones: To proceed, we may observe, that while it appeared only to be
something, which was a very abstract Idea, the Horse carried it abstractedly
too, and remained unconcerned. When it appeared to be a Man, it began to be a
little concerned, having to do with such kind of things as used to do it either
Good or Harm; and therefore it stares at it (a common carriage in sheep
especially) as if it studied, or considered, what to make of it, in order to
its own Interest, or Self-preservation. But, when the Object imprints an Idea
of this particular Man, who either used to bring him Provender, or come to
catch him to make him work, he either comes toward him, or runs away; which
different behavior of theirs (if outward Actions were, in this case, worth
building on) is as good a sign that Brutes have General Ideas, as we can expect
from dumb Animals. Besides, when a Cat, or Dog is hungry, and hunts about for
Meat, how can Mr. L. imagine they long only for one particular sort of Meat, and
not any sort of Meat in common that is agreeable to their nature? I am sure
their indifferency to any such Food (in case they know at all) gives us as good
ground to think they have a General Idea of such a sort, kind, or species of
Food, as it does for any Knowledge they have of particulars. Hence is shown,
that Mr. L's Criterion, or distinctive Mark to know them from Men, (viz. the
having General Idea's) quite failing, we ought to esteem Horses, and other
Cattle, to be Four-footed Men, or else Men must be two-legg'd Beasts. Moreover,
since he grants here. 5. they can compare those Ideas they have, though
imperfectly, and but in some circumstances; and all Judging, and Discoursing
must, by his Doctrine, consist in the comparing Ideas; he must think there are
some of them who are very judicious Gentlemen, and use natural Logic, and,
though not very artificially, make Syllogisms too. In a word, if we have no
pecular Faculties Intrinsecal to our Nature, nor any Primary Operation
belonging to it, and it only, to distinguish us from Brutes but Extrinsecal
shape only, all Beasts might be Men, and Men Beasts: And then we ought in duty
to consider how to correct our Carriage toward our dear Brethren in Nature,
Brutes; which will bring in the Turkish Charity to Dogs, and twenty other
Fooleries: And, it is an excellent Argument to prove the Identity of our
Natures, that Mr. L. brings of some Gentlemen he was acquainted with, who
denied themselves to be Men; and I wonder he would civilly give them the Lie,
by passing upon them the Complement that they were notwithstanding very
Rational Men; for, were it possible any Man could be a Beast, it is most certain
these Men were such. But I wonder not all at such extravagant Conceits; for as
Reason, grounded on our Natural Notions of the Thing, is reduced, if pursued
home, to First and Self-evident Principles; so Fancy, if followed close,
advances at length to pure Folly, and ends finally in perfect Madness.

8. As for us Men, we can certainly affirm, that we do truly perceive, or know,
because we know certainly, by experience, The first consideration pre-requir'd,
ere we ought to think that Brutes know.
or rather by Reflection, that we do know; but we do not thus know that Brutes
know; and whoever thinks he can gather it by Reason, ought, I conceive, er'e he
goes about it, to study exactly two previous points. First, he ought to
consider very attentively, how, or upon what Grounds he can imagine Particles of
Matter, though never so subtle and artificially laid together, can be capable of
Perception, or Knowledge, or how this Suits with the Nature of mere Body. We
can only gather this from Local Motions proceeding from Brutes, with some kind
of Regularity: Now an exact Watch (in proportion to its few parts) does, by
virtue of a Spring within, which is part of its self, afford the same argument
to one that is not aware of its contrivance. For, it shows us, and regularly
too, the Minutes, Quarters, Half-hours, Hours, Days of the Month, and tells us
the time aloud by Striking the Bell: Nay, a Repeating-Clock does, without
Missing, or Mistake, answer the Question (as it were) which by pulling the
String you ask it; and, though you are never so importune in repeating your
question often, yet it still answers truth, with more steady exactness than
Banks his Horse could, by seeing the Motion of his Masters Eye. Yet, if any Man
had drawn thence a Conclusion that those Engines had perciev'd, or known, we are
satisfied that he had been perfectly mistaken. An Italian here had an Engine
which would both a wake one at the hour he designed to rise, and also strike
fire, and light his Candle for him; which I believe is more than the most docil
Brute could ever be taught to perform. The Case had been still more difficult,
had this Watch, or Engine, which seemed self moving, been put into all these
Motions by Subtle and Indiscernable Agents; as Iron is by the Effluuiums of a
Loadstone, or as Memnons Musical Statue was by the Rays of the Sun; for in
that Case the Vulgar, discerning no Material Cause that set it on work, would
presently have had recourse to some Knowing power in the Engine; in the same
manner as when they hear noises in a House, and cannot find out what caused
them, they imediately conclude it is a Spright. Whence results this plain Rule,
that er'e we can with reason conclude, or think any thing, except our selves,
has Perception, or Knowledge, by our seeing it perform any Outward Action, we
ought first to be certain that we can comprehend all the Operations of Bodies,
and all the several Combinations and Contrivances of them; and that we see that
those Actions are impossible to be performed by Bodily parts, laid together by
an infinitely wise Artificer; before we fall to imagine that any merely Animal
Body is more than a Natural Engine; or that it does any more perceive, think, or
know, than does a Watch or Clock.

9. The Second thing necessary to be done er'e we ought to think Brutes have
any knowledge, is, to consider The Second consideration prerequir'd.
exactly the incredible variety of the several Organical parts, found in the
bodies of Animals; which, with the peculiar Uses of each, and the Contexture of
them with the other parts, do swell so many Books of Anatomy already, without
any hopes or prospect of reaching them all: And, besides, it is necessary also
to weigh attentively the Chemical parts (if I may be allowed to call them so)
of an Animal, consisting of Blood, the Humors in it, and especially the
Spirits; which last are apt to be moved, upon every occasion, by the least
touch of all the Bodies about it, nay, by the most minute particles of them,
lodged in the brain and excited there a fresh; and are withal apt to be
carried thence in convenient Vehicles throughout the whole, to set on motion
those parts which are more solid: When he has done this, let him Consider all
these diverse-natured parts laid together by the All-wise Contriver of Nature,
in order to the Animal's pursuing what is Agreeable to its nature, and avoiding
what is Disagreeable to it: When, I say, all these particulars are well weighed,
and duly reflected on, I believe we shall be at a loss to pitch upon any
outward Notion with such wise Contextures, and the Complexion of such
innumerable Material Causes may not naturally produce.

10. To give some ease to our fancy, startled at the Strangeness of many
Actions we see done by Brutes, let us reflect That our selves both asleep and
awake, do, without Knowledge, perform as strange Operations as Brutes do.
on what happens to Men, walking in their Sleep, when the passages to our
Knowing Power are intercepted; and our wonderment will to a great degree,
cease. How regularly do the Phantasms at that time, move our Brutal part, the
Body: Many Authentic Examples of which I could recount worthy our highest
admiration; they being such as, were we awake, and had our rational fears about
us, we neither durst attempt, nor could possibly perform, without extreme
hazard. But, not to insist on these, let us reflect on our selves, even when
perfectly awake, and we shall discover that, however we are set on work by
Motives, or Reasons, yet we know not at all how the outward parts of our Body
(only which we experience in Brutes, and ground the conceit of their having
Knowledge upon them) do perform any of their Operations. What Man living,
though supposed the wisest (much less the Generality) knows how, or by what
passages he is to send Animal Spirits into the Muscles (whence all our Motion
proceeds) or into what Muscles, or what quantity of them is requisite to do such
an Outward Action? What Feats of Activity does a Rope-dancer show us? How many
ways does he distort, wind, turn, poize, stretch, and ply the parts of his
Body? To do which, the Animal Spirits are to be sent now into this, now into
that Muscle, to move this or this or that Limb, or Joint; sometimes great
quantity of them to make a vehement, or quick Motion; sometimes fewer, to move
them more moderately; sometimes none at all into any of them, when he has a
mind to surcease all Motion, and sit still. Yet he knows, no more than a Brute,
or a Stone does, how he is to do any of this, nor can give the least account
how it is done. All this is transacted by the wise Contrivance of the Body;
which is so framed as to be subservient to the Design the Man, as he is Knowing
and Rational, had projected. And the same is done in Brutes, when either actual
Impressions are made upon them from the Objects; or those former Impressions
are again excited in the Brain; which done, all the frisking motions of
Pursuance and Avoidance which they perform, do follow by a Course of Natural or
Material Causes; and, withal, according to those measures and degrees as are
proportioned to the Efficacy of the first impellent Cause, the Object in their
Imagination; the Agreeableness or Disagreeableness of which, to the Nature of
the Animal is that which sets all the Engine on work at first.

11. Nor can the Objection bear any force that some Actions of Brutes resemble
Reason, even though it seems more The Resemblance of Reason in some Actions of
Brutes, no Argument of their Knowledge
then is found in Men; since we experience that a Watch, which is the work of
an Artificer, performs the Operations proper to it, and tells us the time of
the day with more exactness, than the best Reason we have can do without such
helps. So that the Watches acting according to reason, demonstrates indeed
there was Reason in the Framer of it, but argues none at all in the Engine it
self: Wherefore, however the Actions of some Brutes may bear a show of Reason,
this can only argue that they are the workmanship of a Rational, or Wise Maker;
but, not that themselves acted knowingly, or rationally, while they did these
Actions: For my self, I must declare, that I have as much admired the wisdom
shown in the Action of a young Vine, exerting and twisting its little Fingers
about other things near it, to support it self as it grew up, as (all the
forementioned Circumstances weighed and abated) at any Operation of a Brute;
and I doubt not but a Campanella (who maintained that every thing in Nature had
perception) or some such other man of fancy, would discourse, and descant on it
thus: "The poor week limber Vine knew, and was well aware, that, not being able
to support it self, it would, when it increast in length, fall down flat on the
ground, and so be exposed to be trampled under foot, and hurt; and, therefore,
did very prudently cling about other Vegetables, or Poles near it, to sustain
it self, and avoid that inconvenience." And, I dare affirm that we lose the
best part of our Natural Contemplation, by putting Brutes to have Knowledge;
for, what wonder is there that such things as have a knowing Power in them
should know, or, who admires it in a Man? Whereas, it justly raises our mind to
high Admiration and Adoration of the Divine Artificer, to see things which are
made of mere Matter, act with as much Wisdom and Prudence for their own
preservation, as the wisest Knower can by his best Wit, of which he is so
proud, and sometimes with much more. No doubt but the growth and operations of
dull Vegetables, do administer to devout Reflecters occasions of very high
Contemplation; and shall the Operations of sensitive Beings, which are
incomparably more excellent, and more admirable, as being the Top and
Masterpiece of this Material World, afford little, or none at all? Now, if
their Nature be to have Knowledge in them, and it be a thing common to all
Creatures, and expected that GOD should give to every thing what is its Nature,
there is little or no particular ground for our wonderment. GOD has given
Brutes a Knowing Power, and that Power makes them know, and there is an end of
our Admiration, and consequently of our Contemplation, and of that devout
Admiration, to which our Astonishment at the several Actions of those Natural
Automata would otherwise raise us.

12. I beg pardon for this long digression; I thought fit to dilate thus
largely on this point; both because it Brutes have Phantasms, but no Notions or
Meanings.
is a very concerning and useful Preliminary; as also to manifest how the using
the word (Idea) hand over head (as we may say) and taking it Equivocally and
indifferently for Phantasms and Notions, leads this Great Man (as it must needs
have done every Man) into great mistakes. For Phantasms Beasts may indeed have,
they being no more but Effluuiums emitted from other Bodies, and received by
the portalls of the Senses into the Brain; where the Animal Spirits stand
readily waiting to move the Brute, according as those Tinctures are agreeable,
or disagreeable, to the Compound: but Notions, or (which is the same) Meanings,
or Apprehensions, they cannot have; for these being made by Direct Impressions
upon our Spiritual part, the Mind, (only which can mean, or apprehend) to judge
they have any such, would conclude they had a Spiritual, and consequently an
Immortal part in them, which I am sure we shall both of us deny. Besides, had
they Meanings, or were capable of any, they would be capable of the Meanings of
our Words; at least those amongst them which are most Docil, and could Speak,
would not fail, if well taught, and educated, to know much of our Language, and
Answer, in some few occasions, Pertinently; which none of them ever did
designedly, and, if they hap to do so by accident, none thinks they meant as
they spoke, but all mankind laughs at the odd Chance, as at a pleasant Jest.
Those that teach them might point at the things when they pronounce their
Names, as Nurses do to little Infants; and why might not Beasts learn them, as
well as Children; at least learn as much in many years, as they do in two, or
three? Indeed, some Words and Sounds, which are very often used to come into
their Brain, accompanied with some pleasing or harmful Phantasm, do, by virtue
of that concomitant Phantasm, affect them, and make them act; not from their
knowing what these words, or interjections mean, but by virtue of the
Phantasms, or Effluviums, that came along with them, and moves them; or,
because they being lodged together in the Brain, that Word or Sound, or some
other Vehement Motion of ours, excites again the same Phantasm which puts them
upon acting. Nor can we draw any parallel from some wild and Savage Men,
seeming as rude as Brutes; the Question is of their Nature, not of their
Circumstances. Could it be well proved that those Brutish Savages, though
instructed afterward, could never be brought to perfom any actions more
rationally than Brutes do, nor could ever be taught any Language to a tolerable
degree, so as to answer at all Pertinently or Intelligently, the difficulty
would be greater? But this I never heard, or read, asserted by any. Or, conld
it be well attested, that Brutes could fancy, or make choice of a Female for
being more beautiful, or were taken with the Harmony of Music, or did comport
themselves accordingly, I must confess I should much wonder. I remember that
about the year 1663. visiting my Noble Friend Sir Kenelm Digby, he told me he
was much surprised, and uneasy at a Relation made him by a Gentleman, whom he
could not suspect guilty of that Vanity, as to tell an untruth to make his
Story admired; which was, that he saw Apes dance the Ropes at Southwark Fair
(which was then held) and that they framed their Gestures and Motions exactly
according to the Music. For (says he) this, if true, shows they know
Proportion, which argues Reason, and will oblige us to seek for new Principles.
At his earnest entreaty I went to examine the business, and found it thus. A
fellow stood below on the ground with a String (which was put about the Ape's
Neck) in one hand, and a Switch in the other; who, understanding the Music,
made a little twitch with the String, or a menace with the Switch, when he
would have the Ape retire, or advance, to keep time with the Fiddles: Nay, far
were those Mock-men, the poor Apes, from being guilty of any thing that
Resembled Reason, that, when they made them dance with a lighted Wax-candle in
their hand, neither their Tutor's Instructions, nor their own Docility could
teach them to hold the lighted end of the Candle upwards, though they often
felt the inconvenience: for, the melted Wax scalded their Legs, and made them,
in the middle of their dance, steal now and then a little Scratch where it
burnt them* which they did with such a Serious and Innocent grace, that it gave
much divertisement to the Spectators. This Story I relate the more willingly,
to warn others not to give easy credit to particular Men's Narrations, whether
Travelers, or others; much less to suspect their own Principles upon such
Slight Advertisements. I returned to my Friend, and eased him of his Quandary;
for which he was very thankful; and blamed himself much for giving credit to a
Tale, to the prejudice of Evident Reason.

13. To proceed, and pursue my Theme more closely, I would be glad to know, at
least in Common, what kind Ideas, if not Spiritual Notions, Inexplicable.
of things, in this Author's opinion, those [Ideas] are. Are they Corporeal, or
are they Spiritual, or under what Head shall we rank them? If Corporeal, they
cannot be in the Mind; as Accidents, or Modes of it; the Mind being of a
Spiritual nature. If they be Spiritual, Brutes, which have not a Spiritual
Nature, can have no Ideas. Perhaps it will be answered they are not things, but
certain Modes of things: But this satisfies not; for Modes are Affections of
the Thing, or certain Manners how it is; wherefore they must be suitable to the
Nature of the Thing of which they are Modes; for a Thing cannot be such as it
cannot be: And so the question returns, what that Thing is of which those
Ideas are the Modes: Is it Corporeal, or is it Spiritual? If it be Spiritual,
then again Brutes can have no Ideas, because they have no Spiritual Natures in
them, and so they can have no Spiritual Modes: If Corporeal, then our Mind,
which is Spiritual, can have no Ideas in it; Corporeal Ideas being improper
Modes for a Spiritual Nature. I do chiefly insist upon this Objection, to show
more manifestly that the Word Idea, should have been Distinguished at first,
and Counterposed to Phantasm, and not confounded with it: Besides, my Genius
leads me when I discourse about any thing, even though I oppose it, to know
distinctly what that thing is, least I oppose I know not what; and I must
declare that I can make no conception of the word Idea by what our Moderns, and
particularly this Learned Author, has given me concerning it. For, he abstracts
from affording his Reader a distinct and clear view of it; without which his
Book, which runs wholly upon that Word, cannot be perfectly intelligible; nor,
oftentimes, his main Discourses infer any determinate Conclusions.

14. It may perhaps be replied, That every Man experiences he has those Ideas;
as also that he comes to know, by Experience that we have Ideas, gives no
distinct Account what they are.
having them in his Mind; and therefore it is a folly to enquire so
scrupulously about such things as are, in some sort, Self-known; and that it is
enough to say they are Resemblances of things, made in us by the Object without
us. To which I reply, that we indeed experience the An est of something in our
Mind (and, by the way, of something of another nature in our Fancy too) by
which we know things; but, whether it ought to be called an [Idea] or suits
with the proper meaning of this word; or, after it is called so, the Quid est
of that [Idea] or what it is (at least as to the Common Notion or Genus of it)
or what to make of it by the light yet given me by this Author, or any other I
have had the good fortune to see, I must profess I am not able to discern. All
the knowledge I have of it from him, besides that given above which confounds
me, is this, That he calls it frequently a Resemblance, N^r to say, they are
Resemblances.
Portraiture, Image, Appearanc, and such like; which still leave me more
dissatisfied than ever: For, who can have the first knowledge of a thing by a
Picture, or Resemblance of it? Let any Man see the picture of a Tree, or an
Apple, who had never seen those things themselves, nor ever should see them any
other ways; and what knowledge could it give him, but only of things of a far
different nature from a Tree, or Apple, viz. a Cloth, Board, or Paper, thus
figured and colored? Or, how can any Man know that such things are, or have
any being in nature, by a bare similitude of them. I may see the picture of
such a shaped Man, but whether that Man is, or ever was, the picture cannot
inform me; so that it might be some Fancy of the Painter, for ought I know by
the Picture. Indeed, had I known such things formerly, then a Resemblance of
them might, in that case, revive, and call into my mind the knowledge of them;
but, how it should beget the first knowledge of them, as our late Philosophers
put those Resemblances to do, is altogether impossible and inexplicable.

15. Again, since Mr. L. affirms that we know nothing, either by Direct or
Reflex Knowledges, but by having To have Ideas of our own Ideas, inexplicable.
Ideas of it; it must follow, that when by a Reflex Act I know my first Idea
got by a direct Impression, I must have an Idea of that Direct Idea, and
another Idea when I know that Reflex one, of it; and still another of that; and
so still on, all the time while I go on reflecting upon my former Knowledges.
Now, what sense can we make of an Idea of an Idea, or what means a Similitude
of a Similitude, or an Image of an Image? Each succeeding Knowledge must be
different from the former, because it has still a different Object to
represent, and that Object cannot be known without its proper Idea; and, it is
not only the immediately preceding Act which must be thus different, but the
immediately-preceding Idea too, which is the Object of each succeeding Act;
And, in what shall we conceive the difference of those successive Ideas to
consist? It may perhaps be said, that plain reason tells us it must be so,
though we know not the particular manner how it is done. I answer, The same
Reason tells us far more plainly, that it looks very untowardly, and aukwardly,
it should be so; or that there should be a Resemblance of a Resemblance: And my
advancing this Objection does oblige me to show, in due place, how both our
Direct and Reflex Knowledges may be performed after a Connatural manner,
without straining either good Sense, or the Nature of Things. Were it a
Material Resemblance, it might, by rebounding from one place to another, cause
a Resemblance of its self; but here it is quite otherwise; for the first (Idea)
it coming by a Direct Impression from the Corporeal Object without me, must
resemble It; and the Idea of that Idea (or else of my First Direct Act) which
is the Object of my First Reflex Act, must be a Similitude of an Idea that came
from the Object in Nature, and is like it; and the second Reflex Idea must
resemble an Idea, which was like an Idea that represented a thing of a quite
different, or of a Corporeal Nature; and so endwayes; which would put all our
Reflex Ideas into Confusion, as involving still others in them.

16. It Is yet as great a difficulty, if not greater, how the Soul should have a
power in its self (as Mr. L. conceives) No Operation internal or external
begins from the Soul alone.
to reflect upon its own Actions, that is, to form Ideas of its former Ideas;
it being (as I verily judge) metaphysically demonstrable, that an indivisible
Nature cannot work upon it self, or produce in its self a new Act, or a new
Idea by its own single power; or, by it self, move the Body at pleasure, as we
seem to experience in those motions we call Voluntary; or so much as have any
succession of Acts, but by means of the Body; only which (and not the Soul) is
Quantitative, and, consequently, of it self, capable of succession. The farther
explicating and elucidating which Points, are reserved to their proper places.

17. Many other Arguments against these Ideas, will, I believe, occurr
hereafter, which I at present omit, because Mr. L. not only, nor directly
opposed by this Discourse.
I would not fore-stall. But, e're I leave this point, I must do the right to
this ingenuous Author to d^clare, that it was besides his intention in his
Treatise to discourse particularly about the nature of his Ideas, and therefore
I cannot be said properly to confute, or overthrow, what he never went about
to advance, or establish: Though I cannot but judge, that it had been far more
satisfactory to his acute Readers, and most highly important to Science, To
ground all Knowledge on Ideas not distinguished from Phantasms, makes Science
impossible.
to have done so; and most necessary for his Book, since without distinguishing
his Ideas from Phantasms, and letting us know distinctly what his Ideas are,
his whole Essay is unintelligible, and all his Discourses built on the
ambiguous word [Idea] are inconclusive. And, had his penetrating Wit set it
self to that study, I doubt not but it would have exceedingly conduced both to
clear his own thoughts, and to have enlightened others. I desire then it may be
understood, that it is not in order to him only I have enlarged on this point,
but to meet with the mistakes of others also, who do customarily use the word
[Idea,] and yet, as I have good reason to fear, do not perfectly understand
their own meanings. Lastly, I thought it fit to dilate first on this point,
that I might prepare the way to my next Discourse, to which it naturally leads.

COROLLARY.
FRom this whole Discourse collected into a Summary, I deduce this Corollary,
that, since the word IDEA, according to this Author, signifies a Resemblance,
Similitude, or Image, and, consequently is indifferent to Corporeal and
Spiritual Resemblances, that is, to what is in the Mind, and what is only in the
Fancy; and that, only that which is in the Mind can be the proper Material of
all our Knowledges; hence that word is most improper to be used in Philosophy,
which is the Study of Knowledge. Also, that as taken thus undistinguisht, it
does in another regard highly prejudice all true Knowledge of Things, or
Science; in regard it confounds Corporeal and Spiritual Natures, which contain
the two General Objects of all our Knowledges; and are, besides, most vastly
disparate.

PRELIMINARY Second.
That the Elements, or Materials, of all our Knowledges are properly to be
called. NOTINOS; and what those Notions are.

1. BUT, if the word [IDEA] be Equivocal and Improper to be used in Philosophy,
as being unfit That the Elements or Materials of our Knowledges are properly to
be called [NOTIONS.]
to signify the first Conceptions of our Mind, (which are, as Mr. L. says well,
the Materials of Science) and consequently, are apt to make us entertain
Erroneous Fancies for Real Knowledges; it will be be asked what other word we
can invent which is Univocal, Proper, and not liable to signify a Superficial
Resemblance, nor dangerous to seduce us by taking Fantastical Appearances for
the true Knowledge of the Things; but is, of its own Nature, fit to express
distinctly those Solid Materials, by the Composition of which the Structure of
Science is to be raised? I reply, the word [Notions] is such, and answers all
these Intentions; and therefore this is the only word to be made use of by
Philosophers, who seriously and sincerely pursue the Knowledge of Things, and
not their own witty Conceits, or Imaginations. It Is Univocal and Unambiguous,
because Men of Art, or Philosophers, who are the best Reflecters on the
Operations of our Mind, and have the truest Right to express those Thoughts
their Art has given them, have constantly used it hitherto to signify our
simple Apprehensions, or the first Operation of our Understanding; and never to
signify Material Resemblances, or Phantasms: Whence also it claims to be
Proper. And, indeed, it has title to be such even from its very Origin and
Derivation: For, none can doubt, or ever questioned, but that the Compound word
[Cognition] does properly signify True [Knowledge,] and therefore the Simple
word [Notion] must most properly signify those simple Parts, Elements, or
Materials; the orderly putting together of which in a Knowing Power does
compound, or make (Cognition,) Whereas the particular Sense or Meaning of the
word [Idea] which denotes a Resemblance, or Similitude, does not, in its
immediate and proper Sense, in the least intimate any Order to Knowledge at
all; nor any Material, Part, or peculiar Object of it. Nor, lastly, does the
word [Notion] signify a bare Similitude, or Resemblance, which can be, and
usually is, in the Fancy; but (as will be seen shortly) the very thing it self
existing in our Mind; which is most undoubtedly a Solid Material, or Firm
Ground to build the Knowledge of Things, or Science upon it.

2. I hope I shall have candid Readers, and therefore I am not apprehensive
that any will be so captious as to object, The word [Notion] and [Cognition]
are taken here Objectively.
that I do here use an Equivocal word, as well as others, by taking [Cognition]
which signifies an Act of Knowledge, for the Object of that Act. It Is a Fate,
to which all words are obnoxious, to have some Ambiguity, or double sense one
way or other. Thus we call in our common Speech a Parchment by which we hold
our Estates [A Writing,] and a Sentence of Seneca, his, [Saying]; and so take
those words for the thing Written, or Said; though they may also signifiy the
Acts of writing, or saying. But, this is not such an Equivocalness as breaks
squares between me and the Ideists, or that on which my Exception proceeds. The
Univocalness which I assert to the word [Cognition] and [Notion] is such a one
as is taken from their Radix, [Nosco] which, notwithstanding little Gramatical
variations, does still import some Knowledge, or an Order to it; and the genuin
signification of those words, thus varied or declined, is still kept within
that same Line. Quite otherwise than is found in the word [IDEA] which is
Indeterminate to those vastly different Lines of Corporeal and Spiritual,
(which makes it highly Equivocal;) besides that it has no Rapport at all to the
Line of Knowledge from its Radix, or Original Sense. To clear then the meaning
of the word [Notion,] as it is used here from this Slight, and (in our case)
Unconcerning Ambiguity, I declare, that, there being two Considerations in
Knowledge, viz. the Act of my Knowing Power, and the Object of that Act, which,
as a kind of Form, actuates and determins the Indifferency of my Power, and
thence specifies my Act; I do not here take the word [Notion] for my Act of
Simply Apprehending; but for that Object in my mind which informs my
Understanding Power, and about which that Power is Employed; in which Objective
meaning I perceive Mr. Lock does also generally take the word [IDEA.]

3. Since I have formerly blamed the Ambiguous explication of the word [IDEA,]
it is but just it should be required What Notions are.
of me to give a more Determinate and Distinct one of the word [Notion,] which
I shall do in blunt Terms thus; [A Notion is the very thing it self existing in
my understanding.] I expect at the first hearing such a monstrous Position,
which seems to the Antiperipateticks something above Paradox, and as Mysterious
as a Supernatural Point of Revealed Faith, it will be entertained by some of
them with a kind of Amazement, by others with a Smile. On the other side, I am
so little concerned how any receive it, that I must resolutely declare that,
unless this Thesis be as True as it is Strange, it is impossible any Man living
should know any thing at all. By which the Reader will see that the Credits of
the Aristotelians, and their Adversaries, as to their being held Solid
Philosophers, does entirely lie at Stake upon the decision of this main point.
Which therefore must crave the Attention, and Soberest Consideration of those
persons, who take themselves to be concerned in the affair of Science, or in
the Search after Truth.

4. Er'e I address my self to prove my Position, I must bespeak my Reader's
Consideration, that, in a Question of Fancy is to have no hand in discoursing
about Spiritual Conceptions.
this Nature, which depends upon our Reflection on what is, or is not in our
Spiritual part, the the Soul, he must lay aside his pleasing Phantasms, and all
the Imagery, which with such a fine Raree-show uses to entertain and delight
his Fancy. The point is of a higher Nature than to managed by such Familiar
Appearances. The Ideas of Figure, Color, nay, of Quantity it self must sit out
as Bunglers, when such a Game is to be played, in which they have no Skill.
This Contest must be carried on by Means as Spiritual, as is the Subject of it;
that is, by exact Reason, or severe Connection of Terms. And, to think to draw
Intrinsecal Arguments; or to frame pertinent Answers to them, from what we find
in Material Imaginations, when the Question belongs to that part of
Metaphysics which treats of Spiritual Natures, and their Operations, is as
absurd, as it is to contend that the Knowledge of a Man is Great, or Little,
because his Body is Bigg, or Dwarfish; or to fancy that Science is to be
measured by Yards, or Inches. And, though I cannot fear any such Rational kind of
attacque as Close Connection of Terms, for the Negative, yet I grant my self
obliged to produce no less than Clearest Evidence for the Affirmative; provided
we rate Evidence, not from what seems easiest to Fancy, but from the said
Connection of Terms; only which can establish our Judgments.

5. I am to note first, that, as the Moderns grant we know nothing without
having [Ideas] of them within The Question about Notions Stated.
our minds; so I willingly acknowledge, that we cannot know any thing that is
without us, but by having in our understanding Notions of those things. Now,
say I, those Notions must be the very things themselves (as far as they are
known) in our Soul; which they deny, as incredible and Monstrous. I note,
secondly, that in my Thesis, I take the word [Thing] in the largest
Signification, as it comprehends not only Substances, which only are properly
Things; but also all the Modes, or Accidents of Substance, which are improperly
such. These Notes premised, I come to my Proof:

6. First Argument. When I simply apprehend the Thing, or any Mode or Accident
of it, this Operation of my A Notion is the Thing it self in our Understanding;
Proof 1. Because Knowing is an Immanent Act.
Understanding is within my Mind, and completed there; therefore the Thing
Apprehended, which is the Object of that Operation, must be there likewife:
For, otherwise, this Operation of my Mind, it being Immanent, and not
Transient, or passing out of my Mind to the Thing without me, cannot be
employed about that Thing, contrary to the Supposition. Nor could the Thing be
truly said to be Apprehended, unless this Operation, called my Apprehension,
had the Thing for its Object; and this within my Understanding, it being an
Internal Operation. But, that which is within me when I know it, is the Notion
of it: Therefore the Notion of it (taken, as is declared above, objectively) is
the Thing it self in my Understanding.

7. Second Argument. I know the very Thing; therefore the very Thing is in my
Act of Knowledge: But my Act Proof 2. Because the Thing Known must be in our
Knowing Power.
of Knowledge is in my Understanding; therefore the Thing which is in my
Knowledge, is also in my Understanding.

8. Though I will not allow it to be any way an an Answer to these Arguments, to
allege, that it is sufficient that Proof 3. Because a Resemblance is not the
Object of Knowledge, nor sufficient to cause it.
the [Idea] or Resemblance of the Thing be in my Mind, because it does not in
the least shock the Connection of its Terms, or show them Incoherent; but is a
mere shuffling Pretense, thrown in to avoid their Force: Yet I shall condescend
to show it impertinent, and I argue against it thus.

9. Third Argument. That only is Known, which I have in my Knowledge, or in my
Understanding; for, to know Otherwise, Ideas only could be said to be known.
what I have not in my Knowledge, is a Contradiction: Therefore, if I have only
the Idea, and not the Thing, in my Knowledge or Understanding, I can only know
the Idea, and not the Thing; and, by Consequence, I know nothing without me, or
nothing in Nature. Again,

10. Fourth Argument. Philosophy is the Knowledge of Things: But if I have
nothing but the Ideas of Things Proof 4. Because, otherwise, all Philosophy
would be destroyed.
in my Mind, I can have Knowledge of nothing but of those Ideas. Wherefore,
either those Ideas are the Things themselves, as I put Notions to be, and then
I have gained my Point; or else they are not the Things, and then we do not
know the Things at all; and so adieu to the Knowledge of Things, or to
Philosophy.

11. I expect not any direct Answer to these Reasons, yet I doubt not but Wit
and Fancy will furnish a prejudiced Proof 5. Because Similitudes cannot
possibly give us the First Knowledge of Things.
Person with Evasions; and the next will, possibly, be this, that we know the
Things that are without us, by means of the Ideas or Resemblances of them which
are within us. To overthrow which Pretense, I argue thus:

12. Fifth Argument. We cannot have the First Knowledge of any thing by a
Picture, or Resemblance, as was As was proved formerly.
shown, Preliminary 1.. 14. Wherefore, Notions, or Simple Apprehensions being
the First Notifications of the Things to our Mind, we cannot know the Thing by
their means, as is pretended, were they not more than Resemblances; that is,
were they not the very Thing.

To overthrow this Pretense utterly, and withal, to uphold and fortify this
last Argument, I advance this:

13. Sixth Argument. We cannot possibly know at all the Things themselves by
the Ideas, unless we know certainly Proof 6. Because, ere we can know the Idea
resembles the Thing right, both of them must be in the Mind, to be there
Compared.
those Ideas are Right Resemblances of them. But we can never know (by the
Principles of the Ideists) that their Ideas are Right Resemblances of the
Things; therefore we cannot possibly know at all the Things by their Ideas. The
Minor is proved thus; We cannot know any Idea to be a Right Resemblance of a
Thing, (nor, indeed, that any thing whatever resembles another rightly,) unless
they be both of them in our Comparing Power; that is, in our Understanding or
Reason, and there viewed and compared together, that we may see whether the one
does rightly resemble the other, or no. But, this necessitates that the Thing
it self, as well as the Idea, must be in the Understanding, which is directly
contrary to their Principles; therefore by the Principles of the Ideists, we
cannot possibly know that their Ideas are Right Resemblances of the Thing. Now,
if the Thing it self be in the Understanding, there needs no Idea of it; for to
be there, or to be in a knowing Power, is to be known. Again,

14. Seventh Argument. No Relation can be known without Knowing both the
Correlates: Therefore no Proof 7. Because both the Correlates must be in the
Understanding.
Idea, which being a Resemblance of the Thing must necessarily be related to
it, can be known without knowing also the Thing to which it is related as that
which is resembled by it. Therefore the Thing resembled must be known, not only
besides the Idea, but by other means than by it; which can be no way but by the
thing it self existing, in the understanding. Which Argument is enforced by
this Consideration, Proof 8. Because the Prototype, must be first known.
that when the One of the two things that are Related, or Alike, is the
Prototype, the other taken from it, or (as it were) drawn by it; the Prototype
must be first known ere we can judge that the other is like it. But the
Prototype in our Case is the Thing without us, therefore the Thing without us
must first be in our mind er'e we can judge of the other's resembling it.

15. Ninth Argument. Notions are the Meanings, or (to speak more properly) what
is meant by the words we Proof 9. Because Notions are what is meant by Words.
use: But what is meant by the words is the Thing it self; therefore the Thing
it self is in the Meaning; and consequently in the Mind; only which can mean.

16. It may be perhaps replied, that the Ideas are only meant by the Words;
because when we speak, we intend Proof 10th. Because when the thing it self is
intended to be made known, the Thing it self is the first meaning, or what is
first meant by the words.
to signify our Thoughts. I answer, that, however it may be pretended that what
is meant immediately by the words, is our Thoughts, when our own Thoughts or
Judgments about any matter, are the things desired to be known; yet, when the
Things are the Objects enquired after, as, when a Master teaches a Scholar
Natural Philosophy, or any other Truth, the Intention of the Speakers does
primarily aim and mean to signify the Things or Truths themselves; and not our
Thoughts concerning them; and, therefore, the Things themselves are in the
Intention and Mind, or are the Meanings of the Speakers, or Discoursers. And
this passes generally in all other occasions, except only when the Knowledge of
our Interior Thoughts is ultimately aimed at. Thus, when a Gentleman bids his
Servant fetch him a Pint of Wine; he does not mean to bid him fetch the Idea of
Wine in his own head, but the Wine it self which is in the Cellar; and the same
holds in all our Commerce and Conversation about things without us.

17. Eleventh Argument. Our Words are ad placitum, and have no Natural
Connection with the Things they signify, Proof 11. Because the Ideas cannot be
fore-known to our Agreement what Words are to signify, but the Things only.
but are ordered to express them by the Agreement of Mankind: Therefore what is
signified by them, must be fore-known to that Agreement. But the Ideas, or
Resemblances we have, cannot be foreknown to this Agreement, since they could
not be at all known, (being in the Mind,) but by the Words; which, not being
yet agreed on, can make known, or signify nothing. Therefore the Things which
we had naturally Foreknowledge of, and not the Ideas, are that which is
signified by Words. On the other side, since it is no less certain that the
Words do signify what is in the Mind of the Speaker, or his Notions, they must
signify the Thing in the Mind; and, consequently, also the very Things which
are without us, and which were known to us before the Agreement about the
Words, were in our Mind, when we went about to name them: And, were not this
so, Words could signify nothing, which is a Contradiction.

Corollary I. Hence that great Contest in the Schools, whether our Words do
immediately signify our Conceptions, Hence the Question, Whether the Things,
or our Notions, are immediately signified by Words, is Frivolous.
or the Things in re, (as they phrase it,) is put past all Dispute. For, if the
Objective Part of our Conceptions, which are our Notions of the Thing, be the
self-same with the Thing in re, neither the one, nor the other, is immediately
signified; because there is no one, and other, but the same. And if the
Question be put of the Thing as in re, and as in the Understanding; it is
answered, This Question takes in those several Manners of Existing, which
enters not into the Objective Notion, nor prejudices the Identity of the Thing
under either State; and so the Question is again frivolous.

18. Twelfth Argument. The same is evinced from the Verification of our Words;
as, when I say [The Glass is in the Proof 12. From the Verification of
Propositions.
Window,] the Word [the Glass] must mean the very Substance of that Glass
existent without us, and not the Idea of that Glass; for it would be False to
say, the Idea of the Glass is in the Window. Therefore the very Glass it self
which is in the Window, must be also in my Mind.

19. Thirteenth Argument. But, because Resemblances and Likenesses please them
so well, we will try what Proofs Proof 13. Because what is perfectly like, is
the same.
may be drawn from those very Words which themselves do most affect. They hold,
the Idea, or Likeness of the Thing is in the Mind. Let us consider then the
Likeness of a Man in the Understanding; or rather, because we both agree that
we have no Complete Ideas or Notions of any Suppositum, let us take one of Mr.
Locke's Simple Ideas, v. g. Extension. I ask, Is the Idea of Extension, as to
its Representation, in all Respects like that Mode as it is in the Thing; or is
it not? If not, then we can never know that Mode (at least, not clearly and
fully) by that Idea; which yet we must do, ere we can discourse of it as a
Simple Idea. And, if it is perfectly, or in all respects, like it; then it is in
no Respect unlike it; and, by Consequence, in no Respect Different from it,
(for that Difference would be an Unlikeness;) and, if it be in no respect
Different, it follows, out of the very Terms, that it is the very same, in the
Mind, and out of the Mind, which is so much boggled at in our Notions: So that,
at unawares, the Explicaters of Ideas by Resemblances, must be forced to come
over to our Position, even while they would avoid it.

20. Fourteenth Argument. To make this yet Clearer, and to set it above all
possible Confute, let us take the Word, Proof 14. This last Reason maintained
by the Instance of the Notion of Existence
[Existence,] or Actual Being. They know what that Word means, and
consequently, they they have an Idea of it in their Understanding; for it is
this which they say Words signify. This Idea then must either be in all
respects like to Existence, or in some respects; that is, in part only: Not in
part; for Existence has no imaginable Parts in it, nor any diverse Respects or
Considerations; no, not even those Parts made by the nicest Metaphysical
Abstraction of our Mind, called Act and Power; but it is One, most Simple,
Indivisible, and most Absolute Act; and thence it is called by the Schools an
Actuality, as if it were the very Nature of Act it self, without the least
Alloy of the more imperfect Notion of Potentiality, or Power. Wherefore the
Idea of Existence must either be in all respects Like Existence, or not at all
Like it; if not at all Like it, then, having no Idea or Resemblance of it, we
can never know what the Word Existence means: If it be in all respects Like it,
then, by our former Discourse, it is in no respect Unlike it; and therefore, in
no respect Different from it; and therefore it is the very same with it.

21. Fifteenth Argument. It may, perhaps, look like an Amusement, or Surprise,
to pretend the Thing is the same, Proof 15. The same Reason ab^tted by the
Natural Sayings of Mankind.
when it is perfectly like; for I do not expect that every Reader will speculate
so deep, as to see that all Likeness is Unity of Form as far as the Likeness
reaches. Wherefore, to put them out of this Mis-conceit, we will endeavor to
convince them that this Position is not a Trick of Art, but plain honest
Nature: It has been still my usual Method to show, that the highest
Speculations I advance, are abetted by the natural Notions, Sentiments, and
Sayings of Mankind; nor will I decline to bring my present Position to be tried
by the same Test. Let us take then two Quantities, (Yards for Example;) in case
we find them perfectly Alike under the Notion or Respect of Quantity, we make
account we can in true Speech say they are the same Quantity. Or, take two
Pieces of Cloth, of such a Color; and, if they be exactly alike in that
respect, unprejudiced Nature obliges us to say they are of the same Color; and
the same holds in all Substances and Modes whatever. Since then the Ideists
must grant that their Ideas are perfectly like that which they know by them,
(as they must be, as far as the Thing is known by them, because the Thing is
known only by their Resembling, or being like it,) it follows from the Consent
of Mankind, that those Ideas must, consequently, be the same with the Things
out of the Mind which are known by them; which is what we put our Notions to
be. Wherefore, the Notion we have of the Thing, must be the self-same with the
Thing known.

22. It may be replied, that the Notion of a Thing (a Stone, for Example) has a
Spiritual Manner of Being The Difference in the Manner of Existing prejudices
not the Identity of the Notion and the Thing.
in the Mind; whereas the Thing, or Stone, out of the Mind has a Corporeal
Manner of Being, and therefore it is in some respect Different from the Thing;
and, consequently, not perfectly the same with it; and so can only be barely
like it, or resemble it. I answer, It Is granted that it is Unlike it, and so
Different from it, and therefore not the same with it, as to the Manner of
Existing; but I deny that either its Existing, or Manner of Existing do enter
into the Notion, (except in the Notion of God, to whom Existence is Essential,)
or do at all belong to it, or the Thing either; but that the Notion is the
Thing, precisely according to what is Common to it both in the Understanding,
and out of it, abstractedly from both those Manners of Existing. To explicate
which, we may consider, 1. That no created Thing, nor consequently, Mode or
Accident of it, has, of its own Nature, any Title to be at all, (much less to
be after such or such a Manner;) for then Being would be Essential to them, and
not the Gift of their Creator; whose Prerogative of Self-being, or Essential
Being, is Incommunicable to his Creatures. 2. Hence the Things, and
consequently their Modes, do perfectly abstract from being, and not being, much
more from all Manners of being. 3. This appears evidently by those Words which
signify them, the Meaning of which Words is the same with our Notions. For
Example, Take Gabriel, Peter, Bucephalus, an Oak, a Stone, a Yard, Whiteness,
or what other Thing, or Mode of Thing we please; it is evident that the Sense of
them (which is the same with our Notion of them) does not at all include, hint,
or intimate Existence, or Nonexistence. Wherefore, it is set above all farther
Dispute, and (as far as I can foresee) beyond all imaginable Objection, that
our Notion of the Thing is the self-same with the Thing in Nature which is
conceived by us. Q. E. D.

23. Now, if our Soul, when it knows any Thing has the very nature of that
Thing in it, and therefore is The Eminency of the the spiritual Nature of the
Soul, gives her a Power to be all Things intellectually.
intellectually that thing (for to be such a thing is nothing but to have the
Nature of such a thing in it) it follows that, considering her precisely as
knowing a Stone, a Tree, Fire, etc. she is that Stone, Tree and Fire
intellectually, Whence we may discover how Rational, and how Necessary and
Important a Truth that saying of Aristotle is, that Anima intelligendo fit
omnia. In a word, it is due to the Nature of our Soul, as it is Spiritual, and
to the Eminency of her Essence, to comprehend after her manner the whole
Inferior Nature of Bodies, (and much more) or to be an Intellectual World, as
soon as she is her self, and depur'd from her dull Material Compart, as is
shown in my B. 3. L. 4.. 14.
Method. Nor can this making the Soul to know so much (nay, much more) be
deemed an Extravagant Conceit, or too high a Privilege for her, by any well
instructed Christian, who reflects, (as is also clearly Demonstrable in
Metaphysics) that she is made for, or is capable of a Knowledge infinitely
higher, viz. the beatifying Sight of GOD; in comparison of which the Knowing
the whole Universality of Creatures is but a mere Trifle.

24. I much fear that such Readers, who are not raised above Fancy, and have
not well reflected how all Truths, Shown that Things may have two different
Manners of Existing.
and all our Judgments and Discourses that are rightly made, do consist in the
Connection of Terms, will look upon all Efforts of Close Reason, as Chimerical,
and think them to be only a kind of Chiquaning, and little Tricks of Logic.
Wherefore, to comfort the uneasy Fancies of such weak Speculaters, I desire
them to consider how all things were in the Divine Understanding before they
were Created, and are still there; and how their Ideas, that is, their
Essences, had there another, (and that a more incomparable manner of being)
then they had in themselves afterward. From which Divine Archetypes they were
copied into Nature, and thence transcribed, by Impressions on our Senses, into
Human Understandings. This Reflection will (I hope) let them see how it is not
impossible, but Consonant to Reason, that the self-same thing may have both a
Natural, and an Intellectual manner of Existing. I note by the way, that,
whereas I have insisted so much on the Impropriety and Novelty of the word
[Idea,] our Modern Ideists will allege that Plato did make use of that word
before them, and that they do but echo him, while they use it after him. But,
I believe they will find upon Examination, that Plato meant by that word the
Essences, or Natures of Things; and, in likelihood, those very Essences in the
Divine Understanding; however some thought he misapplied it to Universal Ideas,
or Essences, subsisting alone, and not in the Individuals. Now, did our Moderns
take it in the same Sense he did, that is, for Essences, and not for
Resemblances only, I should not except against them as to that particular; but,
to use his word, and affix another Sense to it, is, as I conceive, to abuse it.

25. Corollary II. From this whole discourse, and the many several Arguments in
it, it appears evidently, that No Solid Philosophy can be built on Ideas.
unless the word [Idea] be taken as we take the word [Notion,] that is, unless
Ideas, or Notions, or whatever else we please to call them, be the very things
in our understanding, and not mere Resemblances of them, they can never reach
or engage the Thing it self, or give us Knowledge of it; that is, they can
never make us know any thing; any more than a Picture can make us know a Man we
never saw, nor ever shall or can see but by means of that Picture; that is, not
at all. And therefore, as I cannot but judge what I here advance to be True,
and withal most necessary to be told, so I am obliged, without asking leave of
any, to do that Right to Truth as to declare that those many Schems of
Doctrine, woven upon such Ideas as their Groundwork, though they be never so
Ingenious and coherent within themselves, and may be of some use in Logic to
distinguish our Notions, are both merely Superficial, and perfectly useless in
Philosophy, which is the Knowledge of Things; and can only serve to please the
Daedalean Fancies of the ingenious Contrivers and witty Descanters upon them;
but can never bring us to the Solid Knowledge of any one Thing in Nature, nor
verify any one Predication, or Judgment we make; nor enable us in our
Speculative, or even Common, Discourses about any Thing, to speak one word of
good Sense. Not that I think that Mr. Lock does still take the word [Idea] in
that unaccountable meaning; but, that the acuteness of his Natural Genius does
generally carry him (perhaps unreflectingly) to mean by that word the same I
mean by Notion; though, to say the truth, he totally abstracts from meddling
designedly with this abstruse point.

26. Corollary III. Hence also we may gain some light what Knowledge is. For,
it has been demonstrated that our 1. What Knowledge is.
Notions, on which all our Knowledges are grounded, and of which they are
Compounded, are the very Natures of the thing known; and, consequently, that
our Soul, considered precisely as knowing those Natures, or having them in her,
as in their Subject, is, as such, those very Things which are constituted by
those Natures. Wherefore, our knowing that those things are, or are such or
such (which is Complete Knowledge) is the having those things and their
Predicates of Existent, or of their being affected with such or such Accidents,
so in the Judging Power as they are in the things without; that is, the things
within her must be as the things in Nature are. Wherefore, when the Soul knows
any thing in Nature she must be that thing as it is Another thing distinct from
her; So that in a word, To know is Esse aliud ut aliud; To be another thing, as
it is another. For Example; To know the Bell is in the Steeple, she must not
only have the Bell existent in the Steeple within her, but also that the Bell
in the Steeple is without her; or is in her as another thing, which is neither
her, nor any Thing or Mode belonging to her. To explicate which hard point we
may reflect, that all the Essential Notions of a Thing (were it possible to
comprehend them all) of a Body for example, are Intrinsecal to it; as also all
those Modes or Accidents of it, the Complexion of which does constitute the
Essence of that Body; and even taking them singly, as mere Accidents, they
depend for their being on that Body as on their Substance; But it is not so
with the Natures of those Bodies, or their Modes or Accidents, as they are in
the Soul. For, they are no Determinations or Modes suitable or belonging to her
Nature as it is Spiritual, nor depend Solely on her as on their Subject for
their Existence, as all Modes in their Natural Subjects do. Whence follows,
that when she knows them, they are purely in her as Extrinsecall to her, or as
other Things; and as having their genuin Existence elsewhere, or out of the
Mind. And, in this consists the Excellency of a Spiritual Nature, (from which
we may demonstrate her Immateriality, and, by Consequence, her Immortality)
that by reason of the Superlative Nobleness of her Essence she can comprehend
the whole Nature of Bodies (though she may know other higher Natures also) all
its Accidents, its Existence without us, and whatever can belong to it; and yet
so as to stand a-loof from it, and preserve her Distance and Height above it;
and is withal through the Amplitude of her Nature, able to engraft on her
infinitely capacious Stock of Being all other things; and give them, besides
their own, (if they be inferior Natures or Bodies) a far Nobler Existence in
her self. This Definition of Knowing will, I doubt not, look like Gibberish to
short-sighted Speculaters, who have not reflected steadily on the Souls
Spiritual Operations, and on what Manner things are in the Mind: But, if each
step to it be (as I cannot doubt but it is) demonstrable, the Evidence of the
Premises, and the Necessity of the Consequence ought to obtain of every
Learned Man not be startled at the Strangeness of the Conclusion, because Fancy
is dissatisfyed. That Inferior Faculty is to be curbed and kept within its own
narrow Sphere; and forbid to meddle with Spiritual Subjects which are beyond
its reach and Skill; and are only manageable by Reason grounding it self on
such Notions as are above Matter. And, if it appears by this Rigorous Test that
our Notions are the very things as distinct from us, all the rest of it will
follow of Course by a Natural and Necessary Consequence.

PRELIMINARY Third.
That all our Science is grounded on the Things themselves; and How this is
performed.

1. BUT how can the Things be in our Understanding? since the [Thing,] in its
first and proper signification, An Objection against the Possibility of the
whole Thing being in one mind, cleared.
being an Individual Substance, is the subject of Innumerable Modes, or
Accidents, which we can never reach, or comprehend; and therefore it can never
be known by us completely, as Mr. Lock has very elaborately demonstrated at
large; and, as my self have also proved in my B. 1. L. 2. 7.
Method. This being so clear and confessed a Truth, it seems to follow hence
against us both, that neither the Ideists have any Idea of it Resembling it
fully, nor we any Notion of it, which is truly and entirely the same with it
intellectually; and so neither of us can, properly speaking, pretend to know
any Thing as we ought.

2. To clear this important Difficulty, on which the whole Affair of Science,
and the Confutation of Skepticism, Some Notes premised to clear this Objection.
seems mainly to depend, it is to be noted.

3. First, That the Notion of the Individuum, Thing or Suppositum, can never,
for the Reason now given, be Distinct Our Knowledge is such as our Notions are.
and Complete, but Confused and Imperfect. For, let us take any Individual
thing, v. g. a Stone, we shall find that it has in it what answers to the
Notion of a Thing, (or what has Being) as also of Extended, Dense, Hard,
Opacous, Dinted, etc. it is Divisible into innumerable Particles; its peculiar
Mixture consists of many diverse-natured Parts, with such an Order or Position
amongst them, etc. of all which our Senses, with their best Assistances, can
not afford us clear Knowledge; nor, consequently, imprint any Clear Notion of
that whole Thing in our Mind.

4. Secondly, That, since to know a Thing, is to have the Notion of it in our
Mind, our Knowledge must be such We can have such a Notion of a Thing (or
Essence) as distinguishes it from all other things.
as the Notion is: If the Notion be Clear, Entire and Distinct, our Knowledge
too is such; and, if the Notion be Obscure, Partial and Confused, our Knowledge
must be Obscure, Partial, and Confused likewise.

5. Thirdly, We can have such a Notion of every Individual thing, if it be not
(as the smallest Atoms are) too Confused Notions suffice for a Remote Ground of
Science.
little to be perceptible by our Sense, as (though it be Confused as to it self)
may serve to distinguish it from all other Things, and to make us know it
Exists separately from all others, and independently on them; Moreover, that it
is the Suppositum, or Subject, which has its own Nature or Essence in it, and
also all the Modes or Accidents belonging to it. Thus, when we see a Bag of
Sand, or Wheat, poured out, our Senses acquaint our Mind, pre-imbued by some
common Notions, that each Grain can exist separate; and has, sustains, or gives
Being to its own Accidents, without the Assistance of any of its Fellow-Grains.

6. Fourthly, This Confused Knowledge of the Thing, in gross, is sufficient for
such a Degree of Science of it, as Only Distinct or Abstracted Notions are the
Immediate Ground of Distinct Knowledge or Science.
we can have in this State. For though we cannot have a distinct Knowledge of it
all, taken in the Lump, and therefore do not pretend to have Science of it thus
considered, nor of each Considerability in it taken by Detail; yet, we know
that Confusedly it contains in it self what answers to all the many distinct
Conceptions we make of it, which are the Ground of all the Science we have;
they being all stored up and amassed in the Thing, and apt to be drawn or
parcell'd out thence by our Abstractive Considerations of it.

7. Lastly, That our Distinct Knowledge (or Science) is built on our Distinct
Notions of the Thing framed in Science thus grounded, is truly called, The
Knowledge of the Thing.
our Minds by Impressions on the Senses, which are many, and the Manners of
their affecting us also manifold. Hence our Soul, in this State, can have no
Distinct or Clear Knowledge of the Thing, but by piecemeal, or by Distinct,
Different, Partial, Inadequate, or (as they are generally and properly called)
Abstract Notions; as Mr. Lock has frequently and judiciously exemplified in
the several Conceptions or Notions we have of Gold; which we may consider, as
yellow, heavy, solid, malleable, dissolvable in aqua Regia, etc. Whence, though
it be, perhaps, impossible for us to reach all the Considerabilities that may
be found in it, which ground our Different Notions; yet each Notion we have of
it, being Distinct from all the rest, and being truly the Thing, as far as it is
thus Considered; hence we can have Science of the Thing, though confusedly of the
whole, yet Distinctly of it in part, by such a Notion, as far as it is
conceived by that Notion; notwithstanding our Ignorance of other Considerations
of it; those Abstract Notions being in our Mind, (unless they hap to be
Subordinate, as General and Particular ones are,) perfectly Distinct from, and
Exclusive of one another. Thus we can have Abstract Notions of Length, Breadth
and Thickness in Bodies; or (which is the same) we can conceive Bodies
precisely as they are Long, Broad and Thick; and Mathematicians can frame many
Sciences of Bodies, as thus conceived; and discourse Orderly and Clearly of
each of those distinct Notions, that is, of the Thing, as precisely such;
without meddling with Rarity, Density, Solidity, Fluidity, Heat, Cold,
Moisture, Dryness, or any other Physical Consideration found in the same Body:
Though each of these last also may, for the same Reason, (viz. their Clear
Distinction from all the rest,) be discoursed of with equally Clear Evidence;
and ground as many several Subordinate Sciences in Physic, as the other did in
Mathematics.

8. By what is said, it appears, that all Science, or all Philosophy, being
grounded on these Abstract or Distinct Abstracted Ideas, though Exclusive of one
another, do include or connocate the Thing.
Notions of the Thing, it can be truly said to be the Knowledge of Things; and
that unless this be so, there can be no Philosophy. This Position Mr. Lock has
ingenuously asserted: Whether he holds to it exactly, or no, will be seen
shortly. Though, in case he should be found to deviate from it, it is not peculiar
to him, but a far more Common Error in our Modern School-Philosophers; and, I
fear, in all the Ideists: For these Gentlemen, as soon as they have got such
Ideas into their Heads, and expressed them by Abstract Words, as Rationality,
Extension, Roundness, Length, etc. they, finding this Abstract Conception in
their Minds, and experiencing that they can discourse about it Scientifically,
do presently begin to imagine that those Ideas have got rid of the Thing, and
hover in the Air (as it were) a-loof from it, as a little sort of shining
Entities; and thence have of themselves a Title to be a Competent Groundwork
to build Science on. They Character them to be Resemblances, which is a Conceit
easy to Fancy; and so they set themselves to contemplate them, and employ
their Wits to descant on them. They discourse of them, and them only; for they
do not endeavor to show clearly how those Ideas do engage the solid Nature of
the Thing. Whence it must needs happen, that in case those Ideas chance to be
mere Material Resemblances, or Phantasms, the Knowledge built on them is purely
Superficial and Imaginary; nor can have any more TRUTH in it, than a
Looking-glass, which represents to us a well-proportioned Edifice; or a Dream,
which (as it sometimes lights) is composed of Fancies pretty well Coherent with
one another. Lastly, which is worst of all, they make Truth, which can have no
Foundation, but in the Things which Creative Wisdom or Essential Truth has made
and established, to consist in the mere Agreement of those Ideas. Whereas they
ought to make it consist in this, that those Abstracted Conceptions, or Notions
of ours, are the Thing it self thus partially considered; and also, that our
Judgments or Discourses of them, and all Truths whatever, do wholly consist in
this, that those Partial Conceptions of ours are found to be Identify'd in the
Thing we Judge or Discourse of. It Is the Thing we divide, (as it were,) or take
in pieces by those Abstract or Partial Notions of it; and, therefore, it is the
Parts (as it were) of the same Thing we put together again, and Identify when
we compound Propositions or Judgments.

9. In a word, They make the Abstractedness of those Ideas to be Exclusive of
the Subject or Thing; whereas I This Point farther explicated, and enforced.
make it only Exclusive of other Notions, but to Include and signify the Thing
or Subject, according to some Consideration, or (as it were) Part of it; in the
same manner (to use a grosser Example) as the Hand or Foot signify the Man or
Thing to which they belong, according to his Power of Handling, or Walking.
Hence I hold, that Whiteness, Breadth or Hardness in the Wall, do signify and
import the Wall it self, precisely quatenus, or as it is White, Broad and Hard.
Whence I affirm, that all Science, which consists of those Abstract and
Mutually-distinct Notions, as of its Materials, is truly a Solid (though
inadequate) Knowledge of those very Things; and not of Notions, or Ideas,
aparted from them really, or as Distinct kinds of Beings Existing separately
from it: Which if they were, we should be never a Jot the wiser for knowing all
the Ideas in the World, nor ever arrive at true Philosophy, it being the
Knowledge of Things, and not of Resemblances: Especially, since (as was
demonstrated in my former Section) those Resemblances can never give us
Knowledge of the Things themselves.

We may draw farther Arguments to prove our Position, that all our most
Abstract Notions do include or connotate the Thing or Subject, from all our
Abstract Notions or Ideas, whether they be Essential, or Accidental. To begin
with the former.

10. Arg. 1. It Is impossible to conceive Humanity, for Example, without
connotating Homo its Suppositum; therefore Proved, because Abstract Notions, if
Essential, do evidently include the Thing.
that Abstract Idea, [Humanity,] must signify the Thing, or [Homo,] according
to what is his Essential Constitutive. The Antecedent is proved. The Notion or
Idea of the Definition is the very Notion or Idea of the Thing defined; but the
Definition of Humanity, viz. the Complete Essence of a Man, includes Man in its
Notion; therefore [Humanity,] which is the Thing defined, does also include the
Thing, or [Man,] in its Notion. Wherefore [Humanity,] though expressed
abstractedly, because it is but one Part, as it were, of the Entire Suppositum,
(though it be the principal part of it,) does signify the Thing, or Man,
according to his Complete Essential Form or Constitutive. The same Argument may
be made of any other Essential Idea. Let us examine next the Ideas or Notions
of the Modes or Accidents of Things, and try whether they exclude the Thing, or
include it.

11. Arg. 2. The Idea or Notion of [Modes,] is, that they are the Manners how a
Thing is; and of [Accidents,] Proved, because all Modes do the same.
that they are those which do advene to the Thing, or (if I may be permitted to
strain a Word, to express properly and fully my meaning) Accidents are
Unessential Conceptions of the Thing. Wherefore, the Idea of both of them do
include the Thing in their Explications, and consequently in their Notions, and
not exclude it. Or thus, There can be no Modes of a Nothing; therefore the
Notion or Idea of a Mode involves essentially the Thing of which it is a Mode,
and to which, as such, it relates. Wherefore, the Material Part of it is the
Thing, the Formal Part [as thus modify'd] or [as existing thus] or (which is
the same) as thus conceived.

12. Arg. 3. This is confirmed, because Modes are justly conceived to have no
Being of their own, but to Exist As having no Being of their own.
by the Existence of their Subject: But, when we have a Notion of any Mode in
Nature, we conceive it as some way or other Existing; therefore their Notion
must connotate the Subject or Thing by whose Existence only they do Exist.

13. It would not be hard to multiply Arguments to prove this nice Point,
fetched both from Metaphysics, This makes or shows Philosophy to be the
Knowledge of Things.
and also from Logic, and the Verification of all Propositions, did I conceive
it to be needful. But, I see plainly, that all the Arguments in my former
Preliminary do conspire with their united Force, to make good this Fundamental
Position. For, if this Truth be once firmly established, that our Notions are
the Things themselves, as far as they are conceived by us, it must follow, that
all our Science being built on those Notions, has for its Solid Basis the very
Thing it self, and not any other Things or Nothings, distinct from the Thing
known; such as are their pretty Spiritual Looking-Glasses, those Unaccountable,
Inexplicable, Unnecessary, and Useless Things, called Ideas. And, I hope I may
rest confident that those Proofs of mine will abide the Shock of the most
Strenous Opposition; since, unless that Grand Leading Truth be Certain, it is
demonstrable that no Man living can know any thing at all. For, it is confessed,
that nothing can be known, but by the Means of those Ideas or Representations
of it: And those Arguments evince, that unless the Thing it self be in our Mind
first, those Ideas, or Resemblances cannot possibly give us any Notice, or
Knowledge of it.

14. Note First. On this Occasion we may reflect on the Sagacity of that great
Speculater and Observer of Nature, Hence Aristotle expresses the Modes or
Accidents, by Concrete Words
Aristotle; and may gather, at the same time, his true Sentiments in this
Particular; that, when he came to range all our Natural Notions into his Ten
Common Heads, he did not express the Modes or Accidents by Abstract Words, but
Concrete ones; lest his Scholars should hap to think they were certain Kinds of
Entities Distinct from the Subject: whereas they were Nothing but the Subject
or Substance it self, considered as thus affected, or thus modified: For, he
does not call them (...), Quantitas, Qualitas, as we do; but (...), Quantum,
Quale; nor (...), Relatic, but (...), Relata; or more simply, (...), Ad
aliquid: Which last is abetted by our Common Language; as, when we ask, [What
is he to me?] the Answer is, [Your Friend,] your Father, etc. Where the Words
[to me,] express formally what we call Relation; and the Words [is he,] both
signify that the Relation is a Mode or Accident intrinsecal to the Subject,
however it be Considered in order to another; and withal, that it has no
Being, but that of the Thing or Subject signified by the Pronoun [He:] Which
amounts to this, that what we call in an Abstract Word [Relation,] is nothing
in reality, but the Thing Considered thus, or in order to another Individuum,
which we call to be thus Modified, or conceived to be according to such a
manner Related. The same is observable in the rest, (...), Agere, Pati, Habere,
(...), quando, ubi, which have the Force of Concretes; for it is only the
Subject that can be conceived or said to Act, Suffer, be in such a Place or
Time, or have such a kind of Habiliment: Whereas, were it not for that reason,
he could have expressed them in Abstract Terms, (perhaps more handsomely;) as,
(...), Tempus, Lecus, Actio, Habitus, had it not been his Intention to avoid
Abstract Terms, lest the manner of Expression should represent it as a kind of
Thing, Distinct really from the Subject, and so lead Men to take a Fancy for a
Reality, as it happens in the Mis-acception of the Word [Space,] which breeds
the Conceit of Vacuum. And, he was less sollicitous to do this in the first
Predicament, called by him (...), because there was no Danger Men should take
the Essence of the Thing to be a distinct Thing from the Thing it self, as
there might be in the others* So that this ought to be embraced and
established, as a most certain and most Fundamental Maxim by all who pretend to
true Philosophy, that Whatever Conception of ours has not the Thing, or Res,
(either considered in part, or in whole,) in its Notion, has no Reality in it,
and is a mere Fancy.

Note Second, Hence we may gather the proper manner of Signifying, found in
Abstract and Concrete Words, as The Point elucidated by Abstract and Concrete
Words.
such, viz. that the Concrete Word (Album for Example) signifies directly the
Subject, and indirectly the Form or Mode conceived to be in it: And the
Abstract Word Albedo signifies directly the Form or Mode, and indirectly the
Subject; which indirect manner of signifying is properly called Connotating.

15. This uncommon Doctrine might, perhaps, sink better into the Reader's
Consideration, if it were illustrated Hence Space without Body, or Vacuum, is a
Contradiction.
by an Instance. We will take then Mr. Locke's Position of an Infinite
Imaginary Space, or Vacuum. To make good which Tenent, he imagins that Vacuum
signifies a Space without Body: Which, to my Judgment, is as much as to say, it
signifies a Contradiction, or Chimera. For, I positively deny we can have any
Notion of Space, without including Body, however we may have a Fancy of it: And
I as positively affirm, that Space can signify nothing but Body, according to
such a Mode called Space, or Quantity. For (to wave my former Proofs) I ask him
whence he had first the Notion or Idea of Space? He is too acute to hold Innate
Ideas: It was Acquired then, or wrought in him; And by what, but by the Thing,
that is, by the Body? It was the Body then which he saw; it was the Body thus
modified, that imprinted it self thus on his Senses, and caused such a manner
of Idea in his Mind. Wherefore, to conceit that we can have an Idea of Space
without Body, whereas he never had an Impression or Idea of Space, but what was
in Body, and a Mode of it; and so Identify'd with it, is to relinquish our
Solid Natural Conceptions, and run to Fancies; to abandon the Firm Ground of
all our Knowledge, the Thing, and to pursue instead of it an Aerie Nothing;
(for Modes or Manners, without the Thing of which they are Modes, signify a
mere Nothing, and can be Nothing else;) or, (which is the same) it is to discard
our well-grounded Notions, and to entertain in their Room mere Fantastic
Resemblances. The Notion of Space then being an Impression of and from the
Thing, is the Thing or the Body conceived according to that abstracted Respect
or Mode, called Space? Wherefore, to put Space beyond all Bodies, or where
there is no Body, is a plain Trucking our Natural Notions, for Appearances that
are Groundless, and coined by our Imagination. Perhaps he will say, we can
clearly Abstract the Idea of Space from that of Body; which is so far true,
that our Precise and Formal Notion of the Body, as it is precisely a Thing, or
Capable of Existing, is not the Notion of Space, which is a Mode of the Thing.
But, why must it therefore be Nothing of Body, when it is evidently one kind of
Conception or Consideration of it; that is, when it is nothing but Body, as
grounding the Notion of Space? In a word, Since Space is not of it self A
Thing, or Res, it must and can only be Modus Rei; and therefore, to Fancy an
Idea of it, which excludes Body, is to make it a Mode of Nothing, and
consequently no Mode; which is to destroy the Notion of Space, while he goes
about to refine it. This for the present, till we come to reflect farther upon
that Tenet in its proper Place.

PRELIMINARY Fourth.
Of the Particular Manner how all sorts of Notions are bred in us; and by what
way those Elements of Knowledge do first come into the Soul.

1. THE former Grounds being laid, showing what Knowledge is, and in what it
consists; the next thing The State of the Question.
that comes to be considered is, to show, in particular, the Manner how we come
to know at first; or, by what Connatural Steps, the Things, or (which is the
same) our Notions of them, which are the Materials of Knowledge, are introduced
into our Minds. And, let it be noted, that it is not my Intention here to show,
what complete Knowledges, or Judgments, are in our Soul before others in
Priority of Nature; which I have already done in my Method, Book 2. Lesson 4.
What I aim at here is, to acquaint the Reader very particularly with my
Thoughts how our Mind comes first to be imbued with both Direct and Reflex
Notions, which are the Elements or Materials, of which our Complete Knowledges
or Judgments are compounded.

2. The Difficulty of conceiving how Corporeal Things that are without us,
could get into our Soul which is Spiritual, Aristotle neglects to show
particularly how Knowledge was made.
and affect it, was so puzzling to the Greatest Philosophers hitherto, that it
has made them rack their best Wits to invent some congruous Way how this could
be performed. Aristotle, who ought to have done this, since he advanced that
Position abovementioned which required it should be done, gives us no
particular Account of it; but being resolved, it seems, to follow the sullen
Principle he had taken up, viz. Acroases ita esse edendas ut non sint editae,
left it to Posterity to find it out. Which affected Humor of his, whether it
proceeded from Envy of Knowledge to the World (an unpardonable Fault in a
Professor of Knowledge) or from Vanity, or out of Policy to bring more Scholars
to his walking School, has certainly brought much Disparagement to his
Doctrine, hindered its Currency, and helped forward by the Schools, (who
undertook to explicate him, and did it untowardly) has pestered the World with
diverse Schemes of Philosophy, either newly invented or furbish'd up afresh.
Whether he did explain after what manner we come to know, to his Scholars, I
know not; only it may seem wonderful, if he had done it, that none of them
should have delivered it down to us. But, letting Aristotle alone with his
Faults, which blemished his other great Virtues, and come to the other
Philosophers since his time.

3. These Learned Men saw clearly, that all Corporeal Agents work by Local
Motion, and that no Operation Later Philosophers were at a great puzzle about
it.
of theirs could be transacted without such Motion, at least accompanying all
their Actions, they being all of them Successive or Quantitative; and they
could not conceive how Local Motion should be received or wrought in a Soul,
whose Nature, (it being Spiritual) is incapable of it. For, it must (as the
very Notion of it imports) be made first in one part of the Subject, afterward
in another; which can with no Sense be applied to the Soul, which (it being
Indivisible) has no Parts at all. They were not so well skilled in
Metaphysics, as to reflect, that it was very congruous to Reason to affirm,
That the Notion or Nature of Things (speaking of Created Beings) did abstract
from all Existence; and therefore, that the same thing might have different
manners of Existing, and be in our Soul Spiritually, though out of it
Corporeally: And, those few who did apprehend the thing might thus exist in the
Soul when in it, were still at a Nonplus how it could get into it. Perhaps the
Difficulty of explaining this, might be one Reason, why Cartesius, not knowing
how to give an Account of this, thought fit rather to study, how he might avoid
giving any Account at all of it, and thence recurr'd to the Position of Innate
Ideas. At least, this is the best Excuse I can make in his behalf, for
embracing a Tenet so totally praeternatural; in case (as his Words give us just
occasion to think) it were really his Doctrine.

4. The Schoolmen, whose way it is, when they are at a Plunge how to find out a
Reason for any difficult How the Schools explicated this Point.
Point, to create some Entity which God and Nature never made, and then to
allege 'twas that Entity which did the business; invented their Species
Intentionales; which, if they were not the same with our Notions, or the Things
in our Knowledge, were mere Resemblances coined by Fancy, as our Modern Ideas
generally are. But this raised a new Difficulty, instead of laying the old one:
For, besides that those Species were such unaccountable things, that none knew
what to make of them, or under what Head to rank them, they could do the
Question no Service at all: For, if they were Corporeal, they could only affect
the Soul by way of Local Motion; of which, being Spiritual, she is not capable.
And, if they were Spiritual, it will be asked, How they came to be such, being
caused by a Corporeal Agent; as also, how, being sent from a Body, they could
get into the Soul, or by what Vehicle? Being thus at a Loss, they invented
another Entity, called Intellectus Agens; whose Office it was to depure the
Phantasms from their Dross of Materiality, that they might become fit, thus
refined, to be received in the Soul. But this still multiplied more
Difficulties, and solved none. For, First, What other Reason had they from
Nature to put such a Power in the Soul? Or what other thing was it good for,
but to purify the Species? If it had no other Office, nor served for any thing
but to do this Job, it is manifest 'twas invented gratis, to get rid of the
Difficulty that stunned them, and taken up for an Asylum Ignorantiae, when they
were hard put to it, and wanted something else to say. Secondly, Were those
Phantasms, before they were Spiritualized, in the Soul, or Intellectus, or out
of it? If in it, the old Question returns, How got they thither? If out of it,
How could the Soul's Acts of Understanding, which are Immanent Acts, become
Transitive, and affect a Thing which is without her? Thirdly, Since the
Understanding, or this Intellectus Agens, can only work by Knowledge, how could
it have this Power to alter the Natures of things, or turn them from Corporeal
into Spiritual, when as yet it had no Knowledge at all in it, as before those
Species were refined and fitted to be received in it, it had none? Lastly, Are
those Species they put, when purified, perfectly like the Thing, or
imperfectly? If perfectly like, then they are the same with it, as our Notions
are; and so, the Thing it self is in the Soul, and then those Species of theirs
are to no purpose; for the Thing being there in Person (as it were,) there can
need no Proxy of Species to stand for it; nor can it bear any Sense to call the
Thing a Species of it self. If they be imperfectly like the Thing, they are no
more but Resemblances of it; and then, it is already abundantly demonstrated,
that the Thing can never be known by them: So that they could make nothing
cohere how our first Rudiments or Materials of Knowledge could get into the
Soul, or how the Thing could come to be known by them.

5. The Ideists, on this Occasion; have taken two ways, and both of them very
short ones; which is to skip over How the Ideists behaved themselves as to this
Point.
all those Difficulties at one Leap. The Cartesians tell us in one Word, That
God gave the Soul her Ideas (or, as some of them say, some of them) at the same
time he gave her her Being; and that, by having those Ideas in her, she comes
to know; and, so, by making this quick work, the Question is at an End. This is
soon said, but not so easily proved. Some Rubs I have put in the way of this
Pretense, to hinder its Currency, in the Preface to my Method, and in the Book
it self, as Occasion presented; and shall add many more, in case their
Opposition shall invite me to it. But; what needs any more, since Mr. Lock has
already Confuted that Position beyond possibility of any Rational Reply? Other
Ideists there are, who think it their best Play to abstract totally from that
hard Question; and, finding, by Experience, that they have Ideas and
Resemblances in their Head when they know, they content themselves with That,
without proceeding to examine distinctly what they are, or how they bring us to
the Knowledge of the Things in Nature. These Men do certainly act more
prudently than the former; for, it is much more wise and safe, in order to the
Common Good of Learning, to wave an obscure Point totally; than, by advancing
false Positions, in a matter of universal Concern in Philosophy, to affirm what
cannot be maintained. Though I must declare, that I cannot see but that such a
Fundamental Point, which influences the whole Body of Science, ought not to be
pretermitted. For which reason I have thought fit to lay the Grounds for it in
the two first Lessons of my Method, reserving a more particular Account of it
till further Occasion should be presented; which seems to offer it self at
present.

6. Yet I do not judge this Opportunity so pressing or proper, as to oblige me
to treat such a large Point fully, or How far the Author engages to clear this
Difficulty.
to set my self to demonstrate and smooth every Step I take in this untrodden
and rugged way. This of right belongs to that part of Metaphysics that treats
of the Nature of the Soul; and, particularly, as it is the Form of such an
Animal Body; which may not improperly be called Physics; or Animasticks.
Besides, it were too great a Boldness to pretend to pursue such an abstruse
Point quite thorough with Evident Demonstration. Yet I think I may promise my
Readers, that the Positions I shall lay down orderly to clear it, will have
that Coherence amongst themselves, and be so Agreeable to the Natures of
Things, and to the Maxims of diverse other Sciences; that it will be hard, in
just Reason, to find any considerable Flaw in it. I take my Rise from the
remotest Principles that can concern that Point, and these are my Thoughts.

7. It belongs to the Divine Wisdom to carry on the Ordinary Course of his
World by Causes and Effects; and, The First Cause carries on the Course of
Second Causes by Immediate Dispositions.
on the Matter's side, by Dispositions to further Productions. Thus Wood is
heated by Degrees, e're it becomes Fire, and breaks out into a Flame; and, in
the Generation of every thing in Nature, there are are many Previous
Alterations of the Matter, ere it acquires Another Form, or becomes Another
Thing.

8. Wherefore it belongs also to the same Wisdom and Goodness of God, as he is
the First Cause, that if, in the And therefore he assists Nature, if Disposed,
when it cannot reach.
Ordinary Course of the World, the Subject be disposed for something that
cannot be compassed by the Power of Second Causes, to step in to Nature's
Assistance, and help her immediately by his own Hand. Thus, when the
Individuality is completed, that is, when the Potentiality of the Matter is
Ultimately Determined and Particularized by Second Causes, so that it is become
distinct from all other Entities, or apt to be This, and so fitted for
Existence; which Existence, Second Causes cannot give: God, whose Generous
Bounty stands ever ready to bestow unenviously on his Creatures all the Good
they are capable of, does give them Existence immediately by himself.

9. Therefore, if there can be such a Disposition in the Brain of an Embryo,
that (grown riper) it is apt, as Therefore, if the Matter can be Disposed for a
Rational Soul, GOD will give it.
far as is on the Matters side, to act Comparatively, which is the Disposition
for Rationality: And that this cannot be done, but by having a Form in it of a
Superior or Spiritual Nature, which Second Causes cannot produce; it is
certain, God will, by himself, assist it, by infusing such a Form.

10. There can be such a Disposition in the Brain of an Embryo to work
Comparatively, that is, to Judge and Discourse; There can be such a Disposition
in Matter.
since we experience that we do this actually now, in part, by the means of the
Brain, or something that is near it, or belongs to it.

11. Wherefore, since this cannot be done without having those Materials in us,
of which, Compounded or Compared, Therefore, some Material Part, by which
immediately the Soul has Notions from the Object.
we are to Judge and Discourse, which we call Simple Apprehensions, or Notions;
it follows that there must be such a Disposition in some Bodily Part, as to
convey into the Soul such Notions.

12. Wherefore, since Bodies, in their whole Quantity, or Bulk, cannot be
conveyed by the Senses into the Brain, Therefore Effluviums are sent from
Bodies, to that Part.
the Author of Nature has ordered that all Bodies, upon the least Motion of
Natural Causes, Internal or External, (which is never wanting) should send out
Effluviums, or most minute and imperceptible Particles; which may pass through
the Pores of those Peruious Organs, called the Senses; and so, be carried to
the Brain.

13. This Natural Compound, called [Man,] is truly One Thing, and not
aggregated of more Things Actually Therefore Man is truly One Thing, which is
Corporeo-Spiritual.
Distinct; since the Form, called the Soul, did (though not so Naturally, yet) as
necessarily follow out of the Disposition of the Matter, (taking it as
Seconded, and its Exigency and Deficiency supplied by the First Cause,) as the
Form of Fire, or of any other Body in Nature, does out of the Dispositions
properly Previous to that Form: And, therefore, does as truly (by Informing
that Matter) Make or constitute the Man One Thing, as any other Corporeal Form
does any Body in Nature.

14. Therefore there must be some Chief Corporeal Part in Man, which is
immediately united with the Soul, as Therefore some Chief Part in him which is
primarily Corporeo-Spiritual, or has both those Natures in it.
the Matter with its Form, and, therefore, is Primarily Corporeo-Spiritual, and
includes both Natures. Whence, when that Part is affected, after its peculiar
Nature, Corporeally; the Soul is affected after its Nature, that is,
Spiritually, or Knowingly; which Part Cartesius thinks is the (...), or
Glandula Pinealis.

15. Therefore the Manner how, and the Reason why those Corporeal Effluviums do
come to affect the Soul, Which is affected according to both those Natures,
because of their Identification in that Part.
and cause in her Spiritual Notions of the Thing, is because of the immediate
Identification of the Matter and Form, in that part; whence follows, that the
one cannot be affected, but the other must be affected too after its Different
manner, proper to its Distinct Nature. In the same manner (abating the
Diversity peculiar to each of those Natures) as, when the Matter of Wood is
wrought upon, the Form of it, or the Complexion of Accidents, (making up one
Thing with it,) does also suffer Change. Whence, by the way, is seen the Reason
of that received Maxim, that Actiones and Passiones sunt suppositorum: So that
it is the whole Thing which acts or suffers, though according to this or that Part
of it; and hence it is that the Whole Thing is conceived, though by an Inadequate
Notion we conceive but but one Part of it (as it were) distinctly.

16. This Part immediately informed by the Soul as it is Spiritual, (which we
will call the Seat of Knowledge,) must, The Peculiar Temper of that Part
consists in Indifferency.
whatever it is, be of a Temper the most Indifferent to all Bodies, and to
their several Modes as can be conceived; and (as far as Matter can bear)
Abstract from them all; both that it may be connaturally more sensible of the
Different Effluviums by which their several Natures are to be understood; as
also more fit to beget in the Soul Universal Notions, such as are those of Ens,
or Being; by which all the Negotiation of our Interior Acts of Judging and
Discoursing is managed. Though I am apt to judge that those General Notions are
also caused when the Impression is Confused or Indistinct, as those of Ens or
Being are; and the same is to be said of the Rest in proportion. Thus, when we
see a Thing a-far off, and have but a Confused View of it, it only appears to
us to be something, we know not, particularly what, or A Thing; without making
us know in the least, what Kind of Thing or Body it is. Afterward, coming
nearer, we discern it moves it self; whence we gain the Notion of a Living
Thing: Then, approaching still nearer, we, by a more distinct Impression, know
it is a Horse. And, lastly, when it is within convenient Distance to give us a
perfectly Distinct View of it, we know it is such a Particular Horse of our own.

17. That Part, called the Seat of Knowledge, must, moreover, be the most
Sensible, and the most Tender that can That Part very Tender and Sensible, yet
not Tenacious.
be imagined, that (as was said) the least Effluviums may affect it: And yet it
must not be of a Glutinous Nature, so as to entangle them, and make them stick
there; but that, reverberated thence, they may light in some near adjacent
place, to serve, by their renewed Impulses afterward, for the Use of Memory,
and to excite again former Knowledges; as also, (as will be shown,) to cause
Reflex Acts. That it must not be in the least Glutinous, appears hence
evidently, that, did the Effluviums stick there, we should, whether we would or
no, perpetually contemplate or think of those Objects; which would also hinder
our Perception of others, by mingling the former Effluviums with those which
supervene.

18. The orderly disposure of the world, by Gradual steps arising from less
perfect Natures to those which That part the most Noble of all Material Nature.
are more Noble, and more Perfect, does evince that this Part called the Seat
of Knowledge, is the most Supremely Noble production of Material things, and
nearest allied (as it were) to Spiritual Nature that can be imagined; so that
all the best Perfections that are to be found in Corporeal things, are centered
in it. Whence, though it is too rude to affirm with a certain learned Physician,
that the (...), is a baser part of Man's Body than the Intestinum Rectum; yet I
cannot approve of Cartesius his Conceit, that it is a Glandule; which is one of
the Ignoblest parts we have; but judge it has a peculiar Temperature of its
own; not only specifically distinct from other parts, but that they are scarce
in any degree to be paralleled to it.

19. Whether amongst its other Special Qualities it partakes of the Nature of
those Bodies which in the dark Perhaps it is Reflexive of Light, or Lucid.
do reflect Light; and that the Glossy and Lively Appearances and Resemblances,
which we call Fancies, or Phantasms, do spring thence, I leave to others to
determine. I think it is the Interest of those who make the Septum Lucidum to be
the Seat of Knowledge, to embrace that Opinion.

20. Those Effluviums sent out from Bodies, have the very Natures of those
Bodies in them, or rather are themselves The Effluviums have in them the
Naturee of the Bodies whence they are sent.
Lesser Bodies of the Self-same Nature, (as the smallest imperceptible parts of
Bread and Flesh, are truly Bread and Flesh) which are cut off by Natural Agents
from the great Lump; and, therefore, by Application of themselves, they imprint
the very Body it self, or a Body of that Nature, on that material part which is
the Seat of Knowledge. Whence the Soul being, at the same time, affected after
her manner (or Knowingly) as that part was affected, she has also the very
Nature of that Body (as far as the Sense exhibits it) put in her by that
conformable Impression, when she has a Notion of it.

21. Therefore those Effluviums striking the Seat of Knowledge, and immediately
(as has been said) falling off from They affect that Part, as Things Distinct
from the Man.
it, do affect it as a Thing distinct from the M^n. For they are not there as
belonging at all to the Intrinsecal Constitution of the Body, but as mere
strangers to it: Whence the Soul has the Nature of that Body in her (and
consequently is that Body) as it is another Thing from her, which illustrates
the Explication of knowing given formerly; and that it is to be another thing as
it is another.

22. The Reason why those Effluviums, containing the Essence or Nature of the
Bodies whence they flow, do not Why they imprint Abstract Notions.
breed a Notion in the Soul of their whole Essences is, because they are
conveyed to that part by many different Conduits the Senses; which being
diverse, and each of them (according to their circumstances) apt to be affected
diversely, do therefore receive and imprint them after a different Manner. For
example, those which, by the smart motion of the Air, do come in through the Drum
of the Ear; and consequently by the Auditory Nerve which is joined to it, and
immediately conveys them to the Seat of Knowledge; do affect it with a kind of
Vibration, or (as we may say) Soundingly. Those which come in by the Eye,
affect it Luminously, or as accompanied with Light, and so of all the rest;
whence are caused in our Soul all our Distinct, or Abstracted Notions of the
Thing, or (which is the same) of the Nature of the Thing, in part, or according
to such a Consideration of it; on which, because of the Distinctness, and
consequently Clearness of those impressions, all the Science we have of the
Thing is grounded.

23. There is, moreover on the Soul's side, which is the Subject The Peculiar
Nature of our Soul, renders those Notions perfectly distinct and Indivisible.
that receives those Impressions, another thing highly conducing to make our
Notions yet more Clear and perfectly Distinct, which deserves our best
Reflection. It Is this, that, the Nature of our Soul being Indivisible, it gives
an Indivisibility to all those Notions, or Natures in her; which, as they
existed without her, and were conveyed into her by Effluviums, being Corporeal,
were Divisible, and therefore something Indistinct and Confused: This appears
clearly in most of the Objects about which the Soul is conversant, perhaps, in
all; viz. in Figures, Points, Lines, Superficies, Instants, Measures,
Comparisons, Predications, Respects, Negations, Denominations, Relations, etc.
For example, There is not, perhaps, in all Nature any Body Perfectly, or
Mathematically, Flat, Sphaerical or Triangular; or just a yard, nor any
Duration marked out to be just an Hour; but, by reason that Bodies are affected
with quantity, which is perpetually variable by a world of Agents of diverse
Figures assaulting it; as also because of the Divisibility of Quantity in
infinitum, it is warpt from those Exact Figures, or deviates from those Just
Measures: Whereas, on the contrary, those things, as they exist in the Soul,
are adjusted and Stinted even to an Indivisible; so that the very least
imaginable Consideration, added or detracted, quite alters the Notion to
another Species, Now, nothing can be so concisely Distinct from another, or
more impossible to be Confounded with it, than what is so comprised within its
own Bounds, as to be This and no other, or so much and no more, even to an
Indivisible. Whence it is demonstrable that the Thing, as in our Soul, or as
standing under our Notion, or Conception, is a most Proper Ground for that
Distinct and Clear Knowledge called Science. This is evidently seen throughout
the whole Body of the Mathematics; and the same will be found by Reflection in
all other Sciences whatever.

I note here on the by, that this Power or Faculty of the Soul, which is so
proper and so natural to her, of Reducing all things in her from the
Indistinctness found in them, as they stand in Nature, or from Divisibility to
Indivisibility, does ground most evident Demonstrations of her Immateriality,
and consequently, of her Immortality, were it pursued home.. But this is not my
business at present.

24. That Part, called the Seat of Knowledge, can be affected with many
coherent Impressions at once, which Whence Complex Notions come.
cause in the Soul Complex, or Compounded Notions. This is too evident to need
any Dilating on it, I call those Impressions coherent, which are caused by
Effluviums making singly different Impressions either from the same Thing, or
the same sort of Thing. But, it is on this occasion to be well noted, that,
lest our Knowledges or Discourses be lost in a Crowd, or run astray in a
pathless Wood of Notions disorderly aggregated, the Art of Logic is absolutely
necessary, to range and distinguish our Notions into Common Heads, and to
descend from those General Heads all along by Intrinsecal Differences Method to
Science, Book 1. Less. 3. 2.
; that is, to divide them by more and less of the Common Notion, so to keep
them still within that Line or Head; without which they must needs interfere
and breed Confusion. This Method of Distinguishing and keeping distinct our
Notions, is as necessary for Scientifical Discourses, as it is for an Army to be
Marshalled in Rank or File; without which it is but a Medly or Confused
Multitude. Whence, those who slight this Methodizing their Notions, must
necessarily, in rigorous Reason, talk Ramblingly; though perhaps ingeniously,
according to such a sort of Wit as Men use when they would maintain Paradoxes;
or, as Erasmus used to praise Folly.

25. It being demonstrable in Metaphysics, that whatever is only in Power to
have a new Act, cannot of it The Soul cannot Alone produce any New Act in her
self,
self produce that Act in it self, unless it be wrought upon first by some
other Agent which is in Act; and much less can such a Power do this, as is of
an Indivisible or Spiritual Nature, in regard it has no Parts, one whereof
being in Act it self, may produce an Act in the rest; as it happens in the
Wheels of a Watch, or in our Bodies, when one part of them moves another: It
follows hence, that our Soul can produce no new Act, either of Memory, or of
Reflection upon her own former Acts, nor of Thinking or Willing, etc. without
being first affected by some Object without her, or anew by some Part or
Particle within the Man; which, being in Act it self, may cause those new Acts
of Knowledge in her.

26. The Effluviums, which, by affecting the Seat of Knowledge, gave her to
know at first, are the properest But by the Phantasms exciting her anew.
Agents to produce connaturally these new Acts of Reflection or Memory; in case
it can be found that they are duly qualified for such an Efficiency.

27. Those Effluviums (as was proved above) not sticking on that part which is
the Seat of Knowledge, do consequently How Reminiscence is made.
fall off from it, and are lodged near it; whence it is consonant, that That
Part also having its Effluviums when thus solicited by the Impulse of those
Atoms sent from without; and therefore (all Natural Action causing Reaction;)
when they rebound thence, they carry away some minute Particles of the said
Part. Wherefore these Outward Effluviums, thus imbued, and qualified with some
tang of the Seat of Knowledge, when they come to be Excited again by some
Exterior or Interior Causes, must affect it afterward accordingly; and
thence they become duly qualified to cause a Notion of it as Fore-known, which
we call, to reflect upon it, or remember it. By which we see how Reflection and
Reminiscence are caused by the new Impulse of those former Atoms to the Seat of
Knowledge, tinctured with some Particles of that Part it self. For which
Reason, the oftener this is done, the Memory of it is more Easy and Lively.
Whence is seen, that there is no need of multiplying succeeding Ideas, to know
the preceding ones, when we have Acts of Reflection; a new Impression of the
Effluviums or Phantasms, thus qualified, repeating still the same former Notion
with the Connotate of Foreknown.

28. Memory and Remembrance are inexplicable, without putting those
first-imprinted Atoms to reside still in Memory and Reminiscence, inexplicable,
unless Phantasms remain in the Brain
the Brain, and to be excited there anew. For, were this put to be performed by
a mere Motion upon the Nerve (as most of our Modern Philosophers think,) the
Object being gone, that Motion would quickly cease. Nor could the same Motion
be connaturally revived but by the same Object, which is seldom at hand to make
it again as often as we have occasion to remember, as Experience shows us. Much
less could the Remembrance of Sounds or Tunes, in Man or Birds, be possibly
explicated, unless those repelled Atoms, lying in Order, and striking afresh
the Auditory Organ, did repeat the same Impression they had formerly. For, to
put Millions of Motions to continue perpetually playing in the Fancy, and (as
they needs must) interfering with one another, would destroy all Harmony, and
breed a strange jarring Confusion.

Note, that Reminiscence is oft-times made in us by using our Reason, gathering
or recollecting former Notions The manner how Reminiscence is made in Brutes
by others that orderly succeeded them; in the same manner as we investigate
Causes from their Effects: Whereas in Brutes it is performed merely by a new
Appulse of the former Atoms to that part in which the Imagination consists;
which being the most supreme in the Animal, has a Power to Agitate the Animal
Spirits, and move the Body agreeably to those Impressions; as is found also in
Man.

29. The same Excitation of those particles thus imbued, causes also Reflex
Knowledge of our former Operations. How Reflection is connaturally made.
And indeed Reflection on our past thoughts is the same as Remembrance of them;
for we can neither Reflect on a Thing without Remembering it, nor Remember it
without Reflecting on it. But this Reflection, for the reason lately given, must
proceed from some Object or Cause Extraneous to the Soul; that is from
Effluviums in the Memory thus reexcited. For it is to be noted that as Divines
(or rather Christian Faith) tell us, that Christ having two distinct Natures in
the same Suppositum, all his Operations proper to him as such, were therefore
Theanthropicae, or such as were agreeable and belonging to both the Divine and
Humane Natures: So Man, consisting of both a Corporeal and Spiritual Nature,
and thence being a Corporeo-Spiritual Thing, all his Operations, for the same
Reason, must be Corporeo-Spiritual. Whence he has no Act purely Spiritual, or
uncompounded with the Cooperation of that Corporeal Part, which receives those
Effluviums (called by us Fancy) or without it is Concurrence. Which gives us
farther Light, to see how our Soul cannot reflect on her own Operations, but
the Fancy must go along; and, by what is said, it will be easy to conclude from
which of those parts the Operation must begin anew, viz. from that part from
which it did begin at first. Hence came that Saying of the Schools, That the
Soul has Notions, or knows, Speculando Phantasmata: which are pretty Fanciful
Words; and, though they may perhaps have a good Meaning, yet it is very
unphilosophically expressed: For it makes the Soul to speculate, which (if it
have any Sense at all) signifies to know the Phantasms or Ideas in the
Imagination, when as yet she has no Knowledge in her at all. All her Notions,
which are the first Elements of Knowledge, being caused in her by those
Effluviums, previously to her Knowing either them, or any thing else.

13. From what is said above, it is seen that those Direct Notions, which are
thus naturally imprinted, are Direct Notions, common to all Mankind, and their
Words Proper; Reflex ones Improper, and their Words Metaphorical.
Common to all Mankind in the main, (however they may in each Man differ in
some Degree) and consequently, the Words we agree on to express those Natural
Notions are, for the same reason, Proper Words; whereas those Notions made by
mere Reflection, as are those of Spiritual Natures, are therefore Improper, as
having no proper Phantasms to imprint them connaturally on the Mind: whence
also the Words that express them, are such as are taken or Translated from
Natural Objects; and therefore they are Improper or Metaphorical.

31. From this exact Distinctness of our Notions, even to an Indivisible, or
from this, that one of them is not another, Whence we come to have Negative
Notions.
our Mind has an Appendage of a Negation tacked to every Notion, so that it
becomes very familiar to her: whence she can have a Negative Notion of every
thing she conceives, while the considers it as limited, or reaching thus far,
and no farther; or being This, and no other. Of which Nature are all the Modes
of Ens, they being limited Conceptions of it; no Notion being perfectly
Positive but that of Ens or Being.

32. Hence the Soul can have also the Notions of Indivisibility, Immortality,
Immensity, and innumerable such But Negative Notions, as they are Negative, do
not abstract from the Subject.
like. But, it is very specially to be remarked, that we can have no Notions of
those Negatives as taken abstractedly from the Thing or Subject; for,
otherwise, Non Entities (formally as such) might be the Object of the
Understanding; which is impossible; for [Nothing] formally as such (I add, nor
Vacuum) can have no Effluviums sent from it to the Brain, nor consequently any
Intelligibility; nor can any possible Notion be framed of it. Wherefore
Baldness signifies the Head, quatenus having no Hair on it; Blindness, the Eye,
quatenus having no Sight; Immensity, the Thing, quatenus not capable to be
measured, etc. Hence

33. The Notion we have of [Nothing] or Non Ens, is only that of Ens in it is
whole Latitude, with a Negation How we come to have a Notion of [Nothing.]
annexed to it; in the same manner as in particular Entities, [Incorporeal]
signifies [non Corpus] or as [Indivisible] signifies [Non-Quantum] etc.

24. Hence it is that we come to conceive, and sometimes express Non Ens as an
Ens; as Grammarians do when Hence great Care is to be had, lest we take
Non-Entities, or Nothings, for Things.
they define a Noun to be the Name of a Thing, and yet make Nihil (which
signifies Nothing) a Noun Subjective, and put Adjectives to it. Whence
Philosophers must take very great Care, lest, seduced by our manner of
Conceiving Non-Ens as a Thing, they come to fancy, or judge it to be formally
something; as do the Asserters of Vacuum, and too many others in like
Occasions. For then (I beg their Pardon for my Plainness) their Discourses upon
it can be no wiser than are those Ingenious Verses, made to show how rare a
Thing Nothing is; nor, indeed, so wise: For those Poets did this Ludicrously,
to show their Wit; but these do it Seriously, and make account, that, in doing
so, they show their Skill and Wisdom; which I must think is mere Folly.

35. The Notions of Genus, Species, Subject, Predicate, and generally of all
Terms of Art which are not Fantastic, Logical Notions are Real ones.
but wisely conducing to clear and range our Notions in Order, to gain Science,
are Nothing but several Abstract Notions of the Thing, precisely considered
according to some Manner of Being it has in our Understanding. For Animal and
Homo are evidently Abstract or Inadequate Notions of Peter, taking him as he
exists in Nature: But, when we call Animal a Genus, or, Homo a Species; or,
when, in this Proposition, [Petrus est Homo,] we say Petrus is the Subject, and
Homo the Predicate, we speak of them precisely, as they exist in the
Understanding; For, in Nature, or out of the Understanding, there can be no
Universals, but only Individuals, none else being determined to be This or That
Ens, or capable of Existing: Nor can Propositions be any where, but in the
Mind. Whereas, in the Understanding, the Notion of [Animal] is really larger,
and that of [Homo] narrower; which Artists call Genus and Species. And, in the
foresaid Proposition, Petrus and Homo, which are its Parts, are as truly in our
Mind the Subject and Predicate, as that Proposition it self is there; or as the
Thing, as existing in Nature, is White or Black.

36. This then is the Test to try all the Speculations made by Logicians, and
other Reflecters or Artists, viz. The Test to try Artificial Notions.
to examine whether they suit with, and are built on the Natures of the Things
themselves, as they exist in our Mind; that they conduce to order our Notions
so, as may clear the Way to Science; and that they be not merely Impertinent
and shallow grounded Fancies, as they too frequently are; particularly, the Sea
Method to Science, B. 1. L. 7.. 13, 14.
Entia Rationis, which make such a Noise in the Schools.

Corollary II. Whence, upon the main, is clearly discovered, how all true
Philosophy is nothing but the Knowledge Hence all Philosophy is Real Knowledge.
of Things; either as they have their Being in Nature, which is done by Direct
Acts; or else in the Understanding only, which are known by Reflex ones.

37. Besides those Impressions which cause our Direct and Reflex Acts, there
are others which breed mere Whimsies How our Soul comes to have Fantastic
Notions, or (as we call them) Fancies.
coined by the Fancy, and are purely Chimerical. For our Fancy having
Innumerable Effluviums, or Atoms in it, of many Sorts, which are oft-times
agitated disorderly; hence it comes, that it conjoins and imprints Incoherent
Phantasms on the Seat of Knowledge, and so makes Apprehensions of them in our
Minds; such as are those of a Golden Earth, a Hircoceruus, an Elephant
supporting the World, a Chimera, and such like. This most commonly happens in
Dreams, conceited Prophesies, and Enthusiastic Revelations; especially those
caused by the Spleen. Nor is groundless Speculation, exempt from this Enormity.
Generally this happens when our Thoughts are Unattentive to the Things in
Nature, whose Direct Impressions keep our Fancy Orderly, and Firm. Now, there
is little Harm in our apprehending those extravagant Connexions; the Danger is,
lest Speculaters, seduced by Imagination, do come to Judge that the Things are
so in Nature as they fancy them; which must necessarily fill their Minds with
Caprichio's, and Frantic Conceits. The Ways to avoid these Inconveniences, How
to avoid being deluded by them.
are, First, To attend heedfully to the Direct Impressions from the Things
without us; and to examine whether the Connection of those Fancies be agreeable
to their Natures, or no. Secondly, To make Right and Strong Judgments
concerning those common Notions we had from Nature, which keep our Thoughts and
Discourses Steady and Solid; especially, to keep an Attentive Consideration,
that, as all these Notions came from the Thing, so they are still the Thing,
conceived according to somewhat that is in it; and to take care we do not make
them forget their Original, nor disown the Thing, from whence only, as being
Modes merely depending on it, they had any kind of Being at all; nor,
consequently, Intelligibility. Thirdly, To observe the Methodical Rules and
Maxims of True Logic, which teach us how to distinguish our Notions exactly,
and to keep them distinct, lest we blunder in our Discourses; and which do
withal show us what are the Ways how to frame true Connexions, or right
Judgments and Discourses. But, the last and best Means to keep us from being
misled by Fancy, or following its Vagaries, is, the Study of Metaphysics;
which, being built on the Highest, Steadiest and Clearest Principles, abstract
from all Fancy, and will scarce ever permit those who who are well versed in
it, to fall into Error. And, let it be observed, that nothing in the World
more perverts all true Science, than does the admitting those disordered
Fancies because, being cleanly expressed, they have sometimes a Lively
Appearance, for Solid Truths; nay, laying them often for Grounds, and
Self-evident Principles. This, this, I say, is the main Source of all
Hypothetical Philosophy, and of all Erroneous Schemes of Doctrine, not grounded
on the Natures of the Things; which, therefore, must needs be, at best,
Shallow, and Superficial; and, if pursued home to their Principles, plain
Nonsense, the usual and proper Effect of Ungoverned Fancy.

38. Of those Things that do not come in by our Senses, as Bodies do, but are
of a different or opposite Nature; How we may discourse evidently of those
Natures, of which we have no Proper Notions.
of which therefore we can have no Notion but by joining a Negation to the
Notion of Body, (such as are Indivisible, Incorporeal, Immaterial, Immortal,
and, in general, all Spiritual Things, and their proper Modes,) we can have no
proper Effluviums, or Phantasms, as is evident. Wherefore also, the Notions we
have of them, and, consequently, the Words by which we express them, are all
Improper, or Metaphorical; which, if not reflected on, will breed Innumerable
Errors. The best Notion we can frame of them, is that of Thing, with a
Negation of Body, and of all the Modes of Body joined to it; which does not so
much tell us what it is, as what it is not; or rather, it gives us a Blind, but
Certain Knowledge of what kind of Nature it must be, because it tells us of
what kind of Nature it cannot be; the Differences which constitute that Nature,
and its Opposite, being contradictory, which forces it to be either of the One
or of the other. Yet this hinders not, but we may discourse consequently, or
Scientifically, of those Things that connotate the Negation of Body, full as
well as of the Bodies themselves: For, as we can conclude evidently from the
Notion of Body, that it is Divisible, Changeable, Placeable, Moveable, thus or
thus Qualified, etc. so we may conclude, with Equal Evidence, from the Notion
of a Thing which is not a Body, that it is not Divisible, not Extended, not
Moveable, not Placeable, not affected with any Physical Qualities, etc.

39. Lastly, As for the Notion we have of God, however the An Est of such a
Supreme Being be many We can have no Proper Notion of GOD's Essence.
ways Evident and Demonstrable; yet the Notion of the Quid est of such a Being
is the most Obscure that can be imagined. For, First, Since he must have
Innumerable Perfections in his Nature, and the Notion we have of every ordinary
Suppositum in Nature is therefore Confused, and Obscure, because it grounds
many Notions which we cannot clearly conceive at once, or have a Distinct
Apprehension of them; it follows, that much less can the Divine Nature be
clearly conceived by us in this State, which comprehends all the best
Perfections found in the whole Universality of Creatures, and infinitely more.
Secondly, It Is yet harder to frame a Notion of a Being, in which those
Innumerable Perfections are not found Single, but are all of them centered in
one most Simple, and most Uncompounded Formality; which contains in it self
eminently all the Excellencies that can possibly be conceived in Creatures, and
Millions of times greater, and more. Thirdly, As we can have no Notion of a
Created Spiritual Nature, but by a Negation of what is Proper to Body; so we can
have no Notion of the Divine Nature, but by Denying of him all that belongs
properly to the Natures of such a Body and Spirit both; and by acknowledging
them infinitely short of resembling, or even shadowing him. Lastly, We have no
Notion, or Expression, that can suit with him; no, not even the most
Metaphysical ones. Ens includes Potentiality to Existence; and, all
Potentiality signifying Imperfection, must be utterly denied of him. Existence
seems to come nearer; yet, because it signifies a Formality supervening to Ens,
as it is Existent; and so is, as it were, a kind of Compart, it cannot be Proper
for his infinitely- Simple Being. And even Self-existence signifies a kind of
Form or Mode of the Subject that Self-exists. So that we have no kind of Notion
or Expression, that can perfectly agree to God's Infinite Essence; but we are
forced to content our selves to make use of sometimes one Attribute, sometimes
another, that signifies some Perfection, with [Infinite] annexed to it, which
is not found in Creatures, or which is denied of them, or is Incommunicable to
them. Whence comes that Maxim of the Mysticks, that God is better known by
Negations, or by affirming he is none of those Positive Perfections we find in
Creatures, than by applying any of our Positive Notions to him. And this is all
we can do in this State, till Grace raising us up to Glory, we come to know his
Divine Essence, as it is in its Self; (or, as we phrase it, See him Face to
Face;) in contemplating which, consists our Eternal Happiness.

40. Thus much of our Notions, which we call the First Operations of our
Understanding, and how they The Author speaks not here of Comparing Notions, or
of Judgments.
are caused in our Soul. How our Judging and Discoursing (which are the other
two) are made in it, is shown at large in the Second and Third Books of my
Method to Science.

41. If any Learned Man is dis-satisfied with this Discourse, or has a mind to
oppose it, I think I have Right to require of him two Things: The Author's
Apology for this Discourse; and what can be the only way to go about to confute
it.
First, That he would not object his own Fancies or Dis-like of it, or think
that this is sufficient to invalidate it; but, that he would go to work like a
Man of Reason, and show that This or That part of it does contradict Such and
Such a Principle in Logic, Physics, or Metaphysics. This is the only Solid
Way of Objecting, all other being but Empty Talk, and Idle Cavil. Next, I think
I have Right to demand, (since it is fundamentally necessary to Philosophy that
this Point be cleared,) that he would set himself to frame some Orderly and
Coherent Discourse of his own, built upon Evident Principles, how, or by what
particular Means, the first Knowledge of the Things without us, comes into our
Soul. In doing which, he will oblige the World very highly, and my self very
particularly: And, unless he does this, he will be convinced to find fault with
what himself cannot mend: Which will manifest that he either wants true
Knowledge, or (which is a far greater Defect) Ingenuity.

PRELIMINARY Fifth.
Of the Proper and Genuine Signification of those Words which are of most use
in Philosophy.

1. THE main Hindrance of Science, viz. The Mistake of Fancies for Realities,
or of mere Similitudes The Design of the Author here.
for Notions, being provided against; the other Grand Impediment to true
Knowledge, which is the taking Words, used in Philosophy, in an Ambiguous or
wrong Sense, is to be our next Care. The Inconveniences which arise hence, and
the ways how to detect and avoid Equivocation, are in my Book 1. Less. 11.
Method discoursed of in common; and I have here in my Second Preliminary
cleared also in common the Signification of all Abstract Words, and shown, that
they mean the thing it self, quatenus such or such; or, according to such or
such a Consideration of it as is expressed by that Word. My present Business,
to which my Circumstances oblige me, is to clear, in particular, the Notion or
Meaning of those most Important Words, which being made use of by Learned Men,
and taken by them oftentimes in different Senses, do so distract them in their
Sentiments; and, by drawing their Intellectual Eye, now to one side, now to the
other, make them so frequently miss the Mark while they aim at true Science.
Not that my Intention in this Preliminary is, to pursue the Mistakes of others,
but only to settle the True and Genuine Sense of such Words, to be applied
afterward to the Mis-accepters of them, as occasion requires; though I may hint
now and then some Abuses of them, that so I may the better clear their proper
Signification.

2. I begin with [Existence] expressed by the Word [is] which is the Notion of
the Thing, precisely considered The Meaning of the word [Existence.]
as it is Actually Being. This is the most simple of all our Notions, or rather
indeed the Method. 1. B. 1. L. 2. 14.
only Simple Notion we have, all the rest being but Respects to it. For, it has
no kind of Composition in it, not even that Metaphysical one, of grounding
diverse Conceptions or Considerations of it, as all others have. Whence all
Notions being, by their Abstraction, Distinct and Clear; this most Abstracted
Notion is so perfectly clear and self-evident, that, as it cannot need, so it
cannot admit any Explication. They who go about to explain it, show themselves
Bunglers, while they strive to approve themselves Artists. For, by telling us,
that it is Esse contra Causas, they put [Esse,] which is the Notion defined, in
the Definition; which is most absurd, and against all Art and Common Sense:
Nay, they make it more obscure than it was before, by adding [Extra Causas] to
it, which are less clear than it self was. By the Word [Causes,] I suppose,
they mean Natural ones; and so, though it gives no Clearness to the Signification
of the Word [Esse,] yet it may at least consist with good Sense; and may mean,
that the Thing was, before, or while it was not yet produced, within the Power
of those Causes, or in the State of Potentiality; and that Existence is that
Formality, or most formal Conception, by which the Thing is put out of that
imperfect State, of having only A Power to be, and is reduced to the perfecter
State of Actuality, or Actual Being.

3. As it is impossible to misconceive this selfevident Notion, so it is equally
impossible to mistake the meaning The Extreme Danger of Misconceiving it.
of the word [Existence] which properly expresses that Notion; for, if they
take the word [is] to have any meaning, relating any way to the Line of [Ens,]
or any Signification at all that is, of its Nature, purely Potential, they
quite destroy it is Notion: And, if they take it, in any Sense, for an Actuality
not belonging to the Line of Ens, they must necessarily take it to mean [is
not,] there being no Third or other such Notion to take it for; in the same
manner, as if one takes not Ens to mean A Thing, he must take it to mean
Nothing. Now, though the Goodness of Humane Nature, which abhors Contradiction,
reclaims vehemently against such an unnatural Depravation of Common Sense, as
to take [is,] while thus expressed, for [is not;] yet, taking the meaning of
the Word [Existence] as it is disguised by another Word, which is, by
consequence, Equivalent to it; those Deserters of Humane Nature, the Scepticks,
do take occasion from the altering the Expression, to misapprehend even what is
Self-evident. For it is the same Sense, (when we speak affirmatively) to say a
thing is True or Certain, as to say it is; since nothing can be True or Certain
that is not; and, therefore, when these Men talk of Moral and Probable Truth,
and Probable or Moral Certainty, which mincing Expressions mean [possible not
to be so] they in effect say, that [what is, may, whilst it is, possibly not
be;] Which manners of Expression, though they may seem to some but a mere
Unconcerning School-Speculation; and Unreflecting Men may think it deserves no
other Note, but that of being Ridiculous; yet, I judge my self obliged to
declare, that it is moreover most enormously Mischievous; and that it quite
perverts and destroys (by a very immediate Consequence) the Nature and Notion
of all Certainty and Truth whatsoever, and of Being too; and quite overthrows
all possibility of Knowing any thing at all. Had they said [I think it true or
certain] none would blame them; rather it is a Credit for such Men even to think
heartily there is any Truth or Certainty at all in Philosophy; but to join (as
they do) Moral or Probable, to Truth and Certainty, as a kind of Mode affecting
them, is to clap these most unconsociable Things, Light and Darkness, into one
Dusky Compound, to abet Nonsense, and palliate Ignorance.

4. The Notion immediately next in order to Existence, as that which has the
very least Potentiality that can be The meaning of [Ens] or [Thing.]
in the Line of Being, is that of Ens, or Thing. Wherefore the meaning of that
word can be no other but that of [Capable to be] for, no Created Thing has
Actual Being, or Existence, in its Essential-Notion, but of its own Nature may
be or not be; as, besides what is proved in my B. 3. L. 7.
Method, is seen in the very Notion of Creature; which signifies That which has
its Being from Another; which, therefore, can, of its self, be only Capable of
Being. That the Notion of Ens is distinct from that of Existence is
demonstrated Ibid.
elsewhere, and is farther evident hence, that the Notion of what has Existence
must be different from what is had by it, or from Existence it self. All Mankind
has this Notion of Thing in them; for they experience that every Thing can
exist, by seeing it does so; and they know also they are not of themselves,
whether they hold a first Being, or no; because they do generally see that
Causes produced them. Wherefore all that can be said, or thought of the word
[Ens] is, that it signifies the Thing precisely, as it is Capable of Being.

5. Whence follows, that the Abstract Terms, [Entity] or [Essence] do properly
signify [A Capacity of Being,] The Meaning of [Entity] or [Essence.]
which is the Abstract Term of [Capable of Being.] Though Entity is often used as
a Concrete for the Thing it self. Moreover, Essence is the Total Form of Ens
its Suppositum, or Subject, which adequately and entirely constitutes it such;
as Humanitas is the Total Form of Homo. I call it the Total Form, to
distinguish it from the Partial Form of Body; which, with the Matter, its
compart, do compound the entire Notion, or Total Form of Corporeity.

6. To understand which more clearly we are to Note that the Notion and
Signification of the word [Matter] The Meaning of [Matter] and [Form;] or of
[Power] and [Act.]
signifies the Thing, or Body precisely, as it is a Power to be a Thing; and
Form signifies the same Thing, according to that in it which determins it to be
a Thing Actually. We are to reflect too, that Power and Act, considered in the
Line of Being, are the same as Matter and Form; only the Former words are
purely Metaphysical, because they express the parts of Ens as Ens; in regard no
other conceptions in the Line of Being can possibly be framed of a Body, but as
it is Determinable, or Determinative, which are the very Notions of Power and
Act; whereas Matter and Form, though in Bodies they signify the same as the
former, seem rather to incline to the parts of such an Ens, or Body, Physically
considered.

7. To show literally what is meant by this saying, that Matter and Form
constitute the complete Ens, or make What Is meant literally by the common
saying, that Matter and Form compound Body.
the Subject capable of Existing, I discourse thus. Nothing as it is
Indeterminate or Common to more can be ultimately Capable to be: v. g, neither
a Man in Common, nor a Horse in Common, can possibly exist, but This Man, or
This Horse: Whatever therefore does determine the Potentiality, or Indifferency
of the Subject as it is Matter, or, which is the same, a Power to be of such or
such a Nature, (which is what we call to have such a Form in it) does make it
This or That, and, consequently, disposes it for Existence. Wherefore since the
particular Complexion of the several Modes and Accidents do determine the Power
or Matter, so as to make it Distinct from all others, it does by Consequence
determine it to be This, and, so, makes it Capable of Existing; that is, an Ens
or Thing. I enlarge not upon this Point, because I have treated it so amply in
the Appendix to my Method to Science.

8. Hence is seen what is, or can, with good Sense, be meant by that
Metaphysical, or Entitative part called The Literal Meaning of Substantial or
Essential Forms.
by the Schools, the Substantial or Essential Form; which they say, does, with
the Matter, make up that compound Ens, called Body; and that, in Literal Truth,
it can be nothing else but that Complexion of the Modes, or Accidents, which
conspire to make that peculiar or primigenial Constitution of every Body, at
the first Instant of its being thus ultimately Determined to be This. For, this
Original Temperature of the Mixed or Animal, being once settled by the Steady
Concurrence of its Causes; whatever Particles or Effluviums, or how many
soever, which are Agreeable to it, do afterward accrue to it, are so digested
into, or assimilated, to its Nature, that they conserve, nourish and dilate,
and not destroy it. Whereas, if they be of an opposite Nature, they alter it
from its own temperature, and in time quite destroy and corrupt it. To
explicate which more fully, let us consider how the Causes in Nature, which are
many times of a Different, sometimes of a Contrary Temper to the Compound, do
work upon a Body; and how they make (as they needs must) preternatural
Dispositions in it; till, when those Disagreeable Alterations arrive to such a
pitch, as quite to pervert the former Complexion of Accidents, which we call
its Form; a new Form, or new Complexion succeeds, determining the Matter to be
Another Thing; till it self also, wrought upon in the same Manner, comes to be
Corrupted, and so makes way for a New Offspring. To which, in the very Instant
it is ultimately Determined to be This, the First Being, whose overflowing
Goodness stands ever ready to give his Creatures all that they are Disposed or
Capable to have, does, with a steady Emanation of Being, give his Peculiar
Effect, Existence.

Corollary. The Reason why our Moderns do so oppose Substantial or Essential
Forms, are reduced to two Heads: The Reason why some Moderns oppose Substantial
or Essential Forms.
First, Because they conceited the Form was a kind of Distinct Thing, or at
least a part of a Thing Supervening to the Marter, its Compart, and Compounding
the Ens, after that gross manner as Two Things in Nature do Compound a Third:
Whereas, in reality, they are nothing but diverse Notions or Considerations of
the Thing, formally, as it is a Thing. Wherefore, to say, a Body is Compounded
of Matter and Form, is no more, in Literal Truth, than to say that there can be
no more Considerations of a Body, taken formally, as it is a Thing; or taking
it in the Line of Ens precisely, but of a Power to become such a Thing; and of
the Act or Form, Determining that Power: However the Thing may have in it what
grounds the Notions of many Modes or Accidents; which are also the Thing
materially, though not Formally according to the Notion of Ens. Nor let any
object, that this is to maintain that Things are compounded of Notions, as some
may mis-understand us; for, let it be remembered (as is demonstrated above,)
that the Notion is the very Thing, as it is in our Understanding, according, or
as far as it is conceived by us; that is, it is the very Thing, partially
Considered. The other Reason which the Moderns had for this Mis-conceit, was,
because the Schools generally explained themselves very ill, by making a new
Entity of every different Conception; not comprehending well the Difference
between Metaphysical Composition and Divisibility, and The Meaning of
Metaphysical Composition and Divisibility.
Physical, or rather Artificial ones; such as Apothecaries use when they put
many Ingredients into a Pill; or Carpenters, when of Many diverse Materials they
compound a House; which is the applying, outwardly or inwardly, more Things
(properly so called) together: Whereas Metaphysical Divisibility is never
reduced to Act, but by our Understanding framing Distinct or Abstract Notions
of one and the same Thing. And Metaphysical Composition is no more, but that
there is found in the Thing (though Physically and Entitatively one, and
uncompounded) what grounds those distinct Notions; which being but diverse
Respects or Considerations, it follows, that the Thing in Nature may, without
any Contradiction, (or Possibly,) be Changed according to One of them, and not
according to Another.

9. Hence, Lastly, is clearly seen what is the Principle of Individuation,
about which there have been such warm What is the Principle of Individuation.
Disputes, viz. That it is nothing but that Comploxion of Modes or Accidents,
which make up the peculiar Constitution of a Body at the first Instant of its
being such an Ens or This, as is explicated at large, 8. by which it is,
consequently, fitted for such a particular Operation in Nature.

10. Ens or Thing has many other Names, though all of them less proper. As,
First, [Substance,] which, coming from The Meaning of the word [Substance.] The
word Improper.
the Verb [Substare,] respects only its Modes and Accidents, and not what
concerns its self, or its own Order or Capacity to Existence. Wherefore, it is
very Improper; and, unless the common Usage of it make some Amends for the
Impropriety of the Expression, certainly it is most highly Unfit. Aristotle
calls it (...), which coming from (...), keeps it within the Line of Being. As
I remember Boethius was the first who rendered (...) by Substantia. The Schools
either used it in Imitation of him, or else they took it up when they were to
treat of the Ten Predicaments; and, Nature instructing them that the last Nine
had no Order to Being in their Signification; and so, as taken in their
peculiar Notions, could not exist alone, without needing a kind of Support (as
it were:) hence they called this Support, by a Name suitable enough to their
Thoughts, Substance; and the others, that had not Being in their Notion, and so
had no Title to Being by their own Merits, or to uphold themselves in being,
Accidents; of the Impropriety of which Word more hereafter. I wish there were
no worse in it; and that, they did not fancy all those abstract Notions, which
are only the Thing in part, to have in them the Notion of Things too, or to be
so many Entire Things; though they were Feebler and the other Stronger. However
it were, they went to work Illogically: For, they should have considered, that
all of them (taking them as they were Distinct from the Notion of Thing) could
be nothing but several Conceptions of ours, or (which is the same) the Thing as
diversely considered; and then they might have easily reflected, that we could
not (in general) have more Conceptions than those of Res and Modus Rei; that
is, of the Thing, and of the several Manners how a Thing is; which would have
cleared this Truth to them, that the Manner or the How a Thing is, is nothing
without the Thing, as is deduced formerly. However, the Word [Substantia] with
a sound Explication, may pass, since Use will have it so; and will do little
Harm, so it be but rightly understood to mean what we properly call Ens, Res,
or Thing.

11. On this Occasion, it is my Opinion, that both Mr. Lock and my self should
not be too severe against the Modern That the words [Supporting] and [Inhering]
taken metaphorically, may be allowed, and ought not to be Ridiculed.
Schoolmen, for using the Words [Substantia] and [Inhaerentia;] or, as he
ingeniously ridicules it, [Sticking-on and underpropping.] The manner how the
Thing and its Modes do relate to one Another; being only found in our Mind, and
according to the Being they have there (for out of it there is no Distinction
at all of the Thing from its Modes) is Spiritual; and so, can no other way be
expressed, but metaphorically; and our selves do and must, in such a case,
frequently use such Metaphors to express our Conceptions; which a Critic might
banter sufficiently, by taking them Literally. Indeed, if those Schoolmen did
understand them in that crude Literal Sense, (as I fear many of them did) from
which Apprehension, I believe, his Zeal against them proceeded, they deserve to
be the Sport and Laughter of all Men of Sense; for I know nothing else they are
good for. Now the Truth is, there is a kind of Natural Order in our Notions,
though taken from the same Thing; so that we have the Notion of Res or Thing
antecedently (in Priority of Nature) to Modus Rei, or the Accidents; and we
conceive the Mode or Manner to presuppose the Notion of the Thing, and to have
no Being but as it is in it and affects it. Whence, being conceived to be in
it, and to have no Being by any other means, we may, by a Metaphor not much
strained, say it does, as it were, Inhere in it; and that the Thing supports
its Modes in their Being. Nor will it do us any Harm loqui cum vulgo, to speak
as vulgar Philosophers use; provided we do Sentire cum doctis, or make wiser
Judgments of the Literal Sense of those Words, than they perhaps ever meant.

12. The word [Suppositum] is another Name of Ens or Thing, in a manner, (though
not altogether) the same The meaning of Suppositum or Hypostasis.
with Substance. For [Substance] is, I conceive, meant for the Essential Notion
of the Thing, as it is contradistinguisht from Accidental, or Unessential ones;
and Suppositum does, over and above, relate also to the very Nature of the
Thing, (or to the Complexion of Accidents which constitutes its Essence) and
not only to the Modes, as each of them singly is a mere Accident, and had Being
by it or in it. Whence the Notion of Suppositum is the most Confused of any
other; and signifies that which has all the Forms in it Whatever, whether they
be Essential ones or Accidental; and not only those Modes (or Accidents) which
naturally belonged to it at first as Properties, (or inseparable Accidents) but
those also which accru'd to it since, and are merely Accidental to it.

13. Hence there can be no difficulty in the meaning of the word
[Suppositality] which is the Abstract of the The Meaning of [Suppositality.]
Suppositum: For, it signifies manifestly the Thing according to the precise
Notion of the Suppositum, or of what has all the aforesaid Forms in it: How
agreeable this discourse is to Christian Language and Principles, will easily
appear to Solid Divines.

14. The word [Individuum] which is another name of Ens, used by the Learned,
and, as is seen in those usual The Meaning of the word [Individuum.
words [the same Individual thing,] is got into our vulgar Language, is a
Logical Expression; distinguishing the Notion of a Particular, (only which is
properly a Thing) from the Generical and Specifical Notions; in regard both
these latter do bear a Division of their Notions into more Inferior ones; and
so, that each of the Inferior ones contains the whole Superior Natures in it
which the others do signify; as the whole Definiton, Notion or Nature of an
[Animal] or of [a Sensitive Living Thing] is found in Man, and also in Brutes;
and the whole Definition or Notion of Man, is found in Socrates and Plato. But,
the particular Natures of Socrates and Plato (which are signified by those
words) and their Definitions, could they bear any, cannot be divided into more
which have the particular Natures of Socrates and Plato in them: And, therefore
they are called Individuums; that is, such as cannot be divided into more,
which have the Natures signified by those words in them, as could the Generical
and Specifical Notions of Animal and Homo; whence Individuums are the Lowest
and Narrowest Notion that can possibly be in the Line of Ens.

15. The Individuum, is called by the Latin Schools [Substantia prima] and the
Superior Notions in the The Meaning of [Substantia Prima] and
[SubstantiaSecunda]
Line of Ens. [Substantiae Secundae] which signifies that only Individuums are
in propriety of Speech Entia or Capable of Existing; For, since, (as was shown
above) nothing that is Common or Undetermined can exist, none of the others can
have any Actual being at all but in the Individuum, as a kind of Metaphysical
Part of its Entire Notion; and a Part (in what Sense soever that word be taken)
can not possibly be but in the whole. If this then be their meaning, as I
believe it is, nothing can be more true and Solid. Only I must note that it is
less properly and less Logically expressed; and that Aristotle speaks more
exactly when he calls the Former (...), or primo Substantia, and the latter
(...), or Secundo Substantia; which words denote, that the former is Ens in its
Primary and Proper signification of that word, and the latter only
Analogically, that is in a Secondary and improper Sense; which prima and
Secunda Substantia do not express: For, both these may be properly Entia still,
for any thing those words tell us, though one of them may have an Order of
Priority to the other as Prima and Secunda; in some such Sense as we call God
the Primum Ens, considering him in order to Creatures.

16. From Words used by Philosophers which belong to the Line of Ens, we come
to those which are made The Word [Accidents] is improper.
use of to express the Modes or Manners how a Thing is; which, in a general
Appellation, the Schools have called Accidents. This Word is, certainly, very
improper: For, who can think that Quantity or (as they will needs call it)
Extension, is Accidental to Body, or (as some may take that Equivocal Word)
that it is but by Chance, or by Accident, that Bodies have any Bigness in them
at all? The best Sense I can give it, in pursuance to my own Grounds, is this,
that [Accidental,] which is the Denominative from [Accident,] may mean such
Notions as are Not Essential; or (which is the same) they may mean the Thing
considered as to that in it which has no ways any Order to Being, nor expresses
any such Order by the Word which signifies its Notion. And, were this Sense
universally accepted, and attributed to the Word [Accidents,] it would be a
True and Solid one: For, it is evident, that none of the Words that signify any
of those Accidents, does in the least import in its Signification either Being,
or any Respect or Order to it, as does Ens, and all those Words which do
formally and properly express it, or belong to it. Whence the Notions signified
by such Words, are not Essential ones, or relating properly and precisely to
the Essence; but Modish, (as we may term it,) or expressing some Manner [How]
the Thing is; which is a quite different Notion from that of Ens, or Thing, or
of what formally is found in that Line. I do believe that diverse of the Wisest,
and most Learned Schoolmen did take the Word [Accidents] in this Sense, though
the Propriety of that Word, fetched from its Radix, did not invite, much less
oblige them to do so. I doubt also, that the Usage of that Word in that
warrantable Sense I have now assigned, was not so Common, and universally
Current, even among the Schoolmen, as to force it to bear that Sense; as
appears by their thinking that Accidents were certain kinds of little
Adventitious Entities; much less among the Modern Ideists; who (through their
Shortness in Logic and Metaphysics) do make Quantity, or Extension, the
Essential Form of Body; which is, to put Bigness in the Line of Being; or, to
make Bigness and Being, or the Mode and the Thing, to be in the same Line of
Notions, and Intrinsecal to one another: Whereas, a Thing must first be
conceived to be, ever it can be after such a Mode, or Manner.

17. For the Reason lately given, I cannot but judge, that the Word [Mode,] or
(as some call it) [Modification,] The Word [Mode] more proper.
is far more proper than the Word [Accidents,] to signify those last Nine
Common Heads of our Natural Notions, Which Impartiality of mine, on this, and
other Occasions, giving some Advantage to the Cartesians, and other Moderns,
over other Philosophers, who call themselves Aristotelians, will, I hope,
obtain their good Opinion of me, that I do sincerely follow my best Reason, and
not Pique or Prejudice, while I oppose them in other Things: And I am sure,
it is my own Reason I ought to follow, till clearer Reasons of theirs show mine
to be none; which I have no Reason to fear; for, I hope, it will appear to
every Acute and Ingenuous Examiner, that no Writer ever distinguished his
Notions more Exactly and Clearly, or Connected them more Closely and
Immediately.

18. The Primary Mode of all those Things we converse with, or Bodies, is
called Quantity. This Word is very The Word [Quantity] is very Proper.
Proper, and fully Significant; for, all the Bodies in Nature have some
Quantity or Bigness in them, more or less: Nay, even the least Atome, or
Effluvium, that can be conceived, has Bigness in it, as well as the greatest
Body, nay, as the whole World; though not so much, or so great a Degree of it.
Wherefore, this Word [Quantity] is Comprehensive; and so, fit to signify the
Commonest Affection of Body: But, this is not enough; it is withal, very Simple,
or Uncompounded: Moreover, the Word it self has, on its side, no kind of
Equivocalness, taking it as it is applied to Body in Common; which Requisites
are not found in any other Word used by us, to express that Mode. Only we are
to note, that Bigness, or Bulk, is only proper to Body, as it has in it all the
three Dimensions; whereas, Quantity reaches to how Long, or how Broad, as well
as how Thick: And therefore Quantity is absolutely the properest Word to
express this Primary Mode: However, it is much neglected by our Moderns, who
are grown strangely fond of Extension.

19. The Word [Extension] is very improper to signify it: For, Extension
properly denotes the Action of Extending; The Word [Extension] very improper.
to which is directly opposite, in our usual Speech, that Action, called
Contraction. Or, if it be taken for the being Extended, still its proper
Signification must be a Passion caused by the Action of Extending; which cannot
suit with that Simple and Primary Mode we call Quantity; which is Naturally
Antecedent to, and Independent of those Subsequent Modes called Action, and
Passion. Again, All Intrinsecal Modes are conceived to be certain kinds of
Forms affecting Body, as their Subject; and Forms are very ill expressed by a
Substantive derived from a Verb; and by such an one especially, as must
necessarily (at least) Connotate Action or Passion, if it does not rather
directly, or most properly signify them. Moreover, let them take Extension,
Stretching out, or Exporrection how they will, still Common Sense teaches us,
that we may take Contraction or Straitning in the same manner as they do it:
Whence follows, that if Extension means or implies Impenetrability of Parts,
Contraction must mean Penetrability of Parts* Which Notion none of us will
admit to have any Ground in Nature, though the Maxim tells us, that [Contraries
are employed about the same Subject.] Now, the Word [Quantity] is not entangled
with any of these Inconveniences, but freed from them all, as will appear to
any Sober Reflecter. And, on this Occasion, I beg Leve of our Ideists, to tell
them, that it is not safe, nor prudent, to leave off an Old and used Word, till
they are sure they have found Another which is better, or more proper.
Cartesius made choice of [Extension] wittily, that he might thus more cleaverly
bring all Physics to Mathematics; and others (perhaps, ut est Natura hominis,
fond of a Novelty) followed him unadvisedly; though they were not guilty of any
such Design of their own, or aware of his. And I am sorry Mr. L. affects only
the Improper Word [Extension,] and quite neglects that more Proper Word
[Quantity.]

20. Many other Names, at least Attributes, are given to Quantity; such as are
Divisibility, Impenetrability, Space, The Meaning of Divisibility,
Impenetrability, Space, and Measurability.
and Measurability; the former of which signifies it in Order to Natural Action
and Passion, and respects properly the Parts into which it may be divided; or,
which is the same, its Potential Parts; in which, perhaps, the Nature of
Quantity would be found to Consist, were I here to treat of the Nature of those
Modes, and not only of the Names used in Philosophy. Impenetrability properly
signifies such an Order or (as it were) Situation of those Parts, as that one
of them is without, and not within another; which grounds that Secondary
Notion, which some do improperly call Extension; and Extension or Quantity, if
of any considerable largeness in respect of the Body it contains, is called
Space; which differs from the Notion of Place in this, that Place (if properly
such) is just as much Quantity as contains the Thing placed, and has a respect
to some determinate and known Points: Whereas Space has not in its Notion to be
adjusted to the Body that is in it, not restrained to any set Distance. So that
Space is Place at large, and Place is Space restrained. Measurability grounds
the Reckoning or Computing how many of such a Standard of Quantity as we had
designed in our Thoughts, would, if repeated, equal the whole of which we
intend to take a Survey.

21. Now, Quantity being the most Common of all Corporeal Modes, and which
Antecedes and grounds all the A Short Explication, what Quantity, Quality, and
Relation are.
others, it cannot, for that very Reason, be properly defined; so that (as Mr.
Lock acutely observed) we know such things before we are asked, better than we
do after; for the Asking puzzles our Natural Thoughts, which were Clear enough
before of themselves; and Reflection, which, when there is occasion, is wise,
and enlightens us, does but serve to blunder us when there is no need or
occasion for it. Notwithstanding, I have, in my Method, endeavored to give it
some kind of Explication, by differencing it from all other Intrinsecal Modes,
(which are its Genus, as it were, or rather, a Transcendent Notion to all such
Accidents,) in this, that it tells How the Thing is, according to some Common
Consideration, in which All Things we converse with do agree. By which it is
distinguished from Quality, which acquaints us How a Thing is as to what
respects its own peculiar Nature; and from Relation, which expresses how one
Individuum respects another Individuum. But this (as was said) is out of my
present Business in this Preliminary, which is only to show what Names are
Proper, or Improper; and not to treat of the particular Nature of each Mode, of
which I have, in their due places, sufficiently discoursed in my Method.

22. These, as far as occurrs to my Memory, are the Chiefest Words used by
Philosophers, whose Proper or What [Transcendents] are.
Improper Acception has most Influence upon the Advancement or Hindrance of
Science. Notwithstanding, there are others far more Equivocal than any of the
rest, called Transcendents, or Words Applicable to all, or many of the Common
Heads of our Natural Notions; which are hardest of all to explicate, as wanting
any Common Genus, or any thing like it, to explicate them by. I intended once
to dilate upon them in this Preliminary, as being a Subject very worthy of our
Reflection, and yet scarce treated on by any as they deserve: But, seeing, upon
Review, how Prolix I have been already in my Preliminaries, I am forced to
content my self with Noting them in short; leaving it to others to enlarge upon
them. They are these, distributed into their several Ranks.

23. First, Ens, taken, in its whole Latitude, for the Thing, and its Modes.
Secondly, The Properties of Ens, taken in The Five Sorts of Transcendents.
that large Signification; such as are Unum, Verum, Bonum, and their Opposites,
Non-Unum, or Divisum, Falsum, and Malum. For, the Notions of all the Modes
being improperly Entia, have, by Consequence, only improper Essences, or
Entities of their own; and, consequently, Properties of those Improper
Essences. Thirdly, Idem, Diversum, and, in general, Relatum; taking this last
Word in the largest Sense, for all kinds of Respects whatsoever. In which
Signification, all Things, or properly called Entia, do relate to Existence;
and all their Modes or Accidents do respect them diversely, as certain Manners
how they are. Of which Nature also are the aforesaid Common Words, [Mode,] and
[Accident,] which are Transcendents in respect of the Nine last Predicaments.
Fourthly, Completum, Incompletum, Partial and Total, Generical and Specifical,
Superior and Inferior, Simple and Compound, and such like. Most of which kind
of Transcendents seem rather to respect the Manner of Being which Things have
in our Understanding, than the Manner of Being they have out of it. Of the last
Sort are, Which, What, That which, Something, Somewhat, etc. which are the most
Confused Words imaginable, and signify any Notion, but that of mere Nothing.
By these we make a Bastard or Illegitimate Definition of Ens; and say, that a
Thing is [That which is capable of Existing, etc.] I call it an Illegitimate or
Improper Definition, because the Notion of the Genus (which is one part of a
proper one) has a Determinate Sense: Whereas [That which,] which, for want of a
better, supplies the place of the Genus, has none. For,

It Is to be noted, that in all Transcendents, (unless* perhaps, some of those
of the Fifth Sort, which have a kind of blind, Confused Sense,) the Name only
is Common or Applicable to more, and not the Notion; for, having no one Notion
that is Common to all those Common Heads, they have none till it be Determined;
since no Notion can exist in the Mind, unless it be This, or That, or one, any
more than a Thing can exist in Nature, unless it be determined to be such a
Particular or Individual Thing. Much less has any of them proper Differences,
dividing them by more and less of the Common Notion, as every Notion that is
truly Common to more, may, and must have.

23. Whence extreme Care must be taken, how Students in Philosophy do use these
Transcendent Words; and Great Care to be had, that Transcendent Words be not
held Univocal.
that they do distinguish their Sense most exactly, when they have Occasion to
make use of them. For, they having an Indifferency to many Senses, and those as
vastly disparate as the Common Heads themselves are; that is, (as the Schools
properly phrase it) Senses differing toto Genere, (I may add, Generalissimo) it
must follow, that every time they do use them confusedly, or with a Conceit
that they are Univocal, their Discourse must needs straggle widely, now one
way, now another, and thence confound all our Commonest Notions, which, of all
others, ought to be kept Distinct; the want of doing which, hinders all
Coherence or Connection of Terms, in which only Science consists, and breeds
innumerable, and most Enormous Errors. It would be tedious, I doubt, to my
Readers, though perhaps not hard for me, to show what Prodigious Inconveniences
do arise from the Mis-acceptions of one of those many Different Senses such
Words may bear, for Another, I will only bring one Instance; hoping that by
this, as by a Seamark, my Readers may avoid the Shoals and Rocks of Errors in
other like Occasions.

25. The Word [Compounded] may either mean the Composition of Matter with its
Essential Form; or, that of the What great Errors spring thence shown in the
Univocal Acception of the Transcendent word [Compounded.]
Essence with its Suppositum, which is conceived to have the Essence in it: or,
of the Superior Notions of Ens with the Individuum; All which are Compositions
belonging to the Line of Ens. Coming next to the Modes or Accidents, the whole
Ens or Suppositum may be considered as Compounded with its Primary Mode called
Quantity; or with some Quality, or Relation. Or, with some Action or Passion,
Time, Place, Situation, or Habit. Whence accrues to the Subject the
Denominations of Agent, Patient, Living, or being at such a time, or in such a
Place, Sitting, Armed, etc. All which Nine last Compositions are Modifying or
Accidental ones, and not Essential, or such as concern directly and precisely
the Notion of Thing or Being, as did those of the first sort. Now come
Cartesius and his Followers, who, loath to say the Body and Soul are two
Suppositums; and, wanting Skill in Metaphysics to comprehend what the Union of
Entitative Parts is, or how made, (which are Points too hard for
Mathematicians, and of which de la Forge, though he talks prettily, can make
nothing at all) they would have the Soul and Body compound One Thing, because
they Act together, or assist one another mutually to produce some sorts of
Actions. Whereas Action being only a Mode, and so presupposing the Res, or
Thing, which it modifies, can only determine and denominate its Subject to be
Acting; and therefore Joint-acting can only constitute and denominate the Soul
and Body Co-Acters; which is a vastly disparate Notion from the Constituting
and Denominating them One Thing, as common Sense informs us. We will put an
Instance: My Hand and my Pen do both of them concur to the Action of Writing,
and so compound one Joint-Acter; nay, they depend mutually on one another as to
the producing this Action: For the Hand cannot write without the Pen, nor the
Pen without the Hand: Besides, they are in some sort fitted to one another, in
order to perform this Action; for, the Fingers are so framed, as to hold and
guide the Pen very commodiously; and the Pen (taking in its Handle and the
Nib-end too) is fitted very commodiously to be held and guided by my Hand, so
as to draw the Letters such as they ought to be. Lastly, which is much more,
and a Parallel very agreeable to the Co-action of Soul and Body, they both of
them do modifie each other's Action. For, the best Scrivener writes but
scurvily with a Bad Pen, and the Best Pen writes but scurvily in an unskilful
Hand. And yet the Hand and the Pen are not one Jot the nearer being one Thing,
notwithstanding their Concurrence to this Joint-Action; though it be qualified
with Mutuality, Fitness of the Co-Agents, and the Modification which the Action
receives from both of them jointly, and each of them severally. Besides, they
put the Cart before the Horse, while they pretend that the Acting as one Thing
is to make them one-Thing. For since the Res is, in Priority of Nature and
Reason, before Modus rei; and Being before Acting; and that nothing can Act
otherwise than it is; it is Evident from plainest Principles, and even from the
very Terms, that they must first Be one Thing, ever they can Act as one Thing,
or Be such a Compound, before they can Act as such a Compound. And so, the
Point sticks where it was, viz. How the Soul and Body come to be thus
Compounded into one Ens; of which I have given some Account, Preliminary 4. 8,
9, 10, 13.

26. On this Occasion I cannot but Reflect, that the Cartesians were very
Unadvised to meddle with such a Point, The Cartesians unadvised, in going ultra
Crepidam
as puts them quite past their Mathematics; as likewise, that though they have
framed a Logic or Method suitable to explicate their Mathematical Philosophy,
yet they are but very bad Distinguishers of our Natural Notions into Common
Heads, which is one Principal Part of true Logic; as appears by their rambling
so irregularly from one to the other, as has been shown elsewhere, in their
making Extension or Quantity, which is a Mode, the Form which is Essential to
their First Matter; and here, in putting Composition according to the Notion of
Action, to be Composition according to the Notion of Ens. And whoever
impartially Examins the Distribution of their Notions into Heads, will find it
not to be such as Reason naturally forced, (as ours is,) but such as Design
voluntarily and ingeniously invented.

REFLECTIONS ON Mr. LOCKE's ESSAY CONCERNING Humane Understanding.
REFLECTION First, ON The FIRST BOOK.
1. THIS Book gives me little Occasion to make any Reflections, but such as I
The Excellent Wit, and Unbyassed Ingenuity of the Author of the Essay
acknowledged.
must be forced to make through his whole Essay; which is, on the Penetrative
and clear Wit, and happy Expression of its Author, in his pursuing the Design
which he had prefixed to himself. I could wish, indeed, that he had thought fit
to take his Rise higher, or (to speak more properly) had laid his Grounds
deeper. But, it is to be expected, that every Author should write according to
those Thoughts or Principles with which the Casual Circumstances of his
fore-past Life had imbued him, or as his Natural Genius leads him. His steering
such an Impartial Mean between Skepticism and Dogmatizing, does certainly argue
a very even Temper of Judgment, and a Sincere Love of Truth. And, I shall hope,
that, whoever peruses attentively my Method, (B. 1. Less. 2. from. 5. to. 11.)
will discern that I have so exactly measured out the Pitch of Knowledge
attainable by us in this State, that I am as little a Friend to Overweening,
as I profess my self a Declared Enemy to Skepticism.

2. I am a little apprehensive, from some Words in his Introduction, expressing
his Dis-like that Men It Is Probable he has taken a Prejudice against
Metaphysics.
let loose their Thoughts into the vast Ocean of Being; and his Conceit that
this brings Men to Doubts and Skepticism, that he has taken a Prejudice against
Metaphysics; whose proper Object is, those Notions of the Thing which abstract
from Matter and Motion, and concern Being only. Were I assured that I did not
mistake him, I would, for his sake, enlarge on that Point, and display fully
the Excellency of that most Solid, most Clear, and most Incomparable Science;
which I shall only touch upon at present, by giving my Reader a Summary of its
Principal Objects.

3. It treats of the Formal or Essential Parts of Physical Entities, or Bodies,
in Common, and in Specie; Of the Essential The Incomparable Excellency of the
Science of Metaphysics, shown from the Objects it treats of.
Unity and Distinction of them, and whence it is taken; particularly, of the
Essential Constituents of Elements, Mixts, Vegetables and Animals; and when,
and how, they come to be Essentially, or Individually Changed: Thence,
advancing to the Chief Animal, Man, he treats of his Form, the Soul, and of its
Proper Action: Of the Superior Part of it, the Mind; and, of its Progress
toward its last End, or its Declension from it. Thus far demonstrated, it
proceeds to treat of the Separation of the Soul from the Body; and, to show
evidently its Immateriality, and, consequently, its Immortality. Of the Science
of a Soul separated, and the Eminency of her Acts in that State, above what she
had in the Body; and, lastly, of the Felicity and Infelicity connaturally
following out of her Actions here, and the Good or Bad Dispositions found in
her at her Separation; as also, of the Immutability of her Condition
afterward. It treats of the Notion or Nature of Existence, and how it is
Accidental or Unessential to the Natures of every Created Being; and thence
demonstrates a First Being, or a God, to whom it is Essential to be; that is,
whose Nature is Self-Existence. Whence follows, by necessary Consequence, that
his Nature is Infinitely Pure or Simple, Eternal, Infinitely Perfect and
Immutable, All-knowing, Willing ever what is most Wise, and therefore most Free
in all his Actions; and that the Divine Essence is Unconceivable by any Notion
we can frame or have of it; and Unexpressible by any Name we can give it which
is Proper, and not most highly Metaphorical. Lastly, It demonstrates, there are
Pure Spiritual Beings, which have no Matter or Potentiality in them, called
Intelligences, or Angels; and likewise, (in Common,) of their Number,
Distinction, and Subordination; as also, of their Proper Operations, both
Internal and External.

4. These, and such as these, are the Objects proper to that Supreme Science,
Metaphysics; which any Man And from the Manner by which it handles them.
of Sense would think ought to make it deserve the Esteem of the Best, and most
Elevated Portion of Mankind; and not to be ridiculed by Drollish Fops, who turn
all they understand not into Buffoonery. All these high Subjects it treats of,
I say, if possible, (as I believe it is,) with more Close, more Necessary, and
more Immediate Connection, than the Mathematics can pretend to; since the
Evidence and Certainty of the Principles of this Science (as also of Logic) do
depend on, are subordinate to, and are borrowed from the Principles of the
other; which is the Sovereign and Mistress of all other Sciences whatever.

5. It will, I doubt not, be apprehended, that such High Knowledges are above
our reach, and Impossible to be The Knowledge of these high Objects attainable
by Natural Reason.
attained by us, in this State. They are, indeed, above Fancy; and, I believe,
this Objection is made by Fancy, or by Men attending to the Resemblances of
Fancy, which fall short of representing to us such Sublime Objects. But, why
they should be above our Reason, I cannot imagine; or, why they should be deemed
so Mysterious, as not to be Knowable without a Divine Revelation. It is
manifest, that we can have Abstract Notions of Existence, Thing, Immaterial,
Incorporeal, Knowledge, Will, Operation, etc. that is, we can Consider the
Common Subject [Thing] as Existent, Capable of Being, and (if it be a Spirit)
as Immaterial, Incorporeal, Knowing, Willing, and Operating, etc. as well as
Mathematicians can a Body, as Extended, Round, or Triangular, etc. And, then, I
would know why we cannot, by attentive Consideration, and due Reflection on
those Things, as thus conceived by us, frame a Science grounded on the Things
thus apprehended, as well as Mathematicians can upon a Body considered as
grounding their proper Objects; or, as grounding their Notions of such and such
Modes of Quantity; such as are the Degrees, Proportions, or Figures of it. Let
us not Blaspheme in our Thoughts the Bounty of Infinite Goodness. It was the
Devil's first Calumny against God, that he envied Manking Knowledge: Let not us
carry it on, by entertaining such an unworthy Conceit of Essential Goodness;
but, dispose our selves by seeking a Right Method to Knowledge, and pursuing it
with Industrious Study, and we may be Certain of Success. While I was writing
my Method to Science, the Attempt to show the Reason all along, for such
Notions as were taken from the Thing, according to the manner of Being it had
in my Understanding, and, therefore, was to be carried through with perpetual
Reflection on the Things there, did appear so discouraging, that I was sometimes
half sorry I had undertaken it: But I saw the World needed it, and knew all
Truths were Connected, and therefore was confident of God's Assistance in such
a necessary and useful Occasion. Indeed, Providence has left us no Means to
know what is done in the Moon, or other Stars, (though, perhaps, they are as
busy there, as we are in this Sublunary Planet, the Earth,) because it is not
to our purpose to know such Things. But, whoever considers those Metaphysical
Objects, will, at first sight, discover how Useful the Knowledge of them is,
both in regard of their Influence upon all Inferior Sciences, and to raise us
to Contemplation; as also, to Explicate, Establish, Defend and Comfort
Christian Faith. For, there is a Gradation of Truths, as well as a Connection of
one Truth with another. The Natural are Foundation-Stones,
To bear the Supernatural ones;
Which, though they to Heaven's Top aspire,
It Is the same Ground, raised Stories higher.
Blessed Soul! which, to the Throne Divine,
Winds it self up by its own Line!


All these high Encomiums of Metaphysics, if it shall please God to protract
my Span of Life some few Inches longer, I doubt not but to show, are no more
but its just Due; and, amongst the rest, its Clearest Demonstrative Evidence
and Certainty: Particularly, that the Study of that Science is so far from
increasing Doubts, or leading to Skepticism, (as, perhaps, Mr. L. may
apprehend,) that, on the Contrary, the Knowledge of it is the most effectual
Means imaginable to settle all Doubtfulness, and to Convert or Confound the
greatest Scepticks.

6. Mr. Locke's Tenet of no Innate Notions, nor, consequently, Innate
Principles, does perfectly agree with my Sentiments; Mr. Locke's Tenet of no
Innate Ideas, Solidly Grounded, and Unanswerable.
both as to the Thesis it self, and the Reason for it; which is, that God has
laid Connatural Causes, to give us our Notions; and, therefore, it did not
become his Sovereign Wisdom to do such a needless Action, as to ingraft them by
his own Hand immediately. Besides which, that Judicious Author Accumulates so
many other Pregnant and Solid Reasons, to fix that Position of ours in an
Immovable Certainty, that I see not but it may, for the future, deserve the
Repute of An Established and Leading Maxim in Philosophy.

REFLECTIONS ON THE SECOND BOOK.
REFLECTION Second, ON The First CHAPTER.
1. I Agree perfectly with this Learned Author, That our Observation employed
either about External Sensible Objects, or about the Internal Operations of our
In what the Author agrees and disagrees with Mr. Lock.
Minds, perceived and reflected on by our selves, is that which supplies our
Understandings with all the Materials of Thinking. As also, that a Man first
thinks when he begins to have any Sensations. That the Impressions made on the
Senses are the Originals of all Knowledge. That the Mind is of its own Nature
fitted to receive those Impressions. That in receiving Ideas or Notions at
first the Mind is Passive. That it is all one to say, the Soul and the Man
thinks. And, Lastly, That Men do not always think; which last Thesis he
confutes here very elaborately: But, I cannot at all agree to some Positions he
makes use of to oppose this last Tenet, and, indeed, needlessly; for he produces
good store of solid Arguments sufficient to confute it.

2. For First, He makes the having Ideas and Perception to be the same thing. I
apprehend he means, that when We may have Notions, without perceiving we have
them.
we have Ideas, we must perceive we have them; because he says afterward, that
the Soul must necessarily be conscious of its own Perception. Indeed had he
said the Having Ideas, when he is Awake, and Attentively reflects on those
Ideas, it had been a Certain and Evident Truth: Otherwise, it is manifest that
we retain or have our Ideas or Notions in our Mind when we are soundly asleep,
(it being a strange and extravagant Paradox to say, that we get them all again
as soon as ever our Eyes are open;) and yet we do not then know them; and, to
say we do, is to come over to his Adversary, and grant the Thesis he is
Impugning: For, if a Man does think when he is sound asleep, it is without
Question that he may think always.

3. Next, I must utterly deny his Position, that We cannot think without being
sensible or conscious of it. To disprove We may Think, without being Conscious
that we Think.
which I allege, that when a Man is quite absorpt in a serious Thought, or (as
we say) in a Brown Study, his Mind is so totally taken up with the Object of
his present Contemplation (which perhaps is something without him) that he can
have no Thought, at that very Instant, of his own Internal Operation, or that
he is Thinking, or any thing like it. I have been called sometimes from my
Study to Dinner, and answered, I am coming. Upon my Delay, they called me
again, and asked, Why I came not, having promised it? I denied I heard, or saw,
or answered them; yet, upon Recollection, I remembered afterward that I did. I
knew then that they called me, since I understood their Words, and answered
pertinently; yet, it is most manifest, that I did not at the Time of the first
Call understand that I understood it, or know that I knew it, since it came
only into my Mind afterward by Reminiscence or Reflection; which argues I had
the Knowledge of it before by a Direct Impression, otherwise I could not have
remembered it.

4. Though this Thesis of Mr. Locke's is mentioned hereafter, it were not amiss
to speak my Sense of it where I first It Is impossible to be Conscious, or know
we know, without a new Act of Reflection.
meet it. He judges, that we know our own Thoughts, (which are Spiritual) by
Experience; And I deny we have any Experience but by Direct Impressions from
sensible Objects, either coming from them at first, or re-excited. He thinks it
impossible to know, but we must at the same time be Conscious, or (which is the
same) know we know: And, I judge it impossible we should know we know at the
same time we have that Act only, till afterward we come to reflect upon it by
a new Act; which is to know it, not by Experience, but by Reflection. My Reason
why I am so positive in my Assertion, is this: Nothing can be known by any Act
of Knowledge but the Object of that Act: For the Object of Knowing, and the
Thing known, are the same almost in the very Terms, and perfectly the same in
Sense. Put case then I know by a Direct Impression what we call Extension; in
this case Extension is the sole Object of that Act of Knowledge, and not my Act
of Knowledge it self; therefore I am not conscious I know; that is, I do not
know I know when I have the Act of knowing Extension: For, were it so,
Extension would not be the Sole Object of that Act, but the Complex made up of
Extension, and the Act it self by which I know Extension: which Objects being
of Disparate Natures, ought to be the Objects of Different Acts. Besides, this
would hinder any External Object, or Corporeal Mode to be known Distinctly; for
the Idea of it would be Confounded and Mingled with a kind of Spiritual
Compart, viz. my very Act it self; for this Act being known (according to him)
at the same time with Extension, must needs make up part of the Object of this
Act. Lastly, If we know our own Act Experientially, we should confound Direct
Knowledges with Keflex ones. For (if I understand Mr. Lock rightly) he with
good Reason makes the Internal Operations of the Mind to be the proper Objects
of the Reflex Acts; and, that the genuin Difference of those two sorts of Acts
does consist in this; that by Direct ones, we know the Objects which are in
Nature, or without us; and by Reflex ones, what is in the Soul, or her
Operations; and not the Things in Nature, otherwise than as they are in that
Act: But if I be Conscious, or know that I know when I know the Object without
me, I must by the same Act know what is within me and what is without me both at
once; and so my Act of Direct Knowledge would be Reflex; or rather, that one
Act would be both Direct and Reflex, which makes it Chimerical.

5. The same Argument demonstrates, that we cannot be Conscious of our Reflex
Acts at the very time we produce It Is impossible to be Conscious of, or know
our present Reflex Act, but by a new Reflex one.
them. For, my First Reflex Act has for its sole Object that Operation of the
Mind, which I had immediately before by a Direct one; and my Second Reflex Act
has for its Object the First; and in the same manner, each succeeding Reflection
has for its Object that Act which immediately preceded. Wherefore, if the First
Reflex Act had for its Object, at the same time, both the Direct and it self
too; that is, did we, when we first Reflected, know by that very Act it self
that we did thus reflect, then the Second Reflex Act would be forestalled, and
have no Proper Object left for it. To clear this better, let us assign one
Reflection to be the Last: It were not the Last Reflection, unless the Object of
it were that Reflection which was the last but one. Wherefore, unless that
Reflection that went last before was known by that Act, and the last of all
remained unknown, the Last would have two Objects, viz. The Preceding Reflection
and its self too. This seems to me as plain Reason as plain can be; and, I
believe, Mr. Locke's Different Thoughts proceeded, from not adverting with what
Incredible Celerity our Reflex Thoughts do generally succeed the Direct ones,
and one another. Whence it comes, that, not aware of the imperceptible Time
between them, we are apt to conceit, that the Reflex Act is experientially
known by the very Act it self. Since then, nothing can be known by any Act but
the Object of that Act, and, (as might easily be shown) it would Confound our
Natural Notions Hence, we can never come to know our last Reflection.
strangely, to say, the Act is its own Object; it follows, that it cannot be
known by its self, but must be known (if at all) by the next Reflection. Whence
results this Certain and Evident Corollary, that, It is impossible we should
ever come to know our last Reflection.

6. These are my Reasons why I recede from Mr. Lock in his Opinion, that A Man
cannot think without being It Is utterly denied that Consciousness causes
Individuation.
Conscious of it. But, the Consequence he seems to draw thence, that therefore
Consciousness is that which causes Individuation, I must absolutely deny; and
cannot but judge, that it draws after it a Train of farther Consequences, which
are altogether Extravagant. Of which more, when we come to examine his Principle
of Individuation.

As for the Position, [That Men do always think] which he impugns, and, in my
Judgment, quite overthrows, I The Unreasonableness of the Opinion, that Men do
always think
cannot but wonder what the Asserters of it mean. They grant the Soul has Modes
and Affections peculiar to her own Nature; and, consequently, of which she is
properly the Subject: Why she may not therefore retain them in her habitually
(as it were) without exerting or exercising them, as well as the Body may those
proper to its Nature, is altogether Unconceivable. Indeed, were the Soul, in
this condition she has here, a Pure Act, as Angels are, it would consist with
good Reason; but being here in a Potential State, (as appears by her being
Capable still of New Knowledges, and her being but a Part of that one Actual
Thing called Man, and depending on the Material Compart in her Operations) I
cannot see on what Principle, either Physical or Metaphysical, they can pretend
to ground such a Paradox. This makes me fear, that this Tenet savours strongly
of that odd Opinion, That the Soul here is a Pure Act as the Angels are, or a
Distinct Thing from the Body; that is, a Forma Assistens, and not Informans;
though they are loath to own it barefacedly, but shift it off with witty
Explications of their own Doctrine; which, when brought to the Test of Close
Reason, vanish into Air; at which ingenious ways of Evasion it must be
confessed they are very great Artists.

REFLECTION Third. ON The Second, Third, and Fourth, CHAPTERS.
1. I Must except against his making, or naming the Objects of our Senses,
simple Ideas, having already proved No Notion Simple but that of Existence.
that the only absolutely simple Idea or Notion, is that of Existence: To which
are Respective (which argues some Complexion or Composition) one way or other,
all our other Notions of the Thing which we have, or can have; as is shown in
my Method, B. 1. Less. 2d. from 14. to 20. I could wish he had taken the
Distinction and Order of his Notions from Nature; which Teaches us that the
Notion of [Res] is before [Modus Rei;] and that the Consideration or Notion of
[Thing] is more Knowable than that of any Mode; and the Mode of quantity is
that which naturally antecedes, and grounds, all the The Order of our Notions
is to be taken from Nature.
other Modes that can be conceived belonging to Body. Nor will it excuse this
Deviation from Nature, that we have no exact Notions of Individuals; since we
can abstract the Notion of Entity or Capacity of Being from the Thing, as well
as we can its Solidity, or any of the rest. And certainly, that Notion which
Expresses Reality, or an Order to Being, should claim a Right to be considered
in the first place: I cannot but judge that the Methodizing of his Ideas on
this manner, would certainly have made his ensuing Discourses more Orderly, and
consequently more Clear. But, every Man is Master of his own Thoughts, and of
his own Method. Nor did Mr. Lock intend to write an Exact Logic, which is
what I aimed at; and therefore took that way that best suited with his own
ingenious Conception; which was, that, as all our Notions (as we both of us
hold) come into our Mind by our Senses, so he apprehended it the properest way
to treat of them as they are the Objects of This or That, or many different
Sensations.

2. His 4th. Chapter of Solidity gives me Occasion of making some few
Reflections; which I shall touch on slightly, or omit, because they recurr
hereafter.

First, His using the word [Solidity] in his New Sense seems very Improper.
For, all our Words do either Signify The Word [Solidity] arbitrarily and
abusively taken by M. L.
our Natural Notions, which are Common to all Mankind, whose Meaning therefore
is to be taken from the Usage of the Vulgar; or else Artificial ones, invented
by Artists to express the Notions they are Conversant about: Whereas the Word
[Solidity] taken as it is here, seems to agree to neither. I do not remember it
is ever used in an Artificial Sense but by Mathematicians, who signify by it
the Triple Dimension of Quantity; which is quite different from his Sense of
it: And the Vulgar Understand and Use the Word [Solid] as opposite to [Fluid;]
and say that the Earth is Solid, or Firm, and the Water Fluid, or apt to be
Diffused; both which Senses are vastly different from Impenetrability of the
Potential parts of Quantity; which is the meaning he gives it: So that, as far
as I have read, no Man ever used the Word [Solidity] in his Sense but himself;
and it is not at all allowable to Him, Me, or any Man, to give a new Sense to
any Word not given it before. For, this discourse of mine shows it can have no
Proper Sense at all; and on the other side he does not take it in a
Metaphorical Sense, as we use to do when we transferr it to Spiritual Things,
and call a Notion or a Discourse Solid. All Words are indeed Ad placitum; but
it is Mankind that must please to agree in their Signification; nor must they be
at the Beneplacitum of Particular Men, or Private Authors.

3. He declines, with some reason, the Word [Impenetrability] because it is
Negative: But why might not then His Solidity not at all Essential to Body.
Extension have served, which bears the same Sense? For that, whose Notion or
Nature it is to have its parts without one another, cannot bear the having them
within one another, or their being Penetrated within themselves; which is his
Notion of the Word [Solidity.] He conceives his Solidity to be most intimately
connected with, and Essential to Body, and no where to be found or imagined but
only in Matter, But why his Solidity should be deemed Essential to Body at all,
he gives no reason, and I am well assured no Man living can give any; For it
confounds the Line of Substance or Ens, with that of Quality; which jumbles all
our Commonest Notions together, by making the Thing and its Mode to be the same
Essential Notion. Nor is it Solidity only that is necessarily found in Matter;
for neither can Extension, Divisibility, Measurability, Space, Impenetrability,
etc. be found any where but in things made of Matter, But, what I most wonder
at, is, why [Quantity] should be totally waved and neglected, That Word having
been used by all the Learned World, till of late, is (as has been shown,
Preliminary 5th.. 18.) most Proper; and, either directly, or by Immediate
consequence, involves all the rest in its Signification. For, if a Body have
Bigness or Quantity in it, it must be Extended, and cannot be Contracted into a
Point, Line or Surface. It must be Divisible, or One in the Notion of Quantity.
And, if it must be Extended and cannot be crampt into an Indivisible, its parts
cannot be penetrated within one another; however it may be pierced or Divided
by another Body, by shoving its potential parts toward either side. Lastly, it
must be Measurable, or Proportionable to a Body of the same Quantity. So that I
see not what imaginable Privilege can accrue to Solidity above the rest: And,
it seems to me a New and Groundless assertion, that Impenetrability (though we
abate the Negative manner of Expression) is Essential at all to Body, more than
any of the rest; that is, not at all.

4. This acute Writer, in pursuance of his Doctrine about Solidity, proceeds to
prove there may be Pure Space, Space without Body, or Vacuum, is a mere
Groundless Fancy.
or Vacuum; because we can have an Idea of Space left by a Body without the
Idea of another Solid Thing, or a Body, coming in its Room. I Answer, we may
Indeed have a Fancy of such a Thing, as we may of many other Contradictions, so
they be not expressed in directly opposite Terms, v. g. of a Golden Animal, or a
Chimera, etc. But, I utterly deny that we can have a True and Solid Notion of
it, taken from the Thing it self; as all Ideas must be, that are not
Fantastic. He thinks there is no Necessity, one Body should follow another
that is moved from such a Space; and that the Maintainers of it do build their
Assertion on the Supposition that the World is full. What other Men hold of the
World's being Full, I know not, nor what they mean by it; but I will heartily
deliver my Sentiment, and the Demonstration for it a priori, which is this: I
take my Notion of Quantity from the Thing, or Body; and, I have shown above,
that that Notion is the Nature of the Thing, as it is Quantitative, or Affected
with such a Mode. Here is my firm Ground, and here I fix my Foot.

5. Proceeding hence, and reflecting on this Nature of Quantity in my Mind; I
discourse it thus: I am to find The Contrary to that Tenet Demonstrated.
out in what its (Analogical) Essence or Entity consists; and I discover, it
must be in that which expresses its proper Unity: Seeing then Divisibility best
expresses its Unity, (for, what is Divisible, or Capable to be more, is, eo
ipso, One,) I have found out the Essential Notion or Nature of Quantity; and,
since what is Divisible, or not yet Divided, is Continued; and what is
Continued as to its Quantity, is not Discontinued or Divided according to its
Quantity; therefore Continuity is its proper Unity; which consists in being
Indivisum in se, or within its own Notion, and Formally constitutes its Subject
such. Wherefore, since the Essence of Quantity is the Commonest Affection of
Body, taken in its whole Latitude, as including all Bodies, it follows, that
Continuity, which is its Unity, must be found in them all likewise; that is,
all Bodies, or the whole Nature of Body, that is, the Entire Bulk of Body, must
be Continued. And therefore, it is as great a Contradiction, that some Bodies,
or some Parts of Body, should not be Continued, (or, which is the same, that
there should be a Vacuum,) as that Triangularity should be in some one Body,
and yet it should not be Triangular; that Whiteness should be in a Wall, and
yet it should not be White; or Unity in a Thing, and yet it self should not be
Unum. This is my Way of Demonstrating against Vacuum within the World, to
prove, and not suppose, the World Full, or Continued; which I draw out of the
Abstract Notion of Quantity, or of Body considered as Quantitative; and out of
those Notions, most Intimately and Essentially Connected with it. Which, why it
should not be as Evident as any Demonstration in Mathematics; or why we cannot
draw as clear a Demonstration from the Nature of Quantity in Common, as we can
from the Nature of such a Quantity, I desire any Man, who is so wise as to know
that all Science and Demonstration do consist in the Connection of Terms, to
inform me. I say, any such Man; for, if he knows not This, it is Impossible he
should know any Thing at all in Philosophy, or even in Logic; and so he is not
worth discoursing with.

6. Hence is seen, that it is impossible Therefore it is impossible there should
be any True Experiment to prove a Vacuum.
that a Sucker in a Pump may draw up Water, and yet the next Body not follow.
We may Fancy it if we please; but our Fancy cannot change the Natures of
Things: It cannot make Continuity not to be Continuity; Quantitative Unity, not
to be such an Unity; nor Quantity, not to be Quantity; any more than his
Solidity can be Non-Solidity, or the Parts of Body penetrate one another. Had
Mr. Lock had a Notion of Space, taken indifferently from Body, and something
that is not Body, as we have of Sensitiveness from Man and Brute; he might, in
that Case, have framed an Abstract Notion of it, Common and Indifferent to Body
and Vacuum; for, then, it had been grounded on the Thing, and had been a solid
and true Notion; but, since he had the Idea, or Notion of Space from Body only,
and therefore (as was largely proved above) it could be of nothing else, but of
Body thus Modified, it must be confined to Body, with which (as all Modes are)
it is Identified; and therefore, the Idea, or Notion of it, can never be
applicable to what is not a Body.

REFLECTION Fourth, ON The Seventh and Eighth CHAPTERS.
1. HAving Method to Science, B. 1. L. 2.. 14.
already shown, Mr. Locke's First Chapter commendable.
that our only Simple Notion is that of Existence, I have no Occasion to make
any Remarks on his 7th Chapter, but that it is highly Commendable in the Author,
to reduce his Speculations to Piety and Contemplation: This being not only our
Duty, but that Best End, to which all Solid Speculation naturally leads us.

2. As for his 8th Chapter, I grant, that all the Ideas, or Notions, we have,
are Positive in the Understanding, (at Privative Notions must Connotate the
Subject.
least, in part;) but the Reason of it is, because they do, all of them,
include the Thing, as it is thus considered; without which, we could have no
Ideas of Privations or Negations at all: For, Non-Ens, formally as such, or as
totally Excluding Ens, can have no Intelligibility, nor, consequently, any
Notion, by which we can understand it: And Privations differ from Negations
only in this, that they include in their Notion a Capacity of the Subjects
having such or such a Mode, annexed to its not having it; which Capacity
clearly Connotates the Thing, since there cannot be a Capacity, without some
Thing that is Capable, or has that Capacity. Add, that I see not how, Ideas
being Resemblances, an Idea, considered by us as a Positive real Being, can
ever resemble or represent Privations, they being of (at least) Subcontrary
Natures. What I hold, is, that, when we conceive a Thing, as having some
Privation in it, the Idea of it is partly Positive, partly Privative; and the
Material Part of it is the Thing; the Formal, as Privative, or, as thus
Modified. For, Ideas, I mean, Notions of Privations, without including the
Thing, are Unconceivable, and Impossible; as whoever looks into their See
Prelim. 3.. 9, 10, 11.
Definition, will discern clearly. Of this Nature (in Common) are all the
Notions we have of the Modes, or Accidents; no Notion being truly or perfectly
Positive, but that of Ens, or Thing.

I cannot grant that our Ideas, or Notions, (or even Phantasms,) are caused in
us by mere Motions, continued from Mere Motions made upon the Senses,
Insufficient to give us Knowledge of the Objects.
our Senses, to the Brain, or the Seat of Sensation; but must judge, for the
Reasons alleged Prelim. 4.. 26, 27, 28, etc.
above, that this is performed by those Imperceptible Bodies there spoken of,
or by the Effluviums themselves conveyed thither, and afterward lodged there.
In embracing which Opinion, of our Knowledge being wrought by mere Motions made
by the Objects, his Excellent Wit suffers it self to be led astray by our
Moderns. His Reason (which I conceive is also theirs) is, because it is not
more impossible to conceive, that God should annex such Ideas to such Motions,
than Pain to a piece of Steel dividing the Body, with which that Idea has no
Resemblance. How unlike a Reason this is, appears at first fight; and, I am
sure this Parallel has no Resemblance at all with the Thing it is brought for.
I know of no Annexing the Idea of Pain to a piece of Steel; but, must think
it is a most highly extravagant Conceit. The Business passes thus in Nature. A
piece of Steel being Denser, and withal sharp, is a proper Cause of Dividing
the Body; the Dividing of it, is a proper Cause of its being disordered, and
rendered unable to assist the Soul, or the Man, in his necessary Operations:
This breeds naturally a Conception in the Soul, or the Man, that he is hurt;
which Naturally produces in the Knower, who is highly concerned in it, Grief or
Pain: So that all is here carried on by a Train of proper Causes, to proper
Effects; and needs no Annexing by God, more than to conserve the Order of
Second Causes which himself has established. On the other side, there is no
Natural Resemblance of such a Motion to such an Idea, as is confessed; nor is
the former a Proper Cause of the other; which puts them to have recourse to
this Voluntary Annexion to them by God. Add, that it is an odd kind of
Argument, to allege, that it is not impossible to conceive that God may do
this, or that, without proving he has done it: Nor is it at all allowable in
Philosophy, to bring in a Deus e Machina at every turn, when our selves are at
a loss to give a Reason for our Thesis. Nor is it to be expected, that God will
alter the Nature of Things, for the Interest of any Man's Tenet; but, since his
Wisdom, in his Ordinary Government of the World, carries on the Course of it
according to the Nature of Second Causes, it must first be proved, that what we
maintain, is Agreeable to the Course of Natural Causes, ever we ought to think
or imagine that God will have any hand in it: And, if we can prove this, we need
no Immediate or particular Recourse to God's favoring us, by doing This, or
That, to make good our Argument.

4. I must deny too, consequently to my former Doctrine, that Sensible
Qualities are nothing in the Objects, but Sensible Qualities are the same in
the Objects, as in the Mind.
Powers to produce various Sensations in us; unless it be meant, that they have
Powers to send out such Effluviums into the Brain, by the Senses, as imprint
their very Natures in our Mind; and not barely to produce Motions in our
Nerves. Nor can I conceive why the Ideas of the Secondary Qualities should have
nothing like them, existing in the Bodies themselves; nor be Resemblances of
them. If this be true, why are they called [Ideas,] which either signifies
Resemblances, or Nothing? Again, since the Bodies are put to cause them, how
can we think they are nothing like them? Can any Man think the Effect is
nothing like the Cause, when every Effect can be nothing but a Participation of
the Cause, or something coming into the Subject from the Efficient, which was
in it some way or other before? Lastly, If these Secondary Qualities be
compounded of the Primary ones, (viz. of Solidity, Extension, Figure and
Mobility) in our Understanding, why should not those Primary Qualities in re,
as well compound those Secondary ones in the Thing, or out of our
Understanding? And, if they do, (as it is evident they must, since they are all
there,) then, why are not those Secondary Ideas full as like those Secondary or
Compounded Qualities found in the Thing, as the Primary Ideas were like the
Primary Qualities in the same Thing; and, consequently, resemble them, as well
as the others did their proper Originals? I much doubt, that the Author rather
consulted his Fancy in this particular, than his good Reason: And, because
those Effluviums, or the Figures of Parts, which cause our Sensations, are too
Subtle and Indiscernable to cause Distinct Phantasms of themselves, as the
Primary ones did, but are of a Confused Uniformness in Appearance, he judges
hence, they are Nothing like the others: Whereas, Reason will inform
Reflecters, that, since Color is nothing but the Surface of a Body, as it is
apt to reflect Light; the manner of Reflection found in the Surface of a White
Thing, which is apt to reflect much Light, is, to our Reason, and in our
Notion, such as it was in the Thing imprinting it; and, consequently, (every
thing Acting as it is,) such as came from it. Whence, those who, by Reflex
Thoughts, and using their Reason, do go about to explain or define the Nature
or Notion of Whiteness, do make it consist in such a Reflection of Light,
bringing Effluviums with it from a Surface so advantagiously Figured: And so,
the Notion of Whiteness is the same in the Thing, and in the Understanding;
viz. those Effluviums thus Figured, or Modified, however, the Appearance of it
in the Fancy reaches not the true Nature of the Thing, as it is White; which,
indeed, Fancy never does.

5. The Reason why the Pain, which we feel, is not in the Thing that Caused it,
and Sensible Qualities are so, is, The Pretense of GOD's Voluntary Annexing
Improper Causes to Effects, is Unphilosophical.
because these last are Proper, Univocal, and Immediate Effects of Bodies
sending out Effluviums of their own Natures; but Pain, being an Affection of
the Soul, springing from a Perception that its dear Compart is hurt, and
disordered, is an Improper, Remoter, and Equivocal Production. The Altering,
Disordering, or Spoiling the Temperature or Continuity of the Bodily Parts due
to their Nature, is, (as was shown,) the Immediate and Proper Effect of those
Offensive Agents; but it is Accidental to their manner of Operating, that they
cause Pain, or Pleasure, even remotely; and, it lights only, that sometimes
they do this, because the Subject, or the Body, in which they produce these
their proper Effects, haps to be Identified with a Knowing Nature, only which
is properly capable to Grieve, or be Delighted when a Harmful or Pleasing
Impression is made on the Body, which is Part of the Man, and, in some sort,
himself. The like is to be said of Manna, and other such Instances. The
Alterations or Disorder made in the Guts and Stomach, are Natural, Proper, and
Immediate Effects of it; but the Pain ensuing thence, which is a Spiritual
Disposition of the Mind, is a Remote, Accidental, and Improper Effect of it.

6. By this Time Mr. Lock sees The Power in the Object to cause Sensation and
Knowledge, is Improperly such.
that I agree with him, that the Bodies in Nature have a Power in them to cause
our several Sensations; and, that this Power is that which we call such a
Quality of it. But I disagree with him, that they are only Powers to cause such
a Motion; and affirm, it is a Power, when duly Circumstanced with other
Requisites, (as, with Light, to convey Visible Qualities; Moisture, Gustable
ones, etc.) to send out Effluviums, of their own Nature, to the Brain; (which,
therefore, are Inherent in, and Proper Parts of those Objects,) whether they
cause Actual Sensation, or no. The Sun sends out his Beams, which, scattered
thinly, at this remote distance from the Fountain, are therefore one of Mr.
Locke's Secondary Qualities, which we call Light; yet, contracted by a
Burning-Glass, they perform the Proper Effect of Fire, Burning; whence we ought
to conclude, they are of the Nature of Fire. Can we then deny, or doubt, but
that the Body of the Sun, which communicates, or sends them out, is it self
Fire; or, that, being such, those Rays, and the Sun, have no Similitude with
one another? Or, that, when they strike the Eye, they stop there, and are not
carried into the Brain? Hippocrates tells us, that Omnes parts corporis sunt
permeabiles; meaning, that they are pervious to the Humors; which are gross
Things, in comparison of the Sunbeams. How can it then be doubted, but that
they reach the Fancy; and thence, the Soul; and imprint their Notions or
Natures there: And, though some may deny they are the same in the Mind, as they
are in Nature; yet can it, with any Show of Reason, be denied they are at all
like the Cause that produced them? The like Discourse holds in all other
Sensible Qualities, to what Sense soever they belong.

7. To close this Discourse, I am apt to think, that Mr. Lock intended to
oppose those who hold, that the Sensible Qualities are a little kind of
Distinct Entities. Next, I declare, that, though the Thing has accidentally a
Power in it, to make it self perceived; yet, taking the Thing as an Object, (as
he does,) it is but Improperly called a Power; and not Properly, as are our
Powers, or Faculties, of Seeing, Hearing, Knowing, etc. are: For, the Act being
the End for which the Power was given, the Faculties, or Powers, are bettered,
and perfected, by being reduced to Act; and so there is a real Ground for their
being Related to the Object: Whereas, neither the Object, or Thing, nor any
Sensible Quality in it, is a Jot the better, or any way Altered, by being
perceived, or known; any more than a Cart rolling through the Street, is the
better, or otherwise than it had been, because the Effluviums it sends out do
make a Representation of it in a Shop full of Looking-Glasses, as it passes by.
Whence Logicians say, that there is no Real Relation of the Object to the
Sense, or Intellect; because there is no Real Ground for such a Relation, nor
any Dependence of the Object on those Powers, in any kind; B. 1. L. 7.. 9, 10,
11.
as is shown in my Method.

REFLECTION Fifth, ON The Tenth CHAPTER.
PAssing over this Ninth Chapter about Perception, I confess my self at a great
Loss how to understand diverse Passages in his Tenth, which treats of Retention,
Ideas or Notions are not Actual Perceptions, but the Object perceived, and
durably remaining.
or how to make him coherent with himself. For, First, he tells us our Ideas
are nothing but Actual Perceptions of the Mind. By which Words he seems to make
no kind of Distinction between the Act of Perception and the Object of it;
whereas the Act is the Exercise of our Power of Perceiving, actuated by the
Object about which it is then employed; which Object determins the Indifferency
of the Power to this or that Act in particular; which the Schools call
Specifying the Act: But the Object is the Thing known by the Act; and it is a
strange Paradox to say, that the Act of Knowledge and the Object or Thing known
are the same; especially, if the Thing known be something without us: Next, I
cannot reconcile his making our Ideas to be nothing but Actual Perceptions,
with his making our Ideas, quite through his Book, to be the Object of our
Thoughts, and expressly stating them to be such in the beginning of it, Chap. 1.
8. Secondly, he says, That those Ideas cease to be any thing, when there is no
Perception of them. If so, why does he put us to have Memory or Retention, if,
after the Act is past, there be nothing to keep in Memory or Retain. Thirdly,
in Consequence It destroys the Nature of Memory, to make it consist in the
Reviving Ideas.
of this his Ground, he affirms, that this laying up Ideas in the Repository of
his Memory, signifies no more, but that the Mind has in many Cases a Power to
Revive Perceptions, with a Connotate annexed, of having had them before.
Certainly, this Signification of the word [Memory] is peculiar to himself, and
contrary to the Sentiments of all Mankind; who, were they examined by the Poll,
would, I believe, unanimously declare, that by laying up a Thing in Memory,
they meant, (as the Words naturally import) the Retaining something which has
its being yet within us, and may be brought into play again upon occasion. Can
the Memory be said to Retain what is not? Or can there be a Repository of
Nothing? Is Reviving the Notion of Retaining, they being rather of a Contrary
Sense to one another? Or can Remembering be conceived to be the same Notion with
Reproduction? These seem to me such monstrous Abuses of Words, that I would
willingly think my self mistaken, rather than to father them on so Learned an
Author, did not my Eyes assure me I do not dream or oversee. Nor can the same
Individual Act ever be revived; it depending on many Circumstances,
determinable to such a Time or Place; the former of which can never recur, or
be reproduced. Lastly, What means this Power in the The Mind cannot revive
Perceptions.
Mind to revive Perceptions? The Man, indeed, has a Power, when re-excited by
outward Objects like the former, or by Passion, Disease, or by some other
Casual Circumstances, to rummage the Ideas lodged in the Brain; and, so, by
their new Impression on the Seat of Knowledge, to cause such an Act, as by it
to know the same Thing again; as also to know it was foreknown, as was
explicated Prelim. 4. 26, 27, 28.
above: But to put the Soul to revive Ideas, or even to act, so that the Action
shall begin from her peculiar Nature, is Praeternatural to her Condition, to
her Manner of Existing, and consequently, to her manner of Operating here;
which, as it must be ever with the Bodily part or the Fancy, so it must begin
still from it, as it did at first; with this only Difference, that in the first
Impressions made on the Sense, and thence on the Seat of Knowledge, the Man
(and particularly as to his Soul) is perfectly Passive; whereas afterward by
virtue of those Phantasms, and their former Impression, which have already
affected the said Seat of Knowledge, (which is part of himself) and have been
re-affected by it, the Man is partly Passive, partly Active in remembering; as
Mr. Lock does, I think, also acknowledge; though he explicates it otherwise than
I do, viz. By the Mind's setting it self on work, which I judge, and have shown
to be Impossible, Prelimin. 4. 25, 26, 27.

2. I must not omit here to remark, that when Mr. Lock says, that Ideas fade
in the Memory; or, (as he ingeniously Ideas in the Fancy may fade, but Notions
are never blotted out of the Soul.
expresses it) that [the Pictures drawn in our Minds are laid in fading
Colours] he most evidently discovers, that by Ideas here he means material
Representations or Phantasms, and not those Spiritual Objects of our
Understandings, Notions. For, there is no doubt but that Phantasms, they being
only Imperceptible Particles, of the same Nature with the Corporeal Agents
whence they are sent, do follow, (and that very easily) the Fate of their
Originals; and are liable to be defaced, altered or corrupted, as these are:
Whereas it is impossible, that Ideas or Notions, which have a Spiritual Being
in our Mind, should be liable to any such Decay, Corruption or Mutation. If any
thing could prejudice, destroy or efface them, it must in all Reason be thought
that their Contraries would do it: Whereas clear Reflection tells us, that
Contraries in the Mind are so far from Expelling, Blurring, or Altering one
another there, that they not only very Friendly dwell together, but moreover
that, by their Co-habitation there, they make one another magis elucescere, and
Establish one another Natures. Hot and Cold, Moist and Dry, which are
perpetually fighting, and make such Bustles and Turmoils in the Material World,
are very consistent, and agree amicably in the Soul. The Corporeal Instruments
which brought our Notions thither may perish; but when they are once in her,
they are as Immutable and Immortal as her self. So that the Pictures in our
Minds are so far from being drawn in fading Colors, that they should rather be
said (if we would use a Metaphor to express their Durableness) to be engraved
in Brass, Marble, or Adamant; being as lasting as Eternity. Which Tenet, were I
writing Metaphysics, I should not doubt but to demonstrate; and withal to show
how useful it is to explicate Christian Faith: Particularly those Points of
laying open the Book of Conscience at the last day; when, as the Sybil sings,
[Cunctaque cunctorum cunctis arcana patebunt.] And how Infants are connaturally
saved by virtue of Baptism.

REFLECTION Sixth. ON The Eleventh and Twelfth CHAPTERS.
1. THE 11th. Chapter gives me no occasion to make any Reflections, but only on
his attributing Knowledge to Brutes; about which I have been too large If
Brutes can know, they may have General Notions, and Abstract, and Compare too.
already. He denies indeed that they have the power of Abstracting, or of
having General Ideas. But, if they have true Knowledge, or any more than King
David meant, when he says, The Sun knows his going down, I see no reason why
they may not have General Notions, and Abstract, and Compare too. For, if they
have any Degree of Reason, as he grants they have, they may do all this; and I
am sure, and have already shown, their Outward Actions do as much countenance
their having Reason, as any signs they give us do show that they cannot
Abstract, or have General Ideas; since General Ideas (as every good Reflecter
may observe) are nothing but Imperfect Ideas of the Thing; and in a Thousand
occasions, the Object or Thing affords them no more, but Imperfect or General
Ideas, and therefore they must have them. I am much pleased with his
Distinction between Wit and Judgment; and I could wish that our Men of Fancy,
who affect to bring Religion, and all they understand not, to Drollery, would
apply it to themselves.

2. The Author discourses very acutely, how our Reason and Judgment are
misguided by our not distinguishing The distinguishing our Notions guides our
Reason and Judgment right.
our Notions exactly; whence we may infer, that that part of Logic which
teaches us how to distinguish them accurately, and to keep them distinct, is of
exceeding great use; and that the Study of it is to be earnestly pursued by all
Pretenders to Science; especially by new Beginners: Of which, I hope, I have
elaborately treated in the First Book of my Method.

3. In order to the 12th. Chapter; there is no doubt but that we can unite
several simpler Ideas or Notions into one, All Complex Ideas, or Notions, must
consist of simpler ones, united in the Thing.
and signify them by one Name; but I deny that, if we conjoin them otherwise
than as they are, or may be, united in External Objects, or in the Thing, we
can have any Complex Notions, though we may have a Fancy, of them, or a kind of
Imitation of some thing which once affected our Senses. For, since I cannot but
think I have demonstrated that our Notion is the Thing as conceived by us, or
the Thing existing in the understanding; If I have any Complexion of more
Simple Notions in my Mind, not found to be united in the Thing; the Idea in my
Mind is not conformable to the Thing it self, nor is it, as I have proved it to
be, that Thing; and then to what end should I have such an Idea, as if I come
to predicate it of the Thing, the Proposition would be False, which
consequently would fill our mind with Falsehoods. Next, as has been often proved
formerly, I deny the Soul can Unite or Act of her self, or by her peculiar
power (though the Man may) but is obliged to take what is given her by Impressions
on the Seat of Knowledge. In which case, what the Thing or Object, by a Genuin
Impression, gives her, is Orderly, Solid, and a Seed of true knowledge or
Science; but that which the Fancy gives her, otherwise than as the Thing did
directly imprint it, is Disorderly, Superficial, and a Ground of Error.
Indeed, she is forced to apprehend, whenever the Phantasms strike the Seat of
Knowledge, though their Motions and Complexions be never so Disorderly, or even
Monstrous. Now, whenever this is done, Judicious Men direct their Eye to the
Thing, and examine whether the Conjunction of such or such Ideas, is truly
found in re; or is agreeable to those Direct Impressions it had received
thence; which if it be, the Soul entertains it, after Examination, and lets it
sink into her; it being the true nature of the Thing, and so a Ground to Truth,
to see which her Essence was made; If it be not, she rejects it; for it grounds
a Contradiction to the Nature of the Thing, which is the only Ground of Truth;
and makes or counterfeits it to be what it is not; and it is directly against
her Nature to admit Contradictory Judgments. Now, what Judicious Men, by their
recourse to the Thing, thus reject, those Unskilful Thinkers, who are led by
Fancy, do admit; and by this means their Souls become full of Fantastic
Conceits which never can be brought to any Coherence or Connection of Terms. For
no Terms can Cohere, unless the Notions meant by each of them be really in the
Thing it self; and those Coherences made in the Mind by any other way, or of
any other Materials, are far from Solid or True, as we experience in People
that are Splenetick or Enthusiaistck.

4. Wherefore, whenever the Ideas are connected otherwise than they are or may
be in re, the Object of that Otherwise they are Groundless Fancies.
Act can have no Metaphysical Verity, Unity, nor consequently Entity in it; the
two former of which, being Properties of Ens, cannot be where Ens or Thing is
not. Whence the Objects of those Fantastic Acts is some non-Ens taken for an
Ens; which, if pursued home by a good Logician, must end in a Contradiction.
For example, I can have Notions of Hircus and Ceruus aparted from one another;
but, if I will unite them in my Mind otherwise than Nature exhibited them, and
take them conjoyntly, (as Fancy may) and frame a a Complex Idea of a
Hirco-Ceruus, or Goat-Stag, it must needs be perfectly Fantastical and
Chimerical. This will farther appear, if we take one of Mr. L's Complex Ideas,
viz. Beauty, consisting of a certain Composition of Figure and Color. Now, if
such Figure and Color had not been found, or might not be found united by
Nature in the same Thing, the Idea of it could not have been conformable to
what is in Nature, or the Idea of any Reality, but purely Fantastical and
Counterfeit. The same may be said of his Idea of Lead, with its proper
Qualities; or of the Ordinary Idea of a Man, described here to be a Substance
or Thing with Motion, Thought and Reasoning joined to it: Which Qualities, were
they not joined in the Thing they belong to, or identify'd with it, the Complex
Ideas of them would be nothing but mere Groundless Fancies.

This Point is so Important, that it will deserve to be cleared as perfectly as
possible: I shall therefore allow it a more elaborate Explanation, though I spend
less Pains and Time in my other Reflections.

When I consider an Individual Thing in Nature, (v. g. A Man) according to the
Notion of Being, I have The Manner how all Complex Ideas or Notions are made,
elaborately explained.
two Notions of him, viz. That he is capable of Existing, and that he actually
Exists; the former of which he has by means of Second Causes, which, by
Determining the Matter, gives him his Determinate Nature or Essence. The other
he has immediately from the First Being; and I have a Complex Notion of him
accordingly. Next, considering the same thing precisely as a Body, or such an
Ens as we call by that Name; I find in it somewhat by which it is Corruptible,
or Changeable into another, and somewhat by which it is Determined to be This
sort of Thing, or Body, or to be what it is: And, I conceive and call Body
according to the former of these Considerations Power or Matter; and, according
to the later, Act or Form; and I frame a Complex Idea of it, as it is a Body
accordingly. Hitherto I treat of the Thing as a Metaphysician, and regard it
only according to some Order it has to Being. Proceeding further on, and
dividing still the common Line of Ens, or (what I am now arrived at) [Body] by
Intrinsecal Differences, or by more and less of the Generical Notion, of which
Quantity or Divisibility is the Primary Affection, or that of which all the
other Modes are made; I find that some Bodies must be more Divisible or Rare,
other less Divisible or Dense; and by this means we approach something nearer
to Natural or Physical Considerations of that thing as it is called Body; and
the Science that treats of it, as being immediately under Metaphysics, and
immediately above Physics, may not unfitly be called Archi-Physical; as giving
the immediate Principles to Physics! This way of Considering Body grounds the
Notions of Simple Bodies, called Elements; which differ in Nothing but Rarity
and Density; and also, the Notions of Compound Bodies made up of those Simple
ones. So that now my former Complex Notions of Capable to be and Actual Being;
and, of having Determinate and Indeterminate Respects to that Ens as it is
Body, called Form and Matter, has annexed to it in the Thing many Secondary
Qualities, made up of those Primary ones; such as are, Heat and Cold, Moisture
and Dryness, etc. and so we are come to that Science called Physics or Natural
Philosophy; and my former Complex Notion of such an Individuum, takes in these
Second Qualities, over and above what it contained before. Advancing farther,
we come to consider this Thing or Body with its Parts so diversified by those
First and Second Qualities, or so Organized, that one part (the common Causes
of the World supposed) is able to work on another; which kind of Thing we call
Self-moving or Living. And, still proceeding on by a f^rther Complexion of such
Parts, we come to a Thing that is Sensitive, or Moving it self by the least
Effluviums affecting those tender Organs called the Senses. All which give so
many New Additions to my former Notion of that Individuum, and make it more
Complex. Moreover, we can find in this Sensitive Thing, or this Animal now
spoken of, both as to its peculiar Matter and Form, a Disposition to work
comparatively; that is to judge, and reason or discourse; and, consequently, to
have in it a Knowing Power, which is to be a Man: And, Lastly, Such a peculiar
Degree of this Power of Comparing, which restrains the Specific Notion of Man
to be this Individual Man. So that, by this time, such a Vast Assembly of Modes
or Accidents (the Crowd of which make that most Complex Notion, called the
Suppositum, so blindly confused) do meet in my Complex Idea of this Individual
Man, that, though I see he is a Thing; and a Distinct Thing, because I see he
exists and operates Independently of all other Things; yet, I can have no
Distinct and Clear Notion of his Essence, but by taking it in pieces, (as it
were,) both as to those several Considerations belonging to him, according to
the Line of Being, as was now explained; and also, as to those Conceptions I
make of him, according to all the Physical Modes or Accidents which are in him:
Which Modes, so to gain an exacter Knowledge of him, as Affected with those
Modes, (and the same may be said of all other Things,) we divide, and
sub-divide, as we see agreeable to their Distinct Natures or Notions.

This Discourse may, if well weighed, be, perhaps useful for many Ends. But, to
apply it to our present purpose: All this Multitude of less Complex, or more
simple Ideas, belonging to the Line of Substance, are found Connected in this
Individuum; and, did we add the least of them by our Mind, which was not found
Conjoined in the Thing, my Notion or Idea of him would, so far, be Fantastic,
and False; because there was nothing found in the Thing that answers to such a
Complexion, (only which can make it Real,) but only in my Fancy, counterfeiting
such a Complexion, and mis-informing my Understanding; as it happens in the
Illusive Representations, made in those who are troubled with the Spleen,
Melancholy, or Phrenzy; as likewise, in timorous People, when they think they
see Sprights; or in Horses, when they boggle. Add, that the Mind cannot, of its
self, begin to act, (as was proved formerly:) but all New Acts, or Excitation
of Former Notions in her, are the Acts of the whole Man, and must naturally
arise first from the Bodily Part, or the Fancy; either Imprinting Phantasms,
which it receives from the Objects, orderly and genuinly, on the Seat of
Knowledge; or Disorderly, as its Irregular and Extravagant Motions happen to
conjoyn them. Whence we say that a Man who does not correct such incoherent
Connexions by Judgment, is led by Fancy, or Caprichious.

6. While we are discoursing about the manner how we come by all our Ideas
whether Simple or Complex, it How the Doctrine of Cartesius, Mr. Lock, and J.
S. differ, as to this point.
would not perhaps be improper to set before the Reader's view, what is my
Tenet, the Cartesians and Mr. Locks, and how we differ. The Cartesians do not
own themselves at all beholding to outward Objects for their Ideas (as least,
as some of them say, for the chiefest ones) but they say they are Innate, or
imprinted on the Soul by Gods immediate hand; though some of them (which makes
the matter much worse) chose rather to say they are Elicited or produced by the
Soul it self, upon such a Motion from without; as also, that they are
re-excited by such Motions; in which last Tenet Mr. Lock seems to agree with
them. But this Learned Author denies all Innate Ideas; and holds that the
Simple ones (at least) are caused by the Objects, whether they be Internal or
External; but, that the Complex Ideas are framed by the Mind, which he
conceives to have a virtue of Compounding them as she pleases. Whereas, my
Principles force me to oppose them both, and to hold That all Ideas, whether
Simple, or Complex (provided that by Ideas be meant Notions, and not
Imaginations) are to be taken entirely from the Objects or Things in Nature; as
also that, when we excite them a new, something that is in Act it self must
cause that Action; because a mere Power to do any Thing, (whether in the Soul
or out of it) cannot determine it self to any Action in particular. And, if I
may freely and impartially pass my Verdict between them, I should frankly
declare, that Mr. Locke's way has far more of Nature in it, and consequently is
more Solid than the Cartesian; in regard he holds all our Ideas are originally
taken from the Outward Objects, either emmediately, as to his Simple Ideas; or
mediately, as to those which are compounded of them by the Soul: Whereas the
Cartesians cannot pretend to know any thing in Nature, unless they can solidly
prove these three Previous Points: First, That their Ideas are Innate, or else
produced by the Soul; neither of which I am certain they can ever prove.
Secondly, What those Ideas are, or that they are not mere Fancies. Thirdly, If
they put them to be mere Representations, and not the Thing, or Object it self,
how we can be certain that we must by them know the Things without us,
notwithstanding all that I have alleged to demonstrate the contrary in my
Second and Third Preliminaries. If these Points, which are the main Hinges that
open us the way into Philosophy, or the Knowledge of Things, be not first
firmly established, all their Discourses, though they be never so ingenious, must
be hollow and superficial for want of Solid Ground. These three Points, I say,
they must either show to be self-evident, or they must make them Evident by
Demonstrating them; or else, I am sure, it is most Evident, that all their
Superstructures are Ruinous for want of a Firm Foundation. I would not
misunderstand them, when they explain to us what their Ideas are; and yet they
have such a peculiar Talent of speaking Ambiguous Sense in seemingly plain
Words, that I cannot for my Heart comprehend their Meaning. They tell us
sometimes they hold the Idea, considered Objectively, to be the Res or Thing
itself; but when they add, that it is the Res or Thing [quatenus representata]
they seem to deny it again; for the Words [quatenus representata] signify, in
true Logic, the bare Representation of the Thing; as [Paries quatenus Albus,]
means [Albedo;] the restrictive Word [Quatenus] cutting off the precise Notion
to which it is annexed, from all others. And how odd a piece of Chiquanery it
is to say, that the Picture or Resemblance of Caesar, is Caesar himself,
quatenus representatus, I leave it to others to judge. Besides, if the thing it
self be really there, or in the Knowing Power, it may be known without more
ado, or without needing those little Spiritual Epicycles, (if I may so call
them) those useless Ideas. Mr. Lock, I must confess, began at first to build
Solidly on the Things; but, he is so very acutely and speculatively attentive
to the Ideas in his own Thoughts, and so wholly taken up with Contemplation of
them, that he seems sometimes to overrun his own Principles, (which only at
first he intended to pursue) and quite to lose Sight of the Things. Whereas I
bend my whole Endeavor to keep my Eye steadily upon them through the whole
Course of my Doctrine, without intermingling any gratuitous Suppositions, or
suffering my self to be led astray from the Natures of the Things by any
ill-grounded Fancies of my own, which would court and debauch my Reason, though
they seem never so Ingenious.

REFLECTION Seventh. ON The Thirteenth CHAPTER.
1. IF, as Mr. Lock says, we get the Simple Idea of Space by our Sight and
Touch, then Nature gives us no Idea of a Space, which is not Visible and
Tangible; Extension not well Explicated.
whence follows, that the Idea of such a Space as Vacuum, which is neither the
Object of one of those Senses, nor of the other, is Unnatural and Fantastical.
The Notion of Distance is well explained; but I cannot discern why Length,
Breadth and Thickness should be called Capacity: For, these three Modes (as all
Modes do) express the manner how they Intrinsecally affect their Subject, Body;
whereas, Capacity signifies the Respect to something Extrinsecal to the Body
thus affected, or a Power to contain Another Thing. Much less can Extension be
charactered A Capacity of Space, with something between the Extremities, which
is Solid, Moveable and Tangible; for, though Matter were supposed to have no
Extremities at all, but to be Infinite, it would not be less Extended, but
more: And were the Air supposed to be neither Solid, Moveable or Tangible, yet
still it might be conceived to be Extended. Again, What means it, that
Extension is a Capacity of Space, whereas Space is rather a Capacity of what is
Extended. I wish I knew from what Rule or Ground Mr. Lock takes the Proper
Meaning of the Words he uses; for it seems evident to me, that this Explication
of Extension is merely Voluntary and Preternatural; and seems (though perfectly
Groundless it self) to be laid as a Ground for Vacuum; and, therefore, his
Consequences drawn thence, want Premises. Nor need we take such Pains by
Repeating our Ideas, to gain the Notion of Immensity worse.
Immensity; it is but putting a Negative to the plain Notion of [Measurable,]
and the Deed is done. Rather, it is perfectly Demonstrable, that the Adding or
Repeating our Ideas, cannot possibly give us the Notion of Immensity; for, we
have no Ideas, but of Finite Quantities; and the Number of the Times we can
repeat them, can be but Finite; which the very Terms tell us, can never give us
a Notion of an Infinite Quantity, or of Immensity. When he says, the Mind can
repeat, double, or join Ideas, I must deny it, as impossible, unless, by the
Word [Mind,] he means the Man. The Mind has no distinct Shop of her own, to
work in apart; nor can she work without her Tools, or her Conjoined
Instrument, the Body, as is proved above.

2. Nothing can be more solid, ingenious, or better expressed, than are his
Discourses here about Place: In Place well explicated.
which, he, in great part, observes the Sayings, and Common Language of the
Vulgar; which is the most Natural Way to explain those Notions which are Vulgar
ones, and Common to all Mankind. Whence, when we will needs affix
Significations, to the Words which are generally used to express those Notions,
by our own Conceits, it will most certainly lead us into very great Errors. He
only seems not to reflect upon the Common Saying of the Vulgar, that [Things
are in such or such a Place;] which shows, that their Notion of Place is to be
a Container, and consequently, Extended; the Body Contained, to which it is
adjusted, being such.

3. He argues well ad hominem, against those who make Body and Extension the
same Thing: I suppose, he and they Body and Extension not the same Notion.
both mean, the same Idea; for, the latter is not a Thing distinct from the
Substance in which it is; and the Ideas do most evidently differ, toto genere.
Those Men's Way of Arguing from Ideas including one another, is purely
Fantastical, unless those Ideas be Notions, or the Thing, as thus or thus
conceived; which, like a kind of Parts, are in the whole Ens, and so may be
said to be in it, or Predicated of it.

4. I have already proved, that Space is (materially) nothing else but Body,
considered according to its Quantity; Space cannot be without Extension.
and those Preliminary Discourses, which pretend to demonstrate it, must either
be confuted, or else it must follow, that (whatever we may fancy) the Parts of
Space are both Separable, Moveable, and do resist Motion. Farther, to imagine
Space, that is not Extended, is a perfect Contradiction, though not in the very
Terms, yet by an Easy and Immediate Consequence. For, putting a Body to be in
such a Space, it must be commensurate to such a Part of it; otherwise, that
Body might take up all Space; and must do so, were it not Commensurate to some
part of it only: And to fancy a Thing Commensurate to the Parts of what is
extended, and it self not to be Extended likewise, is a most extravagant
Conceit, and a plain Contradiction. Again, If a Body take up but one part of
Space, and not another part of it, (v. g. that part which is next it, or in
which it is,) Space must not only have Parts, but also one Part without
Another; which is the very Notion of Extension. Lastly, Since Imaginary Space
is put to be Vast, and even Infinite, it cannot consist in an Indivisible;
wherefore, it must necessarily be Divisible and Diffused, that is, Extended:
Whence follows, that, to fancy Body to be put in such a Space, or Place, (for
he grants here,. 11. that these two Ideas differ but in a certain Respect,) and
yet not shove aside or remove those Extended Parts out of that Space, is to
make the Extended Parts of that Space, and of the Body in it, to be within one
another, or penetrated; which implies a Contradiction. Now, if they be not
Penetrated, one of them must necessarily drive the other out of the Space it
occupates; and therefore, the Parts of that Space must be Separable, Moveable,
and Resistent, as those of Body are; they being, in very deed, the self-same.

5. Hence is seen, that in all this Discourse about Pure Space, or Vacuum, Mr.
Lock consulted his Fancy, Extension and Space differ only Formally, or in some
nice respect.
and not his good Reason attending to the Things as they are in Nature. That
which misled him seems to be this, because he finds not in his Idea of Space,
formally considered, the Notion of Divisibility, Separability, nor Resistance;
but that it abstracts from them all, as to the Formal Part of its Conception,
by which it is distinguished from those others. But, this is not peculiar to
Space; nor bears it any Show of being a solid Ground for the Existence of Space
separately from Body. For, Figure has not, in its Formal Notion, Quantity; and
yet it is nothing but Quantity thus terminated. How many Notions have we of
Quantity, and several other Modes, formally Distinct, which yet are nothing
else, really and materially, but Quantity it self. Take Divisibility,
Extension, Measurability, Proportionability, Impenetrability, Space, Place,
etc. They have, all of them, some nice Formality, or different Respect, which
distinguishes them; and makes the Ideas or Notions of them, as such, to be
Formally Exclusive of one another. Divisibility speaks the Unity of the
Potential Parts of Quantity: Measurability, the Respect they have to some
determinate Quantity stated by our Mind: Proportionability, such a Degree of
Equality or Inequality to another Thing, or to their own Parts: Impenetrability
and Extension, the Order or Situation of the same Potential Parts: Space, the
same Quantity, precisely and formally, as it is a Capacity or Power to contain
a Multitude of Things, without any Determination or Adjustment of the Space, to
the Things contained in it; so that the Notion of Space is the self-same as
that of Room: And Place signifies the same Quantity, as having a Power to
contain them Limitedly, and Determinately: Yet, notwithstanding, none ever
conceited, that, because they were apprehended as formally distinct, they could
therefore exist separately, without Quantity, or without one another, (as he
puts Space to exist without Body and Extension,) though all their Ideas are thus
formally Distinct: Nor, consequently, can Space, for the same Reason, exist
without Extension and Body; which seems to be his Ground, built on the distinct
Formal Idea he has of Space, why he thinks there may be a Vacuum: Or else, his
Ground is only a roving Imagination of a Vast Nothing beyond the Universality
of Things, fancied by him to be a Thing he knows not what, nor of what Sort or
Kind. But, enough of this formerly.

6. The Notion of Extension stands in his way, and therefore he endeavors to
make it Unintelligible, and Inexplicable. The Common Explication of Extension
defended.
He objects, that, to say that to be Extended is to have parts extra parts,
is the same as to say Extension is Extension. First, If it were the same in
Sense, where is the Harm? so it be only meant, that it is the same in re; or in
the Formal Notion, as long as the Expression is Different, and not formally
Identical. At this rate we may ridicule all Definitions: For, to say, [Homo est
Animal Rationale,] is the same in reality, as to say, Homo est Homo. Next, I
deny they are formally the same: Divisibility, which is the Notion of Quantity,
expresses only, that the Body it affects, has Potential Parts; and Extension
expresses the Manner how it has those Parts; viz. not Penetrated, or one within
another, but without one another; which adds a new Formality to the bare Notion
of Quantity: And this is a fair Explication for such a most Common and General
Notion; which having no Proper Genus, but a Transcendent, can bear no exact
Definition.

7. To our Objection, that if Pure Space or Vacuum be not really a Body, it not
being pretended to be a Spirit, Ens adequately divided into Body and Spirit.
it must be a mere Nothing, and so cannot exist; he replies, (if I understand
him,) that there may be a Thing that is neither Spirit, nor Body; and he asks
who told us there may not be such a Third Thing? I answer, Our evident Reason
told it us, by dividing Ens into Divisible and Indivisible; which dividing
Members, being Contradictory, allow no Third Thing which is neither the one,
nor the other. Since then he must not say, that such a vast Expansion as Vacuum
beyond all Bodies is Indivisible, either Mathematically, as a Point is, or
Physically, as those Things are which are insuparably Hard; it must be
Divisible, and consequently Extended, Separable, etc. as a Body is. But this
also he denies it to be; and therefore it is evidently concluded, that it is a
mere Nothing.

8. Nor will he acquaint us with his Thoughts, whether Vacuum be a Substance,
or Accident, till we show him a distinct Vacuum must either be Res, or Modus
Rei; otherwise, we can have no Notion of it.
Idea of Substance: Which seems to me a witty avoiding the Question, rather
than a Pertinent Answer. Indeed, we have no Distinct and Complete Notion of a
Suppositum, or Individual Substance, because it involves many distinct Notions
or Considerabilities in it, as their Ground. But, of Substance it self, or,
which is the same, of what is meant by the Word [Thing,] it is scarce possible
to be Ignorant, or to want a Distinct Idea of it: For, there is nothing from
which we need or can distinguish the Notion of Substance, or Ens, and so to
gain a Distinct Conception of it, but either Non-Ens, or Modus Entis; from both
which, honest Nature, if we attend to It, and not to Preter-natural Fancies,
teaches us to distinguish it. I should put the Argument thus: Vacuum, if any
Thing, must be either Res, or Modus Rei; for we have no other Notions: But
Vacuum is neither; therefore it is pure Nothing. I believe Mr. Lock had the
worst of the late Schoolmen in his Eye, when he gave this Answer; who, talking
Metaphorically of Standing under, and Inhering, left their Readers in the dark,
as to what they meant Literally. How God is Metaphorically called a Substance;
and how all our Notions and Words fall infinitely short of conceiving him as he
is in himself, or of expressing him Literally, I have discoursed Preliminary
4.. 39.
above.

9. It Is almost insuperably hard for those who are more versed in Mathematics
than in Metaphysics, to get above The Extravagant Arguments for Vacuum refuted.
Fancy, especially in this Particular of Vacuum, or Imaginary Space; because,
though plain Reason tells them that all Created Things are limited, both in their
own Natures, and consequently in their Modes or Accidents; yet, because they
can fancy something beyond Bodies, they will needs conceit there is some
Ultra-mundane kind of Thing existent out of the World, though it costs them that
highest Absurdity of putting Non-Ens to be Ens, or Nothing to be Something. And
the same Fancy furnishes them with plausible Apprehensions, which serve them
for Arguments. So, Mr. Lock asks, If God should place a Man at the Extremity
of Corporeal Beings, whether he could not stretch out his Hand beyond his Body?
I answer, that, in all Probability, he could neither stretch out his Hand, nor
so much as live in a Region so remote from the Habitation of Mortals: Nor, did
he live, how knows he but the Outmost Surface of the World is insuperably Solid
and Hard; as it is likely it is, so to keep the World Compacted, Close and
Tight? Next, to put God; at every turn, (with all Reverence to his Divine
Majesty be it spoken,) to show Tricks, merely for the Interest of Their Tenet,
(as our Moderns use,) is very Unphilosophical. He will say, it is only a
Supposition; which, even, though impossible, is sometimes allowable to put, that
we may clear a farther Point. Nor do I look upon it to be any other but a
Supposition; only, I judge it to be a very Extravagant one, and Contrary to the
Natures of Things. God's Infinite Wisdom has so contrived the World, (* Omnia
in sapientia fecisti Psalm. 103. v. 24.
Domine,) that Created Things should be the Ground of Truth; therefore,
whatever Supposition or Position draws after it a Contradiction, is as
Impossible, as that Two and Three should not make Five; or that a Thing can be
and not be at once. And, as it has been demonstrated, that when the Sucker in a
Pump is drawn up, the Water must needs follow; because, otherwise, it would
violate the Natures or Essences of Things: And therefore, Vacuum, within the
World, is impossible; so no Force in Nature can make any Protuberancy in the
World's Surface, because it would induce a formal Effect, viz. Distance, and
yet Nothing to make that Distance formally. A Position as contradictory, as
it is to say a Thing is round, and yet no Mode or Accident of Roundness is in
it, which is the Formal Cause of it as it is Round. It Is his Opinion, that they
who deny Vacuum, must hold Body to be Infinite: Whereas, I hold it demonstrable
that there is no Vacuum, nor Infinity of the World neither; nor can I see any
Dependence one of those Tenets has upon the other.

16. He conceives, that no Man can, in his Thoughts, set any Bounds to Space,
more than to Duration. I ask, whether, We can set Bounds to Space, Time, and to
all Duration but GOD's.
by his Thought, he means his Judgment? For, it is evident, that he that can
demonstrate, that the Mode or Accident cannot exist, where the Body or Thing,
of which it is a Mode, is not; or, that both the Extent of the World has, and
its Duration will have an end; can, and must, in his Judgment, set Bounds to
both of them; however his Fancy rambles and roves beyond his Judgment. Or, if
he means, he cannot have a Notion of any thing so great, but a greater may be
still conceived; then I answer, First, That our Conception cannot make or prove
that to be, which is not. Secondly, That none can, indeed, possibly have such a
Notion (by his way) of either of them; but by our way very easily; for, by
adding a Negation to Finite, as it is manifest we may, we may have a Notion of
Infinite, which sets Bounds to all Imaginable Quantities, since none can
pretend to imagine any thing beyond Infinity. The same way gives us the plain
Notion of Immensity, by joining a Negation to Measurableness. Indeed, the
Notion of Eternity can be explicated neither way; neither by repeating or
adding Ideas, nor by a Negation of Finite Time, compounding an Infinite Time,
to which it may be conceived Commensurable: For, to Endure, is to be; and, though
our Duration, which is accompanied with perpetual Alterations and Changes, is
therefore subject to Time, and Commensurable to such and such Portions of it;
yet God's Duration is of a far more Sovereign Nature. Let us reflect, when we
say, God was from all Eternity, what those Words can mean. Infinite Time
neither was, nor can be; and therefore, to explicate Eternity by what neither
was, nor can be, is to explicate it by an Impossibility, which is to make it
Inexplicable. Time was not before the World, in re; nor in our Understanding,
for we were not yet; nor in God's, for he, being Truth it self, cannot know any
thing to be actually, when as yet it was not. Wherefore, since Eternity cannot
be explicated by any Regard to possible Time, it is left that it must be
explicated by what the Word [Duration] imports, viz. by Being; and so it must
consist in the highest Impossibility of Not Being, which naturally follows from
the Notion of Self-Existence. Though I doubt not but those who are not got above
Fancy, are as hard put to it, not to imagine a long Flux of Time before the
World; as they are, not to imagine a vast Expansion of Empty Space beyond the
World. And so it must happen, till Connection of Terms (in which only, and not
in the Fancy, Truth is to be found) comes to govern Men's Thoughts, and
establish their Judgments.

11. But, to leave these little Sallies and Inroads into Metaphysics, and
return to Annihilation implies a Contradiction, and is not an Act of
Omnipotency, but of Impotency.
to our Business: The next Argument is drawn from God's Power to Annihilate a
Part of Matter, and keep the next Bodies from closing; in which Case, a Vacuum
between them is unavoidable. In Answer; First, I ask how he knows God would
keep the next Bodies, in that Case, from Closing? If it be against the Nature
of Things, he will not do it: And if it be a plain Contradiction, as we contend
it is, Mr. L. himself will not say he can do it. Secondly, I fear it would look
like a wild Paradox, and little less than Blasphemy, if I should deny that God
can annihilate; and yet, out of the profound and dutiful Reverence I bear to
his Wisdom, Goodness and Power, I must declare, it is my Tenet, that he cannot;
any more than he can witness a Falsehood, or be liable to any other
Imperfection. It will be thought this limits, and consequently takes away his
Omnipotency: And I, on the contrary, think I have far more Reason to judge,
that the other Opinion argues Impotency, and ours settles his Omnipotency.
Common Sense seems to tell us, that Omnipotency is a Power of doing all things,
and not of doing Nothing. To Act, is to do something; and therefore, to do
Nothing, or make a Nothing, (which the Sense of Annihilation,) is, not to do:
And, it is a strange Notion of Omnipotency, which puts it to consist (in such an
Occasion) in not doing. I wonder what Conceit such Discoursers make of the
Divinity. What I am forced to conceive of him, as Essential to him, is, that he
is a Pure Actuality of Being, (as far as is on his part,) actually, and ever
exercised; that he has no Power in him Undetermined to act, as we have; which
argues some Potentiality, or Imperfection in us. That, Actual Existence being
Essential to him, his Peculiar Effect is, to give Existence, or to Create
Things; and to Conserve them in Being, which is a perpetual Creation, or
Creation continued; and, therefore, that it is more Diametrically opposite to
his Nature, to cause Not being, than it is for Light to cause Darkness. Whence
follows, that whatever his Creatures are naturally disposed for, he is actually
bestowing it upon them. Since then the Essences of all Creatures are Capacities
of Being, the same Goodness that makes the Sun shine on the Just and Unjust,
must give them continually to be actually. The Place is not proper to prove
this Point at large; but, were I writing Metaphysics, and were obliged to
handle it thoroughly, I should not doubt, but to demonstrate from the Natures of
Action, Effect, Causality, the Specification of Action, from the Natures of
Creatures, and almost each of God's Infinite Attributes, that Annihilation is
both Impossible, and also most unworthy the Divine Nature. Some Witty Men think
that Annihilation does best suit with God's Justice; and thence conceit, that
Eternal Damnation is nothing else but to be Annihilated. Whereas, indeed, this
Tenet violates that Attribute in the highest Degree: For, to punish a Sinner
without inflicting something upon him that is penal, is Nonsense: And, what
Pain can a Sinner feel when he is Nothing, or is not?

12. Indeed, Mr. Lock,. 22. argues strongly, and (as far as I can judge)
unanswerably, against the Cartesians; The Cartesians can hardly avoid Vacuum.
who make the innumerable Particles of their Ether, though jumbled together
confusedly, still light so exactly, as to fill every little Interstice. Did
they put them to be Fluid, and of a very Rare Nature, and so, easily Pliable,
they might make some Sense of it: But they make them Solid, Dry, and of a Firm
Consistency; for, otherwise, the Particles of their Elements could not be made
by Attrition of other Parts of their Matter; of which, one of them is (as it
were) the Dust. Nor can it avail them to say, those Particles are less and less
indeterminately; for, every Thing (and Mode too) in Nature (especially if
Consistent) is determined to be particularly what it is, and as it is. Nor can
there be any Thing of an Indeterminate Quantity, any more than there can be a
Man in Common, who is Indeterminate and Indifferent to be This or That Man.

13. As for his alleging that Men have an Idea, of Vacuum, distinct from the
Idea of Plenum, it is true, indeed; and The having an Idea of Vacuum, distinct
from that of Plenum, no Argument to prove it.
it means the same as Non Corpus, and consequently Non Quantum, Non Quale, etc.
and is of the same Nature as is Chimaera, which means Non Ens. But, how does it
follow hence, that it does or can exist, or that (as he phrases it) there is an
Incomprehensible Inane; unless, with the Vulgar Schools, we will make every
Distinct nice Conception of ours to be a particular Entity, and capable of
Existing apart; which I do not think Mr. Locke's good Judgment will allow of.

REFLECTION Eighth, ON The Fourteenth CHAPTER.
THis Chapter affords much Matter for Reflection, which to do as briefly as I
can, I will put my respective Negatives to Mr. Locke's Affirmatives, giving my
Reasons for them, and invalidating his.

I deny, that the Notion of Time is so abstruse as he conceives it. The Word is
used commonly by the Vulgar to The plain Sense of the Vulgar gives us the true
Notion of Time.
express what they mean by it, and their usual Meaning is the Notion or Nature
of it. No Clown can be ignorant of it, if he ever read an Almanac, or saw a
Sun-dial; unless some witty Man comes to puzzle him with Doubts and Questions;
which he may even in things the Vulgar, and all Men living, know very
perfectly. He knows, though not to a Mathematical Exactness, (which is not
requisite to our Time, or our Use of it) that the Year begins on New Years Day,
and that the Sun's Diurnal Motion, till he returns to the same Line or Point,
makes what we call a Day, and that a Day is divided into 24 Hours. He knows how
many Days make a Month, how many Months a Year, etc. He esteems all these,
however he divides them into lesser, or by Addition augments them into greater,
to be Parts of Time; and, consequently, Parts of the Sun's Motion, as well as
he knew that a Day was such. If then they know that all particular Parts of the
Sun's Motion are particular Parts of Time, let us abstract from all these
Particulars, and the Motion of the Sun, in Common, is the Common Notion of Time
it self in reality; however the Formal Notion of Time consists in this, that it
be Known and Regular, (as the Sun's Motion is, as far as they can discern,) so
that they can measure and adjust all their Actions by it, which it is evident
they may. And this Formality of Time they do know too; as appears by using or
applying Hours, Days, Months, etc. to measure and adjust all their Motions or
Actions by them. So that this whole Discourse of mine, Answering the Niceties
objected, which escaped the Observation of the Vulgar, seems to be built on
that Solid Maxim, that The true Signification or Sense of the Words is to be
taken from the Common Usage of them. If Mr. Lock pleases (as I think he will
not) to coin Another Idea of it, and call it Time, he may if he pleases; but it
will not be the Notion of Time which Men have had hitherto; nor will his new
Notion suit with the Sense of Mankind; nor is it possible the Signification he
imposes upon that Word can ever obtain Acceptance in the World, unless some
Supreme Authority, which commands all the World, should enjoin, under great
Penalties, that such a Word be taken in that new Sense, and no other; and even
that will never be; for all Mankind will never be under any such Authority.

2. I deny that Duration ought to be called Succession, unless restrained to
Corporeal Duration is not Succession, but rather opposite to it.
Duration, which is the least worthy that Name. For to endure is to be, which
has Steadiness and Permanency in its Notion; whereas Succession is essentially
Change, and so rather opposite to Duration or Being. Nor is any thing said to
Endure because it succeeds, but because it is all the while other things
succeed; or rather, while it self undergoes some Accidental Change. Whence our
Being is not Commensurate to Succession as it is Being, but as it is Changeable
one way or other; which Changes being accompanied with Motion, must
consequently be Successive as it is. Angels and Pure Spirits have Duration,
though they are Unchangeable, and therefore Unsuccessive; having no Parts or
Vicissitudes in their Natures or Operations, as Material and Quantitative
Things, or Bodies, have. Moreover, the Notion of mere Being is Indivisible,
whereas the Notion of Suceession is essentially Divisible; whence they can have
no Commensuration to one another. For which Reason, before (as we apprehend it)
Motion or Succession begun, or after it is ended, the things afford us no
Ground to conceive any thing like before or after, but only one Ever-standing
or Unchangeable and Indivisible Instant; which better expresses our Eternity,
or constantly being ever, than any Correspondence to Succession or Motion can;
whose Natures are Finite in Duration, and so can never reach Infinite Duration,
or that ever-constant Being called Eternity.

3. I deny absolutely, That the Notion of Succession ought to be taken from the
Train of Ideas running in our It Is a strange Paradox to say, the Notion of
Succession or Duration is to be taken from the Train of Ideas in our Head.
Heads, but from the Things in Nature; and Mr. Lock, (Chap. 5.) makes Motion,
which is the same with Succession, one of his Simple Ideas which comes into the
Mind by diverse Senses from Outward Objects. Which how to reconcile with his
Doctrine here, I am at a Loss: Nor can I see why the Rolling of a Cart-wheel in
the Street, or the Flying of a Bird in the Air, should not more naturally and
more solidly give us the Idea of Succession, than our observing the Gliding of
Ideas in our Fancy, or Mind.

4. I deny that his Argument, drawn from our not perceiving Duration when we
sleep, does conclude that this Our not Perceiving Duration when we Sleep no
Argument for it.
Successive Train of Ideas gives us, or is the Notion of our Duration. For,
none can think he endures not, whether he perceives it or no; or that our
Duration ceases, or is interrupted, though he thinks not of it; or that its being
longer or shorter depends on our having Attention to those Ideas, but on its
Correspondence to more or less of the Sun's Motion: Nor, had we endured more or
less, or been a Jot more or less Old, whether we had waked or slept all our
Lifetime. Nor, is this peculiar to the Idea of Duration, that we have no
Perception of it in our Sleep; but common to Extension, and all other Modes
whatever; which, nevertheless, are, or continue in being, after their manner,
whether we perceive them or not. Wherefore his Notion of Duration taken from
our Co-existence to such a Train of Ideas, is ill-grounded, as not having any
the least Foundation in Solid Nature, but in Witty Fancy.

5. I deny also, that the Idea or Notion of Succession comes by Reflection on
our Train of Ideas: Because Experience This Tenet is against Experience.
tells us it comes naturally by a Direct Impression from Outward Objects, which
we see move or succeed.

6. I deny absolutely, that, though all that is said be waved, a Train of our
Ideas can either be a proper Cause of the Notion And against the Nature of
Things, and of Resemblances too.
of Succession, or represent it: For Succession or Motion has, of it self, no
distinguishable, much less Actually distinct Parts, any more than Permanent
Quantity, or Extension has any Nicks or Notches to butt, bound, determine or
distinguish it here and there; but they both proceed in one Even, Confused and
Undistinguishable Tenor; whereas in the Train of Ideas, each Idea is actually
Distinct from the other. Whence the Notion of such a Succession ought to be One
continued Idea, or the Idea of a Continuance, or else it resembles not the
Thing as it is in Nature; nor consequently, is it a Similitude or Idea of the
Thing, or outward Object; that is, it is no Idea at all, nor so much as a good
Phantasm; much less is it a Notion, or the Thing so in the Understanding, as it
is out of it. Whence I must utterly deny what he says here,. 6. that Motion
produces in the Mind an Idea of Succession, any otherwise, than as it produces
there a continued train of Distinguishable Ideas. For, Distinction can never
represent that which is essentially Indistinct, as Succession is: Or, if he
means the Interval's between the Appearances of one Idea, and another are
Indistinct and Confused, it will be ask't by what Idea this Indistinct Interval
is made known to us; and why the same Idea may not as connaturally be imprinted
by the Motion of Bodies in Nature; the Succession of which our Eyes, Ears, and
Touch, do testify?

7. I must deny too that Duration (as he takes it) and Succession cannot one of
them be a Measure to the other. One Motion, if Known and Regular, may and must
be a Measure to another.
For, all that can be conceived of the Notion of Duration (besides Being)
fitting it to be a Measure, is some Designed Part of Motion or Succession: And,
when two things move, that which moves more regularly (provided it be evidently
knowable, and its Quantity some way or other Determined) is in all points
fitted to be the Measure of the others Motion. Nor is it more difficult to
measure the less Regular Motion by the More Regular one, if the other
requisites be not wanting, than it is to measure the Extended Quantity of a
Permanent Body, v. g. a Yard of Cloth (which as found in the Piece is
Undetermined) by a yard-wand, whose Quantity is Stated and determined. For
Example, when I write or walk an hour, the Motion of Sand in an Hourglass,
which is more known and Determinate, measures the Motions of my Pen or Legs,
whose Successive Quantity or Motion is less certainly known or Determinate than
the other is. And, as that Determinate Motion measures the other, so the Motion
of the Sun, which is knowable to all mankind (which the Glass was not) and, to
their apprehension, Regular, brought to Proportionate and Determinate parts by
help of our Understanding, is apt to measure all our Motions whatever; which
Measure we call Time, as I think, Mr. L. grants. Whence I deny that Time is
measured by the Motion of the Sun (as Mr. L. objects, and justly wonders at)
for it is that very Motion, fitted, as is now said, to be a Common Measure to
all others. He mentions many other Signs or Marks of Periods supposed
Equidistant, as the Returning of Birds at such Seasons, the Ripening of Fruit,
or Fire lighted up at the same distance of Time, increast in Heat, etc. but
what must measure the distance between those Periods? Or, what is this to our
Time as it is now. St. Austin was puzzled to know, whether, if Rota figuli
moveretur, and all things else stood still, there would in that Case be Time or
no. But all these Extravagant Suppositions are frivolous. Mankind takes their
Notions from things as they are, and as they work upon their Senses; which, in
our case, is the Regular and Known Motion of the Sun; and they take the Notions
of its parts, from the Designation, Division and Multiplication, made by our
Understanding; and not from wild Suppositions, which neither come home to the
Point, nor are, ever were, or shall be; nor are, or could be so Regular and
Knowable to all Mankind, as this Motion of the Sun is.

8. I must absolutely deny, and moreover think it a most Extraordinary
position, to affirm that we must not judge There is no show of Reason that the
Equality of the Periods of Duration can possibly be taken from the Train of our
Ideas.
that the Periods of Duration are equal, by the Motion of the Sun, but by the
Train of Ideas that passed in Men's minds in the intervals; which, I conceive,
is the Sense of his. 21. and. 12. and of the Tenor of his Discourse in diverse
places. For, first, how does it appear that the Motion of the Train of those
Ideas is it self Equal, or near Equal, in any one or the same Man at all times;
without which we cannot know by their Equal succession that the Periods which
they are to measure are Equal, When a Man is in a stupid Humor, his Thoughts
play very little and slowly; when he is sound a-sleep, not at all; when Awake
and Brisk, or agitated by some great Passion, they move very swiftly; when
sedate and composed, more moderately; so that it is impossible to fix the
succession of those Ideas in any Regularity. Next, how can we know that those
Ideas move regularly, and not rather very differently, in diverse Men?
Contemplative, Melancholy and Dull Men use to fix their Mind long upon one
Thought; and, consequently, upon one Object of their Thought, or one Idea:
Whereas those who are endowed with Gayity of Wit, (which is defined C^ler motus
Intellectus) and those who are possessed with Phrenzy or Madness have their Ideas
succeeding one another very Swiftly: When we Judge, we fix our thought; when we
Invent, we muster up whole Armies of them on a Sudden. 3ly, Let any Man consult
his own Interior, and examine with the most exact Reflection, whether his Ideas
have moved Swiftly, or Slowly, the last hour, he will find himself at a loss to
give any good account of them; much more to assure himself, or ascertain others
that they moved regularly: Wherefore the Train of Ideas (and the same may be
said of his other Imaginary Measures,. 19.) are quite destitute of that Chief
Property of a Measure, viz. that it self be Regular; and, if it concerns all
Mankind, most Notorious to all who need it. For want of which, and for the
Reasons lately given, perhaps no two Men in the World could agree, or come to a
right Understanding with one another, about the Time of their Actions, which
would put all the World in Confusion about their Common affairs. Lastly, Mr. L.
assigns no Reason to evince the Regular succession of his Ideas in his. 9.
which seems the proper place to assert that Principal Point upon which all his
Discourse depends; and he only says, that he guesses that the Appearance of the
Ideas vary not very much in a waking Man; and that they seem to have certain
Bounds in their Quickness and Slowness. And the Reason he gives afterward,.
10. for this (as he calls it) odd conjecture, is easy to be solved by our
Principles: For, there is no doubt but that some short time must be allowed for
the coming of Impressions from without, for the ferrying them over the Medium,
and the Re-exciting them in the Fancy, by which Notions are bred in our Mind;
which a very quick Motion of the Outward Object may prevent, as in a Brand
whirled round, etc. and there must be also some Marks to make us observe too
slow Motions; Yet, between those two Extremes, there are so many Degrees, and
such Variety intervene, that the Succession of those Ideas may nevertheless be
very Uneven and Irregular. Rather, I may with better Reason, affirm that it is
impossible it should be any way Regular at all; since their Succession depends
on the Fancy (the most Irregular and Unconstant Faculty we have) applying the
Material Ideas or Phantasms anew to the Seat of Knowledge; which Application
thousands of Causes may retard, or accelerate. His Objections against the
Regularity of the Sun's Motion not being Mathematically such, is of no force.
It Is sufficient that it be so Regular as serves our use to measure, and adjust
our Actions by it; and the same may be Objected against one measuring Cloth by
a Yard-wand, whose length is never Mathematically Exact.

9. Wherefore, Notwithstanding the respect I have for Mr. L. I cannot but think
that such quivering Grounds as This odd Tenet not positively asserted by Mr. L.
these can never support his most unaccountable Opinion,. 12. that The Constant
and Regular Succession of Ideas in a Waking Man, are, as it were, the Measure
and Standard of all other Successions. His own good Judgment saw well the
weakness of his grounds; wherefore his clear Sincerity, and usual Modesty would
not suffer him to deliver assertively, and assuredly, what he saw was
Uncertain; and therefore he proposed it rather as a Paradox, or (he calls it)
an odd Conjecture, than maintained it as a Position; however, the Conception
being so New, he was tempted not to pretermit it wholly: In doing which too, I
believe, he not so much gratified himself, as the Humor of most late
Philosophers; who are far more addicted to value what is Quaint than what is
Solid.

REFLECTION Ninth, ON The Fifteenth CHAPTER, Of Duration and Expansion
considered together.
1. I Have already said enough of Imaginary Space, Imaginary Time, and of the
true Notion of Eternity. Philosophers must speak of Things as they are, if they
mean ImaginaryTime before the World, a mere Illusion of Fancy.
to speak Truth; and, therefore, the applying our Idea of Duration, which is a
Mode of Ens, to Imaginary Time before the Creation, when as yet there was no
such Ens as was Capable of such a Mode, is evidently against the First
Principles of our Understanding; and the same Illusion of Fancy that induced
Mr. L. to put Space (which is a Mode of that Ens called Body, and neither has,
or ever had any Being but its, nor Power to beget any Idea at all in the Mind,
but by being It) beyond the World, that is, beyond the Universality of Things;
where there can only be pure Nothing. When we relinquish the Things on which
only Truths are grounded, all the Ideas we pursue and substitute in their Rooms
must necessarily be mere Fancies, and inevitably plunge us into Contradictions
and Absurdities. Wherefore, I have no Occasion to make any further Reflections
upon the Grounds of this present Discourse, the Foundation of it being, I hope,
overthrown in my Preliminaries, and diverse other places; yet, upon his Manner
of his carrying it on, I must a little Reflect. As,

2. First, That they who endeavor to introduce Opinions Inconsistent with our
Natural Notions, must be They who advance Tenets against Nature, must alter the
Meaning of those Words that express our Natural Notions.
forced to change the Common Signification of Words, lest they cross them in
their Discourses, and in the Explication of their Tenet. Hence (as I have noted
above) Mr. L. altered the Signification of the Word [Solidity,] to make way for
an Unsolid Being, or an Empty Space, as also, the meaning of the Word
[Extension,] which he would confine to Material Beings; and chose to make use
of the Word [Space,] because it seemed less to connotate the Notion of Body,
than Extension did. And, here, he rather chooses to make use of the Word
[Expansion,] as if it were better, that is, Different from Extension. The Word
is proper enough, for which I do not much blame him: Only, I must affirm, that
no Wit, nor even Fancy of Man, can conceive or imagine any thing, existing any
where but in the Imagination, (or, even scarcely there,) to be Expanded, but it
must also be really Extended; nor to be Extended, but it must be Divisible;
and, therefore, its Parts Separable by the intervening Body, (which he denies
of his Inane,) unless we put them to be insuperably Hard, Solid, or Infractil,
as Epicurus did his Atoms; or that, if they be thus Extended, and yet the Parts
of the Inane do not separate, and give way to a new-come Body, there must not
inevitably follow a Penetration of Extended Parts; that is, those Parts that
must be without one another, must be at the same time within one another; which
is a direct Contradiction.

3. Secondly, I cannot but specially remark, to what incredible Extravagancies
Fancy, if not checked by Reason, God's Immensity not Commensurate to an
Infinitely Expanded Space.
transports Men, though otherwise of the greatest Parts; even so far as to
conceit that God's Immensity consists in a kind of Quantitative Diffusion of
his Essence, or in the Commensuration of it to an Infinite Expansion. For, what
else can his Argument here,. 2. for his Infinitely Expanded Inane mean, couched
in these Words, [Unless he (viz. the Denier of such a Vacuity) will confine God
within the Limits of Matter.] What, I say, can this mean, but that he
apprehends God's Unconfined or Infinite Being, would be Confined, Finite, and
consequently Lost, unless there were an Infinite Quantity of Imaginary Space
answerable to it in Extent or Expansion. A Conceit certainly most unworthy the
Divinity, whose Essence was equally Immense ere any Creatures were made: Nor
can any of his Essential Attributes be taken in order to them; for, this would
give his Essence some kind of Dependence on his Creatures. This is something
like (but much worse than) the Opinion of those Ancients, who thought God to be
the Soul of the World. -- Penitusque infusa per Artus
Men's agitat molem, and magno se corpore miscet.
Which Whimsy making God a kind of Compart with Matter, is long since exploded
out of the Schools by the solid Principles of Christian Faith. God is not in
his Creatures by any Co-extension to them, or any other way than by giving them
Being; and his Immensity, which is Essential to him, consists in this, that,
did an Infinity of Creatures exist, he would be Intrinsecally, and of himself,
able to give, or rather, actually giving Being to them all. Or else,
[Existence] being the least Improper Notion we can attribute to God, he is said
to be Immense, because his Existence is Illimited, or Infinite.

4. Thirdly, I much wonder what those Words should mean, [And he, I think, very
much magnifies to himself the We can have no Notion of a Vacuum, but a Fancy
only.
Capacity of his own Understanding, who persuades himself that he can extend
his Thoughts farther than God exists, or imagine any Expansion where he is
not.] For, First, I deny any Understanding can conceive or have any Notion of a
Vacuum, though he may have a Fancy of it; the Notion being the Thing it self in
our Understanding, imprinted by Outward Objects, by means of the Senses;
whereas, his Inane never made, nor can make any Impression upon the Senses at
all. Next, For the same reason, I deny our Thoughts are extended to Imaginary
Space, if by Thoughts he means Notions, or Judgments built on them. Lastly, I
see not why our Fancy may not extend it self farther than God Exists; that is,
(as is lately explicated,) gives Being to Creatures; as well as Fancy can
extend it self farther than God's Omnipotency can act. Splenetick or Maniacal
Men can fancy they are made of Glass; that, if they make Water, they shall
drown all the World; that, though standing on the Ground, they touch the Moon;
that their Nose, though but an Inch and an half long, touches and feels the
opposite Wall, though perhaps a Furlong distant: The Quaker fancied he was a
Grain of Wheat; and, when any Pigeons flew over his Head; fell down in a
mavelous Fright, lest they should peck him up, and fly away with him, etc.
Now, none of these are a possible Object of the Divine Omnipotence, which is
employed in making Things, which are the Ground of Truth; and not in making
Nothings, or undoing the Natures of Things, (as Fancy does,) and so laying a
Ground for Falsehood and Contradiction.

5. Fourthly, I remark, that the Texts of Holy Writ, which speak humano more,
or in Accommodation to our Scripture-Texts the worst sort of Arguments for
Philosophers, unless they be most Plain, and Literally meant.
low Fancies and Conceptions, are the worst sort of Arguments imaginable, and
most unfit to be alleged for such by a Philosopher; being apt to lead us into
a Thousand Enormous Errors. For, if they be taken in a Literal Rigor, (as
Philosophical Arguments ought,) they would make God no better than his poor
Changeable Creatures. They would make him, at every turn, Angry, Sorry,
Repentant, Subject to all, or most Passions; Moving from this place to that;
and liable to Innumerable Imperfections. All which are opposite to the
Unchangeable Nature of the Divinity; and therefore ought to be removed from
him, as far as our Thoughts can distance them.

6. The Divine nature is Essentially Actual Being; and he goes below his
Sovereign Excellency who conceives any Only Self Existence, and what flows from
that Notion, is Peculiar to GOD.
thing of it by any other Notion, or Speaks of it by any word that is in the
least Potential, or comes not up to Actual and Essential Existence. All his
Attributes, as Metaphysics demonstrate, do flow or follow from that infinite
Source of all Perfection, Self-Existence; or rather, are nothing but It
diversely conceived by us; and, therefore, cannot, according to Literal Truth,
be any other way rightly explicated but by Being. Much more then are all the
Modes of Ens, founded in Creatures, especially those belonging to the basest of
all other Entities, Corporeal Things, (such as are Diffusion, or Commensuration
to Space or Quantity) most highly Derogatory to that most Simple and
All-comprehending Mind, which eminently and actually contains them all, and
concenters in its self all Possible Being. Creatures are no more but [Rags of
Being, torn into thin Formalities;] Whereas the Divinity is the Inexhausted
Source of Existence or Being it self in the most Full, Complete, and Entire
Latitude its vast Notion can bear.

7. I should think my self very happy, if I could correct this Influence of
Fancy over Men's Thoughts, when they Our Natural Notions assure us, that it is
mere Fancy to explicate GOD's Attributes by respect to Corporeal Natures.
speak of Spiritual Natures, without making long Excursions into Metaphysics;
and, perhaps, this plain Discourse may help much toward it; it being fetched
from our most Natural Notions, and known to us (as it were) by a kind of
Experience. Let us take then any Spiritual Mode or Accident, a Virtue for
Example, and let it be that of Temperance; which done, let us ask our Natural
Thoughts, how Long, Broad, or Thick that Virtue is? Is it as little as a
Barly-corn, or as big as a House? Is it a Yard in Length, or but an Inch? Is it
as Thick as a Wall, or as Thin as a Wafer? etc. And, Honest Nature would answer
for us, that it is Nonsense to ask such a Question; its nature being perfectly
of another kind, and utterly disagreeable to any of these Accidents. Again, Let
us ask what Color or Figure it is of? Is it Blew, Green, or Yellow? Is it
Round, Apiece, or Triangular? Is it Rare or Dense, Hot, Cold, Moist, or
Dry? And we shall discover that the Asker, if serious, would be looked upon by
all Mankind as a Fool or a Madman; such Qualities as these being as much
Disparate from the Subject we are Enquiring about, as Knowledge is to a Beetle,
or Science to a Mushrom. And yet, it would not be wondered at, that such
Questions as these should be asked of any Body whatever. And what does this
amount to, but that Nature assures us, by her free and sober Acknowledgment of
it, that this Spiritual Mode, called Virtue or Temperance, is quite different
from the whole Nature of Body, and from any Corporeal Thing that by our Senses
ever entered into our Fancy. Since then this Spiritual Mode or Accident has
nothing at all to do with Body or its Modes, it is clearly evinced by the
Ingenuous Confession of Unprejudiced Nature, that the Subject of it, which we
call a Spirit, is so vastly removed from all we can say of Body (Being only
excepted) that it is perfect Nonsense to attribute any thing to it which we find
in Corporeal Natures. Since then we can truly say of Corporeal Natures, that
they are Long, Short, Diffused, Extended, Commensurate to one another in their
Bulk, Motion, Duration, etc. we must be forced to deny all those of Spirits;
and to Judge that they have nothing to do with any of these, nor can bear the
having such Modes applied to them, or said of them, under Penalty of forfeiting
our plainest Reason, and contradicting Common Sense. And, if it be such an
Absurdity to apply them to Created Spirits, how much more absurd must it be to
explicate God's Eternity, Infinity, or Immensity by such gross Resemblances, or
an Imaginary Order to the Short and Fleeting Natures of Corporeal Creatures?

8. Lastly, to sum up all, I deny that the Notion of Motion is taken from the
continued Train of Distinguishable Ideas; and I affirm that it is Imprinted by
the Object without me, and is one continually successive and undistinguished
Mode there as it is in the Thing. I deny too, that Duration is Motion or
Succession, but only Being; though our Being (it being Unconstant and Fleeting)
is accompanied with Succession, and subject to Motion and Time; and
commensurate to them, only (not as it is Being, but) as it is Fleeting, or
perpetually Changing some way or other. I deny it also, as the most prodigious
Enormity a Rational Soul could be liable to, through its giving up the Reins of
Reason to wild Fancy, to say, that our Measure of Time is applicable to
Duration before Time. For Mr. Lock makes Duration inconceivable without
Succession, and there could be no Succession before the World, when there was
only one Unchangeable God, in whom is no Shadow of Vicissitude or Succession.
Does not the plainest Sense tell us, that we cannot apply one thing to another,
but there must be One and Another; and where is that Other Duration or
Succession before Time, or before the World, whenas it is confessed there was
none. Can any Man apply a Mode of Thing to Nothing, which yet must be avowed by
this Author; for before the World there was nothing but God; to whom it could
not be applied, and therefore there was nothing for Mr. L. to apply it to. But
this is parallel to that seducing Fancy that inveigled his Reason to hold a
Vacuum; he took the Notion of Space from Body, and then applied it to what was
neither Spirit nor Body, but mere Nothing; and, here, he took his Notion of
Duration, or Succession from Bodies moving; and when he has done, he would
apply it to what is not Body (nor Spirit neither) nor Motion, nor like it, but
contrary to it; that is, he would apply it to mere Nothing. I desire he would
please to consider, that the Thing to which Another is Applied must exist as
well as that which is Applied to it; and this antecedently to his Application
of one to the other. Wherefore both Space and Duration being both Modes or
Accidents, he must first prove, there is something beyond the World to which he
can apply the Mode of Space; or something before the World, to which he can
apply the Mode of Successive Duration, or it is perfect Nonsense even to talk
of Applying one to the other. But this he has not done, and his way of
attempting to do it seems to be this; first, he fancies he can apply those
Modes to something there, and then; and thence concludes, there must be Things
there to which they may be applied; as if his Fancy could create Entities at
Pleasure, or to please her Humor. Nor matters it that we can apply stated
Measures of Duration, and thence imagine Duration where nothing does really
endure or exist, or by this means imagine to morrow, next Year, or seven Years
hence; for we cannot apply them by our Reason, but only upon Supposition that
they will exist, and then there will be also some Thing or Subject supposed fit
for them to be applied to; whereas an imaginary Space beyond the World, or
imaginary Time or Succession before or after the World, neither is now, nor can
there ever be any possible Subject to which they can be Applied; and so the
Application of them can bear no manner of Sense. I must confess the word
[imagin] which Mr. L. uses, cap. 14. 32. is very fit for his purpose, and gives
the greatest Semblance of Truth to his Discourse. But, by his Leave, our
Imagination cannot create Entities, nor make Things, to which he is to apply
his Ideas, to exist when they do not, nor ever will exist; and, unless it can
do this, his Application is no Application; for to apply a Thing, or Mode of
Thing, to Nothing, is no Application at all. Both Space and Successive Duration
are Modes Proper to Body, whence only we had them; and, a Mode without the
Thing of which it is a Mode (Modes having no Entity of their own) is a mere
Nothing. Let him prove then first, that there are beyond or before the World
any Thing to which they can be applied; otherwise he will be convinced to
ground all his Discourse on this Principle, [Whatever we can imagine, is.] Which
Maxim being utterly denied, he must make it Evident by Proof. Which if he does,
it will do his Book more Service, than any Principles taken from all the
Sciences in the World; for all these are as much opposite to Him, as he is to
Them.

REFLECTION Tenth, ON The 16th and 17th CHAPTERS.
1. I have little to except against his 16th Chapter, of Number. Nothing,
certainly, could have been delivered more solidly, or more ingeniously. I only
Endless Addition of Numbers can never give us the Notion of Infinity.
reflect on the last Words in it; viz. That the Endless Addition of Numbers, so
apparent to the Mind, is that, I think, which gives us the clearest and most
Distinct Idea of Infinity. For, since it is granted that all we do actually
conceive, how much soever it be, is Finite; and all our Ideas are of what we do
actually conceive; I cannot comprehend how that which is Finite can give us the
Idea of Infinite. It may be said, that our Reflecting that we can still add
more Endlesly, is that which gives us the Notion of Infinity. I reply, that,
were this Addition of Numbers taken from the Objects side, so that we saw that
by such an Addition, Number might at length arrive to be truly or actually
Infinite; then, indeed, that Object (viz. Number) thus considered, or reflected
on, might beget in us the Idea or Notion of Infinite: But, it is taken only from
our side, who are the Adders, or Multipliers; and so, means only that we can
never come to take so much of it, but more may by us be still taken; whence,
since all we can possibly take of it (our Term of Life, and consequently, our
Additions being stinted and Limited) must still be Finite; this may, indeed,
furnish us with an Idea or Notion of a very great Number, and by us
Incomputable; which notwithstanding, for any thing we can thence gather, may be
of it self Finite, though our Additions can never de facto reach its
by-us-Innumerable Total. Now, how a Finite Number, a finite Number of Times
repeated, though we called in Algebraical Multiplication to our Assistance, can
give us the Notion of Infinite, which is contradictory to it, surpasses all
Imagination. And, instead of showing how it does so, Mr. Lock tells us here,
that we must Suppose an Inexaustible Remainder beyond the Finite Idea, and that
Infinity consists in a Supposed Endless Progression; which is, in a manner, to
suppose or beg the whole Question: For, if this Inexhaustible Remainder be
still actually Finite, (especially, if held by us to be such,) it can never
give us the Idea of Infinite Actually, which only is the true Idea of Infinite;
a Potential Infinity, or a mere Power to be Infinite, rather signifying not to
be Infinite; for, nothing is, what it is only a Power to be, especially such a
Power as is never Reducible to Act: Wherefore, this Inexhaustible Remainder
must be supposed more than Potentially, that is, Actually Infinite; which is
the Thing in Question. Or, if he says, this Remainder is only a Power to be
still greater, but is Impossible ever to be actually Infinite, then how can it
ever, possibly, beget in us an Idea of True or Actual Infinity?

2. I have explicated above, by how plain and easy a Method we come to have
our Notion of Infinity; which is, How we come to have that Notion,
Prelim. 4. 31, 32.
by joining the Sense of the Adverb [Non] to that of [Finis:] And Mr. Lock,
Chapter 17.. 8. seems to come over to my Thoughts; where he says, that the Idea of
Infinity seems to be pretty Clear, when we consider nothing in it but the
Negation of an End. Whereas, on the other side, he grants, that the Idea of an
Infinite Space or Duration is very Obscure and Confused. Now, if the Clearness
of an Idea be the greatest Perfection it can have, it follows, even from his
own Concession, that the Idea of Infinity ought rather to be taken from the
Negation of Finiteness, than from this Confused Way of Adding and Repeating
more and more of Space or Duration. Add, that (as was said) this way can only
give us the Idea of a Potential Infinity; nor that neither well, unless that
Power to be Infinite could ever be reduced to Act, which is impossible it
should: Now, the Negation of Finiteness fully reaches an Actual and Absolute
Infinity; and is applicable, and truly to be Predicated of God himself, and all
his Intrinsecal Attributes, as Being, Duration, Power, Wisdom, etc. without
needing any Recourse to the transitory and limited Natures or Modes of
Creatures to explicate it. Whereas, Mr. Locke's Idea of Infinite cannot be
predicated of God, or his Attributes, at all: Nor can we say that God is
Infinite, in his Sense of that Word; in regard he says, that our Idea of
Infinity is (as he thinks) an Endless Growing Idea; For, the Infinity of God,
and of all that can be conceived to belong to him, is incapable of Growth,
Degrees, or Additions; but is one Indivisible Being, without any possibility of
our conceiving more or less in it, if we conceive it as we ought.

3. On the other side; How facil and natural is my Way of our gaining an Idea
or Notion of Infinite? We see And with what Ease.
most Things we converse with to be Limited, or Finite; wherefore, the Notion
of the Thing as it is limited, or (which is the same) the Notion of Limitation
or End, is very familiar and obvious to our Thoughts. Since then Experience
teaches us that we can very easily join a Negation to Finiteness or End
whenever we please, as well as we can to any other Notion; and, thence, have a
kind of Complex Notion of Infinite, as well as we can of Immortal, Immense,
Immaterial, Incorporeal, Indivisible, etc. We have the Notion of Infinity given
to our hands, without more ado; or without perplexing our selves with making
use of those ^ame Helps of Adding or Repeating those stinted Measures of
Corporeal Modes or Accidents, whose very Natures (besides the Finite Number of
Times we can only repeat them) do make them utterly Incapable ever to reach
Actual, that is, True Infinity.

4. As for the Question he introduces here, viz. Whether the Idea of Infinite
be Positive, or Negative, or includes The Notion of [Infinite] is most
perfectly Positive.
something of both; my firm Opinion is, That, however the Gramatical way of
expressing that Conception seems to be Negative, yet the Notion it self meant
by that Word, is altogether Positive. My Reason is, because the Idea or Notion
of Finis or Limit (in what kind soever it be) does formally signify [no
farther in that kind,] which is perfectly Negative: Wherefore, the Negation
added to Finite, in the Word [Infinite,] quite taking off that Negative Sense
which did before belong to the Word [Finite,] gives the Word [Infinite] a Sense
purely Positive. Again, we can have no Direct Impression from the Thing; nor,
consequently, Direct Notion of [Infinite,] nor, consequently, any Reflex Notion
of it; for, all Reflex Notions have for their proper Object, the Direct ones
which are already in our Minds: Wherefore, if the Notion of [Infinity] can be
had any other way than by adding [Non] to [Finite,] it must come from our
Reason finding out by Discourse, that there is a First and Self-existent Being,
whose Essence and Attributes are beyond all Limits, or actually Infinite.
Whence follows, that, since clear Reason demonstrates, that all Created
Entities, and consequently, all the Modes belonging to them, are Finite, and
only God is Infinite in his Essence, and in all his Intrinsecal Attributes: And
Reason also tells us, that all which is in God, (to whom only the Notion of
Infinite can belong,) is most highly Positive; the same Reason teaches us to
correct in our Thoughts the Grammatical Negativeness of the Word [Infinite,]
which can only be applied to Him; and to look upon it, and esteem it, as most
perfectly Positive.

5. I cannot pass by, unreflected on, a Passage,. 16. in which Mr. Locke's
Fancy imposes strangely upon his Duration easily conceivable, without
Succession.
Reason: He says, that Nothing is more unconceivable to him, than Duration,
without Succession. What thinks he of the Duration of God, in James 1. 17.
whom is no Vicissitude, or Shadow of Change; (which Text, I believe, no Man,
at least, no Christian, but holds to be Plain, and Literally True;) whereas,
Succession is essentially perpetual Change? Let him please to reflect, that [To
Endure so long,] is nothing else but [to be so long;] which done, by cutting
off [so long] in both those Sayings, he will sind, that [To Endure,] is neither
more, nor less, but simply [To be.] Whence his Conceit is so far from being
True, that Nothing more wrongs Duration, or Being, than does Succession, or
Motion. And, therefore, our Duration here, which is Unsteady, Unconstant, and
Transitory, is justly reputed to be the worst sort of Duration, or Being; and
the next to Not-Being, or Not-Enduring at all. Again, Common Sense tells us,
that nothing moves merely for Motion's sake; and, therefore, that all Motion
is, to attain something which is Not-Motion, but the End of it, that is, Rest.
Wherefore, Eternal Rest, or that Duration called Eternity, is the End of all
the Motion of the whole World; conformably to what the Holy Scripture, speaking
of the State of Eternity, tells us, that, Apocal. cap. 1. v. 7.
Tempus non erit amplius; Time (nor, consequently, Succession) shall be no
more. Wherefore, since, taking away Motion and Succession, it is impossible to
imagine any thing in Duration, but only Being; and Eternity is an infinitely
better Duration, or State of Being, than this Transitory one, which is
Successive; it follows, that Eternal Rest, in which we have all we can have, or
could acquire by Motion, at once, is the only true Duration, and our Duration
here only the way to it. So far is Duration from being Unconceivable without
Succession, if we guide our Thoughts by Principles, and not by mere Fancy.

REFLECTION Eleventh. ON The Eighteenth, Nineteenth, and Twentieth CHAPTERS.
1. THE three next Chapters of Simple Modes, are very suitable to Mr. Locke's
Doctrine delivered formerly, and almost all of them agreeable to Nature;
Thoughts are not to be called Sensations.
particularly the 20th, which gives us more genuin Definitions of the several
Passions; and more aptly, in my Judgment, expresses them than Mr. Hobbes has
done; though he is justly held to have a great Talent in delivering his
Conceptions. But, I must deny that the Perception or Thought, made by
Impressions on the Body, by Outward Objects, is to be called Sensation. For if
Thoughts be Sensations, then the Sense can Think; which being the proper Act of
the Mind, I believe none will say if he reflects that our Soul is of a
Spiritual Nature. Nor are the Modes of Thinking at all proper to the Senses.
The Truth is, that Man having two Natures in one Suppositum, all the
Impressions upon him as he is an Animal, do also at the same time (I may say
the same Instant) affect him also as he is Spiritual; whence they are to be
called Sensations, as they are received in that material Part called the Seat
of Knowledge; and the same Direct Impressions, as they proceed farther, and
affect his Soul, are called Notions, or Simple Apprehensions. Wherefore, as the
two Natures in Man are Distinct, and have their Distinct Properties and Modes;
so the Words, that are to express what is peculiar to each of those Natures, are
to be Distinguished too, and kept to their proper Signification; which cannot
be, if Thought, which is peculiar to the Mind, be confounded with Sensation,
which properly belongs to the Corporeal part. But I suspect the Printer may be
here in the Fault, and not the Author; the Sense in this place being something
imperfect.

2. To the Question proposed, (Cap. 19. 9.) Whether it be not probable, that
Thinking is the Action, and not the Thinking is the Action, and not the Essence
of the Soul.
Essence of the Soul? I answer, That it is more than probable; for it is
Demonstrable, that it is only the Action, and not the Essence of it. For, in
such Natures as are potential, or apt to receive Impressions from other things,
(as the Soul is in this State;) and therefore their Essence does not consist in
being Pure Acts (as Angels are,) Being must necessarily be presupposed to
Operating; especially, when their first Operation (as Thinking is to the Soul)
is a mere Passion, caused by Impressions from another thing; which are
therefore purely Accidental to the Subject that receives them. And I wonder Mr.
Lock would even propose this as a Question to be yet decided, or think it but
Probable; since he has formerly maintained assertively, That Men do not always
think: For if it be not certain that Thinking is not the Essence of the Soul,
it follows necessarily, that Men must always think; since the Soul can never be
without her Essence, or what is Essential to her.

3. His Position, that Things are Good or Evil only in reference to Pleasure or
Pain, however it may hap to be misunderstood Mr. L.'s Position, that Things are
Good or Evil only in reference to Pleasure or Pain, is True and Solid.
by some well-meaning Bigots, is a most solid Truth; and is exceedingly useful
to explicate Christian Principles, and to show God's Wisdom and Goodness in
governing Mankind Connaturally. He proposes to him Fullness of Joy, and
Pleasures for evermore; and such as, being Spiritual and most Agreeable to the
Nature of the Soul, are Pure, Durable, and filling the whole Capacity of its
boundless Desire; not Transitory, Mean, and Base; which, though they cloy, never
satisfy. Heaven would not be Heaven, if it were not infinitely Pleasant and
Delightful; nor would Hell be Hell, if it were not Penal. And in case that
Explication of Epicurus his Tenet, which is given it by some of his Followers,
be truly his, which makes Man's Summum Bonum consist in Pleasure at large, and
chiefly in the best Pleasures of the Mind, it would not misbecome a Christian
Philosopher. Whence results this Corollary, that The whole Body of Christian
Morality depends, as on its Practical Principle, upon our making a wise Choice
of the Pleasures we pursue here. For, the Object of our Will, and consequently,
of its Acts of Love, is an Appearing Good, and the Lively Appearance of that
Good is that which makes the Will prompt to act effectually; whence, since that
which breeds Pleasure in us, must needs appear Lively to be a Good to us, there
needs no more but to choose wisely what is most Pleasant, or most Agreeable to
our True Nature, Reason; (such as the best Spiritual Goods are;) and we may be
sure by such a well-made Choice to arrive at that Best, Greatest, and Purest
Pleasure, Eternal Glory.

REFLECTION Twelfth. ON The 21th. CHAPTER.
1. IN this Chapter of Power, I find more to admire than confute. The Author
always Ingenious, even when he errs, has here much out done his former The due
Commendation of Mr. L's Doctrine in this Chapter of Power.
self. Particularly, his Explication of Freewill, is (generally speaking) both
Solid and Acute; and his Doctrine that Liberty is consistent with a perfect
Determination to Goodness, and Virtue is both Learned and Pious. Yet I am
forced to disagree with him in some particulars: In giving my Thoughts of which
I will imitate Mr. Locke's laudable Method; in making my Discourses
Subservient, and in showing them to be Agreeable, to Christian Principles.

2. It Is an excellent Thought, that The Clearest Idea of Active Power is had
from Spirit. For Bodies can act no otherwise, That some Spiritual Agent is the
First Mover of Bodies.
than as they are acted on themselves; nor can the first moved Body that moves
the rest, push others forwards farther than it self is moved by something that
is not Body, or by some Spiritual Agent; which therefore has the truest Notion
of Agency in it, without any Mixture of Patiency; because the Body moved cannot
react upon it. Though therefore we may have by our Senses the Idea of Action and
Passion, from the Effects we see daily wrought by Natural Causes on fit
Subjects; yet the Clearest Idea of Action, is given us by our Reason, finding
out that the Beginner of Corporeal Action is a Separated Spirit, or pure Act;
and therefore not at all Passive from any other Creature, nor from the Body it
operates on, by Reaction, as is found in Corporeal Agents. And, our Reason
gives us this Idea, (as it does many other Reflex ones) by seeing clearly that
neither can there possibly be Processus in infinitum amongst Corporeal Agents;
nor can they, of themselves alone, begin to move themselves, nor move one
another Circularly; and therefore the First Corporeal Motion must necessarily
be Originiz'd from some Pure Spirit or Angel. Now, Mr. Lock conceives that the
Soul, according The Will cannot move our Bodies.
to her Faculty called [Will] moving the Body, gives him this clearest Idea of
Active Power; which Tenet I have in diverse places disproved Preliminary 4..
25. 26. Refl. 5.. 1.
formerly; and shown that the Soul, by reason of her Potential State here,
cannot principiate any Bodily Action; nor the Man neither, unless wrought upon
by some External or Internal Agent, which is in act it self.

3. He Judges with good reason, that the Vulgar mistake of Philosophers, in
making every Faculty or Power a Distinct The Understanding and Will, not
Distinct Powers.
Entity, has caused much Obscurity and Uncertainty in Philosophy; which humor
of Multiplying Entities, I am so far from abetting that perhaps he will think
me to err on the other hand, in making the Understanding and Will to be one and
the same Power, and affirming that they only differ, formally, in Degree. He
shows clearly how, in proper Speech, the Will is not Free but the Man; unless
it be signified with a Reduplication, that by the Word [Will] is meant Man,
according to that Power in him called the Will. For Powers (as he discourses
well) belong only to Agents, and are Attributes only of Substances, and not of
the Powers themselves. Perhaps this reason of his will abet my position, that
the Understanding and Will are the same Power. Those who make them two, do this
because they find in the Notion of [Will] only a Power of Acting, and not of
knowing; and in the Notion of [Understanding] only a Power of knowing, and not
of Acting: But the same Men make the Understanding direct the Will, which they
call a Blind Power; by which they make one of those Powers, formally as such,
to work upon the other, as if the former were an Agent, and the latter a
Patient. I add, moreover, that they do this with the worst Grace that is
possible; for what avails it the Will, to be directed by the Understanding, if
it does not know how the Understanding directs it? And to make the Will to
know, is to make it a knowing Power, which is to make the Will (though they never
meant it) to be the Understanding. Not reflecting in the mean time when our
Understanding is full of any Apparent Good, the Man pursues it, and so becomes,
or has in him a Principle or Power of Acting; which is what we call Will.

4. Perhaps a Philosophical Discourse, beginning from the Principles in this
affair, if expressed Literally, and pursued Man's Freedom, or Self determination,
deduced from Principles.
home by Immediate Consequences, may set this whole business in a Clearer
Light; and show us very evidently how Man determins himself to Action; and
therefore is Free; as also how he is Predetermin'd to determine himself, than
any particular Reflections on our own Interior: Which, though they may oftentimes
have some Truth in them, yet, not beginning from the bottom-Truths that concern
the point in hand, they can never be steady, but are now and then liable to
some Errors.

5. Beginning then with the Animal part in Man, and considering him barely as
an Animal, and wrought upon as The Difference between Man and Brutes in their
Determination to Action.
other Animals are, I discourse thus. Particles, agreeable to the Nature of the
Animal, being by the Senses conveyed into the Brain, do, if they be but Few,
lightly affect it; and work no other effect but a kind of small Liking of it;
If more, they make it (as we say) begin to Fancy it: But, if they be very many,
and sent from an Object very Agreeable or Good to such a Nature; they will in
proportion to their Multitude and Strength, cause naturally a Tendency toward
it, and powerfully excite the Spirits, so as to make the Animal pursue it; that
is, they will become such a Principle of Action; which in mere Animals we call
Appetite. To which Action that mere Animal is not carried through Choice, or
Freely, but is naturally and necessarily Determined to Act for the Attainment
of that Good, in the same manner as Iron follows the Lodestone. But, if we
consider this Animal, as having now a Rational and Knowing Compart joined to
it, things will be ordered after another manner: For, those Impressions are
carried farther than the Region of the Brain, even into the Soul it self, which
is endowed with a Faculty of Reflecting upon those her Notions, whence she
gains exacter Knowledge of those Bodies that imprinted them. Nor only so, but
she can reflect upon her own Operations too, and know that she knows them; by
which means she comes acquainted with her own Nature, and comes to see that
Knowledge and Reason is that Nature of hers; which she finds is a Nobler part
of the Man, than is the Body; because by it she excels and governs Beasts; and,
in great part, under God, manages Corporeal Nature. Moreover, she can discourse
her Thoughts, compare the Objects, or the Goods they propose, and gather the
Preference some ought to have above others.

6. Things standing thus with the Man, it is evident that he has now not only
that Nature called the Body, to Man naturally pursues what is according to
Reason, or Virtuous.
provide for; but another, and that a Spiritual, and much better Nature, to
look to, and to procure for it all the Good he can, and such Goods as are
Agreeable to it. He finds evidently, that no Corporeal Things can be its Proper
Good, taking it as it is Distinct from the Body. He may easily discern, that its
Distinct Nature being Knowing, or Rational, nothing can perfect it but what is
according to Reason, or improves Knowledge; and that the Acquisition of Science
does perfect it in the latter Regard, and Virtue in the Former; Virtue being
nothing but a Disposition to act according to Right Reason in such and such
Matters, or in such and such Occasions. Reason therefore is the Ground of all
true Morality; and, to act according to Reason, is to act Virtuously:
Wherefore, to act Virtuously would be most Natural to Man, if his True Nature
be not depraved; which it cannot, without Impiety, be thought to be, if we
consider it as it came immediately from God's Hand. Wherefore, if it be not so
now, but be blinded and misled from Reason and Virtue, by Passion and Vice,
(as we experience it is,) it is demonstrable hence, a posteriori, that it has
been Therefore his Nature has been perverted since his Creation.
some way or other perverted since its Creation; which Christianity tells us,
has happened through Original Sin, transfused from Adam. Moreover, as the Sense
of Corporeal or Sensible Pleasure or Pain invites the Man to pursue what is for
the Good of the Body, and makes him tend toward what is Agreeable, and eschew
what is Harmful to it; so, in Man, as he is Rational, there is, or ought to be,
answerable to those, a Spiritual Pleasure and Pain, viz. the Satisfaction and
Dis-satisfaction of Mind, which we call Conscience, or the Law of Nature,
annexed to all our Actions; our Thoughts (as St. Paul says) accusing or
excusing one another; so to keep us from Unreasonableness, or Vice, and make us
more pliable to follow Reason or Virtue. For, as Grief or Pain is caused in us
by our Knowing that our Bodies, for which we have a great Concern, is
Disordered; so the Stings of Conscience (as far as they proceed from Nature)
come from our Knowing that our better part, our Soul, for which we ought to
have an incomparably higher Concern, is wounded or disordered in her
Rationality, which is her Essence.

7. Hence is seen, that Man is apt to be wrought upon by two several sorts of
Motives, viz. those which are suitable Therefore Supernatural Motives are added,
to strengthen Man's weakened Nature, or Reason.
to the Good of the Body, and those which are agreeable to the Good of the
Soul. Now, were not Humane Nature (as was said) perverted, these two could not
clash; nor would there be any Inclination in the Man to do any thing which
could prejudice his Superior Part, Reason; to which the Inferior, the Body, is
naturally Subservient. But, Man's Nature being poisoned in the Springhead, the
Motives of the First Kind did hazard quite to over-bear the Motives of the
Second Sort; and so Mankind became liable to act, in a manner, perpetually
against Reason, or, (to express it in Christian Language,) all his Actions
might have been Sinful, and himself a Slave to Sin. Wherefore, to obviate the
violent Impulses of Passion, and to strengthen our Reason against its Assaults,
God's Wisdom, Goodness and Mercy took care to give us a Doctrine full of
Supernatural Motives, and those the most powerful ones that could be conceived;
taught us by a Divine Master, and ascertained after the best Manner; so to make
the Appearance of the Eternal Goods it proposed (if reflected on) Lively; which
might keep us upright, and move us effectually to follow our true Nature,
Reason; and so pursue our true Last End, by the Practice of Virtue.

8. Now, there can be no Question but that, both in the State of Pure and
Uncorrupted Nature, as also in the Supernatural Motives being the stronger,
would always prevail, were they duly Applied to a Subject disposed.
Corrupted State of it, thus powerfully assisted, the Innate Propension of the
Will tending strongly to Good or Happiness; and [Good] and [Motive] being in
our Case the same, Eternal Goods would most strongly carry the Will, and
prevail over Temporal ones; as certainly as Heat ut octo would prevail over
Heat ut duo, were there the same Application of one as of the other to the same
Object equally well Disposed; in case the Proposal or Appearance of both these
Goods were but Equal.

9. Both these Motives, Natural and Supernatural, have their several Species or
Phantasms beating upon the Why the Understanding and Will must be the same
Power substantially.
Seat of Knowledge; with this difference, that the Natural Phantasms, being
directly imprinted, are Proper ones; but those Reflex ones, being of Spiritual
Natures (as the Words and Language they are expressed in do testify) are
Metaphorical and Improper. As then, when in a mere Animal a Sensation is made
by a small Number of Agreeable Effluviums they make only a slight Fancy,
Imagination or Representation of it; but when an Impression is made by a great
Multitude of them, the Animal is Naturally ripe for Action, and is Enabled, or
has a Power to act, which Power, thus prompt to act, we call Appetite: So (as
was said above) in a Rational or Knowing Animal, a small Quantity of Reflex
Notions may serve to give it a speculative Knowledge of the Object proposed:
But, when those Reflex Impressions are many, and of such Objects as, being very
Agreeable or Good to our true Nature, are therefore highly concerning us to
have them; the Appearance of them is so Lively, and the Strength of their
Motive Force is so great, that the Man becomes fit to act for them; which
Principle of Action we call Will. So that Knowledge and Will differ but in
Degree, as did Fancy and Appetite in a mere Animal. By which Explication are
avoided all the Incoherent Positions about this Subject; such as are, that the
Understanding directs the Will; that the Will knows; that one Power works upon
another, etc. Whence is seen,

10. First, That the way to conquer in our Spiritual Warfare, is, to strive to
Multiply and Strengthen those Reflex How to conquer in our Spiritual Warfare.
Thoughts, especially those given us by Supernatural Motives; and to make their
Appearance Lively in the Soul; that so it may be able to beat down and overcome
the opposite Band of Impressions from Corporeal Objects which assault it: Which
I conceive to be what is Literally meant by a Lively Faith working in us that
best Virtue, Charity. Next, in order to the same End, we must endeavor, by a
cautious and prudent Avoidance, to lessen and weaken the Impressions from
Corporeal Objects; which is done by that Virtue which we call Temperance, or
(when it is to some high degree) Mortification; and, by that means to dim the
Appearance those Objects would otherwise make; lest, if it be too Lively, they
should overcome the Motive Force of those Objects which are Spiritual. But, it
is to be noted, that the multiplying, or frequently repeating those Reflex
Impressions, are not so necessary to every Person, nor always the best. For, a
Wise, Judicious Christian, who, out of a Clear Sight of Spiritual Motives, has
(by a thorow-Penetration of their Excellency and Preferribleness) his
Speculative Thoughts so Lively, that they fix his Interior Practical Judgment
to work steadily for the Attainment of Eternal Happiness, is a far more Manly
and Strong Christian, than those who arrive at a high Pitch by the frequent
Dints of Praying, or other good Exercises, almost hourly continued: For, those
Well-knit Thoughts, and Rational Judgments, are (as it were) an Impenetrable
Phalanx; and being Connatural to our Reason, no Assault can shock or break
their Ranks. Yet, even in those firmest Souls, Christian Discipline and
Vigilance must be observed; lest, not having those strong Thoughts or Judgments
still in readiness, they be surprised by their Ghostly Enemy; which I take to
have been King David's Case, when he first sinned.

11. Secondly, It is seen hence, that Man determines himself to Action, or is
Free. For, it is evident, both to Reason It Is evident, that Man determines
himself to Action,
and Experience, that all those Thoughts, Discourses, Judgments and Affections,
he had in him before, naturally, or supernaturally, are the Causes of the
Determination of his Will. Wherefore, all these being Modes or Accidents
belonging to him, and Modes not being Distinct Entities from the Thing to which
they belong, but the Thing it self, (or, the Man thus modified;) it follows,
that Man determines himself to Action; or, is a Free Agent.

12. Thirdly, Since Man has neither his Being, his Powers, his Actions, nor
consequently, the Circumstances by Yet, as Predetermin'd by GOD.
which he came to be imbued with his good Thoughts (from whence he has the
Proposals of his true Good, and of those incomparable Motives to pursue it)
from Himself; but had all these from the Maker and Orderer of the World: And,
since this Series of Internal and External Causes (called, in Christian
Language, God's Grace) did produce this Determination of himself, it is
manifest, that he was Predetermin'd by God, the First Cause, thus to Determine
himself, as far as there was Entity or Goodness in his Action.

13. Fourthly, Since all our Powers are, by the Intent of Nature, ordained to
perfect us, and that Power, called Determination to Virtuous Action does
perfect, and not destroy Freedom.
Freedom, does not perfect any Man while he determines himself to that which
will bring him to Eternal Misery; it follows, that the more he is Determined to
Virtue and true Goodness, the more Free he is. Again, Since a Man is Free when
he acts according to the true Inclination of his Nature; and the true natural
Inclination of a Man is to act according to Right Reason, that is, Virtuously;
it follows, that Freedom is then most truly such, and the Man most truly Free,
when he is Determined to Virtuous Actions. Whence Irrationality, or Sin, is by
the Holy Ghost called Slavery, which is opposite to Freedom. From which
Slavery, the Mercy of God, merely and solely through the Merits of his Son, our
Redeemer, has freed us.

14. Fifthly, We Experience, that the Lively Proposal of Temporal and Eternal
Goods, when it arrives to that Good, if evidently Appearing such, does
certainly determine the Will.
pitch, that there is hic and nunc, such a Plenitude (ex part Subjecti) of
such Objects or Motives, that it hinders the Co-appearance, Co-existence, and
much more the Competition of the Contrary Motives, does always carry the Will,
or the Man, along with it. For, the Object of the Will being an Appearing Good,
and no other Good, in that Juncture, (at least, Considerably,) appearing,
because the Mind is full of the other; it follows, that the Inclination of the
Will to Good in Common, which Man is naturally determined to, must needs carry
the Soul; no other (as was said) then Appearing. Whence, Mr. Locke's Position,
that Uneasiness alone is present; and his Deduction thence, that therefore
nothing but Uneasiness determines the Will to act, is shown to be Groundless:
For, an Appearing Good cannot but be always Present to the Soul; otherwise, it
could not appear, or be an Appearing Good.

15. Sixthly, Hence wrong Judgments arise, either through Want of Information,
as, when Men are not imbued How Wrong Judgments come.
with sufficient Knowledge of Eternal Goods; or else, through Want of
Consideration; whence, by not perfectly weighing and comparing both, they come
to prefer Temporal Goods before Eternal ones.

16. Lastly, it is to be noted, that Sin does not always spring from False
Speculative Judgments, but from their Sin generally springs from True but
Disproportionate Judgments.
being Disproportionate. For, it is a Truth that Temporal Goods are in some sort
Agreeable to us; nor would they hurt us for loving them as far as they merit to
be loved, provided we did but love Eternal Goods as much as they deserve to be
loved too. Sin therefore is hence occasioned, that through too close and frequent
a Converse with them, we too much conceit, and make vast Judgments of these
Temporal Goods in proportion of what we make of Eternal ones. And, were not
this so, no Sin would remain in a bad Soul when separate, or in a Devil; nor,
consequently, the proper Punishment of Sin, Damnation, because they know all
Truths Speculatively. Wherefore, their Inordinate Practical Judgments (in which
Sin consists) springs hence, that they do not conceit, or (as we say) lay to
heart the Goodness of True Felicity, because they over-conceit or make
too-great Judgments of the Goodness found in some False Last End, which they
had chosen. Yet these Disproportionate Judgments, though Speculatively True, are
apt to beget wrong Practical Judgments, and wrong Discourses or Paralogisms in
the Soul of a Sinner, to the prejudice of his Reason; as has been shown in my
METHOD, Book 3, Less. 10.. 18.

17. Mr. Locke's Discourse about Uneasiness, lies so cross to some part of this
Doctrine, that it obliges me to examine Of Uneasiness, and Mr. L's discourse
concerning it.
it. He endeavors to show that Uneasiness alone and not Good or the Greater
Good, determines the Will to Act. His Position, though new, and Paradoxical, is
very plausible; and, taking it in one Sense, (viz. that there is always some
Uneasiness when the Will is Altered in order to Action,) has much Truth in it;
and it seems to have much Weight also, by his pursuing it so ingeniously: Yet
there is something wanting to render his Discourse Conclusive. For,

18. First, If we look into Grounds and Principles, they will tell us, that
it is the Object of any Power, which Good is the only Determiner of the Will;
and not Uneasiness.
actuates, or determines it; and the Object of the Will cannot be Uneasiness:
All Uneasiness being evidently a Consequence, following either from the not yet
attaining the Good we desire, and hope for; or from the Fear of Losing it. And,
if we should ask whether Uneasiness does affect the Will, otherwise than sub
ratione mali, or, because it is a Harm to the Man; and Ease otherwise affect
it, than sub ratione Boni, (that is, because it is Good to him;) I believe it
is impossible, with any Show of Reason, to deny it. Now, if this be so, it will
follow, that it is Good only which is the Formal Motive of the Will; and Ease,
no otherwise than as it is Good.

19. Secondly, All that we naturally affect being only to be Happy, or to be
well; it follows, that Good only is that Proved from our Natural Desire of
Happiness.
which our Rational Appetite, the Will, strives to attain; or pursues, and acts
for.

20. Thirdly, Appearing Good being held by all, to be the Object of the Will,
(for none hold, that Good will The Appearance of the Good is of greatest
weight, but, in a manner, disregarded by Mr. Lock.
move it, unless it appears such;) and the Greater Appearance of it having a
greater, and sometimes the Greatest Power to move it, I observe, that though Mr.
Lock does now and then touch slightly at the Appearance of the Good proposed
to the Understanding; yet, he no where gives the full Weight to the Influence
the several Degrees of this Appearance have over the Understanding, to make the
Man will it; but only denies that Good, or the Greater Good, in it self,
determines the Will. Whereas, even the Greatest Good, ^dimly appearing such,
may not, perhaps, outweigh the least Good, if it be very Lively represented,
or Applied close to our view, by a Full Appearance of it. Hence, his Argument,
that [Everlasting Unspeakable Goods do not hold the Will; whereas, very great
Uneasiness does,] has not the least Force; because he still leaves out the
Degree of their Appearing such to us. For, since (especially in our Case) eadem
est ratio non entium, and non apparentium; and no Cause works its Effect, but
as it is Applied; he should either have put an Equal Appearance of the two
Contesting Motives, or nothing will follow.

21. Fourthly, This Equal Appearance put, his Argument is not Conclusive, but
opposes himself. For, the Putting this Appearance, his Reasons do not conclude.
prodigious Torments inflicted by the Heathen Persecuters, upon the Primitive
Martyrs, were, doubtlesly, the Greatest present Uneasiness Flesh and Blood
could undergo; yet the Lively Appearance of their Eternal Happiness, (though
Distant, and Absent,) which their Well-grounded Faith, and Erected Hope assured
them of, after those Short, though most Penal Sufferings; overcame all that
Inconceivable Uneasiness they suffered at present.

22. Lastly, How can it be thought, that the getting rid of Uneasiness, or
(which is the same) the Obtaining Proved, because Ease is not the Perfection of
a Soul.
of Ease, can be the Formal and Proper Object of the Will. Powers are ordained
to perfect the Subject to which they belong; and, the better the Object is
which they are employed about, so much, in proportion, the Man is the
Perfecter, who applies that Power to attain it. It cannot then be doubted, but
True Happiness being the Ultimate Perfection Man can aim or arrive at, which is
only attainable by Acts of his Will; that Power was naturally ordained to bring
Man to his highest State of Perfection by such an Acquisition; or, by loving
above all Things, and pursuing that Object; and, consequently, since this
consists in obtaining his Summum Bonum, it is the Goodness of the Object,
apprehended and conceited such, which determines the Will; and, therefore, the
Straining after Greater, and even the Greatest Goods, and being Determined to
them, is what, by the Design of Nature, his Will was given him for. Now, who
can think, that merely to be at Ease, is this Greatest Good; or the Motive,
Object, End, or Determiner of the Will? Ease, without any farther Prospect,
seems rather to be the Object of an Idle Drone, who cares not for perfecting
himself at all; but sits still, satisfied with his Dull and Stupid Indolency.
It seems to destroy the Acquisition of all Virtue; which is Arduous, and not
performed but by Contrasting with Ease, and present Satisfactions. It quite
takes away the very Notion of the Heroic Virtue of Fortitude; whose very
Object is the Overcoming Ease, and attempting such Things as are Difficult, and
Inconsistent with it. I expect, Mr. Lock will say, that all these Candidates
of Virtue had not acted, had they not, according to their present Thoughts,
found it Uneasy not to act as they did. But I reply, that Uneasiness was not
their Sole Motive of Acting, nor the only, or Formal Determiner of their Will:
For, in that case, if merely to be rid of Uneasiness had moved them to act,
mere Ease had satisfied them. Whereas, it is Evident, they aimed at a Greater
Good than merely to be at Ease. In a Word; Ease bears in its Notion, a
Sluggish, Unactive, and most Imperfect Disposition: It seems to suit only with
the (...), or Insensibility of a Stoic. Pleasure and Joy have some Briskness
in their Signification: Desire is Active, and implies a Tendency to some Good
we affect: But the mere being at Ease denotes no more but a Stupid
Indisturbance; which Noble Souls hate, as mean, and are weary of it: And, if
Ease be the proper Motive and Determiner of the Will; and the Greatest Good the
Will can have, or wish, is Eternal Glory; it would follow, that the Glory of
the Saints and Angels in Heaven is nothing but being in the best manner at
Ease; which is far from Elevating the Soul to the highest Degree of Perfection,
as Glory, or the Beatifying Sight of God does; and only signifies, she is, when
in Heaven, securely out of Harm's way, or free from being disturbed ever after:
By which, no great Good accrues to her, but only a kind of Neutral State, in
which she shall receive no Hurt.

23. The true Point then seems to me to stand thus; The Object of the Will, an
Appearing Good, works many The Truth of this Point stated.
Effects immediately consequent to one another. First, When the Appearance is
but slight, it begets a Liking of it; when Lively, a Love of it, which
determines the Will to it; to which, if Great, follows an Effectual Tendency
toward it, called Desire of it. Desire not satisfied, troubles us, or makes us
Uneasy: Uneasiness makes us strive to change our Condition, to get Ease. This
makes us to cast about, and Consider how to find Means to do it: Means found,
we make use of them, and actually go about to rid our selves of what was
Uneasy to us. Now, though some of these are nearer to our Outward Action than
others, yet the Appearing Good in the Object is the Common Cause which produces
all those Orderly Dispositions; in virtue of which, as the First Motive, they
do all Act, Assist and Concur to determine our Will to go about the Outward
Action with Vigor.

24. Ere I part with this Chapter of Power, I am to observe, that Mr. Lock has
not any where so much as Mr. L. omits here the Idea of Power to be a Thing,
though Nature suggests i^
touched at the Power to be a Thing; though Nature gives us as Clear a Notion of
it, as of any other Power whatever. For, as often as we see one Thing made of
Another, which we know is not Created anew, so often our Natural Reason forces
us to acknowledge that somewhat of the former Thing could be made another
Thing; and this, as evidently as when we see a Thing Act, which did not Act
before, we must acknowledge it had antecedently a Power to Act; and thence we
frame an Idea or Notion of such a Power accordingly. But of this Power, called
Matter, and of its Metaphysical Compart, the Form or Act, I have treated
largely already in my Appendix to my Method, to which I refer my Reader; as
also here, Preliminary 5.. 6, 7. I note, by this Omission of the Notion of
Metaphysical Power, or Matter, that Mr. L. holds so rigorously to his First
Ground, that all our Notions are got by Sensation and Reflection, that he seems
to make account, that, by working upon these, we do not gain other Notions by
using our Reason; in which Sense, I must deny that Ground of his. Or else, he
omits this, and other Notions, (especially Metaphysical ones,) because he finds
no Proper or Formal Similitudes for them in his Fancy; which makes it still
more Evident that he too much consults his Imaginative Faculty, to the
Prejudice of his Reason; and, too frequently, means by his Ideas, mere Fancies.
Which also is the reason why he blunders so about the Notion of Substance.

REFLECTION Thirteenth, ON The Twenty Second and Twenty Third CHAPTERS.
1. I Find nothing in Chap. 22th, [Of Mixed Modes] to reflect on, but what has
been spoke to already. The Author pursues with much Accuracy his Our Mixture of
our Notions is Regular, Mr. L.'s Irregular and Disorderly.
own Method of showing how his Ideas of Mixed Modes are made up of Simple ones.
Which, in a manner, falls into the same, as does our way of ranging all our
Notions into the Common Head of Substance and its. Modes, and then compounding
them as Use and Occasion invites us, or rather as Nature forces us. Nor do I
see how the Name ties (as Mr. Lock fancies) the several Ideas together, more
than barely by signifying the Combination of them made beforehand in our Minds.
The different Method in this Point, taken by Mr. Lock and us, seems to be
this. That We, by distributing our Ideas or Notions into Ten Common Heads, do
know at first view in which Box to look for them; and, this discovered, we find
also all our Particular Notions, that are within the Precincts of each Head, by
Dividing the Head it self by Intrinsecal Differences, or more and less of it;
which done, the Mixture of that Compounded Notion is Close and Compacted; each
Part of it, if in the same Branch of that Division, being Essential to the
other. And, if some Part of the Compound Notion be taken from other Heads, we,
by looking into their Notions, and Comparing them by our Reason, know how much,
and what Share of that Notion is borrowed from others, and belongs or not
belongs to it; and in what manner it belongs to it: Which teaches us how to
predicate diversely; and instructs us how the Terms of our Propositions are
connected, and whether they be connected at all. Which exceedingly conduces to
Science, and (as we conceive) is hardly performable by his way, but rather is
Inconsistent with it. Again, while we Divide those Common Heads, in case our
Division be rightly made, we, with the same labor, frame Genuin and Proper
Definitions of each Notion under each respective Head. Whereas, we conceive,
his way of Mixing his Ideas wants the Beauty of placing their Parts orderly,
which the Process from Superior to Inferior Notions has; and his Mixed Ideas,
if he goes about to explain and compound them, have so Ragged, Shattered, and
Dishevelled an Appearance, that it is hard to determine which of his Simple Ideas
that makes this Mixture, (much more which of his Compounded ones) is to be the
First, Second, Third, etc. So that the Definitions of his Ideas do more
resemble a Confused Heap than a Regular Building; as will be observed by any
Man who reflects on those Definitions and Explications of his Ideas he now and
then gives us. In which, however it may be pretended, that his Materials are
oft-times proper, and the same with ours, yet it will be impossible to show,
that his way of laying those Materials together is Regular, Artificial, or
Handsome. He speaks of the Combinations, Compositions, and Mixtures of his
Ideas; but I do not remember he ever tells us, much less maintains, their
Regularity, or the Order in which his several Ideas, or the Words which express
them, are to be placed; which must necessarily leave his Reader's Thoughts in
much Confusion. Indeed, it seems not to have been his Intention in this
Treatise to observe the Rules of Art, but only to give us our Materials;
wherefore, as I do not object, or much impute this Deficiency, so I thought it
not amiss to note it.

2. While I perused Mr. Locke's 23th Chapter, of the Idea of Substance, I was
heartily grieved to see the greatest Without knowing what Substance or Thing
is, we cannos pretend to Philosophy.
Wits, for want of True Logic, and through their not lighting on the right way
of Philosophizing, lay Grounds for Skepticism, to the utter Subversion of all
Science; and this, not designedly, but with a good Intention, and out of their
Sincerity and Care not to affirm more than they know. He fancies that the
Knowledge of Substance and Extension are absolutely Unattainable. Now, if we be
altogether Ignorant what Substance or Thing means, we must bid Adieu to all
Philosophy, which is the Knowledge of Things, and confess that we talk all the
while of we know not what: And, if we be invincibly Ignorant of what Extension
is, farewell to all the Mathematical Sciences; which, (those that treat of
Number, or Arithmetic, excepted) do all of them presuppose our Knowledge of
Extension, and are wholly grounded on that Knowledge. Wherefore, that I may
perform the Duty I owe to Science and Truth, I judge my self obliged first to
establish the Literal Truth in this Point; and, next, to satisfy his Scruples
and Difficulties. In order to which I discourse thus.

3. We can have no Knowledge of a Nothing, formally as such; therefore all our
Knowledge must be of Things one All our Notions, and, amongst them, that of
Substance or Res is taken from the Thing.
way or other; that is, all our Knowledge must either be of the Res or the
Modus rei; or, (as the Schools express it) of Substance or Accidents; for,
other Notions we cannot have. Again, Since Mr. Lock grants the Accidents or
Modes are not distinct Entities from the Thing; they can only differ from it
Notionally; or, as diverse Notions, Considerations, Respects, or Abstracted
Conceptions, which our limited Understanding (not able to comprehend at once
the whole Thing, and all that belongs to it, in the Bulk) has of the Thing,
which grounds them all. Hence all our Knowledge of Quantity, (under what Name,
or in whatever Formality we take it) is of the Thing as it is Big, Divisible, or
Extended: Our Knowledge of Quality, is of the Thing considered according to
what renders its particular Nature Perfect or Imperfect. Relation is still the
Thing, according to that in it which grounds our comparing it to others. Now,
as we can consider the Thing according to its Modes or Accidents, so we can
have another Notion or Consideration of the Thing as to its own self*
abstracting from all these former Considerations; or a Notion of the Thing,
(not according to any Mode it has, but) precisely according to its Thingship
(as we may say) or Reality; that is, in order to Being; or (which is the same)
we can consider it precisely and formally as an Ens, Res, Substance or Thing;
and all we can say of it, thus considered, is, that it is capable to be
actually. For, since we see Created Things have Actual Being, yet so that they
can cease to be; all that we can say of them, (thus considered) is, that they
are Capable to be. Besides, since we see they have Being, were this Actual
Being or Existence Essential to them, they would be of themselves, and so could
not but be; and, consequently, must always be; which our common Reason and
Experience contradicts; in regard we know them to have been made; and we see
many of them daily Produced, and others Corrupted. This Discourse is built on
this Principle, that all our Ideas or Notions (and amongst them the Notion of
Substance or Thing) are but so many Conceptions of the Thing; or which (taking
the Word [Conception] objectively) is the same, the Thing thus or thus
conceived; which, besides what is said here, is proved at large in my Second and
Third Preliminaries.

4. Now, according to this Explication, which when we are distinguishing the
Notion of Thing or Substance We cannot be Ignorant of the Notion of Substance
or Thing.
from its Modes (as both of us are here) is evidently true; it is so far from
being Impossible to know, even distinctly, what the Word [Substance] or, which
is the same [Thing] means, or what Substance is, that it is impossible to be
ignorant of it. For, every one must needs know what it is to be; since without
knowing this, we could not understand any thing another says, nor what our
selves think; for all this is performed by Affirming or Denying, expressed by
[is] or [is not,] which speak Actual Being, or not Being. And it is in a manner
Equally Impossible not to know what [Capacity] or [Power] means; which are the
only Ingredients of [Capable to be,] which is the very formal Conception of
Ens, as it is precisely Ens; or, of the Thing according to the mere Notion of
Substance, taking that Word in a Logical Sense, as it is distinguished from
Accidents; and not in a Grammatical one (as it were) for a Supporter of the
Accidents; for, this is a Secondary Sense of [Thing,] and does not signify
what it is in it self, or according to its Primary and precise Notion, as is
noted above; but, according to what Respect or Consideration it bears to
others, or other Notions.

5. Thus far concerning the Idea or Notion of Substance in Common, or taken as
abstracted from its Modes or Accidents. We know the more Inferior Notions of
Things less perfectly;
Descending thence to such and such sorts of Substances, and keeping still in
that Line, it is plain that there goes more to their Composition, than there did
to constitute the bare Notion of Substance it self; and therefore the Modes or
Accidents must be taken in (for there is nothing else in Nature imaginable) to
constitute them such and such: Wherefore, the Complexion of those Accidents
which constitutes them of such or such a Nature, and nothing else, is (as the
Schools phrase it) their Substantial or Essential Form. And, if we go yet
lower, there will need still a greater Complexion, or a Decomposition of
Accidents for the same Reason; and so still more, till we come to an Individual
Thing; or, as they call it, the Substanstantia Prima; which, only, is in proper
Speech, A Thing, because And the Individual Essence least of all.
It only is Capable of Existing. But, when we are got to this lowest Step in
the Climax of Substance, I mean to the Individuum or Suppositum, which includes
in it all the Modes that constituted the Superior and Inferior Natures above
it, and those innumerable Accidents over and above, which distinguish it from
all other Individuums of its own kind, and by which it is perfectly determined
to be This in particular, and no other; then, it is no wonder our bewildered
Thoughts are lost in a Wood; it being impossible for us to conceive, find out,
much less to know distinctly the confused Medley of those Numberless Accidents
or Modifications found in the Suppositum, which do completely constitute its
Individual Essence.

6. And hence arises Mr. Locke's first Difficulty, and his Apprehension that we
can make nothing of the Idea of Substance. To gain a Distinct Notion of
Substance or Thing, me must consider it abstractedly from its Modes, singly
considered.
But, he may please to reflect, that we ought to distinguish between the Notion
of a Thing or Substance taken as Involving all the Modes aforesaid; and the
Notion of Thing, as Excluding, Abstracting from, and Contradistinguish'd to to
them all; in which later Sense I take it here, and himself too, as appears by
his Considering it as a Supporter to the Accidents. Which done, I am confident
his Difficulty will be at an End: For this is as easy to be done, as it is to
see the Difference between the mere Notion of Thing, (or what is Capable to be)
and such a Thing, or Capable to be of such or such a Nature. Next, he thinks
that all we can make of the Idea of Substance is, that it is a Substratum, or
Supporter of the Accidents. To whch I Answer, that if we consider Substance in
reference to its Modes, we do indeed make such a Metaphorical Conception of it;
but not, if we do (as we ought when we consider it singly) conceive it as it is
in its self, or as to its own precise Notion, or Idea. It Is partly the
Impropriety and Unfitness of the Word [Substance] (as I have noted Preliminary
5. 10, 11.) and partly the Blundering Explication of the Common Schoolmen,
which breeds all this perplexity. And, indeed, it is no wonder, if, when we take
Metaphorical Words Literally, we find our selves at a loss, and that our
Thoughts ramble into Extravagancies. The Literal Truth of the whole business is
this in short, which who ever does not well reflect on, and carry along with
him, (the Distinction of our Notions depending on it,) I dare confidently
affirm must necessarily discourse Confusedly, and Incoherently.

7. The Thing, or Individuum, as it stands in Nature, does (as was said)
contain in its self what grounds, corresponds The Literal Truth how Substance
and its Accidents, or the Thing and its Modes are distinctly known.
to, and verifies thousands of Different Notions or Conceptions which we may
make of it. We cannot, as Experience teaches us, weild or manage all or more of
those Notions at once; and, therefore, our Knowledge of it (taken as it is in
Nature, or in the Bulk) is so Confused, that we know not distinctly what it is,
more than to see and experience that it is, and is Distinguished from all
others. The only way then to gain a Clear and Distinct Knowledge of it, is to
take it in pices (as it were) by our various Considerations of it, and frame
many Partial, Inadequate or Abstracted Notions of it. All these Notions, how
many soever they be, are either of Res, or of Modus rei; that is, either they
must be the Notions or Natures of Thing, or of such a Thing; and both the first
of them, and also all the rest, are nothing but the Thing diversely Considered.
The Conceptions, or Notions of the Modes or Accidents are innumerable; but
there is only One which is the Conception of Thing it self, which we find to be
this, that it is Capable to be or exist; and, this Notion, or (which is the
same) the Object thus considered, we call Ens, Res, Substance or Thing. The
other Notions we have of it, such as are Big, Qualified, Related, etc. have
neither Being, nor any Order to Being in their signification, or peculiar
Notion, as had the other. Wherefore, since Nature tells us that we must first
conceive the Thing to be, ere we can conceive it to be after such and such a
manner; nor can the Mode or Manner be apprehended to be of its single self
capable to be, otherwise than as it is annexed to what is Capable to be by its
self, or by its own peculiar Nature, that is, as it is identify'd with it;
therefore no Mode or Accident can exist by Virtue of its own Idea or Notion,
but in Virtue of the Notion of Thing or Substance; with which, therefore, though
formally Different, they are all materially Identify'd. Or thus, more briefly:
Had not the Thing somewhat in it which grounds this true Conception of it, that
it is Capable to be; none of the Accidents (they all wanting in their Notion any
Order to Being) could be conceived to be at all. And this, in Literal Truth, is
the great Mystery of those Positions, about which Disputants in the Schools,
blinded with their own illunderstood Metaphors, have so long, like Andabatae,
fought in the dark about such Questions as these, viz. Whether the Essence of
the Accidents is their Inexistence, or Inherence in the Substance; Whether the
Substance supports them in Being: Is their Substratum, or the Subject, in
which, those Accidental Forms, do Inhere? Then, in pursuance of their Fanciful
Metaphor, some of them begin to cast about how those Forms are United to the
Subject or Substance, or come to be received in it; in order to which, and that
nothing may be wanting to do the work thoroughly, they coin a new connecting
little Entity, called an Union, to soder them together, and so, instead of
making it One Entity, they very wisely make Three. All which Conceits, if we
look narrowly into them, have at the bottom this mistake, that all our several
Conceptions have so many distinct Entities in the Thing corresponding to them.
Which vast Error both perverts all true Philosophy, and is against a First
Principle in Metaphysics, by making Unum to be Divisum in se, or One Entity to
be Many. Now, if these Modes be Things, or (to speak more properly) if the
Notion of every manner of a Thing be the formal Notion of the Thing it self, or
of what is Capable of Existing; first, the Nature of Modes is destroyed; for
they will be no longer the [How,] but the [What;] and the Nature or Notion of
Substance, or Ens, is lost too; for, if all the Modes are Distinct Entities, or
Capable of Existing, they must all be Substances; which blends all the Notions
Mankind has, or can have, (on the perfect Distinction of which, all Science is
grounded,) in a perfect Confusion; and, consequently, reduces all our Knowledge
to a Chaos of Ignorance.

8 But I wonder most, how this Learned Man can think none knows what Extension
is. We cannot open our It Is impossible not to know Extension, is being, in a
manner, Selfevident.
Eyes, but they inform us, that the Air, and other Bodies which which we see,
are not cramped into an Indivisible, but are vastly Expanded, or (which is the
same) Extended. May we not as well say we may see Light, and yet have no Notion
of it? And, does not himself make Extension to be one of his Simple Ideas, the
Knowledge of which goes along with all the Knowledges we have of Bodies; and,
withal, resembles the Thing; For what, thinks he, serves an Idea, but to make
Men Know by it what it represents; or, consequently, an Idea of Extension, but
to make us know Extension? Perhaps he may think we cannot know it, because we
cannot define or explicate it, but in Words Equivalent to it. But, first, this
Objection has no Ground; because all Definitions and Explications in the World
are the same Sense with the Notion they Define and Explicate; and, were it not
so, they would be no Definitions nor Explications of that Notion; for they do
no more but give us all the Parts of the Entire Notion, and all the Parts are
the same as the Whole. Next, how does it follow, that, because we cannot
explicate it, we do not know it? Whereas, the direct contrary follows in our
present Case: For, the commonest Notions can the worst be defined. because they
least need it, being Self-known, or Self-evident. Not all the Wit of Man can
Define and Explicate what it is to be; and, yet, all Mankind knows it
perfectly, or else it is impossible they, not knowing what the Copula means,
should know the Truth or Falsehood of any Proposition whatever. Thirdly, He
seems to think that (as some of the Schoolmen do imagine) Contradictory
Positions may follow out of the Notion of Extension; else, why should he imagine
the Difficulties concerning it are Inextricable: Which I must declare against,
as the the worst piece of Skepticism, next to the denying all First Principles.
For, if Contradictory Positions may follow out of any Notion taken from the
Thing, then that Notion, and consequently the Thing it self, would not have any
Metaphysical Verity in it, but be purely Chimerical. Add, that the learned
Thomas Albius, in his Excellent Preface before the Latin Edition of Sir Kenelm
Digby's Treatise of Bodies, has clearly solved those Imaginary Contradictions.

9. To show the Difficulty of Knowing Extension, he objects, that no Reason can
be given for the Cohesion of The Cohesion of Extended Parts is above Physical
Proofs, and can only be known by Metaphysics.
the Parts of Extended Matter. If he means, that we can give no. Physical
Reason for it, or such an one as fetched from the Qualities or Operations of
Bodies, I grant it; for all those Qualities and Operations are Subsequent to
the Notion of Extension, and Grounded on it: But, if he thinks there cannot be
a far Better and Clearer Reason given from the Supreme Science, Metaphysics, I
deny it. I explain my self; All Positions that concern the Essences of Things,
or Modes either, do belong to the Object of Metaphysics; so that, whoever
makes the Natures or Essences of any of these [not to be what they are,] is
most clearly convinced, by his violating that Metaphysical First Principle, [A
Thing is what it is,] to maintain a clear Contradiction. If then Divisibility
be the Essence of Quantity, and Divisibility signifies Unity of the Potential
Parts of Quantity; and Continuity (as making those Parts formally Indivisas in
se) be evidently the Unity proper to those Parts; it follows, that Quantity
being the Common Affection of Body, does formally, and as necessarily, make its
whole Subject, that is, all its parts, Continued, or Coherent; as Duality does
make a Stone and a Tree formally Two; or Rotundity in a Body makes it Round; or
any other Formal Cause is engaged by its very Essence to put its Formal Effect,
which would induce a Clear Contradiction if it should not.

10. It Is not in this Occasion only, but in many others too, that Great
Scholars puzzle their Wits to find out Whence it is in vain to seek for Natural
Efficient Causes for those Effects that depend on Formal Causes.
Natural Causes for diverse Effects, the true Reason for which is only owing to
Trans-natural ones, or from these Altissimae Causae, which only Metaphysics
give us; and it happens also, not seldom, that Men beat their Brains to find
out Efficients for that which depends only on Formal Causes; whose most certain
Causality depends on no Second Causes, but only on the First Cause, God's
Creative Wisdom, which established their Essences to be what they are. Let any
one ask a Naturalist, why Rotundity does formally make a Thing Round, and you
will see what a Plunge he will be put to, not finding in all Nature a Proper
Reason for it. The same, in other Terms, is the Ground of Mr. Locke's
Perplexity how Extended Parts do cohere; to which, the properest and most
Satisfactory Answer is, because there is Quantity in them, which is Essentially
Continued; and, so does Formally give Coherence of Parts to Body, its Subject.
By the same means we have a Clear Reason afforded us, why Bodies impell one
another; which Mr. Lock thinks is Inexplicable. For, putting one Body to be
thrust against another, the Body that is Passive must either be should
forwards, or there must necessarily be Penetration of Parts; unless, perhaps,
at first, the Impulsive Force be so slight and leisurely, that it is able to
cause only some Degree of Condensation. Every thing therefore acting as it is,
if the Body, or the Quantity of it, be Extended, or have one Part without the
other, and, therefore it be impossible its Parts should be penetrated, or be
one within the other, the Motion of the Passive Body must necessarily ensue.

11. To proceed: Mr. Lock makes account we have as clear a Knowledge of
Spirits, as we have of Bodies; and We may have Clear Knowledge of Spiritual
Natures by Reflection.
then argues, that we ought no more to deny the Existence of Those, than of
These. Which I should like well, did he maintain and prove first, that the
Nature of Bodily Substances is clearly Intelligible: But, to make those Notions
which are most Essential and Proper to Bodies, and most Obvious of all others,
viz. their Entity or Substance, and their Extension, to be Unintelligible, and
then to tell us, that The Idea of Spiritual Natures are as Clear as that of
Bodily Substance, which he takes such pains to show is not Clear at all, is, as
I conceive, no great Argument for their Clearness, nor their Existence neither;
but rather, a strong Argument against both: The Parallel amounting to this,
that we know not what to make either of the one, or of the other.

12. As for the Knowledge we have of Spiritual Natures, my Principles oblige me
to discourse it thus: We can have The Reason Why; and the Manner How.
no Proper or Direct Notions of Spiritual Natures, because they can make no
Impressions on our Senses; yet, (as was shown Reflex. 9.. 7.
above,) our Reflection on the Operations, and Modes which are in our Soul, make
us acknowledge those Modes are not Corporeal; and therefore, that the Immediate
Subject of those Modes (our Soul) is not a Body, but of another nature, vastly
different, which we call Spiritual. Our Reason assures us also, See Method to
Science, B. 4. C. 6.. 18.
by demonstrating that the first Motion of Bodies could neither proceed
immediately from God, nor from our Soul, (which presupposes both that, and many
other Motions, to her Being,) that there must be another sort of Spiritual
Nature, distinct from our Soul, from which that Motion proceeds; which
therefore being Active, and so in Act it self, is not a Compart, but a Whole,
and Subsistent alone; which we call Angels: Their Operations prove they have
Actual Being, and therefore a fortiori they are capable to be, or Things.
Whence we must correct our Negative Expressions of them by our Reason; and
hold, they are Positive Things; all Notions of Thing being Positive. Farther,
we can as evidently discourse of those Beings, or Things, though Negatively
expressed, as we can of any Body: v. g. if an Angel be Non-quantus, we can
demonstrate it is Non-extensus, Non-locabilis, etc. and, from its having no
Matter, or Power, which is the Ground of all Potentiality and Change, it is
hence collected, that it is a Pure Act; and, therefore, that once Determined, it
is Immutable, at least Naturally. Lastly, I affirm, that, this presupposed, we
can discourse far more clearly of Spirit, than of Bodies: For, there are
thousands of Accidents belonging, intrinsecally or extrinsecally, to every
Individual Body, whence all our Confusion, and Ignorance of it comes; whereas,
in a Pure Spirit, there are only three or four Notions, viz. Being, Knowledge,
Will and Operation, for us to Reflect on, and Manage; and, therefore, the
Knowledge of them is (as far as this Consideration carries) more Clearly
attainable, than is the Knowledge of Bodies.

REFLECTION Fourteenth, ON The 24th, 25th, 26th, and 27th CHAPTERS.
1. THE 24th Chapter [Of the Collective Ideas of Substance] gives me no
Occasion to reflect. Only when he lays (as it were) for his Ground, that the
The Mind alone does not collect Notions, or compare them.
Mind has a Power to compare, or collect many Ideas into one, I am to suppose
he means, that the Mind does not this of her self alone, without the
Jointacting of the Body, as has been often proved above; for, otherwise, the
whole, or the Man, cannot be said to be the Author of that Action.

2. The 25th Chapter gives us the true Notion of Relation, and very clearly
expressed; which he seconds with Verbal Relations come not from Defect in our
Language, but for want of a Real Ground.
diverse other Solid Truths, viz. That some Terms which seem Absolute are
Relatives; that Relation can be only betwixt two Things; and that All things
are capable of Relation. What I reflect on is, that he gives us not the true
Difference between Real and merely Verbal Relations; nor the true Reason why
some Relative Terms have, and others have not Correlates He thinks the Reasons
why we call some of them ExtrinsecalDenominations (which is the same with
Verbal Relations) proceed from Defect in our Language, or because we want a
Word to signify them: Whereas, this matters not a Jot; since we can have the
Idea or Notion of Relation in our Minds, if we have good Ground for it, whether
we have a Word to signify it or no; or rather, if we have a Real Ground for
it, we shall quickly invent either some one Word, or else some Circumlocution
to express it. Let us see then what our Principles in this Affair say to us.

3. Relation is not here taken for our Act of Relating, (for then it would
belong to another common Head of Notions, called Action) but for the Thing as
it is referred by our Comparative Power to another; Wherefore, there must be
some Ground in the Thing for our thus referring in; and, consequently, if the
Relation be new, or such a one as before was not, there must be some Novelty in
the Thing it self to ground it. Whence follows that, if there be such a Real
Ground on the one side only, and no Real Ground on the other, there will be a
Real Relation on the one side, and no Real Relation on the other, but only a
Verbal one, or an Extrinsecal Denominatien; Answering, or (as it were) Chiming
Grammatically to the Term which is really Relative, v. g. Our Powers of Seeing
or Understanding any thing, have a Real Relation to their proper Objects; both
because such Objects Specify the Power, or make it such a Power, that is, give
it its peculiar or distinct Essence; as also, because the Power is by the
Object actuated and determined to act; that is, the Power is intrinsecally
Changed, or otherwise than it was, by means of the Object; but the Object
suffers no kind of Change, nor is it at all Altered, or otherwise than it was
by being known or seen. Whence the Intellective or Visive Powers are really
Related to the Object; but the Objects, for want of a Real Ground, are not
really Related back to the Powers; however the Words [Understood] or [seen,] do
Verbally answer to the Acts of Understanding and Seeing; which is, therefore,
called by the Schools in their barbarous Language [Relatio dedici] or an
Extrinsecal Denomination. For farther Light in this very necessary Particular,
I refer my Reader to my Method, Book 1. Less. 7. where, if I flatter not my
self, he will find the Notion of Relation treated of very fully and clearly.
Especially I recommend to his Perusal the 9th, 10th, 11th, and 12th Section,
where I discourse of that Unmutual Relation of the Measure to the Thing
measured; the exact Knowledge of which is far more useful than any other piece
of this Subject; however it lay out of Mr. Locke's Road to take notice of such
Speculations as regard, or not regard, the Thing as their Ground.

3. Reviewing his 26th Chapter, (of Cause and Effect, etc.) I found that he
acquaints us very exactly, how we What Causality is, and what grounds the
Relations of Cause and Effect.
gain the Ideas of them by our Senses; but he proceeds not to show us, (which
yet he often does in other occasions) in what the nature of Causality consists,
which is of the Chiefest use in Philosophy. For, what is the Learned part of
the World the better, for having those rudest Draughts, or (as Mr. L. well
calls them) materials of Knowledge, Ideas or Notions, or for knowing how we
come by them, (in which he very frequently terminates his Enquiries,) if we do
not by Reflection and Reason, polish and refine them, and thence attain to true
Knowledge of the Things, from which we gleaned them; or by what virtue they
come to be Causes of such Effects? What I conceive of Causality is, that it is
the Power of Participating or Communicating some Thing, or some mode of Thing,
to the Patient, which was before some way or other, in the Thing that caused
it: On which point I have no occasion to to dilate here particularly. Only,
which concerns our present purpose, I am to note, that that which is thus
communicated is the Real Ground on which the Real Relation of the Effect to its
Cause is founded. Whence follows, that the Cause also, when it has some Real
Change, by being reduced from the Imperfecter State of mere Power, to the
Perfecter one of Act, or (as we say) gets something by producing such an
Effect, will have a Real Ground, and Consequently a Real Relation to the
Effect, and not otherwise. And hence it is that God, our Creator, has no Real
Relation to his Creatures, though they have many to him; because he is no
otherwise, nor better, in the least, by Creating them, than he had been in Case
he had not Created any thing at all; and therefore there is no Ground in Him of
a Real Correlation to them.

4. The 27th Chapter (of Identity and Diversity) requires a deeper
Consideration. In order to which, I know no The Knowing the Principle of
Individuation, must anteceede the Knowledge of Identity and Diversity.
more Compendious way to clear the Point in dispute between us, than to fetch
my Discourse from those Principles that concern it. The Subject does, indeed,
properly belong to Metaphysics; but I will endeavor to do what I can, to
avoid those Abstracted Mediums, which are made use of in that Supreme Science.
And, first, as the Ground work of my Discourse, I am to settle the Principle of
Individuation, or how a particular Thing or Substance, comes to be what it is;
for, this done, it will be easily seen whence we are to take our Measures, to
judge when it continues the same, and when it is to be another, or a Different
Thing from its former self. I discourse thus; nor will it be Tedious I hope to
repeat often, what is so Useful to be remembered, as being the sure Ground of
all our Knowledge.

5. All our Conceptions, by which only we can discourse of Things, are either
of Res or Modus rei; that is, they What gives the Ground to Specify all Notions.
are either the Notions of Substance or Thing precisely; or else, the Notions
of Accidents. Of these the Word [Thing] has a very Abstracted Notion, and is
perfectly Indifferent and Indeterminate to all Particulars: Wherefore the
Notion of such a Species or sort of Thing, being (as was said above) more
Determinate, must have something superadded to it to determine it, and compound
or constitute it of such a Species; which can be nothing but such a Complexion
of Accidents or Modes; there being (as was said) nothing else imaginable that
can be added to the Notion of Thing. Now, Philosophers agreeing to call that
which determins the common Notion of thing; and so, constitutes such and such
Species or Kinds of Things [A Substantial or Essential Form;] hence, the
Substantial Form of all the Sorts, Kinds, or Species of Natural Bodies can be
nothing else but such a Complexion of Accidents, as fit the Thing for such a
kind of Operation in Nature. And, hitherto, if I mistake not, Mr. Lock and I
may agree in the main, however we may differ in the manner of Explicating our
selves.

6. Descending then to the Individuals, it is evident, that a Greater
Complexion of Accidents is necessary to What gives the Ground to our Notions of
the Individuum.
determine and constitute the several Individuums, than would serve to
constitute the Species; for, the Species or Kinds of Things are but few, but
the Individuums under those Kinds are Innumerable; and, therefore, more goes to
distinguish these from one another, than was needful to distinguish or
determine the other: Whence it comes, that we can never comprehend or reach all
that belongs to the Suppositum, or Individuum. Wherefore, it being a certain
Maxim, that [what distinguishes, does constitute,] this Medly of Innumerable
Accidents, which differences or distinguishes each Individuum from all the
rest, does also intrinsecally constitute those Individuums; or, is the
Intrinsecal or Formal Principle of Individuation. Moreover, since nothing in
Common, or not ultimately determined to be This or That, is capable of
Existing; nor, consequently, in proper Speech, a Thing; it follows again, that
that Complexion of Acccidents, which gave the Thing its Primigenial
Constitution in the very first Instant it was thus ultimately Determined to be
This, (or Different from all others of the same Kind,) did truly and properly
Individuate it. Note, that this Discourse holds equally in Elementary, Mixed,
Living, Vegetable and Animal Individuums; allowing only for the smaller or
greater Number of Accidents, which goes to the constituting each of them
respectively. Why Mr. Lock, who allows the Complexion of Accidents to
constitute the Specific Nature, should not follow the same Principle, in
making a greater Complexion of the Modes Intrinsecally distinguish the
Individuum from all others, and so constitute It, I cannot imagine; it being so
perfectly Consonant, and necessarily Consequent to his own Doctrine, and
agreeable to Evident Principles.

7. Applying then this Discourse to Man: Since it is the constant Method of
God's Wisdom, as he is the Author of How Individual Men are constituted.
Nature, to carry on the Course of it by Dispositions on the Matter's side;
and, therefore, to adjust and fit that which Supervenes to what Pre-exists;
and, especially, to suit the Form to the Matter; and, since it is evident that
the Embrio pre-exists to the Infusion of the Soul, as the peculiar Matter to
its Form; it follows, that the Soul is adjusted to the Bodily or Animal Part;
and, according to the Degree, that part of it, called the Fancy, is better or
worse fitted (as far as is on its side) to perform such Actions, when it is
ripe; or, more or less fit to work comparatively, (in which all Judging and
Discoursing Method to Science, B. 2. L. 1.. 10.
consists,) there will be infused a Soul apt to judge and discourse more
perfectly, or less perfectly, according as the Matter requires. And, were it
otherwise, so that the Soul were apt to work more perfectly than the Body were
able to go along with it; first, that greater Degree of Rationality in the Soul
would be lost, and in vain; and next, the Man, God's Workmanship, would be
disproportioned, and, in a manner, Monstrous in his most Essential Parts.
Putting then those Parts orderly fitted to one another, which can only be done
(as was shown) by suting the Supervening Part to that which pre-existed, it
follows necessarily, that as the Bodily or (merely) Animal Matter of Man, the
Embryo, was, in the Instant before the Soul was infused, (and the Man made,)
individually different from all of the same Kind, or from all other Embryo's;
and so, was, consequently, just to such a Degree, fit, by the peculiar
Disposition of its Brain, (as its conjoined Instrument,) to act with the Soul
comparatively; so, it is impossible (the Soul being proportioned to that
Matter, as its Form) that any two Souls should be perfectly Alike, or Equal in
Rationality; or rather, that any Two Men should have a Capacity of Knowing, or
Reasoning, to the self-same Degree: For, were they equally Rational, those two
Men would be but one and the same Man Essentially, or under the Notion of such
a Species; in regard that, though they might have many Accidental Differences,
yet they would have nothing in the Line of such a Rational Ens, or Man, to
distinguish them Essentially, or make and constitute them formally Two such
Entities, or Things, as we call Men, or Rational Animals.

8. This premised, I come to examine Mr. L's Discourses upon this Subject. He
imagins Existence is the Principle Existence cannot possibly be the Principle
of Individuation.
of Individuation; which can consist with no show of Reason. For, since Thing
in Common cannot exist, and therefore what is Ultimately determined to be this
Thing, or an Individuum, can only be capable of Actual Being; it is evident that
the Individual Thing must, (in priority of Nature or Reason) be first
constituted such, ere it can be capable of Existence. Wherefore it is impossible
that Existence, consider it how we will, can be in any manner the Principle of
Individuation, the constitution of the Individuum being presupposed to it.
Again, since, as has been shown above, the Notion of a Thing, or an Individuum,
(speaking of Creatures) is [Capable to be] it is impossible that Actual Being,
or Existence, should constitute the Potentiality or Capacity of Being, any more
then the mere Power of walking can constitute or denominate a Man Actually
walking. Besides, both Logic and Metaphysics demonstrate that, Existence, it
being the immediate Effect of the first Cause, who is Essentially an
Infinitly-Pure Actuality of Being, is therefore the most Actual of any Notion
we have, or can have. Wherefore, since whatever does difference or distinguish
Another, must necessarily be more Actual than the Notion Distinguished; it
follows, that Existence is of its own Nature a most perfectly uniform and
Undistinguishable Effect, that is one and the same in all Creatures whatsoever,
as far as concerns its own precise Nature or Notion: For Reflection will inform
us clearly, that whatever Notion is Distinguishable is Potential; and that the
Distinguishing Notion is more Actual than it. Since then no Notion can be more
Actual than is that of Existence; it follows, it cannot possibly be
Distinguished at all. Whence follows this Unexpected, though Clear, Consequence,
that, if Existence does constitute the Individuality, all the Individuums in
the world, as having one and the Self-same Constituter, would be but one
Individuum.

9. Next, Mr. L. fancies, that the Existing of a Thing in the same Time and
Place, constitutes the Identity of a Thing; The Outward Circumstances of Time
and Place cannot conduce to constitute the Individual Essences.
and the being in several Times and Places constitutes its Diversity. By which
it is easy to discern, that he distinguishes not between the Extrinsecal Marks
and Signs by which we may know the Distinction of Individuals, and what
Intrinsecally and Essentially constitutes or makes them differeut Things. Who
sees not that Time and Place are merely Extrinsecal to the Notion of Substance,
or rather toto genere different from it, as belonging to other Common Heads?
And therefore they are too Superficial Considerations for their Identity and
Diversity (which are Relations grounded on their Essence) to consist in them.
Besides Time and Place are evidently no more, but Circumstances of the Thing;
wherefore, that very word (Circumstance) shows plainly that they cannot be
Intrinsecal, much less Essential to it; and it evidences moreover that they
suppose the Thing already constituted, to which they are annexed. Though then
Practical men may have light thence to distinguish Individuums; yet, it is very
Improper for Philosophers, or Speculative Reflecters, to make the Entity of
Things, which grounds the Relations of Identity and Diversity, to consist in
these Outward Signs and Circumstantial Tokens.

10. This Learned Gentleman conceives there must be a Different Reason for the
Individual Identity of Man. An Individual Man is formally an Individual Thing
of that Kind, and an Individual Person too.
To make way to which he premises, and would persuade us gratis, that it is one
thing to be the same Substance, another the same Man, and a third to be the
same Person. But, I must forestall all his Subsequent Discourses by denying
this Preliminary to them. For, speaking of one and the same Individual Man, as
he does, I must affirm that it is all one, nay, the same Formal Conception of
him, to be the same Substance, Man and Person, For Example, it is evident that
Socrates is one Thing under the Common Head of Substance, or Ens, descending by
the Genus of Animal, and Species of Homo; whence this One Thing or Substance is
not only Necessarily, but Formally one Man, because he is formally a a Thing,
or Substance, under the Kind or Species of Man; and it is impossible he can be
under any other. Again [Man] bearing in its Essential Notion that he is an
Intelligent Being, he is Essentially and Formally one Person too. Nor can we
separate, even by our thought, one of those Considerations from another, unless
we take the word [Substance] or [Man] in a Generical, or Specifical Meaning for
Substance, and Man in common; which we are forbid to do by our very Subject in
hand, which is about the Principle of Individuation; or else, unless he takes
Substance for Parts of Matter, with their Quantity and Figure acceding and
deceding to the Individuum; which Things are not Essential to Man, nor fit him
for his Primary Operation; which Position followed home, would, perhaps, make
the Individuality of Man, and of all Things else, alter every Moment. So that
Mr. Lock, led by the different Sound of Words, makes Three Notions of One; and
then racks his Wits to show how this One Notion, made into Three, is
distinguished; which we may easily foretell must render his Discourse very
Extravagant, as will be seen shortly.

11. Perusing his 8th Section, I much fear that his Tenet, that Brutes are
knowing and rational, does influence The Essence of Things not to be taken from
the Judgment of the Vulgar, nor from Extravagant Suppositions.
his Thoughts strangely on this Occasion, and makes him dislike the Definition
of Man, [viz. a Rational Animal;] and he seems here not only to take the Idea
of Individuation, but of his very Nature and Kind too from his Make and Shape;
and then he discants on what People would think of a Thing in the Shape of a
Man, which never used Reason any more than a Cat or Parrot; or, of a Cat or
Parrot that could Discourse or Philosophize? I answer, I will tell him my Mind
when it shall please God to do Miracles to help out our want of Principles;
and, in the mean time, that I think such Extravagant Suppositions, perverting
the Course of Nature, should not be heard amongst Philosophers; much less be
brought instead of, or to Abett, Arguments. It would be more to purpose, if he
could convince Men of Sense by Conclusive Reasons, that it is possible that
Knowledge should be made by Artificial laying together Particles of Matter; or
else, if it cannot, to prove that Srutes have Spiritual Natures in them: For,
one of these two must necessarily be first made good, ere we can with Reason
affirm, that ^^^^^s have, or can have Knowledge. It Is Principles and not
Fancies which must guide our Thoughts in such concerning Points. What I
conceive Sober Men, and even the Generality, would think of such Irrational Men
and Rational Brutes is this: They would think the former, if they could never
be made to understand, or answer pertinently in their whole Lives,
(notwithstanding their Make,) to be no Men; and the Later, I mean those
Philosophizing Brutes to be either Devils, or Engines acted and animated by
them: So far are such wild Suppositions from giving us the Notions of Things.
But the main Point (in which Mr. Lock frequently mistakes) is, that it matters
not at all what People think or judge. We are indeed to take the Meanings of
Words which express our Natural Notions, or Simple Apprehensions, from the
Users of them, the Populace; but, the Applying, or Joining those Words or
Notions to one another, in order to the framing Thoughts or Judgments of such
Connexions, we are to take only from the Learned, or from the Principles
belonging to the Sciences that treat of such Subjects, and not at all from the
Vulgar; which if we did, we must judge, as many of them doubtlesly do, that the
Moon is no bigger than a great Cheshire Cheese; nor one of the Fixed Stars so
big as a Brands-end, or a Beacon on Fire.

12. The former Distinction forelaid, he proceeds to make Personal Identity in
Man to consist in the Consciousness Consciousness cannot constitute Personal
Identity.
that we are the same thinking Thing in different Times and Places. He proves
it, because Consciousness is Inseparable from Thinking, and as it seems to him,
Essential to it. Perhaps he may have had Second Thoughts since he writ his 19th
Chapter, where, 4. he thought it probable that Thinking is but the Action and
not the Essence of the Soul. His Reason here is, Because it is impossible for
any to perceive, without perceiving that he does perceive. Which I have shown
Reflex. 2. 2, 3, 4, 5.
above to be so far from Impossible, that the Contrary is such. But, to speak
to the Point: Consciousness of any Action or other Accident we have now, or
have had, is nothing but our Knowldge that it belonged to us; and, since we
both agree that we have no Innate Knowledges, it follows, that all both Actual
and Habitual Knowledges which we have, are Acquired or Accidental to the
Subject or Knower. Wherefore the Man, or that Thing which is to be the Knower,
must have had Individuality or Personality from other Principles, antecedently
to this Knowledge called Consciousness; and consequently, he will retain his
Identity, or continue the same Man, or (which is equivalent) the same Person,
as long as he has those Individuating Principles. What those Principles are
which constituted this Man, or This Knowing Individuum, I have shown above, 6,
7. It being then most evident, that a Man must be the same, ere he can know or
be Conscious that he is the same; all his Laborious Descants, and Extravagant
Consequences, which are built upon this Suppositions, that Consciousness
individuates the Person, can need no farther Reflection.

13. Yet it is a great Truth, that Consciousness of its own Actions is
Inseparable from a Knowing Individual Substance, That Consciousnes is
Inseparable from every Individual Man.
or Person, and remains with it eternally; and (which will justify the
Forensick Consideration he mentions) will Acquit or Condemn him when he appears
before God's Dread Tribunal; not because it constitutes its Personality, but
because nothing we once knew, or knowing, did, is possible to be ever blotted
out of the Soul. Whence it comes, that a Soul not only knows her self as soon
as separated, (or rather, is then her own First, and most Immediate, and
Ever-most-present Object,) but also, because, she then knowing all the Course
of the World, and, consequently, all the Actions of her past Life, both Good
and Bad, is disposed, by the Knowledge of the former, and by the Consequences
of them, laid by God's Mercy or Justice, to erect her self by Hope to an Ardent
and Over-powering Love of her true Last End, which will save her; or, by her
Knowledge, or the Consciousness of the Latter, to sink into Despair, which will
plunge her into a Hell of Endless Misery. It is also true, that we are
Conscious here of any perceptible Good or Harm that happens to our Person;
because we cannot but Reflect on what concerns any part of our Individuum,
which is our Self; which, yet, is so far from proving that our Personality
consists in this Consciousness, that it proves the direct contrary: For, it
shows that our Person, or Individual Self, affected thus agreeably, or
disagreeably, is the Object of that Consciousness; and Objects must be
antecedent and pre-supposed to the Acts which are employed about them, because
the Objects are the Cause of those Acts. Nor is there any farther Mystery in
the Word [Self;] for it means no more but our own same Intelligent Individuum,
with which we are well acquainted, partly by Direct, partly by Reflex
Knowledges.

14. It looks so very odly to say, that one of our own Acts should constitute
our own particular Essence, Yet Angels, who are Pure Acts, are constituted, in
part, by the Act of Knowing themselves.
(which it must do, if our Personal Identity consists in our Consciousness,)
that I am apt to think that Mr. Locke's great Wit aimed at some other Truth,
though he hap'd to mis-apply it. I can but guess at it; and perhaps it is this:
It Is, without doubt, true, that the Essence of Subsistent Spiritual Natures,
which (as having no manner of Potentiality in them) are Pure Acts, (I mean
Angels,) consists in Actual Knowledge; which Act is first of themselves. And,
if so, why may not this Act of the Soul, called Consciousness, employed about
her self, or her own Actions constitute the Soul, or the Man's Personality.
But, the difference lies here, that those Pure Spirits having no Matter or
Potentiality in them, Annexed to, much less Identify'd with their Natures,
their Essence is formally constituted by their being in Act according to their
Natures; that is, by being Actually Knowing: Whereas, the Soul, in this State,
being immersed in Matter, and Identify'd, or making One Thing with her Bodily
Compart, and needing to use it as her Conjoined Instrument (as it were) to
attain Knowledge, is therefore in a State of Potentiality; whence she has no
Innate Notions, (much less Principles,) but is merely Passive in acquiring
those First Rudiments of Knowledge: However, after she is thus preinform'd, she
(or rather, the Man, according to his Spiritual Part) is, in part, Active, when
he improves those Knowledges, or ripens them to Perfection, by his Reflection
and Reason, as both of us hold.

15. I see no Necessity of making any farther Remarks upon this Chapter, after
I have noted some other ill-laid, No Soul is Indifferent to any Matter.
and wrongly supposed Grounds, which occasioned his Mistakes. As, First, That
the Soul of a Man is indifferently alike to all Matter. Whereas, each Soul not
being an Assistant, but an Informing Form; and, withal, being but the Form of
one Particular, and therefore fitted (as was lately proved) to the Disposition
of the particular Pre-existent Embryo; it can be received in no Matter, but
that which is individually determined in it self, as to its Animality; and
therefore it requires a Form distinct from all others, or as the Individual
Constitution of the Embryo was. Secondly,. 28. he makes account, the Specific
Idea, if held to, will make clear the Distinction of any Thing into the same,
and Diverse: Whereas, our Subject (as I suppose) being about Individual
Identity, and Diversity; how the holding to the Specifical Idea, in which all
the Individuums under it do agree, and which makes them one in Nature, should
clear the Distinction of Individuals, is altogether inexplicable. It must then
be only the Individual Idea, or Notion, as far as we can reach it, (to which
there go more Modes, than to the Specifical,) and its Intrinsecal Composition,
which can diversifie Things Really, or make them to be Really the same, or
Diverse: However, some Outward Circumstances can do it, quoad nos. I am not much
surpised, that Mr. Lock, led by the Common Doctrine, does think there are no
The Notion of the Individuum is Essential.
Essential Notions under that which Logicians call the Species: Whereas, all
Individuals being most properly Distinct Things, must have also (Essence being
the Formal Constitutive of Ens) Distinct Essences, and so be Essentially
Distinct. But of this, enough in my Method, Book 1. Less. 3.. 11. etc. His
Proof of it is very plausible: But the Reader may observe, that while,. 29. he
uses the Word [that Rational Spirit, that Vital Union,] he supposes it That;
that is, Individually the same; instead of telling us what makes it That.
Besides, that he throughout supposes Existence to individuate; which is already
confuted. Lastly, I observe, that, to make good his Distinction of [Person,]
from the Individual Substance, and Individual Man, he alleges, that a Hand cut
off, the Substance is vanished. By which it is manifest, that he takes
[Substance,] The Substance is the same, though some Quantity of the Matter does
come and go.
not for the Thing, called Man, constituted by a Soul, as its Form; but, for
the Quantity of the Matter, or the Figuration of some Organized Part: Whereas,
taking the Word [Substance,] as he ought, for Ens, or Thing, no Alteration or
Defalcation of Matter, Quantity, or Figure, etc. makes it Another Substance, or
Another Thing; but such a Complexion of Accidents, or such a New Form, as makes
it unfit for its Primary Operation, to which it is ordained, as it is a
Distinct Part in Nature. Nor can this argue in the least, that Consciousness
constitutes Personality; because this happens not only in Men, or Persons, but
also in Trees and Dogs; which, if they lose a Branch, or a Leg, are still the
same Substance, or Thing; that is, the same Tree, and the same Dog, as all the
World acknowledges.

REFLECTION Fifteenth, ON The 28th, 29th, 30th, 31th, and 32th CHAPTERS.
1. THE 28th Chapter [Of other Relations] is very Ingenious, and consonant to
his his own Principles. It might; indeed, shock a less attentive Reader That is
only true Virtue, which is according to Right Reason.
to see Virtue and Vice rated, or even so much as named so, from the Respect
they have to the Lesbian Rule of Reputation or Fashion, called in Scripture
Consuetudo Saeculi, which the more Libertine Part of the World would set up and
establish as a kind of Law. And this, I suppose, was the Occasion that made
that very Learned and Worthy Person, Mr. Loud, except against it. But the
Author has cleared that Point so perfectly in his Preface, that none can now
remain dissatisfied: For who can hinder Men from fancying and naming things as
they list.

2. I take leave to discourse it thus: The word [Virtue] both from its
Etymology and true Use, signifies Manly, or becoming a Man, taking him
according to his Genuin and Undeprav'd Nature given him by God; that is, Right
Reason. This Reason, if we use it and attend to it, will give us the Knowledge
of a Deity: In Speculative Men, by way of Demonstration; in others, by a kind
of Practical Evidence, from their observing the Regular and Constant Order of
the World, especially of the Celestial Bodies; as likewise by their Scanning,
according to their different Pitch, the Solid Grounds of the Christian Religion
Revealed to us by God, viz. The certain Testimony of the Miracles, and other
Supernatural ways by which it was introduced and recommended. This Right Reason
convinces us we are to Adore this Supreme Being and Great Governor of the
World, and to Obey him in those things he has manifested to us to be his Will.
This assures us that he governs his Creatures according to the Natures he has
given him; and, therefore, that he governs Mankind according to his True
Nature, Right Reason; and consequently, that the Rule of Living, or the Law he
has given us, is absolutely the Best for the Universal Good of the World, which
Right Reason teaches us is be observed ahd preferred before the Satisfaction of
our own private Humor or Appetite; and therefore this Rule, called the
Decalogue, or Ten Commandments, is most Rational. Whence, from its being most
Agreeable to Man's true Nature, Reason, it is hence styled Jus Divinum Natural,
or the Law writ in Men's Hearts. This shows how complete a Summary of our
Comportment with all others of our own kind, that Incomparable Precept is, [Do
the same to others as you would they should do to you] and that a Rule so short
and plain in Words, and so comprehensive and universally Beneficial in Sense,
could only be dictated by a Divine Master. This assures us that, if this
Infinitely Great and Good Governor does, to elevate and perfect Souls, oblige
them to believe any other and higher Points, especially such as are Uncouth to
the Course of the World, or to Natural Reason, he will, out of his Wisdom and
Goodness, give us such Convincing Grounds for our Belief of them, as shall
overpower the Repugnance of our Fancies, and oblige us according to Principles
of Right Reason to assent to them as Truths. This tells us also, through our
Reflection on the Goodness, Piety and Peaceableness of Christian Doctrine, that
the Principles of it (that is, the Doctrine it self) are True and Sacred; and
lets us see how infinitely we are bound to his Favor, and Merciful Kindness,
for enlightening us with so Sacred a Law, and so every way conformable to Right
Reason. And, if any Company or Sort of Men have, out of the Depravedness of
their Nature, framed to themselves, and introduced any other Rules of Manners,
grounded upon Vainglory, False Reputation, or any other new-fangl'd Conceits
of their own Invention; v. g. if they would strive to Legitimate, and make pass
for Current and Unblameable Morality, Duelling, Excessive Drinking, Swearing,
Whoring, Cheating, etc. This tells us how Unmanly, and far from Right Reason,
those Actions are; and how the World could not long subsist, did Men take their
private Revenge, besot their Brains continually with Excess; Blaspheme, or
needlessly and carelessly (that is, irrevently) slubber over God's Holy Name,
which alone gives Majesty and Authority to all those Sacred Laws; or, did they
live promiscuously with Women, or take away all they could get from other Men.
This Right Reason, abetted by Costly Experience, shows us what pernicious
Consequences, and Inconveniences of many kinds, do attend the Breach of those
Laws, instituted for the Universal Good of the World; and, how all the Course
of our Life is dis-jointed, and out of Frame, when we once yield the Conduct of
it to Passion and Vice. Lastly, It Is this Light of True Reason, which makes
those who are conscious to themselves that they have deviated enormously from
this Rule, look upon themselves as Debauchers and Deserters of their Reason,
which is their Nature; as Breakers and Contemners of the Law (not of the Land,
but) of the World, and Disregarders of the Lawgiver himself; as Base, Mean,
Corrupted, and Rotten at the Heart, Degenerate from their own true Nature; and,
therefore, (unless they reform themselves,) utterly incapable of being promoted
to that Perfection and Happiness, to which the ever ready Generosity of their
Infinitely-Bountiful God and Maker, would otherwise advance them; and,
moreover, as Liable to all those most Dreadful Punishments, which the Anger of
so great a Majesty, justly provoked, will certainly inflict on them. Whence
ensues Interior Heart-gnawing Sorrow, and Stings of Conscience; and, if they
persist, Despair and Damnation. These Things considered, and Virtue being
Nothing but Right Reason (Man's true Nature) employed about Fitting Objects, in
Fitting Occasions, I do not think we are to attend to what Irrational Men,
Libertines, or Humourists call Virtue or Vice, and esteem Laudable or
Blameable; but to what Right Reason, the only Established and Impartial
Standard in this Case, teaches us to be truly such: And, I think it had been
better, and more unexceptionable, to have called such good and bad Dispositions
[Reputed Virtues and Vices,] than to join those Qualities in an Univocal
Appellation with those Rational or Irrational Habits, which only, in proper
Speech, are truly such.

12. As to the 29th Chapter, [of Distinct and Confused Ideas,] I cannot think
that the Confusion of Ideas, is in reference How we come to have Confused
Ideas, or Notions.
to their Names; but springs mostly from the Reasons assigned by himself,. 3.
For, what are Names, but the Words which signify those Ideas? The Idea, then,
is in my Mind, what it is, and such as it is, independently of those Names; as
being there before I named it. And the same Reason holds, for keeping up the
Distinction of those Ideas; for the Notions will be still what they were,
whether one Name or Another be imposed on them: And, I think Mr. Lock agrees
with me, that they are like Figures, which, the least detracted, or added,
makes the Idea be quite another. If one talks to me of a Mufti, and I take that
Word to signify a Rat-catcher, my Idea of a Rat-catcher is the same as if the
Word [Rat-catcher] had been used, though the Reference of the Idea to that Name
be as wrong as may be. Or, if I speak of an Individuum, called Longinus, and
another takes that Word to signify a Yard; my Idea is confused, being of an
Individuum; and his Distinct, though the Word be the same. So if the same Person,
rectified as to the Meaning of any Word, takes it now in a different Sense than
he did formerly, then he has another Idea by it than he had; but yet, both his
former, and his New-got Idea are still unalterably and perfectly distinct. But,
I observe, that Mr. Lock attributes many Things to Words and Names; which,
whether it be his Over-acuteness, or my Dullness, I can make nothing of. What I
conceive of Confused Ideas, is this: In two Cases chiefly they are Confused,
viz. when there is a Confusion in the Things themselves from which they are
taken, and to which they Correspond; as, when too many Considerabilities are
blended together (as it were) in the same Suppositum, or Individuum; or, that
the Object it self consists of Many Things; as, a Heap, an Army, a Sack of
Wheat, etc. Or else, when the Object is not well represented, either by Defect
of the Organ, the Distance of the Object, or the ill Disposition of the Medium.
To this latter sort belongs the Imperfection of our Understanding; which, not
able to comprehend the whole Thing, is forced to make many Inadequate Ideas or
Notions of it; which, not reaching to particularize the Thing, must therefore
be Common, or General, as containing more under them Indeterminately, that is,
Confusedly. In two Cases also, Names seem to cause in us Confused Ideas: One,
when the Word is perfectly Equivocal, and signifies neither Sense
determinately. The other, when a Multitude of Words are huddled together
inartificially, or stammer'd out unintelligibly; to which we may add, our not
understanding the Language thoroughly. In which Cases, we have either no Notion
at all, or, if any, a very Confused one. And these seem to me the only solid
Ways to breed Confused Ideas, as being taken from the Nature of the Things, and
of their Circumstances; and from the Nature of the Words, as Words; that is,
from their Significativeness. As for the Secret and Unobserved References, the
Author speaks of, which the Mind makes of its Ideas to such Names, I must
confess, I know not what it means, more than that the Understanding knows
perfectly, or imperfectly, what the Word stands for, or (which is the same)
what is its true and proper Meaning. Concerning Infinity, of all sorts
whatever, I have said enough formerly, on diverse Occasions.

3. The 30th Chapter needs no New Reflection. The 31th, [Of Adequate and
Inadequate Ideas,] has in it much The whole Thing, as it needs not, so it
cannot be known clearly.
of true Philosophy; especially, where he makes the Essences of Things consist
in the Complexion of the Modes or Accidents. I grant, that whole Complexion is
not knowable by us in this State: But, why have not we as much Knowledge of
them as is necessary for us? Or, why must we think we know Nothing of them,
unless we have (over and above our Use) all those superfiuous Degrees of the
Knowledge of Things, as may satisfy also our Curiosity, or Humor? By those
Accidents of Gold, which we know, we can discern Gold, Ordinarily, from other
Metals: Or, if any Cunning Fellow would impose upon Nature and us, and
undermine that slighter Knowledge of the Generality, to cheat them; God has
furnished us (especially those whose peculiar Concern it is) with Means to
countermine their Sophisticating Arts. I grant too, that our Idea of Individual
Substances is not Adequate; but, if an Imperfect Notion of them be sufficient
for our purpose, and withal, most suitable to our Imperfect Understanding, why
should we desire more.

4. Moreover, there is another Reason, of a higher Nature, and most Supreamly
Wise, grounded on what the The Metaphysical Reason why this Complexion of
Accidents which constitutes Individuums, should be almost infinitely various.
Metaphysicians term Altissimae Causae, which we call First Principles, why
this Complexion of Accidents should be so Numerous, and Millions of Ways
variable. It becomes the God of Truth, so to order his World, that Things
should be a Ground for Truth. Now, had there not been almost as Infinite
Variety of those Modes which constitute, and, consequently, distinguish, every
Individuum; it might happen, there being such an innumerable Multitude of those
Individual Things, that some Two of them, which, by being Two, must be
Different, would yet differ in nothing, or in no respect, or Mode; and so, they
would be One, and not One; which is a Contradiction. Nay, not only diverse
Things, but each Discernable and Divisible Part of the same Thing, however
seemingly Uniform, must have a various Complexion of those Modes, to
distinguish them. For Example; Let a 20s. Piece of Gold be divided into Forty
Parts; each Part, after Division, being now a Whole, and a Distinct Thing from
all the rest, must either have some Distinct Modes in it, to distinguish it
from all the others, or it would be Distinct, and yet Not distinct, (having
nothing to distinguish it;) that is, it would be One Thing, and yet Not one
Thing; or rather, the same Part, and yet Not the same Part; and this in the
same respect, (viz. under the Notion of Substance, Thing, or Part;) which is a
perfect Contradiction. Wherefore, the God of Nature, who is always Essential
Truth, has so ordered it, that Things, and each part of Things, how minute
soever, should have a Ground in them of differing from one another, as whoever
is used to Microscopes, will easily discover. As for what concerns us, this
Inconceivable Variety tasks our Industry, employs our Speculation, and raises
our Contemplation, by making us see that God's Wisdom is infinitely exalted in
the least of his Creatures; and by obliging us to break out into Transports of
Admiration, Job 36. 26.
Ecce, Deus magnus vincens Scientiam nostram.

5. Since then we see and experience that Things do exist, and therefore
(nothing being Able to do what We can sufficiently know Things without
comprehending fully this C^mplexion.
it is not Capable to do) are Capable of Being Actually, or Existing; since we
know they existed not of themselves, or by virtue of their Own Essence; and
therefore, that to be merely or purely Capable of Existing, is the very Nature
or Notion of Created Things, considering them precisely according to the Notion
of Thing or Substance. Since we know the Last Distinction, or Individuation, of
Things thus considered, consists intrinsecally in the Complexions of Modes or
Accidents, which ultimately determins them to be this; and since, withal, we
have such Outward Marks and Signs of their Individuality, from their Existing
in the same Time and Place, and other such like Circumstances, (in which Sense,
and not in making them intrinsecally constitute the Individuum, Mr. Locke's
Doctrine in this Point is admitted.) Lastly, Since there are the highest Reasons
imaginable, that this Individual Complexion of Accidents should be impossible
to be comprehended by us in this State; let us content our selves with this
sufficient Knowledge which we have of them, without grasping foolishly at more
than we are able to fathom.

6. In my Judgment this Acute Author might have excused this 32th Chapter, [Of
True and False Ideas.] He No Formal Truth or Falsehood in Ideas or Notions.
grants they cannot properly be True or False in themselves; and Ideas or
Notions, being nothing but the Nature of the Thing (as thus or thus conceived)
in our Minds, can have no Consideration belonging to them, but what they are in
themselves, or that they are what they are, which is called their Metaphysical
Verity; and therefore (as he says well) they can no more be True or False, than
a single Name can be said to be such. The Improper Truth or Falsehood which he
seems willing to attribute to them, belongs (as he also intimates) to
Judgments; that is, to the Connexions of his Ideas, and not to the Ideas or
Notions themselves, which are the Parts that are capable to be connected. But,
if This Truth or Falsehood (which Mr. Lock would force his Reason to show,) can
any way belong to them, it will not be Improperly but Properly such; for Truth
and Falsehood are most properly found in Judgments, and only in them. Wherefore,
either no Formal Truth or Falsehood at all can belong to Ideas, or it must be
Proper Truth or Falsehood; which is what the Author denies, as contrary to his
Intention.

REFLECTIONS ON THE THIRD BOOK.
REFLECTION Sixteenth, ON The Subject of this whole Book.
1. IN the 5th Section of the First Chapter, the Grounds are well laid to show
how Metaphorical and Improper Conceptions and Names come; and how Whence Proper
and Metaphorical Notions and Words have their Origin.
they are Translated from those Notions which arise from Impression on the
Senses. For, to have Senses being common to all Mankind; and, withal, they
being, (with a very small difference) apt to be affected by Objects after the
same manner, the Notions thus imprinted are Natural and Common; and, therefore,
the Words that Men agree on, or by Use establish, to signify such Notions, are
Proper; the Universal Use of them, and the General Consent that they should
signify those Natural Notions, making them current, and giving them this
Propriety. Whereas, the Notions we have of Spiritual Natures, and of the
Operations of our Mind produced by it, not being imprinted Naturally, but got
by Reflection, have no Words or Names which Mankind agrees to call them by.
Whence we are forced to make use of our Natural Notions and Expressions, (with
some Additions annexed, to show their Difference) to signify our Reflex Ideas;
and, therefore, the Conceptions we have of such Natures, and consequently the
Names by which we signify them, being Transferred from the Natural ones to
them, are called Metaphorical.

2. As for Rules to know the right Sense of Words, as far as relates to
Philosophy, there can be but Two in The General Rules to know the right Sense
of Words.
General, viz. that the Sense of Those Words or Names which express our Natural
Notions, which are common to all Mankind, is to be taken from the Vulgar; and,
the Sense of Artificial Words from the Masters in those respective Arts; these
Two sorts of Men being the Framers and Authors, as it were, of those two sorts
of Language; and who, by their Imposing, Accepting, or Using of them in such a
Sense, have stamped upon them their Proper Signification, and given it to be
Sterling and Current; in which, and not in Etymologies or Criticisms only,
consists the Propriety of Words. Nor can I see (Care being taken to avoid
Equivocalness) what further Inspection into the Nature of Words can be needful
for a Philosopher. I say, in this Designation, Agreement, and Usage of the
Word, and only in this, consists all the Connection or Tying the Ideas to the
Words, and those Secret References of the former to the other, of which Mr.
Lock speaks so often in his Second Chapter, and other places; nor can it
consist in any thing else.

3. Indeed those Words which express Artificial Notions are most liable to be
mistaken; because Artists have the Words of Art most liable to be mistaken.
Prerogative of Coining their own Words, and of Affixing to them what
Signification they please. Whence, if their Thoughts differ, the Words that
express them must needs be Equivocal or Double-sensed. For all Art being
nothing but Reflection on Nature, polishing and perfecting those rude Draughts
given us by our Mother-wit to an Exactness, and Reflections being Various in
diverse Men, according to their Degree of Skill, and their Talent of Penetrating
the Nature of the Object they are employed about; the same Univocalness of
Signification is not to be expected in those Words that express our Reflex
Thoughts, as in those by which we notify our Direct ones, in which all Mankind
(as was shown) do agree. This chiefly happens in many Logical Words; for the
Notions that Art makes use of, being wholly built on the manner of Existing the
Thing has in our Understanding, which none but Steady, Solid and Acute
Reflectcters can perfectly discern; hence, those Reflex Notions, and
consequently the Names which are to signify them, become liable to Ambiguity;
which has, doubtless, been the Occasion of many fruitless Contests; which end
(if they ever end at all) in Word-Skirmishes.

4. Yet, it will not be hard to prevent, or avoid, all Mistake even in these,
if we do but attend heedfully to the The way how to avoid being mistaken in
Words of Art.
Manners by which those things exist in our Minds, and take the Sense of those
Words from the ablest Artists, or best Reflecters. For Nature (if we do not
relinquish it) and familiar Explications, will make them easy to be understood.
For example, let it be told us by a Logician, that the Species is the lowest
and Narrowest sort of Common Notions, that have none under them but
Individuals; and it will be presently seen that the Conception we call [Man]
(thus apprehended and expressed) is a Specifical Notion. Let it be told us again,
that a Genus is a Larger Notion which has diverse Species or Sorts under it;
and, it will quickly appear that [Animal] is a Generical Notion; Or, if a
Logician acquaints us, that a Proposition is a Speech which affirms or denies;
and that that part of it which is affirmed (or Denied) is called by Men of Art
the Predicate, and that part of which it is affirmed or denied, is the Subject;
and that which expresses the Affirmation or Negation is the Copula; and there
can be no difficulty to know that this Speech (A Stone is hard) is a
Proposition; that [Stone] is the Subject, [Hard] the Predicate, and [is] the
Copula; and so in all the rest, if a Right Reflecter have the management of
them. But, care is to be taken that we do not pin our belief upon Authors, who
frame Artificial Notions out of their Imagination, without regard to the Thing
as it is conceived by our Understanding, or according to the Manner it is there;
for, then, we shall quite lose the solid Grounds of Nature, and let our Wits
loose to follow their Butterfly Fancies; For, that Thing called [Man,] as thus
conceived, is as truly a Species, and [Animal] a Genus, considering it as it is
in our Understanding with such a degree of Abstraction, as an Individual Man,
as existing in re, or out of the Understanding, is Twolegg'd, or a Horse
four-footed. And, for the same Reason, it is as evident to true Logicians, or
right Reflecters, that in the Proposition now mentioned, there are as truly,
really, necessarily and essentially those Three parts lately spoken of, as it is
to a Mathematician, that there are three Corners in a Triangle: The same
Reason, I say, holds for both; for the Soul is as really a Thing, as the Bodies
in Nature; and her Modes, or Accidents, and their Manners of Existing, are as
Real, as those of any Bodies are, or can be, perhaps more. Whence it is Evident
also that, in the Proposition now mentioned, the Thing diversely conceived, or
its Modes, are truly and really Subject, Predicate and Copula in the Mind; and
that, though they be expressed in Logical Terms, they do not put off their Natures,
or Notions, which were directly and Naturally imprinted on the Understanding;
but are only super-vested with an Artificial Dress, thrown over them by our
Reflection: For, otherwise, we could not say the Thing called [A Stone] is hard,
but we must withal mean and say [the Subject is the Predicate] in case not the
Natural Notion of the Thing, but only the Logical Notion were predicated; Nor
could the former of these two Propositions be True, the Later, False, if the
Thing it self, or its Modes were not the Materials that Compounded it.

5. Wherefore, this is to be established as a certain Maxim, and a necessary
Preliminary to all Philosophy whatever, Even in Terms of Art the Thing is
chiefly signified.
that it is the Thing in our mind that gives Solidity and Steadiness to all our
Judgments and Discourses; for all these are made up of Notions, that is, of the
very Thing it self in our Mind, Inadequately and Diversely conceived: Wherefore
That is still the Groundwork, however it be wrought upon, ordered and postur'd
by Reflection and Art. From default of this Consideration springs all the
Wordishness, and empty Disputes among trivial Philosophers; of which Mr. L.
does, with good Reason, so often Complain. I wish he could as well give us an
account, that the Ideas he and others speak of are the Thing it self,
inadequately conceived by us, and not mere Representations of it; for, this
done, we might hope for true Philosophy from the Principles of the Ideists.
Which they cannot pretend to show, or to give us this Hope, till a solid Answer
be given to what is alleged against them in my Second and Third Preliminaries;
where I undertake to demonstrate that it is impossible.

6. I am not of Mr. L's mind, that Metaphysical Words (however Logical ones may
be ambiguous) are so unintelligible, Metaphysical Words not Unintelligible, but
most Clear.
or in fault. For those words that signify Being, or what nearly relates to it
(which are the Chief Objects of that Queen of Sciences) are absolutely the
Clearest that Mankind ever uses, or can use; so that, whoever abuses or
misaccepts them, must needs be a Deserter of Common Sense. Notwithstanding, in
regard some pretended Scholars have on diverse occasions used Philosophical,
and even Common Words variously, I have thought fit to add a Fifth Preliminary,
to show what Sense the Chief Words used in Philosophy must have; and that they
can signify no other. Lastly, I have shown at large in my Method, B. 1. Less.
10th. how Equivocalness springs, and how it may be detected and avoided.

7. This Learned Author having most elaborately, largely and acutely
prosecuted in his former Book the This Third Book concerning Words seems
Unnecessary.
Distinction of his Ideas, and the whole Duty of Words being to signify our
Thoughts to others, I cannot discern what need there could be to take such
pains about those Outward Signs. Many curious Remarks do indeed embellish his
Discourses, which show that his Exuberant Wit, can make good work of the dryest
Subject, and raise elegant Structures out of the Sleightest Materials: Yet,
notwithstanding, I see not how they conduce to promote the Solid Knowledge of
Things. The very Essence, I say, and the Nature of Words being to Signify our
Notions, or to impart the Knowledge of the Things in our Mind to others; their
Sense must either be supposed to be Agreed on, and Foreknown to the Speakers
and Hearers, or they will scarce be allowed worthy to be called Words but
rather Empty and Insignificant articulate Sounds. Wherefore, if the Idea or
Notion of the Speakers be Clear, or Obscure; Distinct, or Confused; Adequate or
Inadequate, etc. The Word must either express it accordingly, or it is not the
Name of such an Idea or Notion, nor a Word* sit for it, and much less for any
thing else; and therefore it is good for nothing at all. This makes me wish Mr.
L. had rather thought fit to take particular Notice of those Words, which have
been Abused or Misaccepted by Trivial Philosophers; and had cleared their
Ambiguity, rectified their Impropriety, and Substituted (if need were) others
more Proper in their stead; which must certainly have had great Influence upon
the Advancement of Science. Nor need he much wonder that Dull or Hasty Men, who
either are not capable of much Sense, or will not take pains to reflect on
their Natural Notions, or (which is the same) on the meanings of their Words,
do make use of them, and yet talk by rote all the while; following the Track of
others whom they have heard speak them, or the Jargon of their Masters; who
breed their Scholars to stick to their Words, as unalterably as if they were
Principles; though perhaps neither of them were so Wise as to know, or so Prudent
as to regard much their determinate Meaning.

8. Things standing thus, and my Intention, in this whole Treatise, being only
to carry on my Method to Science, Whence J. S. is not much concerned to reflect
on it.
and to reduce to Solidity, those Discourses which I conceive have too much of
Fancy in them, I have no more to do, as to this Third Book, but to note by the
way some particulars that occurr, and which, as I judge, do by ass from true
Philosophy.

9. The Author seems to dislike our way of Defining by a Genus Nature teaches
us to define by a Genus and a Difference.
and its Difference, and to think it may be better performed by enumerating
some certain Ideas, which, put together, do make up the Sense of the Notion
defined. To abett which Doctrine, he gives us this Definition of a Man, viz. A
Solid Extended Substance, having Life, Sense, Spontaneous Motion, and the
Faculties of Reasoning. I discourse thus: What best suits with the Vulgar is
one thing, what becomes Men of Art, another. It will serve the Common People
well enough to declare their Thoughts by huddling together many particular
Considerations; nay, they will define even Individuums (if such as these may be
called Definitions) by this Method, as Homer did Thersites. But the Point is,
how Art, which is to perfect and polish the Rudeness of raw Undisciplined
Nature, ought to behave it self. Reflection, the Parent of all Arts, teaches
even Housewives and Lawyers, that it is very convenient for the one to put such
and such Linen into distinct Drawers; and, for the other to distribute all
those Writings that concern different Businesses into distinct Boxes: And the
same Faculty teaches Logicians also to range all their Notions (the Materials
they are employed about) into distinct Common Heads, so to gain a Distinct
Knowledge of each; which, they being innumerable, would otherwise lie mingled
confusedly. This performed, what are they to do next? Must they hover still in
these few common Heads of Notions? No, certainly; for, then, they would not
have enough of such more-particular Notions as are needful for Discourse. They
must descend therefore from those Common Notions to more-particular ones under
each of them; and this, as Plain Reason tells us, gradually: that is, they must
divide those Common Heads by Immediate Distinctive Notions, called Differences:
for, were they not Different, the Product of that Division could not be more
Notions; whereas Division must (at least) make Two of One. And, whence must we
take those Differences? From other Common Heads? No surely; for this would
confound all our Notions again, which we had taken such Care to distinguish
into those Heads, in case the more particular ones, or the respective Species,
were made up of one Notion found in one Line, and of another found in another.
Those Differences then that divide each Common Head, must be found within the
same Head, or (as we use to call them) must be Intrinsecal; which ( B. 1. L. 3.
2.
as is demonstrated in my Method) can be no other but more and less of the
immediate Superior Notions. The First two Differences (of Ens, for Example)
joined with the Common Head it self, gives us the Definitions of the two first
Subaltern Genera; and each of those two (and of the inferior) Genus's being
for the same Reason divided after the same manner, do still give us naturally
(as it were) the Definitions of the next two Members immediately under them;
and so still endways, till we come at the Individuums; each of which being
constituted by an innumerable Multitude of Accidents, we are, when we come
there, lost in a pathless Wood; and can no longer Define or give a clear and
entire Account of the Intrinsecal Dictinction of those Particulars, but are
forced to content our selves with some few Notions belonging to them, which
distinguish them from others; or to describe them by Outward Signs and
Circumstances for our Use and Practice; our Speculation being here Nonplust.

10. When Mr. Lock shall have leisurely considered each Step of this short
Discourse, he will find that Nature Those who oppose this Method must be forced
to use it.
forces us upon this Method of Defining by a Genus and a Difference; that Art,
(which is nothing but Nature well reflected on) shows us it must be so; and
that his own Definition of Man will oblige him, even while he opposes this
Method, to have recourse to it for Refuge. For, when he puts Man to be a Solid
Extended Substance, should it be denied, because there is but one part of Man
(his Body) that is Solid and Extended, and not his Spiritual part, the Soul;
his only Defense can be this, that those Words were meant only for the General
Notion, or what was Common to Man and all other Bodies, (for which Reason,
Substance there is the Highest Genus;) and that which follows is meant to
difference or distinguish him from them. Next, it will be unanswerably
objected, that Man being a Thing, or (which is the same) a Substance, which
signifies merely what is capable to be, and a Definition telling us the Essence
of the Notion defined, he deviates manifestly from the Fundamental Laws of Art,
by taking in such Differences to distinguish Substance, viz. Solidity and
Extension, which are Foreign to this Common Head of Being or Thing, and belong
to other Common Heads, which are only Modes of Thing, viz. those of Quantity
and Quality. Add, That this seems also to contradict his own Doctrine, (B. 2.
Chap. 13. 11, 12. and B. 3. Chap 6. 21.) where he makes Extension and Body not
to be the same. I suppose he means in part; which, were Extension a Proper and
Intrinsecal Difference of Substance, constituting the Essence of Body, could
not be said. Now, as was lately shown, all these Rubs are avoided if we
separate our Notions into Common Heads; and, by dividing those Heads by
Intrinsecal Differences, at the same time make our Definitions of each Inferior
Notion. Nor can it be objected, that we also use Extrinsecal Differences, while
we divide Substance by Divisible and Indivisible, and yet make Divisibility the
Notion of Quantity; for, all such Exceptions are fore-stall'd in my Method, B.
1. Less. 3. and particularly,. 5. and 6.

11. The like Error, and no less Fundamental, is his Assertion, Chap. 3. L.
11. that Generals and Universals belong The Mind does not frame Universal
Notions designedly; but as forced to it by Nature.
not to the Real Existence of Things, but are the Inventions and Creatures of
the Understanding, made by it, for its own Use, and concern only Signs, whether
Words, or Ideas. Had he said, that Universals belong not to the Existence of
Things, as they are in Nature; or, that Universals, as such, are not capable of
Existing there, I could understand him: But, if he means, they do not belong to
the Existence of Things in the Understanding, or, that they are designedly
invented, or framed, or made use of by it, for its own Convenience, I must
utterly deny it. For, it is as evident that Nature makes them in our Mind, as
it is that because we cannot here comprehend Individuals, therefore Nature, by
imprinting Objects diversely in us, and by different Senses, forces the Mind to
have Partial or Inadequate Notions of it. Now, every Inadequate Notion, in what
Line soever, is an Universal Notion; as will appear to any Man who reflects
upon the Ideas or Notions of Ens, Corpus, Vivens, Animal, Homo; all which are
Inadequate (and withal, Universal) Notions, in respect of the Individuum. When
I see a Thing a-far off, so that I can yet make nothing of it, but that it is
something, or some Body, it is evident that I have only an Universal Notion of
it, since I know not yet what it is in particular; and, that this General
Notion is not Invented or Created by my Mind, but given me by Nature. The like
happens when I hear one knock at the Door, without knowing who it is in
particular; and in a Hundred such like Occasions. So that the Mind, and it
only, is indeed Capable of Universal Notions; but, it is only Nature, and not
her self, which begets in her those Notions. Her only Work is, to Compare, or
Discern the Identity or Diversity of those Notions; but Nature gives her those
Objects, or Materials, on which she thus works. Thus, when we see two or many
Things agree, it is those Natural Objects, that have in them something Agreeing
to both, which causes in me a Common Notion, called Animal, or Homo; and the
mind lends nothing but her Comparing Nature, to make those Common Notions;
which Artificial Reflecters, designedly re-viewing, call them Genus and
Species. Let us hold to the Things in Nature. Our Mind (as was often said) is
not here in an Actual State, but in a Potential one; and, therefore, when we
ascribe to her singly any Activity, we make her do what she cannot do; and, so,
missing the true Causes of such Effects, we fall into great Errors.

12. As for that Catachresis of Nominal Essences, which answer to those few
Abstract Notions we have Actually of Nominal Essences Groundless, and
Catachrestical.
the Things, when we name them, making a Complex Idea, I deny we have any such
Intention as he speaks of, in naming any Thing: For, though at that time we do
actually know but Few of those Accidents, whose Complexion does, indeed, go to
the whole Essence; yet, being pre-assur'd the Thing has more Modes in it than
we know or think of, we do not nominate them precisely according to what we do
then actually know, exclusively of all others, but including them confusedly.
Rather, otherwise, we cannot know the Thing at all, because it involves
confusedly all the Modes that are in it, Known or Unknown, as their Subject:
For, though we should afterward discover more particular Accidents in Gold than
we did formerly, yet, we should not alter the Name which signifies its
Substance, or Essence; nor would call it any thing but Gold still; however the
newly discovered Mode gave us a new Idea of it self, Annexed to that of
Substance. The Essences are no otherwise Ingenerable, but as they are from
Eternity in the Divine Ideas; nor Incorruptible, but as they are either there,
or else in some Humane or Angelical Understanding, out of which they can never
be effaced. Lastly, What have Names or Words, which are nothing but Articulate
Air, or Figured Ink, (excepting what is Annexed to them by our Minds,) to do
with the Intrinsecal Natures of Things, that they should be one Sort or Kind of
Essences.

13. This Learned Author justly complains that we have so few Definitions; and
my self have both resented it in Aristotle's Definition of Motion defended.
my Preface to my Method, and have also excited and encouraged Learned Men to
make good that Defect. But, till the Best, and only Proper Way (which I
mentioned lately) to make Definitions be allowed and taken, I am sure there
will be no new ones made that will deserve that Name; and those Few that are
already made, will still be exposed to the baffling Attacks of Fancy. Aristotle
was, certainly, the best Definer of any Philosopher yet extant; yet, his
Definitions are excepted against by Witty Men; and (which is worse) for no
other Reason, but because they are too Learned, that is, too Good. Mr. Lock
expresses here great Dis-satisfaction at two of them; which, to my best
Judgment, not all the Wit of Man can mend. The First is. of Motion; which
Aristotle defines to be Actus Entis in potentia, quatenus in potentia. Now, I
wonder not that Mr. Lock, who, in his large Chapter of Power, never so much as
mentioned the Idea of Power to be a Thing, nor the Power to have such an
Accident, or Mode; nor, consequently, the Idea of an Act answering to such a
Power, should conceit this Definition to be Gibberish. However he came to
pretermit them, it is most manifest that we have Natural Ideas or Notions of
both these. We cannot see a Thing made actually of Another, or Altered to be
any way otherwise than it was; but Nature obliges us to see, and say, that that
Thing, of which the new one was made, could, or had a Power to be, It, or have
Another made of it. Or, when we see it is anew made Hot, Cold, Round, White,
Moved, Placed, etc. but that it could, or had a Power to become such, ere it
was Actually such. These Ideas then of Act and Power are so Natural, that
Common Sense forces us to acknowledge them, and Common Language must use them:
And it is a strange Fastidiousness, not to allow those Transcendent (that is,
most Common, and most Clear) Words in Definitions, whose Notions or Meanings
Nature gives us; and which Words, or Equivalent Expressions, Common Discourse
forces us to use. Yet, in the Uncouthness of these Words to some Men's Fancies,
consists all the Difficulty which they so boggle at in this Definition. The
Ens, or Body, was only Capable, or had a Power to be moved ere Motion came;
and, now, by Motion it is Actually moved. It is evident then that Motion is the
Act, or (which is the same) the Formal Cause, which reduced that Power into
Act, or formally denominated it moved Actually. Act then, was a Proper Genus,
as far as those most Common Notions can have one. Now comes the Difference [in
potentia,] which is, to determine what kind of Act Motion is. To understand
which, we may reflect, that a Body has many other Acts or (as we conceive and
call them) Forms in it, such as are Quantity, Figure, and all Qualities
whatever; as, Roundness, Length, Breadth, Health, etc. But they are not Acts of
that Body, as it is in power to be otherwise than it is, but as it is actually
such or such: For, they truly denominate it to be actually Round, Long,
Healthful, etc. Whereas, Motion, being formally a mere Tendency to an Effect
not yet produced, constitutes and denominates a Body to be only in power to be
what by that Motion it is to be afterward. For, reflecting on all Motions
whatever, v. g. Generation, Alteration, Augmentation, Sanation, etc. none of
them affect the Subject, or Body, in order to what it has already fixedly; but
in order to a newly generated, or rather, producible Thing, Quality, Quantity,
Disposition, Health, etc. which the Matter or Subject has only a Power to have
or acquire by means of those respective Motions. The last Words, [quatenus in
potentia,] signify, that the Thing, as affected with Motion, is formally and
precisely considered to be in power to be such or such, and not at all as
actually so. Matter has the Notion of Power to be another Thing; but in regard
it is a kind of Compart, constituting actually the stable and entire Ens, the
Thing, or Body, which has Matter in it, cannot be said to be merely in power to
have Matter which it has Already. Whereas, by having Motion in it, which is
only the Way or Means to attain what Nature aims to produce, it must be thus
merely and formally in Power to that to which it is Tending. Wherefore, this
Definition most appositely fits the Notion of Motion, by distinguishing it most
perfectly from all other Sorts of Acts whatever; without a Tittle conceivable
in it that is Defective, Superfluous, or Disparate. Yet, this is here
charactered to be Exquisite Jargon, and a Famous Absurdity. I should be glad to
see how one of our new Philosophers would define Motion: I doubt he would find
it a puzzling Task to explicate its Formal and Proper Nature; in regard that,
besides its being very General, it is the Blindest and See Method to Science,
B. 1. L. 8.. 2.
most Imperfect Notion we have, and most approaching to Nonentity; being
neither the Thing as it is in it self, nor as it is yet another, but hovering
(as it were) between both. And I am certain, it is impossible to perform it,
without varying the Words used by Aristotle, to others of the same Sense; or,
even to give some tolerable Explication of it, which can suit with its Formal
Notion.

14. The other Definition which Mr. Lock mislikes, is, that of Light; which he
says Aristotle defines, The Act Aristotle's Definition of Light, most Proper.
of a Perspicuous Thing, as it is Perspicuous. Now, though Light be Fire, were
the Particles of it contracted into one closer Body, as it is by a
Burning-Glass; yet, the Rays of it, thinly scattered, have, like all other
Effluviums, the Notion of a Quality or Mode of the Body they are received in;
and Modes or Accidents have their Analogical Essences from the manner they
affect their Subjects. The Question then is, What is the Proper Subject of
Light? Mr. Locke's Principles deny the Sun is the Subject; and put it to be
only the Cause of it: Nor can an Opacous Body be the Subject of it; for it
affects not that Body it self, but the Surface which reflects it; and then it
has the Notion of Color. It Is left then, that the Proper Subject of Light must
be a Medium, which is Perspicuous, or which has a Power in it to let it pass
through it, to our Eyes; and, therefore, only Light is, properly and formally,
the Act which informs or actuates that Power; which cannot possibly be
expressed better than by these Words, The Act of a Perspicuous Body, as it is
Perspicuous. For, putting the Air, or the Water, to be that Medium, those
Bodies may have many other Acts or Accidental Forms in them; as, Rarity,
Fluidity, Humidity, Coldness, etc. yet, according to none of these, is Light
the proper Act of either of them; but as they are Pellucid, or Perspicuous;
because, whatever other Qualities or Powers they may have, if they had not that
called Perspicuousness, it could not affect those Bodies at all. I observe by
Mr. Locke's Discourse here, that he makes account Definitions are made for the
Vulgar: Whereas, they are only framed by Art, for Men of Art, or Philosophers.
But, surely he is pleasant, and cannot mean seriously, when he finds fault with
this Definition, as Useless, and Insignificant, because it will not make a
Blind Man understand what the Word [Light] means. The Meaning of the Word, is
the Notion of it in our Mind; and our Notions, or Ideas, (as both of us hold,)
come in by Impressions from the Object upon our Senses. If, then, Blind Men
could have no sensible Impression of Light, it is impossible they should have
any Idea or Notion of it, let the Definition be never so good. Definitions are
the Work of Reflection, and are to suppose our Natural Notions, which are the
Rough Draughts of Knowledge, Common to us, and to the Vulgar: Art is to polish
our Notions, and bring them to Exactness and Concinnity, by Defining them; and
not to imbue us with them, when Nature never gave them: And it is a hard Case,
if Aristotle's Definitions must be Useless and Insignificant, unless they work
Miracles.

15. I agree with him that the Definition of Motion, which he says is that of
the Cartesians, [viz. That it is the The Cartesian Definition of Motion, Faulty.
Successive Application of the Parts of the Superficies of one Body to those of
another] is Faulty. Whether it be theirs or no I know not, I think they give
another: Yet, I doubt not but Mr. Lock has his Reasons why he dislikes it.
Mine is this; because Successive Quantity and Motion are the self-same Formal
Notion; and, so, the Definitum is as plain as the Definition which should
explain it. Besides that, [Application] is one sort of Motion, and therefore is
harder to be understood than Motion it self, which is the Genus to it. All
which Absurdities, and others such, Aristotle wisely avoids, by using the
Transcendent, or more Common Notions of Act and Power.

16. I pardon Mr. Locke's Opinion, That nothing is Essential to Individuums;
because this Error is Common, Individuums under the same Species differ
essentially.
or rather Epidemical, amongst the Modern Schools; and springs hence, that
those Authors do not distinguish between what serves for Logical Speculations,
and what is the Real Constitution of Things in Nature: For, what can the word
[Essentia] of which Essential is the Denominative, possibly mean, but that
formal Notion qua Ens est Ens. Since then the Notion of Ens or Thing is only
Proper to the Individual Substance, as being its First Analogate; it follows
that, if they be diverse Entia or Things, they must have diverse Formal
Constituents, or diverse Essences. Nay more, it follows that [Ens] being only
properly spoken of Substantia Prima or the Individuums, and Improperly of
Substantiae Secundae, and much more of the Modes or Accidents; therefore,
Essence (the Formal Constituent of Ens) can only be properly said of the
Essences of Individuals, and improperly of any other Essences: So that only
diverse Individuals, in proper Speech, do differ Essentially, or have Essential
Differences belonging to them. But, of this enough in my B. 1. L. 3. 11.
Method. I only remark how odd it is to say, that Two Men are Two Things, and
yet do not differ under the Notion of Thing, but only Accidentally; or,
according to the Notion of some Mode or Accident; which is perhaps as much as
my self now do differ from my self a Year ago, and yet I am the same Thing now
I was then. But, I have said enough above of what Intrinsecally Constitutes
diverse Entities or Individuums; and how we sufficiently know them, though we
comprehend not the whole Complexion of Accidents that constitutes their
Individual Essences, on which a good part of this 6th Chapter proceeds.

17. The two last Chapters contain many various Observations in them; and such
as may both delight, and in some sort Whence we must take our Measure of Simple
and Compound Notions.
profit inquisitive Wits: Yet they touch upon some difficult Points, which are
contrary to my Sentiments, and cannot well be solved without first laying my
Grounds; especially that about the Unknowableness of Real Essences. To clear
which farther, and withal to meet with other Difficulties that may occur, it
will be necessary to lay, or repeat, for the Foundation of my future
Discourses, some few Principles.

I have, I hope, demonstrated in my Preliminaries, that all our Ideas, or
Notions, which are Solid, and not Fantastic, are nothing but several
Conceptions of the Thing; or, which is the same (taking the Word [Conception]
for the Object, and not for the Act of Conceiving) the Thing diversely
conceived. Hence all our Conceptions, or Notions, are Inadequate, especially if
they be Distinct, and not Confused. Hence the most abstracted Notion we have,
or can have, let it be Figure, Color, Existence, or what other we please, even
though signified by the most Abstract Term, is still the Thing considered
precisely as having those Modes in it; in regard that, as those Modes, or
Accidents, have no Entity of their own, but merely that of the Thing which they
affect, so they can have no Intelligibility, or Knowableness, (which is the
Property of Entity) but as they are conceived to belong to the Thing, or to be
It: So that, (Hardness being that by which a Thing is formally Hard) neither
would Hardness be Hardness, nor would Existence be Existence, if they were the
Hardness or Existence, of Nothing; for Nothing can neither be hard, nor exist,
nor have any other Affections belonging to it. Again, it is evident we can have
no distinct Notion of the whole Ens, or Individuum; nor consequently of the
Essence, (properly such) which is the Form that Constitutes the whole Ens: For
this contains in it what grounds or Corresponds to great multitudes of
Inadequate, or Partial Notions, and contains them blended (as it were) in the
Thing as in their Root; and this so Confusedly and inseparably, that only that
most acute Divider, called Acies Intellectus, can take them a sunder, or
separate them. Moreover, there are not only Confused and Distinct Ideas, as Mr.
L. acknowledges, but also (which I remember not he takes notice of,) Notions or
Ideas which are more and less Confused or Distinct; or partly one, partly the
other, and this with very great variety; as is seen in his Example of Gold, of
which (and the same may be said of all other Bodies,) some Men gain by Degrees
more distinct Knowledges than others do. To proceed, it is evident that, of all
other Notions, that of Existence has the least Composition in it that can be.
Whence all Clearness of our Notions coming from their Distinctness, and their
Distinctness Springing from their Simplicity, the formal Notion of Existence is
the most Clear; that is, self-evident, and therefore Inexplicable; all
Explications being of those Notions that can need it. The Notion of Ens, which
signifies Capable to Exist, has but a very little Composition, and
Consequently, Confusion in it, as consisting of Actual Being, and the Power to
it, For the same Reason Corpus has more of Composition or Confusion in it, than
Ens; Vivens than Corpus; Animal than Vivens; Homo than Animal; and Socrates, or
the Individuum, most of all; There going still (as was shown above) more
Notions to constitute and Compound each inferior Notion than there does to
constitute those above it; whence, still as they are more Compounded, they are
proportionably more Confused, that is, less Distinct, or less Clear. The Ideas,
or Notions, of Individuals therefore, or of particular Things, are for the
reason now given the most Unintelligible; meaning by that Word, the most
impossible to be comprehended all at once. This reflected on, and it being
shown above, that both Nature and Art instruct us to divide our Notions into
Common Heads, and to proceed thus gradually to Inferior ones; it is most
evident that the only Proper and Natural way of distinguishing our Notions into
Simple and Compounded, is to be taken (not from our Fancy, what Ideas seem most
Clear to us) but from this Gradual Progression from Superior to Inferior
Notions; in regard there goes still more to compound the Inferior Notions,
than there does to compound the Superior. Whence follows out of the very Terms
that those must be more Compounded, or less Clear, these more Simple, and more
Clear.

18. The same Rule holds, and for the same Reason, in all the Common Heads of
the Modes or Accidents. The The same Rule holds in Accidents as well as
Substance.
Notion or Idea of the Supreme Genus has no Composition but that noted above,
which is common to them all, of Connotating the Subject. Whence, it is the
Simplest or least Compounded, as involving both that of the Common Head and
that of the Difference, superadded to it. Hence neither the Ideas of Motion nor
Extension, if by this Latter be meant (as by distinguishing it from Motion it
should seem) Permanent Quantity, are Simple Ideas; but the Idea of Quantity is
the Simple one; and they, being evidently such Kinds of Quantity, viz.
Permanent, and Successive, are clearly Compounded of Quantity and of the two
Different Ideas which make them those two several sorts of it. Much less is the
Idea or Notion of Number or Figure Simple ones; for the former is compounded of
the Idea of Mere Quantity and of [Discrete;] and the later of the Idea of
Quantity, and of such or such a manner of Terminating it. And, the same may be
easily shown of all the rest of his Simple Ideas whatever, excepting only that
of Existence. From these Principles I make the following Reflections.

19. First, That the Ideas can never be in fault when we name things wrong, but
our own heedlesness or Disagreement The Idea or Notion can never be in Fault
when we Name things wrong.
about the Meanings, for which such Words stand. For, our Common Notions are
wrought by Natural Causes upon the samenatur'd Patients, the Senses, and thence
upon the Soul. Whence Notions are what they are invariably, without their
meddling or being concerned with our Signifying them, or applying them to these
or these Words. We have them from Nature; the Signifying them by such and such
Words, comes from our Voluntary Designation; and that is all can be said of
them; as Mr. L. has shown B. 2. Chapter 32. 2.

20. Secondly, Confused Ideas, they being all Compounded, may have fewer or
more Distinct Ideas annexed to their Confused Notions may have more Distinct
ones Annexed to their Subject.
Subject, according as we gain a farther Distinct Knowledge of the Object, as
is exemplified in Mr. L's frequent Instance of Gold. In which case, it is not a
new Specifical Notion, nor so much as a new Nominal Essence, as Mr. L. calls
it: (for, let us discover never so many New Qualities in Gold, every Man will
call that Thing Gold still) but the Additions or Appendages of New Distinct
Notions, tack't as it were to the Confused one; or new Inadequate Notions,
approaching so many little steps nearer to the making it an Adequate one.

21. Thirdly, Since we know beforehand, that every Thing has a Distinct Nature
or Real Essence peculiar to its self, Confused Notions do not exclude, but
include those distinct ones which are yet Undiscovered.
we take those most Remarkable Accidents intrinsecally belonging to it, to be
that Essence; especially if they do sufficiently distinguish it from all other
Natures; and, when we find they do not, we acknowledge our Judgment may be
false, we strive to correct it, and suspend till we gain better Light; yet
still our Notions are inerrably what they are, and faultless, however it fares
with our Judgment. Nor does our Judgment exclude the yet-undiscover'd Modes
from the Notion of the Thing; but, we include them all in the Lump or
Confusedly. Whence it is the Real Essence of the Thing which is known, though
Imperfectly and Inadequately. Thus we know a Man and a Horse to be two Things
of different Species by diverse manifest Qualities which never agree to both of
them, and therefore distinguish them; and, though it is the whole, or rather a
Greater Complexion of Accidents which does constitute the Specific Difference;
yet even that is known truly, (though imperfectly) when we know it but in part,
especially (as was said) when it is sufficient to distinguish one from the
other: In the same manner as when I see but a Man's Hand or Face, I am truly
said to see the Man, though [Man] signifies the whole, which I see but in part.
The solid Reason of which is this Great Truth, that [There are no Actual Parts
in any Compound whatever.] Whence follows, that every Part is the Whole in
Part, or according to such a Part; which is one of the Chiefest Principles that
gives Grounds to the Science of Physics, and therefore is Demonstrable by the
Superior Science, Metaphysics.

22. Fourthly, Our former Discourse being well reflected on, which shows that
the most solid and certain way of We must not judge which Notions are Simple,
which Compounded, from the Clear or Obscure Appearances they make to our Fancy,
but from the R^le given above, 18, 19.
Knowing which Notions are Simple, which Compounded or Complex, is not to be
taken from the Easy Appearances to our Fancy, or from seeming Experience, but
from their being more General or more Particular; we may farther learn what
Notions are Clear and which Obscure, and how or why they are so. For, it is
manifest that all Confusion and Obscurity springs from Composition, or the
Involving many Notions, as is evidently seen in Particular or Individual
Bodies; and all Distinctness or Clearness in our Notions from their involving
few or none, as is found in the most General Notions. Add, that, if this Rule
be observed, the Order in our Complex Notions will be more Regular. Whereas the
other unmethodical way of making so many Simple Ideas, places those Ideas at
random, or hap-hazard. Lastly, If our Method be observed, Complex Ideas cannot
be taken for Simple ones, as has been shown Mr. Lock does in most of his.

23. Fifthly, That the Distinction of Simple and Complex, Clear and Obscure
Notions, is not to be taken from Shown hence, because th^se Men conceit that
Metaphysical Notions, are Obscure, whereas they are evidently the Clearest.
Appearances to our Fancy, but from the solid Grounds now spoken of, is seen
farther by this Instance, that many Men are much distasted at the Notions
belonging to Metaphysics, such as are Being, Ens, Essence, Act, Power, and
such like. The Reason of which is, that we do customarily reflect upon our
Notions, and endeavor to define or explain them. Whence, in Metaphysical ones,
finding this to be very Difficult, and in many of them Impossible, hence Men
fancy them to be Inconceivable and Incomprehensible; and thence they take a Toy
at Metaphysics, and pretend it insuperably hard and mysterious. Now it passes
with these Reflecters, as it does with those that would look steadfastly on the
Sun at Noonday; they find a kind of Cloud hovering before their Eyes, and seem
bedarken'd with too much Light. The Test to stick to in such Cases is, to set
themselves to define or explicate their Notions; which done, if they find they
can invent no Notions more Clear than those Notions themselves are, they may be
sure they are self-evident, and may safely look upon them as such; and, if they
find they can be defined or explained, they may be sure there will be found in
their Definition or Explication more Notions equivalent to that one; and thence
they may be assured also that the Notion Defined or Explicated, has more Parts,
or Composition in it; and, therefore, is not Simple nor perfectly Clear, since
it needs to be made Clear by others, which therefore must be more Simple and
Clearer than It.

24. Sixthly, It appears from what is said, that it is not to avoid different
Significations of Words, that Men suppose Not the Design of avoiding different
Signification of Words, but plain Nature, forces us to ^put Real Essences.
a Real Essence belonging to each Species; but because it is impossible there
should be any Individual Thing, but it must have Superior Notions, or (which is
the same) it must be of some sort or other in Nature; and, the Notion of this
Sort, or Species, must be an Essential and main Part of the Individual Essence.
For, it is evident, that Nature forces us to have both the one, and the other
Notion, without any formed Design of ours; and Words have nothing to do but to
signify them.

25. Lastly, Hence it appears, that Words do not therefore become Ambiguous,
because they have no Settled Standards Words are not Ambiguous for want of
settled Standards in Nature.
in Nature; as Mr. Lock apprehends in Mixed Modes, especially in Moral ones.
For, all Virtues and Vices being nothing but Dispositions to act according to
Right Reason, or contrary to it, have as fixed Standards in Nature, as Reason
it self has; taking [Nature] for the Reflections we naturally have upon the
Operations of our Soul, and for what is Agreeable or Disagreeable to its true
Nature; as also, on the Subjects and Circumstances, about which, and in which
it is employed. Hence, the Words which he instances in, viz. Sham, Wheedle,
Banter, are evidently Deviations from Right Reason in our Just and Civil
Comportments with other Men; and all the Notions that go to their Definitions,
are as much Connected as any other Genus and Difference are in any other
Definition whatever. So likewise, his Mixed Modes, Murder and Sacrilege, are
defined; The Killing a Man lawlesly, and the Taking to our selves lawlesly, or
Abusing Holy Things; and have the same Solid Connection, as any other Notions;
which consists in this, that the one of them is Common or Determinable properly
by the other, and the other is Particular or Determinative of it, which makes
them Cohere together in good Sense. As for our Soul's Connecting them at
pleasure, it is quite otherwise: She has Notions of each Common Head naturally;
and Nature and Art do both of them conspire to oblige us to divide those Heads
by Intrinsecal Notions, called Differences; and, it is not at her Pleasure and
Choice, what Differences shall be Proper, what Disparate. Nature has settled
the Agreeableness of one of these Notions to the other; so that, should we put
a Difference to a Generical Notion, which is Inconsistent with it, the Notion
thus defined would be Nonsense, and Chimerical; and no Wiser than Green
Scarlet, or a Apiece Triangle.

26. Let the Obscurity and Ambiguity of Words spring from what Causes Mr. L.
pleases, concerning which he is The Thing signified is not to be blamed for the
Abuse of Words; but their Ambiguity, ill Contexture, or Mis-application.
very Acute in his 10th Chapter, it is to me very evident, that the Thing
signified is not to be blamed for the Abuse of Words, and, that this Abuse of
them must spring from one of these three Heads, viz. Ambiguity of Single Words,
the ill Contexture of them, and their Mis-application. Artificial Words are,
indeed, (as was said,) more liable to Obscurity; and, perhaps, Logical ones
most of all. But, since the Users of those Words do pretend to Learning, let
them define their Terms of Art, and it will quickly appear whether they agree
in the Notion of those Terms, or no; and, by declaring what the Notion meant by
that Term is useful for, it will appear which of the Definitions agrees truly
to that Notion, and which does not.

27. Though then some Men have the Knowledge of more Accidents in the same Thing,
or in the same Essence, Imperfect Knowers agree in the Thing, and not in the
Name only.
than another Man has, yet it does not follow they agree in nothing but the
Name, or that they substitute the Name for the Thing; for they do both of them
acknowledge and agree that they speak of the same Thing, or of the same
Essence, notwithstanding this more particular Knowledge which one of them has
of it above the other. In the same manner as diverse Persons may know, or
discourse of the same Individual Man, Socrates, (though the Complexion of
Accidents which constitute the Individuum be far greater than that which
constitutes the Specific Notion;) notwithstanding that, one of them better
knows his Humor, Temper, Constitution, Science, Virtue, and his Degree of
Rationality, (which is most Essential to him, as he is This Man,) than the
other does. Whence this Position does not only make all Philosophy, or
Knowledge of Things (which are not such, but by their Real Essence which
formally makes them such) to be impossible; but, it makes even our Ordinary
Communication amongst Men unintelligible, because we should still speak of
Diverse Things, and not of the same: For, Diverse they must be, if they have
Diverse Essences, which formally constitutes them such. Yet, I must declare,
that I verily judge this Learned Author delivers this Doctrine out of his
Sincerity, without intending to do any Favor to the Scepticks; and that he is
not aware how much this leans to that Maxim of the Pyrrhonians, viz. that
[Nothing can be known, unless it be known perfectly;] which is sufficiently
confuted by this Evident Reflection, that our Soul works by Inadequate Notions,
and builds her Knowledge on those Partial Notions; that is, we can truly know
that Thing, though we know it but imperfectly, or in part.

28. And, where is the Harm to this Acquired Knowledge, called Science, though we
know the Thing, or its Essence, The Knowing Things by Abstract Notions
promotes, and not hinders Science.
only imperfectly, by those Partial Notions; since Science has not for its
Object the whole Thing in the Bulk, nor its whole Essence neither, but only
Abstracted Conceptions of it? Cannot a Mathematician discourse Scientifically
of Wood, as it is Long, Broad, or Solid; or a Carpenter or Carver know it to be
Wood really, or to have the real Essence of Wood, and such a Sort of Wood, by
its Color, its Degree of Hardness, its Aptness to be Cut, or its being more
easy to do so if one goes according to the Grain, and such like; unless he
knows all those Innumerable Accidents found in its Entire and Exact
Composition? Or, cannot (I may say, do not) we all agree to call its Real
Essence [Lignea, or Woodish,] without abusing the Word; because one of us
penetrates the Nature, or Real Essence of it, more than the other does? I
suppose, Mr. Locke's laudable Zeal against some pretended Philosophers, did, on
this occasion, something bias his good Reason, that he might better oppose
them. And, certainly, it must be acknowledged, that, never were Words more
abusively used, to the prejudice of good Sense, than those by which they
express their Essences, and their Specific and Essential Forms; so that, for
want of some Determinate and Literal Intelligible Meaning, which could give a
Philosopher any Light what to make of them, they seemed nothing but mere Words,
obtruded upon us for the only Truths; and so tended to reduce Science to
Mysterious Nonsense, and Unintelligible Cant. But, I could wish,
notwithstanding, that Mr. Lock had not over-strain'd some Points, to baffle
their Insignificant Talk. I hope his discerning Judgment will distinguish me,
and all true Aristotelians, from the Abetters of their Folly; and let them
answer, if they can, for themselves.

20. His last Chapter is, about Remedying the Abuses of Words. Wherefore, since
diverse of those Abuses are By Mr. Locke's Principles, there is no Way to remedy
the Abuse of Words.
conceived by him to spring from our Names given to Real Essences, and it is
impossible, he says, to know fully what those Real Essences are; I should be
glad he would put us into a Way to do an Impossibility, and Comprehend them
fully; otherwise, since name them we must, we shall, according to his
Discourse, be necessarily enforced to the Abuses of Words, without any possible
Remedy; which is something too hard a Case.

31. I am a little apprehensive, that I do not perfectly hit Mr. Locke's true
Meaning in some Passages here, Mr. Locke's Sentiments, after all, Ambiguous.
and elsewhere; finding his Discourse in other Places Sub-contrary to what I
took to be his Thoughts. For example; Speaking here,. 19. of Showing and
Defining Substances; all which being Entities, must have Real Essences in them;
he has these Words: [For, there being ordinarily in each Sort some Leading
Qualities, to which we suppose the other, which make up the Complex Idea of
that Species, annexed; we give the Name to that Quality or Idea which is the
most observable, and we take to be the most Distinguishing Idea of that
Species.] Where, if, instead of the Words [to that Quality,] be put [the
Subject of that Quality,] to which subject we suppose the rest of its proper
Complexion of Accidents annexed; it will be perfectly Co-incident with my
Thoughts as to this Point. Only, I wonder why he pitches upon some one Quality;
as also, why he says not a Word of the Matter, which, (in all Bodily
Substances,) determined by this Complexion of Accidents, makes up the Thing.
This manner of Expression makes him seem to discourse all along as if this
Complexion of Accidents, abstractedly considered, without any Regard to the
Matter, did make the Essence; whereas, they cannot do this at all, unless by
their Determining the Potentiality of the Matter to be This, and as including
that Determination of it; that is, as including the Matter thus Determined.

Of the Equivocalness in Words, the several Sorts of it, how it comes, and of
the Way how to detect it; as also, of the Means how we may arrive at their True
and Proper Signification in several Subjects, I have treated in my Method to
Science, Book 1. Less. 11.

REFLECTIONS ON THE FOURTH BOOK.
REFLECTION Seventeenth, ON The First Three Chapters.
1. THis Learned Author having, with much Exactness, treated of all that can
belong to his Ideas, the being affected with which is called the First Of the
Second Operation of our Understanding.
Operation of our Understanding, or Simple Apprehension; he advances to the
Second [Judgment,] which is expressed by a Proposition. It Is by this that we
have Complete Knowledge or Cognition; which (as the Word it self imports) is
the putting together of Notions in the Understanding after its manner; that is,
in order to the seeing them connected, or knowing they are so. The First
Chapter is both comprehensive of his Subject, and has much Truth in it. Whether
it goes to the bottom, and does not require some Deeper Truths to explicate the
Point fully, is now to be examined.

2. He defines Knowledge to be The Perception of the Connection and Agreement,
or of the Disagreement and Repugnancy Mr. L.'s Definition of Knowledge in many
respects Faulty.
of any of our Ideas. My Exceptions against this Definition are: 1. That
[Perception] being the Act of a Knowing Power, can mean nothing but Knowledge;
and, therefore, to define Knowledge by Knowledge seems Inartificial and
Preternatural: For, it will still be asked, what this Knowledge he calls
Perception is? 2. Mr. Lock granting Perception to Brutes, he must necessarily
allow them Ideas, and that they can connect them too. Wherefore his Book being
Entitled, An Essay concerning Humane Understanding, it is needful we know what
kind of Ideas We have, what Brutes have; and, (not to speak of our or their
Perception) whether they do connect them as we Men do. For, this Concession
makes Perception to be the Genus in this Definition; and, therefore, to
appropriate it to Humane Knowledge, the large Signification of it ought to be
restrained to such a Perception as is peculiar to Man. But, what I most dislike
is the word [Ideas,] in our perceiving the Agreement or Disagreement of which
he puts Knowledge to consist. Philosophy is the Knowledge of Things; wherefore,
unless those Ideas be the Thing it self in our Understanding; or, if they be
not, but Similitudes only (as the Word imports) unless it be well made out that
those Similitudes do give us the Knowledge of the Thing it self, (which I have
demonstrated in my Preliminaries they cannot) it is impossible we should ever
arrive at true Philosophy, though we did perceive the Connection of all the Ideas
in the World. Nay, unless they be the Thing it self (in part,) no Predication
we make can be True.

3. To show this more fully, I entreat Mr. Lock to consider, that this
Connection of Ideas he speaks as necessary to Knowledge cannot consist in the
Connection or Disagreement of Ideas.
Knowledge, is that which is signified by the Word [Est;] which being so, in
this Proposition, [Sugar is sweet,] the Word [Est] must according to him, if
only Ideas must be connected, naturally and genuinly affirm, that one of those
Ideas is the other Idea, or that the Idea of Sugar is the Idea of Sweet; which
is evidently False. For those Ideas differ toto genere; the former belonging to
the Common Head of Substance, the other of Quality; and besides, it is perfectly
contradictory to Mr. Locke's avowed Doctrine, that each Idea has its peculiar
Metaphysical Verity, or is what it self is, and is distinct from any other
Idea, and therefore is to be Denied of it. Whence follows, that it is not in
seeing the Connection or Disagreement of the Ideas themselves that Knowledge can
consist; for they are, as to themselves, always Distinct, and therefore
Unconnected; so that we can never say one of them is the other, which yet we do
in all our Affirmative Propositions; whence follows, that all our Affirmative
Propositions would be false. It follows then, that it is the Subject or Thing
inadequately conceived by our Understanding, which is said by the Copula [Est]
to be Identity'd really and Materially with it self as conceived by another
Inadequate Notion; and, that [Est] speaks their being united in the same Ens,
or ingrafted on the same Stock of Being. And, certainly, it appears, at first
Sight, to be an odd Explication of Knowledge and Philosophy, to maintain, that
they consist in seeing the Connection or Disagreement of Similitudes.

4. Wherefore, I should rather think, that, as Notions are defined, The Thing
in the Understanding inadequately conceiving The true Definition of Knowledge.
it, (which has been abundantly proved,) so Knowledge ought to be Defined, The
Inadequate Notions of the Thing, existing in the Understanding, so connected
there, as they are in the Thing in Nature. To make good my Definition, I
discourse thus: First, It has been proved by many Arguments, that all our
Notions are Partial Conceptions of the Thing; or, which is the same, (if we
take the Word [Conception] for the Object, and not for the Act of Conceiving,)
they are the Thing inadequately conceived. And, I dare be confident, those
Arguments are unanswerable; and that no true Reason, or Connection of Terms, can
ever shock them: However, I may expect much Repugnance of Fancy, ere that Point
be admitted. Secondly, All our Distinct Notions being Inadequate, and
consequently, (as it were,) Parts of the Thing, as it is Knowable by us; it
follows, that (according to our Doctrine) the Immediate Object of all our
Knowledge, being somewhat of the Thing, is wholly built on the Thing it self,
and therefore Solid. Thirdly, Those several Notions, however Inadequate taking
them Abstractedly, yet they do connotate the whole Thing; since no Part can be
conceived, but in reference to the whole, or as in it, it being impossible the
former can be apprehended to be a Distinct Thing from the latter; because, if
it were of it self a Distinct Thing, it would be of it self a Whole, and not a
Part. Fourthly, The Copula [Est] speaks the Identity of those Parts with the
Whole; for, they can only be Identify'd, as they are One with the whole Thing
materially; since formally, as Parts, they are contradistinguish'd from one
another. And, were it not so, few Propositions (as was lately proved) could be
True. Whence, let us take any Proposition, v. g. [Socrates is wise;] the true
Sense of it is, that the Individual Substance, called Socrates, is the same
Thing, Materially, or Really, with that which is Wise; or, that, what answers
to Socrates, and to Wise, are found in the same Thing. Fifthly, In regard
Parts, as such, are distinguished formally from one another; therefore, we
cannot say that any Partial Notion, expressed formally as a Part, is Another.
Whence we cannot say [Petreitas est sapientia,] though we can say [Petrus est
sapiens;] in regard those Abstract Words do formally signify such a Partial
Notion of the whole Thing, or a kind of Part of it. And, though each of them does
connotate the whole Thing, yet, with a Quatenus, (to which that Abstract manner
of Expression is Equivalent,) they cut off such a precise Considerability, or
Notion of it, from all others; and therefore, such Words can only signify
that precise Notion, or (as it were) Part, and no other. Lastly, Hence it is,
that we cannot predicate a Concrete of an Abstract, nor an Abstract of a
Concrete; because the Abstract signifies, distinctly and formally, only a Part,
and the Concrete the whole, (though confusedly,) and not any distinct Part of it.
But I expatiate too much into the Subject of Predication, and shall pursue it
no farther at present.

5. To come closer to the Business in hand; It appears by what is here said,
that it is not enough for Knowledge, Our Definition of Knowledge farther
maintained.
nor answers the true Notion of Philosophy, that Ideas be predicated of other
Ideas, or Similitudes of Similitudes; nor (which is the same) that we see they
agree or disagree with one another; but it is necessary, that the Ground of our
Knowledge, and of our Predications, be taken from the Thing it self, as is
expressed in our Definition. I produce not here the Definition of Knowing which
I gave in my Preliminaries, because it is not yet granted by those with whom I
am discoursing, that our Notions are the Things in our Understanding; though (one
Consideration, which is brought there, being added) these two Definitions are
Co-incident: But I accommodate my self to Mr. Locke's Words, as far as they
will bear, that the Difference between us may be made more apparent.

6. Hence, whereas Mr. Lock makes Four Sorts of Connexions of our Ideas, in
which Knowledge is found, viz. 1. Of Hence, there is but One Sort of Connection,
in which Knowledge consists: viz. that of Co-existence.
Identity, or Diversity: 2. Of Relation: 3. Co-existence: 4. Real Existence; I
must, in pursuance to the Grounds now laid, affirm, and maintain, that there is
but one Sort of Intellectual Connection of our Notions, viz. that of the
Co-existence of what is meant by the two Terms in the same Thing; and, that
(there being but one Copula [Est,] all the other Sorts of Connection are
co-incident with this one. For, the First consisting in this, that each Idea,
or Notion, is its Self, and not Another, signifies no more but what we express
by this Identical Proposition, [The Thing as thus conceived, is the Thing as
thus conceived; or, not as otherwise conceived.] Whence it is Self-evident,
because the Terms being every way the self-same Notion, are as closely
connected as perfect Identity can express them; whence they can admit no Middle
Term to come between them, and make the Proposition Evident, or prove it: But
their Evidence is entirely grounded on this first Metaphysical Principle,
[Every Thing (whether Substance or Accident) is what it is; or, is Indivisum in
se, and Divisum a quolibet alio;] that is, in plain terms, One. The Second,
[Relation;] taking it not for the Act of our Mind, comparing or connecting it
to another; but for the Ground of it in the Thing, which obliges our Comparing
Power, when it is in it, to refer it actually; is still the Thing it self,
inadequately conceived to be Connected with, or agreeing to the same Thing in
part, as is explicated above. V. g. Master and Scholar are grounded on the
Actions and Passions of Teaching, and being Taught, which are Inadequate
Conceptions, Co-existing in those two Persons, and Identify'd materially with
those Subjects: And the same is found in all others, which are thus Connected.
And the Last, Of Real Existence; As, when we say, [Peter is,] clearly imports,
that what is meant by Peter, the Subject; and by Existent, which is the
Predicate, (implied there in the Word [is,]) are Co-existent; or, are found in
the same Thing. But, more of this when we come to consider his 4th Chapter, Of
the Reality of our Knowledge.

7. His Second Chapter, Of the Degrees of our Knowledge, distinguishing it into
Intuitive, Demonstrative, and Sensitive, The Degrees of our Knowledge assigned
by Mr. L. very Solid.
is admirably Solid, Clear, and Rational throughout. The First of these is
proper to Principles, the Second to Proofs, the Last to the Knowledge of
Particular Things or Modes by the way of Experiments. Indeed, Intuitive
Knowledge is proper to Pure Spirits, called Intelligences or Angels; which,
because they do not glean their Knowledge from various Impressions on the
Senses, consequently they do not divide the thing into Parts, by Inadequate
Notions, when they come to know it; nor compound those Notions again into
Propositions, as we do; but, at one direct and full View, called Intuition,
they comprehend the whole Thing, and all that belongs to it, at once. Whence it
seems not so proper to attribute Intuition to us Mortals, who are but poor
Retailers of our Imperfect and short Notions; which we spell (as it were) and
put together as Children do Letters, when they are, otherwise, not able to read
whole Words currently. But this is very pardonable in Mr. Lock; for, to say
true, it is very hard to find another Word which fits our Knowledge of First
Principles much better; though I think [Self-evidence] might serve. My self have
long ago had such a Thought, though I expressed it warily in these words: "There
is nothing in all our Knowledges, that, in the manner of it, comes so near the
Angelical Intuition as does our Knowledge of Self-evident Principles, expressed
by Identical Propositions. It divides as little as is possible for us in this
State; for it predicates the same of the same; nay, the whole of the whole;
and, for the same Reason, it as little compounds again. Whence, it resembles it
not a little in its Absolute Evidence and Immovable Firmness; and is the
nearest Approach possible to Simple Intuition. That so, as the Order of the
World requires, the Supremum infimi may immediately confine upon the Infimum
Supremi."

8. I was much pleased to see Mr. Lock declare, that upon this Intuition
depends all the Certainty and Evidence we have Every Step we take in
Demonstrative Knowledge, or every Consequence, must be grounded on Self-evidence
of our Knowledge, and particularly, that, in every Step Reason makes in
Demonstrative Knowledge, (that is, in every Consequence we deduce) there is an
Intuitive Knowledge of the Agreement or Disagreement of the next intermediate
Idea. I add, Upon which Agreement all the Force of Consequenee, that is, all
our Reasonings are grounded. The Evident Proof he gives for it here, is worthy
the attentive Consideration of his Learned Readers. It Is not in this occasion
only, but in diverse others, though I have not always noted them, that Mr. Lock
and my self have, without designed Confederacy, agreed in Positions of great
Moment; which, I know not how, have escaped the Thoughts of all other Authors I
have seen. The Reader may please to review my Method to Science, B. 3. Less.
1.. 3. where I discourse thus: "Wherefore, since, if the Consequence, in which
consists the Essence, and all the Force and Nerves of Discourse, be not Clear
and Evident, there could be no Certainty or Evidence of any thing that needs to
be made known or Concluded; and so our Faculty of Exact Reasoning would have
been given us to no purpose; hence, it is manifest, that however one Proposition
may be made known by other Propositions that are connected and consequential to
one another; yet the Consequence it self cannot be proved by Another
Consequence. For, the Question would still return how, and in virtue of what,
that Consequence which made the other Evident, is Evident it self, and so in
infinitum. Whence it follows, that the Evidence of all Consequences whatever,
must be built on something in a higher manner Evident than any Consequence or
Proof can otherwise make it; that is, on a Self-evident Proposition.]" The
certain Knowledge of which kind of Propositions, as Mr. Lock holds, is to be
had by Intuition.

9. I have been larger upon this Point, and do most especially recommend it to
the best Reflection of our Readers; The great Usefulness of this last Position.
because it is not only the Deepest and Firmest Ground, but also the very best
Test of all Argumentation; and therefore the main Hinge on which all Science
turns. I must confess, for all that, I cannot see why, since all Self-evident
Truths can only be expressed by Identical Propositions, this Learned Gentleman
is so shy to use those Words, since the Sense he brings on this Occasion, is
clearly Equivalent to those Identical Forms of Speech; nor, if put into
Propositions, can be expressed by any other. I think we should not be ashamed
of them, or think them Trifling, because some Men of Fancy, who never set their
Thoughts to trace Evidence and Truth to their Originals, are pleased to make
themselves Sport with them; nor because their Terms are too closely connected;
For, they must be so; and, were they not so, they would be unworthy the Name of
First Principles, nor do us any Good when we come to reduce other Truths into
them; which is the best Way of Demonstrating.

10. The Extent of Humane Knowledge, of which he treats in his 3d Chapter, is a
very Excellent Subject. Science Skepticism and Dogmatism are, both of them,
highly prejudicial to Science.
has two Capital Enemies, Skepticism, and Dogmatism: The one will allow very
little, or Nothing at all, to be known; the other pretends to know too much.
The former, by breeding a perfect Despair of Knowledge, discourages the
Industry of the best Wits; and makes them, since Truth cannot be found, to
addict themselves only to Wordish Talk and Declamation: To which contributes
not a little, that many who have incomparable Fancies, have oftentimes the
worst Judgments; especially, if they have let their Wits loose to Raillery, and
Drollery: For, such Persons, proud of their Joking Talent, do think they answer
a Demonstration, if they can but break a Jest upon it. And, besides, they have
the Faculty of cutting Capers beyond the Moon, and raising Objections at
random. The Latter does, perhaps, as much Harm, by Presuming to demonstrate
every Thing: And the Overweening of these Men is the more pernicious, because
they make a Show of a great Friendship and Zeal for Science; and yet, by
falling short of their Extravagant Pretensions, they throw a Scandal upon her;
and make weak Distinguishers apprehend there is no Science at all. The One
deviates from Zeal for Truth, in Excess; the Other, in Defect: And the
Judicious Decision of this Point, [Of the Extent of our Knowledge,] settles the
Golden Mean between both. I have endeavored, in my Method, B. 1. Less. 2. to.
12. to establish from Clear Grounds, the Just Pitch of our Knowledge in this
State: Mr. Lock does, with his usual Candor, attempt to do the same in his
Way; Concerning which, I am to give him my Thoughts; which are these.

11. There is no doubt but we have less Knowledge than we might have had,
through our Want of some Notions; We have Sensitive Knowledge of other Notions,
besides Existence.
as also, for want of discerning the Agreement or Disagreement of them in the
same Thing. No doubt too, but Intuitive Knowledge, which is only of
Self-evident Truths, cannot reach to all that belongs to our Notions, or Ideas;
and, that we too often want proper Mediums to connect those Notions, in order
to Demonstration: As also, that our Sensitive Knowledge (I suppose he means
that which is had by Experiments) does not reach very far; otherwise, our
Senses giving us (as we do both of us hold) all the First Natural Notions we
have, I believe it cannot be denied, but that they give us withal the Ground
of all our Knowledge. Whence I cannot see, why he limits Sensitive Knowledge to
the Notion of Existence only; or, that our Senses do make us know only that a
Thing is: For, certainly, our Senses do as well tell us the Wall is white, as
that the Wall is; though, in proper Speech, it does neither, but by means of our
Mind, comparing the Notions of the two Terms, given us by the Object, in order
to the seeing their Co-existence in the Thing. All they do, is, to give us our
Notions; which the Soul (that is, the Man, according to his Spiritual Part)
compounds into a Proposition; and so frames a Judgment of the said Co-existence
(or Inconsistency) of those Terms, or (which is the same) of what is signified
by them, in the same Thing. Nor do I think Mr. Lock will much deny any of
this, however we may express our selves diversely.

12. It Is very true that our Experience gives us some Light to know what
Qualities do belong to such Substances; Only Principles and Demonstration and
not Experiments, can give us any Intelligible Explication of Natural Qualities.
yet, I cannot think it impossible to know this very often a priori, by
Demonstrative Reason, though we do not know the Constitution of the Minute Parts,
on which those Qualities do depend; much less do I judge, that, though we did not
know them, yet we could not discover any necessary Connection between them and
any of the Secondary Qualities; he means, those Qualities which are the Objects
of our Senses. Nor do I wonder Mr. Lock thinks thus, because he does, all
along, pitch his Thoughts on the Corpuscularian Hypothesis, as on that which,
in some Men's Opinion, goes farthest in an Intelligible Explication of the
Qualities of Body. Now, my Judgment is, that it is demonstrable, that the
Principles of the Corpuscularians cannot possibly give Account of the
Constitution either of the Minute Parts, or of the least Atom, nor,
consequently, of any Body in Nature; or (which is the Proper Work of a
Philosopher) refund any Quality into its Proper Causes; I mean, such Causes as
they can prove to be such, or must be such; however, they may fancy them to be
such, by allowing to themselves Voluntary Suppositions for Principles. I have
shown in my Appendix to my Method, that the most Celebrated of the
Corpuscularian Philosophers, the Cartesians, cannot know the Constitution of
the most minute Part of any of their Elements, since they can never tell us by
their Grounds, the Primary Qualities of their First Matter, of which their
three Elements, and, consequently, all Natural Bodies are made. To show we can,
I will give a short Summary of the Aristotelian Doctrine in this particular,
truly represented, and cleared from the Mis-conceits of some late Schoolmen.

13. It Is confessed, and Evident, that Quantity is the Primary Affection of
Body; of which, re-modify'd, (as I Short Hints of the true Aristotelian Grounds.
may say,) all Qualities are made. We can show, that by it Body is Divisible;
and, therefore, Quantity (for that, and and many other Reasons) is
Divisibility, especially, taking it as considered Physically: however, taking
it as capable to be Measured, Proportioned, and Figured, (as Mathematicians
do,) it may not very unfitly be called Extension. But, take it, (as I said,) as
affecting Bodies, in order to Natural Action and Passion, in which the Course
of Nature consists, (as a Natural Philosopher ought to consider it,) and it is
Divisibility, or a Capacity to be divided by those Causes. Nor can the Greatest
Cartesian deny this, since he grants, that the First Operation in Nature, is,
the making their three Elements, by Grinding (as it were) or dividing their
First Matter. Proceeding by immediate Steps, we are to seek out the first Sorts
of this Divisibility; and this must be done by finding the most Simple
Intrinsecal Differences of that, or any other Notion, which can only be more
and less of the Common Notion. Now, more and less of Divisibility Considered,
in order to Natural Agents, is the same as to be See Method to Science, B. 1.
L. 3.. 1, 2.
more easily, and less easily Divisible by by those Agents, which we call to be
Rare, and Dense. Rarity therefore, and Density do constitute the Simplest Sorts
or Kinds of Bodies. And, since it is inconceivable that Matter should be
divided at all by Second Causes, but the Divider must be more Dense, or more
able to divide, than the Matter that is to be divided by it; it follows, that
Rare and Dense Bodies were originally such; or, that there were Created at
first some sorts of Bodies that are more, and others that were less divisible;
as is clearly expressed in the two first Verses of Genesis. And Reason abets
it; for, otherwise, the Course of Nature, consisting in Motion, could never
have been Connaturally made; because, had all the Parts of Matter been equally
Divisible, there could be no Reason why one part of the Matter should be the
Divider, rather than the other; and so there could have been no Motion, nor,
consequently, any Course of Nature at all.

14. By the Division of Rare Bodies by Dense ones, and the Division of their
first Compounds, the Number of How all Secondary Qualities come to be made.
Parts increasing, there naturally followed the various Size, and the Grossness
and Minuteness of those Parts; as also, their various Figures, Situations, etc.
All which contribute to compound the Species and Individuums. Of these,
variously mingled and remingled, all the rest are made. From Simple Division,
two Things are made of one; whence follows the Individual Diversity of Bodies,
according to the Notion of Substance, or Ens. More Accidents are (as was said
before) still taken in, to make the Subaltern Genera and Species, even to the
lowest Sort, or Kind; and innumerably more of them, to distinguish and
constitute Individual Bodies.

15. To come a little nearer our main Point: unless those Qualities, Rarity and
Density, which are the Primary The Course of Nature is fundamentally built on
the Admission of Ratity and Density.
ones, be admitted, the World could never have been formed connaturally; nor
the Course of Nature carried on; because, (as was now shown,) in that
Supposition, there would have been no Motion. For, Motion of Material Entities
is performed by the Intervening of the Parts of the one between the Parts of
the other, and, so, Dividing it; which is impossible, unless the one had been
Rarer, or more yielding; the other Denser, or less yielding. But, this once
settled, it is evident from the very Terms, that there are Proper Causes, both
on the Agent's and Patient's Side, for the one's Dividing, and the other's
being Divided. For, the Rare being more Divisible than the Dense, it is
demonstrable, that the Dense being impelled against the Rare by Motion, (which
comes from a Superior Agent,) the Rare being more Divisible, will give way, and
be divided by the Dense; which is clearly impossible in the Corpuscularian
Hypothesis; which puts all Parts of their Matter to be equally Rare, or Dense;
or rather, (as the Cartesians do,) neither Rare, nor Dense; all Qualities,
according to them, being made by mingling their three Elements; which Elements
are themselves made by, and presuppose, the Motion of their First Matter.
Whereas, yet, it is impossible to conceive, but those Parts of that Matter must
be either Rare, or else Dense, at least to some Degree. And, as denying the
Rarity and Density in the First Bodies does, by making Motion impossible, put
the Course of Nature out of Frame, both in its Beginning and Progress; so it
utterly destroys all Demonstration in Physics, which is grounded on Mediums
from Proper Causes, and Proper Effects.

16. Passing over many Immediate Steps, which show how those Four Principal
Qualities, Heat, Cold, Moisture, That by these Grounds, the Nature of Secondary
Qualities is Demonstrable.
and Dryness, are made of Rarity and Density, acted upon by the common Causes
in Nature; we come to show how these two Primary Qualities do constitute many
Secondary ones; and how these last are refunded into the other, as their Proper
Causes; and, therefore, are Demonstrable by them, as by their Proper Mediums. A
few Instances may serve, as Hints, to explicate others. That great Pellucidity
in the Air is necessarily, and properly refunded into its extreme Divisibility,
or Rarity; by which it becomes easily penetrable in all its Parts, by those
Spicula Ignea, the Rays of the Sun; and Opacity, for the same Reason, is the
Proper Effect of Density; which hinders its Subject from being penetrated, or
Divided by them; whence also it is a Proper Cause of Repelling, or Reflecting
them. Again; Who sees not that Liquidity, which makes its Subject easily
yielding to be flatted evenly, as we see in Ponds; or driven to run into
Cavities, by the common Motion of Gravitation, is a proper Effect of Rarity, as
Consistency is of Density? Spissitude is a Constipation of Dense Parts, or the
Want of Pores to admit the Ingress of other Bodies. Grossitude is clearly
nothing but Density, in a bigger Quantity of its Parts. Friability is refunded
into great Dense Parts, and very large Rare ones: Whence, those Rare Parts,
which, were they less, would better cement those Parts together, being now very
large, and, withal, very Divisible, are easily divided; and, consequently, the
Body is soon shattered: As we find in Dry Clods, out of which, (while they were
yet Wet Dirt,) those Parts which were Watery, being drawn by Heat, large
Cavities are left, which the Air now possesses. On the other side, Ductility
and Malleability are the Effects of the very smallest Rare Parts, finely
compacted with the minutest Dense ones. Those Small Dense Parts, so closely
woven, and, in a manner, Contiguous, keep the Rare from evaporating; and the
Rare, by being such, and interwoven with the Dense all over, make the Compound
yield to Expansion, without Breaking; being very small, are not easily
separable; and yet, though rarified farther by the subtilest Agent, Fire, they
render it Fusible.

17. Were these Principles which I rawly and briefly touch on here, pursued by
Learned Men with Immediate The true Reason why some Men think them Inexplicable.
Consequences, which, true Logic assisting, is far from impossible; the Nature
of those first-mixt Qualities, and by their means of many others, would not be
very hard to explicate. But, if Men are resolved to neglect all Natural
Principles, and the Intrinsecal Constitution of the First Bodies in Nature, and
will needs run upon nothing but Mathematical Notions, which pre-suppose those
Principles; nor could be found in Nature, unless the other be first admitted,
or Division made Possible; (for neither Parts, nor consequently Figures of
Parts, could be made without Division, nor Division unless some Bodies were
naturally apt to divide, others to be divided, that is, unless some were Rare,
others Dense) or, if, instead of demonstrating their Natural Principles by the
Superior Science, they will needs have recourse to Voluntary Suppositions; and
violate the Nature of Causality, and of the Deity it self, by making him whose
Proper Effect (he being Essentially Self-existence) is to give Existence, or
create, to be the Proper and Immediate Cause of Motion; and go about to prove
Ignotum per Ignotissimum, by supposing (as they sometimes do) that God wills
this or that, which is for the Interest of their Tenet, and too hard to prove:
If, I say, Men are resolved to follow such Untoward Methods, it is no Wonder
Science does not advance, but the World is detained in Ignorance of many
things, which otherwise it might know. Did Learned Men set themselves to carry
forwards the Grounds of Nature in Euclides Physicus (where they will find
Demonstrations enough) to farther Conclusions, with the same Zeal as they do the
Mathematics; I doubt not but the Evident Truths, which would by Degrees
disclose themselves, would both encourage, and enable them, to make a farther
Progress in Knowledge; nor would the Science of Second Qualities, (about which
Physical Demonstrations ought in great part be employed) be held so Desperate.
But to leave these Discourses, and apply my self to Mr. L. I cannot but wonder,
that amongst all his Ideas of Qualities, he not so much as once mentions (as
far as I remember) those two Chiefest ones of Rarity and Density; though nothing
is more obvious in the whole Course of Nature than these are. Which, with many
other Reasons, makes me think he had not seen, or at least well weighed the
true Aristotelian System, (which he might have seen in Sir Kenelm Digby's
Treatise of Bodies, and its Latin Preface; as also in Institutiones
Peripateticae;) but took it as represented by the Modern Schools. For my self,
I must declare I verily judge, that the Grounds I here insist on, are the only
true ones that a Natural Philosopher can have; that they are Demonstrable; and
I do offer my self to maintain them to be such, if it shall please any Learned
Objector to attempt to show these Principles Faulty; or that we build on any
Supposition at all, and not on what is either Self-evident, or easily and
immediately Reducible to Self-evidence. Which, I believe, no other Sect of
Philosophers did ever so much as pretend to.

18. To come to those Qualities, which are the Formal Object of our Senses,
called by Mr. Lock Secondary The Possibility of demonstrating them shown by
the Instance of Color.
Qualities, I have shown already that diverse of them are Intelligible and
Explicable by Rarity and Density; only certain little Respects are added to
them, which too lie in our Ken: Nor do I doubt but most of the others may be
clearly and distinctly known by the same Grounds. Indeed, diverse of them depend
on the Figure and Texture of Parts; which, though we can never know with a
Mathematical Exactness, yet I see not why we may not demonstrate the Natures or
Kinds of each Quality, so far as to distinguish them from others, and refund
them into their Proper Causes; which is enough for our purpose, and most
proportionable to our State. For Example, Light brings from the Wall into the
Eye, and so into our Knowing Power, the Notion of Whiteness, and of other
Colors from other Objects. It cannot be doubted then, (since Light of its self
is Uniform) but that there is some Disposition in the Surface of the Object, or
the Figure of its outmost Parts, which reflects Light after a different manner,
and affects the Seer accordingly. Nor is it hard to conceive, but very Evident,
that a very smooth Surface, as having fewest Pores in it, will reflect more
Light, and so make it more Visible; especially if those Outmost Parts be
Roundish, which reflect Light every way, or toward all sides. It is manifest
then that, that Quality which is most Visible of all others being that which we
call Whiteness, the Proper Causes of that Quality may be found out. Which will
further appear hence, that if, on the contrary, the Surface have Small-pointed
Parts and Large Pores, much of the Light will be lost in those shady Grotts,
and scarce any Beam of it reflected; which therefore is the Proper Cause of
that Lightless Appearance called Blackness; which is the Reason why, when there
is no Light at all to be reflected, all things seem Black. If we hold a
Thousand Needles Points toward our Eye, they appear Black, because of the
vastness of the Interstices or Cavities in proportion to the extant Parts which
should have reflected the Light: Whereas, were the Object a polished Plate of
Steel, the Interstices or Pores being less, it appears more luminous and
whitish; which may give us some faint, but sure, Light, how this Color is
made. The Intermediate Colors are made by the Mixture and Demixture of those
Extremes; whence, out of the Degrees of their partaking those, Contrary or
Subcontrary Qualities are framed, as Blue, Green, Yellow, and all other
Colors. Nor is this Degree, constituting each of those Species, Unknowable. A
Picture-drawer can tell us what Proportion of his Paint of such a Color he
adds to that of another Color, to make what Third Color he pleases. We see
then, that the Secondary Quality of Color, may come within the Compass of our
Knowledge. Nor do I see why the rest of them may not become equally
Intelligible, did we seriously set our Reflex Thoughts on work to study them;
especially Experimental Knowledge assisting, by hinting to us such Matters of
Fact as give Light to our Reason, (when furnished with, and attentive to, true
Natural Principles) how it may reduce those Qualities unto their Proper Causes,
which is the only Work of Science.

REFLECTION Eighteenth, ON The 4th and 5th CHAPTERS.
1. I Come now to a nearer view of the 4th Chapter, Of the Reality of
Knowledge, the main point in which the whole Doctrine of the Ideists is
concerned. The State of the Question.
To State it rightly, I do not doubt (as I have expressed my self formerly) but
that the Ideists have many true Notions of the Things; that is, the Things
themselves in their Minds, after a Natural Manner, as well as their Opposers
have, notwithstanding their ill Speculation; and thence oftentimes discourse
right; for the same Reason that, though some Philosophers held that the Eye sees
per Emissionem, others per Receptionem Radiorum, yet they naturally saw both a
like, however their Speculative thoughts, disfer'd about the manner how Seeing
was made. Wherefore the true State of the Question is, whether they can have
any Real Knowledge of the things in Nature, according to the Principles of the
Ideists; or, by their putting our Notions, which are the Ground and Materials of
our Knowledge, to be only Likenesses, Appearances, Similitudes, Resemblances,
Pourtraitures, or Pictures of the Things, (which are the names they give them)
and not the Things themselves in our minds: For, if they can have no Real
Knowledge, or Knowledge of the Thing, by such merely representing Ideas, then
it must be said that those Ideas, being confessedly the First and only
Materials of their Knowledge, the Ideists will become oftentimes liable to
deviate from Nature, and fall into Error by adhering to such Groundless
Principles, as is the Substituting very often Empty Resemblances, or Fancies,
for the Things themselves; nor can they ever be able to give a Solid Account by
their Principles, that they know any thing.

2. Now, it seems to me (though I should wave those many pregnant Arguments
brought against them, in my How we know the Things by means of Ideas,
Inexplicable.
three first Preliminaries) that the very Position of the Ideists, does decide
the Question, and confute themselves. For, if we may trust their words, they
agree that we know the Things as well as the Ideas, and only differ in the
manner how: Of which Mr. L. tell us here 3. It Is Evident the mind knows not
Things immediately, but only by the Intervention of the Ideas it has of them.
Whence I much fear that by Ideas he means Phantasms, or Material Pictures in
the Imagination; by whose Intervention it is indeed confessed we know. For,
otherwise, it is far from Evident, that we know them by means of those
Spiritual Conceptions, we call Notions; since we bring many close Arguments,
fetched from the Nature of the Thing, to prove that there is perfect Evidence of
the Contrary: For, those Ideas or Notions being held and shown by us, to be the
Things in our Mind, their very being there, or in a Knowing Power, is to be
known: Nor can they be held by us to be the means to know themselves; for, so
the same would be the Means and End both, which is a Contradiction. But, let us
consider his words. The mind, he says, knows the Things by the Intervention of
Ideas. The Question then is what the Idea does, and what the word
[Intervention] means. Does the Mind see the Thing without, by sending out her
Rays of Knowledge to it? This cannot be said, in regard all the Acts of
Knowledge which the Mind has, are Immanent ones, and are received in that which
produced them, as in their only Subject. Does then the Thing that is without,
send its beams by the Ideas, as by a kind of Spiritual Optick-glass, to which
the mind lays her Intellectual Eye? Neither can this be said, for the Mind
could see or know the Thing it self were it in it, else how could it know the
Ideas? Rather, were the Thing in the Understanding, it could not but be known,
whether there were any Similitude, besides, in it, or no. It may be said that
the Mind knows the Thing by the Idea because it is a Picture or Similitude that
represents it. But I way walk in a Gallery, and see a Hundred Pictures in it of
Men, and many other Things in Nature; and yet not know one jot the better, any
one of the Things represented, unless I had know them formerly, though Apelles
himself had drawn them. I may remember them again, indeed, if I had known them
before; which cannot be said in our case, because those Ideas of theirs are to
give them the First Knowledge of the Thing.

3. Being thus at a loss to explicate [Intervention] or to know The Ideists
must be forced to grant that the Thing known is in the Mind.
what It, or the Idea or Representation serves for, we will reflect next upon
the Word [know] which Mr. Lock applies (though not so immediately, yet)
indifferently, to the Thing and to the Idea. Now, if this be so, and that to to
be known agrees to them both; then, as the Idea is in the Mind when it is
known, so the Thing, when known, should be in the Mind too, which is our very
Position, thought by the Ideists so Paradoxical, and yet here forcibly admitted
by themselves. And, if neither the Idea brings the Thing into the Knowing
Power, or (which is the same) into the Mind; nor the Mind, or Knowing Power
goes out of the Soul to it, I know not how they can pretend to show how the
Knowing Power, and the Thing known, can ever come to meet, as they must when
ever an Act of Knowledge is made. It Is to no purpose then, to allege that the
Thing comes into the mind, or is brought thither by means of the Idea; for, if
it comes or is brought thither, let it be by what means it will, it is most
incontestably Evident that, after it is come or brought thither, it is there.
Nor can all the Wit of Man avoid this Consequence, unless plain words must lose
their Signification. Wherefore Mr. L. in pursuance of his own Principles should
not have said that the Mind does not know Things immediately, but by means of
the Ideas; but, that it does not know them at all, neither mediately nor
immediately; for if the Thing be in the Knowledge at all, they must be in the
Mind, where only the Knowledge is; which comes over (thus far) to our Position.

4. It must be confessed, that Mr. Lock has here,. 3. put the Objection
against the Ideists as strongly, and home, The Necessity of the Thing's being
in our Mind, farther enforced.
as it is possible: But I must still persist, and avow, that neither his own
excellent Wit, (which, had he light on right Principles, could reach to any
thing that is within the Compass of Possibility,) nor all the World joining in
his Assistance, can clear that Objection, so as to satisfy any Intelligent
Man, who is true to his Reason guiding it self (as it ought) by Connection of
Terms, and not by Fancy; nor show, that by his Ideas any Knowledge at all of
the Thing can be possibly had. First, He alleges the Agreement or Conformity
of the Things with his Simple Ideas. And I reply, that he cannot, by the
Principles of the Ideists, show that the Things do agree or disagree with his
Simple Ideas at all. To demonstrate which, I argue thus: Ere he can know that
the Representation and the Thing represented do agree, Common Sense tells us,
he must have both the Idea and the Thing in his Comparing Power, that is, in
his Mind; that so he may take a View of both of them, and consider them in
order to one another; and, by doing this, see whether the one does truly
resemble the other, or no. But, this is directly against the Principles of the
Ideists, who do not allow that the Thing can be in the Mind, but the Idea only.
Next, he alleges, that his Complex Ideas are Archetypes; and not Conformable
to the Things, as the others were, but to themselves only; and, therefore, he
says, they cannot lead us into Error, because they cannot but represent
themselves. I pass by the Oddness of the Position, that the Idea, which is a
Picture, should be a Picture of it self, or represent it self: I only note,
that this Allegation which should clear the Point, quite loses it, and gives it
up. For, the Question is, whether his Ideas do give us the Knowledge of the
Things in Nature; and it is evident, and confessed they cannot give us this
Knowledge of them, but by representing them: Now, he tells us, that his Complex
Ideas are not Copies of the Things, nor represent them, but themselves only.
Whence is evidently concluded, that we are never the nearer to the Knowing of
Things by them; no, not obliquely, and at Second hand, or by the Intervention
of those Ideas, or Similitudes representing them, as was pretended formerly.
Whence, for any thing he has produced, we may justly doubt whether such Ideas
are not Whimsical Fancies, without any Reality at all; since he will not allow
them even that slightest Relation to the Things, of so much as representing
them. But, which is much worse, he affirms,. 5. that those Ideas themselves are
considered as the Archetypes; and the Things no otherwise regarded, but as they
are conformable to them. Now, this seems to me a strange way of proving the
Reality of our Knowledge, by Ideas, to affirm, that we are not to regard the
Things, but as conformable to our Ideas. Is not this to make Philosophy not the
Knowledge of Things, but of Ideas only; and to pretend, that the Thing must
only be held True, if it be Conformable to our Ideas? He might as well have
said Fancies; for, he expressly says, these Complex Ideas are made by the Mind,
and not taken from the Thing, nor like it: And, whatever is neither the Res,
nor so much as like it, can neither have Reality, nor Show of Reality; and
therefore, must be a mere Fancy. Now, these Complex Ideas reach much farther
than all the others do; viz. to Modes, Substances and Relations; as is seen,
Book 1. Chap. 12. So that this Discourse of his destroys the Reality of our
Knowledge in almost all the Things we are to know. He will, perhaps, say, those
Complex Ideas are the Effects of certain Powers to Cause them, found in the
Thing; and, by this Means they bring the Things, as being their Causes, into
their Mind. But the Argument returns still with the same Force; for, if they
bring the Thing into the Mind, then the Thing is in the Mind when it is brought
thither. Add, that this makes them Resemblances of the Thing, which he denies;
for, the Effect, being a Participation of the Cause, must necessarily resemble
it; especially, if it be a Natural Effect. Nor can he say they make us know the
Thing, because they are made up of Simple ones: For, as the Simple Ideas only
made us know the Thing by representing it, so these other not representing It,
have lost the Power of making us know it at all. So that, let them turn which
way they will, either the Thing is never brought into the Knowledge, or the
Mind; and then it can never be known: Or, it is brought thither, and then it
must be there; which is our Position, and denied by the Ideists.

5. I have shown above, that all Mathematical Knowledges, though they are never
so abstractedly expressed, are Mathematical and Moral Knowledges are grounded
on the Thing in the Mind.
grounded on the Thing, or on Body; and Moral ones, (which two he here
mentions,) on the Nature of Man, or Reason; which, I suppose, none will say are
Nothings; and, therefore, they are, both of them, true Knowledge of the Thing,
considered in part, or inadequately.

6. In his 8th Section, he defends himself for having so little regard (as it
may seem) to the Real Existence of All Essential Predicates, and Accidental
ones too, are truly the Thing, and the whole Thing, implied consusedly.
Things. I discourse thus: We have more Real Notions of the Thing, than barely
Existence; for, every Notion that belongs to the Line of Thing or Substance,
whether Inferior or Superior; nay, every Mode or Accident that does belong, or
ever did belong to the Thing, either Intrinsecally or Extrinsecally, are all of
them Real; so that he needs not be sollicitous any should object, that his
Ideas have no Reality in them, because he regards not their Existence only.
And, were such an Objection made, or had it any force, he might also reply,
that in every part of his Discourse, he does regard Existence, and cannot do
otherwise; unless any Objecter should be so weak as to allege, that what
exists in the Mind, does not exist at all. For, if he had once his Notions from
the Thing, they would be still the Thing in the Mind, and Real, though the
Individual Objects, whence they were taken, be perished. Nay, more; those
Things would have a Better, a more Durable, and more Noble Existence in the
Mind, than they had in Nature. I say, [those Things;] not fearing that any
should object, that Thing signifies the whole; which may seem contrary to my
former Doctrine, that the Thing is only in the Mind by Inadequate Notions, or
in part. For, though the Formal Conception be only of some Quality of it,
expressly and distinctly, yet it implies or connotates the Knowledge of the
whole Thing confusedly; it being most clearly demonstrable in Metaphysics,
that there are no Actual Parts in any Compound whatever: So that it is still the
whole Thing that is known, though only a Part (as it were) of it be known
distinctly. Upon this Evident Principle, that there are no Actual Parts, is
grounded that Solid and most approved Maxim, that Actions and Passions are of
the Suppositum, or Individual Thing. Thus, when the Hand strikes or wounds a
Man, it is truly said, that the Man (which signifies the whole Thing) did it,
and is answerable for it; and, if he kills the Person he struck, the whole Man
will be hanged for it, though the Hand only, and not the Legs, Head, Neck, etc.
gave the Blow. Now, this could neither be said with Truth, nor that Punishment
be inflicted by Justice, if the Word [Hand] did not signify, and truly were
the whole Man, according to his Faculty of Handling or Striking, or according
to that Part which immediately did that Action. The self-same is to be said,
and for the self-same Reason, of our Inadequate Notions; and, that each of them
implies, or connotates (that is, materially and entitatively is) the whole
Thing, though formally or precisely but a Part of it, as it were; or the Thing
according to such a particular Considerability, found in it, or Identify'd with
it. Whoever shall weigh attentively the Force and Coherence of this Discourse,
will clearly discern how entirely all our Philosophy is built on the Things,
and is the Knowledge of them; and how far the Ideists fall short of having that
Solid Ground for the Basis of their Discourses: But, especially, this Tenet,
which puts their Complex Ideas not only not to be the Thing, (which it must be
some Way, or to some degree or other, if it be not a mere Fancy,) but, not to
be so much as a Copy or Resemblance of it, which (as was said) is the slightest
and least Relation it can possibly have to it.

7. I would have none think, that, by this Discourse I deny Complex Notions, or
Ideas. The Ten Common Heads That our Complex Notions are Regular, and well
grounded; Mr. L's, not so.
are the Simpler ones; which when we divide by Differences, each Inferior Genus
and Species, (they being made up of the Superior Notions, and those
Differences,) are Complex Notions, as their very Definitions tell us. Whence
Mr. Locke's Complex Idea of Murder, Sacrilege, or whatever else they be, are
given us by the same Method. And, the difference between him and me in this
Point, is this; that we complicate our Ideas regularly, and according to the
exact Rules of Art; and he seems to make his voluntarily, or else by Reflection
on his own Interior, and what he experiences in himself; which I take to be a
very fallacious way, because very few can distinguish well between a Phantasm
in the Imagination, which is a Material Faculty in us; and a Notion, which is
Spiritual, though they be both of them Interior, or within us. To show the
Difference between which, I have given a short Hint in my Method, Book 1. Less.
2.. 24. and much more here, in my Preface.

8. It is very hard, when two Writers go upon different Principles, not to
mistake now and then one the others In what manner we compound such Notions.
Meaning; and I would be loath to wrong so Ingenuous an Author. Sometimes he
seems to mean no more by his Complex Ideas, but either those Compound Notions
which are made up of the Simpler Notions of the Genus and Difference, as we
descend downwards in the same Line; or else, of those in diverse Lines; and, I
am sure, let him discourse them as he will, they can be compounded of nothing
else; those Common Heads comprizing all the Natural Notions we can have. It is
no less certain too, that we can put together (as he says) Simple Notions as we
please, which we have not observed thus put together in things that actually
exist. But then we must be wary, while we do this, that our Reason joins them
by seeing them Consistent and Compossible: For, our Fancy will put together
Ideas which are utterly Repugnant to one another, and are altogether
Chimerical. Now, if the Notions, thus joined by us, be Consistent, the Nature
or Thing supposed to be the Ground of those Notions is possible to be; which
being the Notion of Ens, hence they are conceived as a kind of Intellectual
Entity, created (as it were) by the Mind, and thence have an Intelligibility,
which is a Property of Ens (Non-Entities and Chimaeras being Unintelligible)
and we can have a kind of Counterfeit, or Artificial, Notion of them as
Entities, though such a thing never existed in the World that we know of; though, I
believe, 'tit hard to conceive, that we can frame a Complex Notion of a Nature
that is Capable to be, but it exists somewhere in the Universality of
Creatures, here, or elsewhere. How the Mind, using the Fancy, can do this,
cannot, I think, be better elucidated, than by reflecting on what those, who
write of the Excellency of Poesy and Poets, use to say in Commendation of
those Daedalean Artists. They tell us that a Poet has that Name from the Greek
Noun (...), which signifies A Maker. The Reason they give for this Appellation
is, that whereas other Artists have their Materials given to their Hands to
work upon, by shaping it into an Artificial Form; the Poet alone is the Maker
as well of his Matter, as the Contriver of its Form. So that the Ideas he has
in his Head of his Heroes, his Lovers, his Ladies, and of Virtuous Persons, are
indeed (as Mr. Lock calls his) Archetypes, and regard not whether such
Incomparable Patterns he has invented did ever exist in Nature, or no; nor is
it to his purpose. Yet still (as Mr. Lock says well) that his Complex Ideas
are made of Simple ones, so (by the leave of those Self-magnifiers) the Poet
could never have had those Excellent Ideas of his Heroes, or their great
Actions, had he not been pre-imbu'd with Natural Notions; which he joins
together ingeniously, and exalts them to a high Pitch, so to make them
Exemplars for others to imitate. Rather, he only adds Superlative or
Extraordinary Degrees to what he finds in Nature. Whence it is manifest, he
regards not what is, but what should be; quite contrary to the Duty of a
Philosopher, who is to take his Complex Notions from Things, just as he finds
them complicated in Nature, and then discourse upon them by his Reason; and not
to stand coining new Complex Ideas which Nature never gave him. What therefore
I most dislike here in Mr. Lock is, that he seems not to reflect on what it is
which makes some Ideas or Notions more Simple than others, viz. Their being
more Abstracted or Universal; for this frees them from the Partnership of
more-compounded Differences, and the Complexion of Multitudes of Accidents;
(which, still, as they descend lower, are requisite to distinguish the Kinds of
Things;) by which means they become more Simple or less compounded; whence, the
Supreme Heads of the Ten Predicaments are the Simplest Notions of all others,
except that of Existence. Did Mr. Lock rate the Simplicity and Complexion of
his Ideas from this certain and well-grounded Rule, there might an easy
Accommodation be made between his Doctrine and mine as to this Particular. But
his Zeal against the Cobweb Schemes some Modern Schoolmen had woven,
transported him to ravel that Excellent Frame of Notions, which both Nature and
Art had given us; and, (as Cartesius and others have done) to model all
Philosophy upon a new, though less Solid, or rather far from Solid, Foundation.

9. That I may say as much as I can in behalf of the Ideists, it may be
alleged, that they find by Experience Things All Pleas fail the Ideists,
unless they perfectly distinguish Phantasms from Notions.
are as their Ideas do represent them, and that they Succeed as we by means of
our Ideas do Forecast them: Therefore Real Knowledge may be had by means of
Ideas. I answer, First, That this Agreement they have between what is in the
Mind and out of it, would equally, nay better, be explicated, were the Things
themselves in the Mind, and not the Ideas; and, therefore, it can be no
Argument for the Reality of their Knowledge by Ideas only. Besides, I deny that
when their Ideas are not true Natural Notions but Fancies, they experience
them, or any Effect of them; as in Vacuum, or Duration before or after the
World. Secondly, I answer, That Experience only helps them by giving them
Knowledge; and Knowledge, according to them, can only be had by means of Ideas;
wherefore they must either prove, by other Grounds, that Similitudes can give
us Knowledge of the Things, or they do petere Principium, beg the Question, and
prove idem per idem. For, if mere Representations can give us no true
Knowledge, Experience, which only assists us by giving us Ideas, is quite
thrown out of doors, and may all be Fantastical. All is wrong and falls short,
if the First Ground of our Knowledge be Incompetent and Insignificant. Besides,
Experience gives us both Phantasms, which are Material Representations; and our
Notions too, which are Spiritual; but Experience is not duly qualified to tell
us which is the one, and which is the other; though this be of the highest
Concern in our Case: All it can do is to inform us, that we are affected by
some Agent working on our Senses. Nay, of the two, it more inclines us to
embrace Phantasms for Notions; for those do make upon us the more Sensible
Impression, and cause a more lively Representation. To distinguish perfectly
between this False and True Ground of Knowledge, is of the most weighty
Importance of all other Points of Philosophy whatsoever; and yet I must
complain, that not the least Care (as far as I have observed) is taken any
where in this Treatise to distinguish them; and particularly, not in this
Chapter, which had been the proper Place to treat of that Subject: But, on the
contrary, (as I have shown above) they are carelessly Confounded. And I must
declare, that without settling this Point well, we can never have any Certainty
what Knowledge is Real, what Fantastic: Or, when we do truly know, when only
seem to know: But, there is not a Word here to that purpose.

10. As for the Monsters and Changelings here spoken of, I think Philosophers
should have nothing to do with Odd Miscarriages of Nature ought not to shock
Natural Principles.
Lusus Naturae, or (...), which are besides the ordinary Course of Nature; but
with the Common Course of Causes, or Nature it self. My Judgment is, too, that
People should be very wary in Killing any Monsters that approach to Humane
shape; and, that it were fitter there should be Hospitalls to breed them, till
perfect Observations were made concerning them. The Novelty of the sight, would
invite Spectators, and bear their Charges: Unless perhaps there may be danger,
lest the Imaginations of the Apprehensive Sex, who see such Uncouth Shapes, or
hear frequent Talk of them, should, by that occasion, breed more of them. What
concerns us is to look to our Principles, and not to be misled from them, by
reflecting on such odd preternatural Productions; as I must think Mr. Lock is,
when he thinks Changelings to be something between a Man and a Beast. The
Division of Animal into Rational and Irrational is made by such Differences as
are perfectly Contradictory to one another; between which there can no more be
any Third or Middle, than there can be a Medium between is and is not. If then
that odd Birth be Rational, let the shape be as Distorted as it will, it is
truly a Man; if it be not, let it look never so like a Man, it is a Brute. When
it is the one, when the other, may hap in some odd cases to be Doubtful; and
then it belongs to the Prudence of Intelligent Men to decide it; or, if they
cannot, it becomes us in Christian Prudence to act warily. Indeed, if the
Definition of Man, viz. Rational Animal, be questionable, we shall (as I said
above) be at a great Loss to know our own Kind; which would be but a melancholy
Business. And, if we forego our Principles, distinguishing between Corporeal
and Spiritual Natures, we may perhaps grow in time no wiser than the Common
People amongst the Portugueses in Brazil, who conceit the Apes and Monkies
there have as much Wit as themselves have, and could speak well enough too if
they would; but that, out of a deep Reach of Policy, they counterfeit
themselves dumb, and not to understand the Language, lest they should be forced
to work.

Corollary I. From this Discourse, and the Evident Grounds of it, all
possibility of Vacuum is clearly confuted. Hence, no Vacuum.
For, if the Idea or Notion of Space be only an Inadequate Conception of Body,
whence it is evidently taken, or Body conceived according to such a Mode of it;
then to put Space without Body, or where there is no Body, is a perfect
Contradiction. Corallery II. Hence also, though the Cartesians could demonstrate
there are Innate Ideas, (which I judge impossible) The Cartesians are concluded
against by J. S. as well as other Ideists, or rather more.
yet, unless they declare and prove, by their Principles, that those Ideas are
the things themselves in our Understanding, and not Resemblances only, the
same Arguments I have used against others will have equal, or rather a far
greater Force against them; and conclude, that they cannot, by their
Principles, have Knowledge of any Thing, but that they know Nothing. And, how
they should pretend they are the Things themselves, if they do not so much as
allow them to be taken from the Things, is altogether Inconceivable.

11. Concerning Truth in General, of which Mr. Lock treats in his 5th Chapter,
no more can be said (speaking All Truth consists in Joining or Separating
Partial Conceptions of the Things; and not in Joining or Separating Ideas.
of Natural Truths) but that it is, the Things Existing such in our Minds as
they exist in themselves. For, this put, our Minds will be conformable to the
Things, whose Metaphysical Verity fixes them to be what they are, or (if we
speak of them as affected with any Mode) as they are: Whence our Judgments
concerning them, being thus grounded, cannot but be True. What Mr. L.'s Joining
or Separating of Signs, etc. has to do with Truth, is beyond my Skill to
comprehend; for Signs are no more Truth, than the Bush at the Door is the Wine
in the Cellar. I have demonstrated over and over, that Ideas, which he makes
here one sort of Signs, and are mere Similitudes, can never give us Knowledge
of Things; much less can Truth, which is the Object of Knowledge, consist in
conjoining or separating them; and, least of all, can Truth consist in the
Joining or Separating the other sorts of Signs, viz. of Words without the Ideas
or Notions; for, thus considered, they are no more but Sounds or Characters. To
discourse this Point from its Fundamental Ground, and declare it Literally: The
Metaphysical Verity of the Thing, which, put into a Proposition, predicates the
whole Thing (or Mode) of it self, and affirms that the Thing is what it is,
gives us our First Truths, or First Principles. And all other Truths consists
in this, that Inadequate, or Partial Notions or Conceptions of the Thing,
either as to what is Intrinsecal or Extrinsecal to it, are predicated either of
the Thing as in it self, that is, according to the Line of Substance, which are
called Essential Predicates; as, when we say, Petrus est Animal; or, as it is
affected with some Mode consistent in the same Subject; as when we say, Petrus
est Albus, Pater, Locatus, Galeatus, Album est Dulce, etc. and it is impossible
there can be any more sorts of Formal Truths but these two: For all Predication
is made by some kind of Identification, as is plainly signified by the Copula
[is,] and there cannot possibly be any other sorts of Identification, but
either in the whole, or not in the whole; that is, in part, or according to
Partial Conceptions of the same Thing; nor can there be any Identification at
all of Ideas; Mr. Lock confessing, that each of them is what it self is, and
no other.

12. I take it to be a strange kind of Catechresis to make two sorts of Truth,
Montal and Verbal, and we may with as The Distinction of Truth into Mental and
Verbal Extravagant, and the Parts of it Coincident.
good Sense say, that a Tavern has two sorts of Wine; one in the Cellar, the
other in the Bush at the Door; for Words are good for nothing in the World but
merely and purely to Signify: So that when we say a Man speaks True, the Sense
of those Words can be only This, that the Proposition he speaks does signify
such a Thought or Judgment in his Mind as is really Conformable to the Thing he
thought or spoke of: And I wonder this Great Man can imagine that, in our more
Complex Ideas, we put the Name for the Idea it self; for then that Name would
signify Nothing at all, if neither the Thing nor the Idea be signified by it,
as he seems to hold. Again, Words differ from mere Sounds in this, that they
have some Sense or Meaning in them, and Meanings are the very Notions we have
in our Minds: Wherefore the Parts of this Distinction of his would be
coincident, because all Verbal Truths (were the Expression proper) would
necessarily be Mental ones; and Mr. Lock seems to say the same, 8. where he
makes those Truths which are barely Nominal to be Chimerical. I grant too, that
Truths may be distinguished, according to their several Subjects, into Moral,
Physical, Metaphysical, etc. But I must severely reflect on his describing
Moral Truths, 11. to be the Speaking Things according to the Persuasion of our
own Minds, though the Proposition we speak does not agree to the Reality of
Things: For, since it is most Evidently known, that the Persuasions of Men's
Minds not only may, but do frequently contradict one another; by this
Definition of Moral Truth both Sides of the Contradiction may be True; which
destroys Truth by confounding it with Falsehood; and makes the Art of
Distinguishing ridiculous, by making Truth a Genus to some sort of Falsehood, or
not-Truth to be one kind of Truth. It Is a very dangerous thing in Philosophy to
bring Distinctions, unless each Member of the Notion divided includes the
Notion of the Genus. They were invented for clearing Truth; but, if ill made,
or ill-manag'd, nothing in the World breeds greater Error and Confusion.
Corruption optimi pessima.

REFLECTION Nineteenth, ON The 6th, 7th, and 8th CHAPTERS.
1. BY what has been delivered in my foregoing Reflection, my Notes upon his 6th
Chapter [Of Universal Propositions, their Truth and Certainty] will be
Universal Propositions in the Mind are easily Knowable Antecedently to Words.
easily understood. But, I am to premise, First, That the Question is not here,
what proves the Truth of such Propositions, which is the work of Logic; but,
whether there can be any Truth in them, or Certainty of them at all, or no.
Secondly, That the Formal Truth of Propositions can only be in the Mind; or,
that Mental Propositions only are capable of Truth or Falslhood; though Words be
needful to signify them: And, therefore, I must deny that The Consideration of
Words is a necessary part of the Treatise of Knowledge; meaning by that word,
Philosophical Knowledge, as our Circumstance determine us. Let Logicians but
take care that the Words be Univocal, and not Equivocal, or double sensed, and
all else that can be considered to belong to Truth, is to be looked for in the
Mind, and can be no where else. Hence, I cannot admit his Distinction of
Certainty of Truth, and Certainty of Knowledge in any other sense than that
Knowledge is the Act, and Truth the only Object of that Act; since nothing can
be known to be what is not; nor known to be True, which is not True. The
Generical Notion [Certainty,] should first have been explicated, ere those two
sorts of it had been defined; otherwise both those Definitions must necessarily
remain Unintelligible. I shall presume that I have in my METHOD shown from its
Grounds what Certainty is, viz. The Determination of our Understanding, or
Judging Power by the Object's actuating it, or being actually in it as it is in
its self. With which, what his putting together of Words in Verbal Propositions
has to do, surpasses my understanding. And, it is as hard to conceive, that
General Truths can never be well made known, and are very Seldom apprehended,
but as conceived and expressed in Words. That General Truths cannot be made
known to others without Words, is in a manner, as Evident as it is that we
cannot see one another Thoughts; nor is this peculiar to General Truths, for
scarcely can Particular ones be made known any other way: But, that they cannot
be known or apprehended by our selves (which seems here to be his meaning) but
as conceived and expressed in Words, is so far from Evident, that the Contrary
is such; for, it is impossible to express them in Words, unless we do first
apprehend and conceive them in our Thoughts; and were not this so, all the
while we use Words in speaking of General Truths, we should do nothing but talk
of we know not what: For, our Thoughts and Apprehensions are ex Natura rei,
presupposed to the Words by which we express them; and, to do otherwise is to
let our Tongue run before our Wit. Whence we account them silly and Senseless
people, and Perverters of Nature, who make use of Words before they know their
Meaning.

2. I have shown above, that it is not necessary to our being Certain of any
Proposition that we know the precise It Is not necessary to know the precise
Bounds and Extent of the Species.
bounds and Extent of the Species it stands for; but that it is sufficient to
know it in part Distinctly; and the rest of it, or the whole, Confusedly;
provided that part of it, which we know is sufficient to distinguish it from
all other Species: And, were not this so, it would follow that we never could
know the Truth of any Universal Proposition whatever; especially when we
discourse of the Species Infima, which requires a Complexion of very many
Accidents, whose precise Number and Bounds are utterly unknowable by us. A
Position which makes Logic useless; scarce any Conclusion being deducible from
Premises, unless one of them be an Universal; and quite destroys all Science
which is employed about Universal or General Truths. He instances in Man and
Gold, and judges that, for want of knowing the Extent of their Species, it is
impossible with any Certainty to affirm that all Men are Rational, or all Gold
yellow. We cannot indeed know this by considering every Individual Man by the
poll: But, if by the word [Man] we mean no more but a Rational Animal, it is so
far from Impossible to know, and affirm that All Men are Rational, that it is
Impossible not to know it. And, were it a proper place to make good that
Definition here, I could demonstrate that it does agree to Man, and can agree
to nothing else; and therefore that Definition is True and Adequate: Nor can
the contrary be sustaind any other way, but by unacquainting us with our selves
and our own Kind; and by jumbling together these Species, which are
distinguished by Contradictory Differences, and Confounding the vastly-Distinct
Natures and Properties, of Corporeal and Spiritual Beings. As for the Species
of Gold, Yellowness (which he instances in) is not Essential to it, as
Rationality is to Man; as being but one of those Accidents, by which we
distinguish it from other Species of Minerals; and I have hinted some other
formerly, which are more Intrinsecal and Essential to it than its Color.
Again, we are moreover Certain by manifest and daily experience, and by the
constant and Common Practice of the World, that Mankind is acquainted with enough
of those Accidents to distinguish it. One bespeaks a Golden Cup, and the
Goldsmith makes it for him: Nor was it ever heard that any of this Trade, did
hope to Cozen a Sensible Man, by obtruding upon the Buyer Brass, or any other
Metal, for Gold; or, if he did, that Goldsmith's-Hall could not distinguish
it: Nay, if it be but a little alloyd, there are ways to find it out; which
shows that Mankind is furnished with means enough, to distinguish Gold from other
Metals, and for the same reason other things also; though the Extent of all the
Species, and their precise bounds, be not exactly known to those Speculaters,
who will needs forgo their Natural Knowledge of Things to pursue Scrupulous
Fancies: which, let loose to fly at rovers, are too hard for their Reason
Unestablish'd by Principles.

3. Hence an Answer is given to Mr. Locke's Acute Difficulty, viz. That it is
impossible for us to know that this or Unnecessary Knowledge not to be coveted,
nor the Want of it complained of.
that Quality, or Idea, has a necessary Connection with a Real Essence, of which
we have no Idea at all; that is, (according to his Principles,) no Knowledge.
For, since a Real Essence is that which constitutes such a kind of Ens, or
Species; and what distinguishes an Entity or Species from all others, does also
make it this, or that Species; that is, does constitute it; it follows, that,
since, by my Discourse here, we have such a Degree of Knowledge of that kind of
Ens called Gold, as to distinguish it from all others, we have a Sufficient and
True (though not an Adequate and Distinct) Knowledge of its Essence too, that
constitutes it such a kind of Ens. Indeed, if nothing will content us but
Superfluous Knowledge, for Curiosity sake, of each particular Mode that belongs
to that Essence, it is no wonder if we labor in vain; and, by over-straining to
go beyond our selves in this State, fall short of our Aim. I must confess, that
it would concern us much, as we are, to know whether there be any Quality,
which we do not yet know in the Thing, inconsistent with those we do know; for,
this would blunder our Notion of it, and make it Chimerical. But, as it is
impossible Creative Wisdom should lay Grounds for Contradiction; so, in case
those Qualities be all Consistent, where is the harm not to know them? And,
since Consistency implies some kind of Agreement or Connectedness of the one
with the others, who knows how far their Connection and Dependence may be known
in time, if right Principles were taken, and pursued? It Is a strange
dis-satisfy'd Humor in us, to complain we know not all, when we know enough: I
know no Man is more free from this Fault than Mr. Lock, or declares more
against it formerly. What I dislike in him in this Point is, that, by his too
much Introversion, he forsakes Nature; and, by his too nice Speculation of his
Ideas, hazards to breed a Conceit in his Readers, that they know less than they
really do; and, that we are not able to attain half that Knowledge we, in
reality, may arrive to; which, though contrary to his Intention, must needs
incline Men to be Scepticks as to Essences and Substances.

4. The 7th Chapter, [of Maxims,] is admirably Clear, and, in the greatest part
of it, very Solid; abating his Proceeding The Nature and Use of General Maxims,
mistaken by Mr. Lock.
upon Ideas, and applying his Discourses to his former Hypothesis; to which Mr.
Lock was obliged, that all the Parts of his Work might be woven of the same
Piece, and Consonant to one another. He explicates very well, how they are
Self-evident: Yet, though they be such, he has three Exceptions against them; 1.
As not being First known; 2. As, in a manner, Useless; and 3. Dangerous. He
proves the First, because Particulars are known before Universals. I understand
him not. Knowledge may be either considered, as instilled by insensible
Degrees, into Infants, or the Ruder Sort; or, as Reducible to the clearest
Grounds, by Men of Art. Now, I cannot think that Mr. Lock imagins, that we, or
any Man, hold that Maxims were meant for Infants, or the Vulgar; or, that
either of them ought to be taught General Principles at first, and by them
attain to Particular Knowledges; or, that the Users of Maxims ever intended
them for that end. Wherefore, all his Discourses to prove them not to be
First-known, may be allowed to have their full Force, and yet hurt no body,
being wronglevell'd. The Point then is, how they may avail Artists, or
Speculators: And this leads to his Second Exception, their pretended
Uselesness; which he endeavors to show, by alleging, that it is as Evident as
any Maxim whatever, that the same Idea, is the same Idea, and no other; v. g.
that the Idea of Yellow is the Idea of Yellow, and not of Blue; and, therefore,
that Maxims serve to little purpose, and are also Innumerable. Now, I grant,
indeed, that all such particular Propositions may be Self-evident, and Truths;
as also, that Truths of this kind, which express the Metaphysical Verity and
Unity of every Thing, and of every Mode of Thing, are Innumerable. But, I do
not think that any Man living thought those to have the Usefulness of Maxims or
Principles, which are always General, or Universal: For, the Notion of
[Principles] super-adds to their being Truths, and Self-evident, that they
influence many other Truths that are (as it were) under them; which cannot be
said, or thought, of those particular Propositions. For example; Should any one
go about to refund the Verity of this Truth, Yellow is Yellow, and not Blue,
into this, because White is White, and not Black, it would look more like a
Similitude, than a Reason; and be ridiculous to allege the one to be the Cause
of the other; because Yellow is not White; nor has the Notion of the one any
Influence upon, nor any thing to do with the Notion of the other; in regard
both of them stand upon the same Bottom, or on the same Level. But, should any
Sceptick ask why the Idea of Yellow is the Idea of Yellow? though it is foolish to
ask it, yet, it would not look so extravagant to answer, because Every thing is
what it is: And, I believe, Nature would force Mr. Lock, or any other to give
this for his Reason. In like manner, should he ask why a Man is a Man? It would
look preter-natural to answer, because a Tree is a Tree, Whereas, it would look
very natural to answer, because Every Thing is it Self, or, is what it is.
Which shows to an Acute Reflecter, that this Universal has some kind of
Influence upon the Others, which their Fellow-Particulars had not. And, the
Reason is, because Universals do engage for all the Particulars under them;
whereas, one Particular owes not this Duty to another Particular, to which it
has no such Real Relation as the Notion of an Universal has in the Mind to its
Particulars. And, Who sees not, that, from this Proposition, Every Man is
Rational, it follows, that Peter, John, and each particular Man, is Rational?
But, from this, that Peter, and a few other Particulars, are Rational, it does
not follow, that Every Man is Rational: Wnich shows, that (as was now said) the
Truth of the Universal engages for the Truth of all Particulars, and not
vice-versa; nor one of them for another.

5. Another Reason for the Usefulness of Universal Maxims, and, why Artists use
to reduce the Truth of Particulars The Terms of General Maxims Clearer than
those of Particular Propositions.
to them, is, because they are more Self-Evident than the Particular Identicals
are. This Position looks something odd; for, since Self-Evidence is the highest
Evidence that can be, to put Degrees of Self-evidence, is to say, there can be
something Higher than the Highest; which looks like a Bull. To clear this
Point, I discourse thus: In all Self-evident Propositions whatever, the Terms
are so closely Connected, (being, indeed, the same,) that no Middle Term can
come between them, so to prove them Connected, or make them Evident; wherefore,
they must either not be Evident at all, (which were shameless to say,) or they
must be Evident of themselves; that is, Self-evident. And, in this regard, or
in the Closest Connection or Identity of their Terms, all Self-evident
Propositions are Equally such. But, there is another kind of Evidence arising
out of the Greater Clearness of the Terms themselves. Now, it has been shown
formerly, that all Clearness of our Notions springs out of their Simplicity,
and Uncompoundedness; and all Obscurity out of their Composition, which breeds
Confusion: As also, that all General Notions are more Simple, and consequently,
more clear than the Particulars are. Whence follows, that the Proposition,
which has more-general Terms in it, (such as all General Maxims are,) do gain
hence a greater Degree of Evidence, and are more Undeniable. For example; Let
Mr. Lock tell a Sceptick, that Yellow is Yellow, and not Blue; he may answer,
that he will yield to neither Proposition; because, Yellow and Blue are Species
of Color, and (according to Mr. Locke's Grounds) he knows not the distinct
Bounds, or precise Extent of neither of them; and therefore, should he grant
it, he must assent to he knows not what. Tell him, Mr. Lock speaks of the
Ideas of those Colors; he will ask what an Idea is, and, doubtless, pick new
Quarrels at the Definition; especially, these being the Ideas of Secondary
Qualities, which himself says, have nothing Like them in the Thing. But, tell
him, it cannot be denied, but that they are Something, and not merely Nothing,
in regard we experience we have them; and, that Every Thing must necessarily be
what it is, (which is one of the Maxims excepted against;) he will be put to a
Stand, and Nonpluss'd: For, what can he say? The Identity of the Thing with it
self, whether it be a Substance, or an Accident, cannot be denied; nor can he
deny, that the same is the same with it self, (which is another Maxim;) for,
the Word Thing, signifies, a Supreme Generical Notion; and, the Word Same, is a
Transcendent; which are both of them Clear, because the Latter has no kind of
Composition in it, the Other as little as is possible. So that he cannot begin
to shuffle here, or press to know the meaning of the Terms, as he did when they
were Particulars; the Universal Terms being far Clearer than those Particulars
are.

6. Hence another Usefulness of Self-evident Maxims is discovered; which is,
not to deduce Conclusions from Such General Maxims are never used to deduce
Conclusions from them, but to reduce Inferior Truths to them.
them, as from Premises, as Mr. L. seems to apprehend; but, to reduce Inferior
Truths, which are less Clear to them. That this can be done, and how it is
done, I have shown in my Book 3. Less. 4.
Method. And, Mr. Locke's Concession here, 11. that They are of great Use in
Disputes, to stop the Mouths of Wranglers, abets and confirms my late*
Discourses: For, Whence could they have this strange Virtue to stop the Mouths
of such Unreasonable Men, but because their Evidence is Greater than any
others, or than Particular Self-evident Propositions are? Otherwise, why could
not these do it as well as General Maxims? Now, if this be so, why cannot they
satisfy and instruct Rational Men, and conduce to quiet and fix their
Judgment, as well as to Nonplus Wranglers? It Is the Nature of Evidence, to
enlighten and instruct Men of Sense; and more Proper to it, than to amuse and
surprise Sophisters. Let any Learned Man reflect on all the Maxims in Euclid's
Elements, in Euclides Physicus and Metaphysicus, or any other Author who
pretends to Reasoning with Exact Closeness; and he will easily see for what
they are Useful, and How. Nay, even Mr. L.'s Identicals, [Yellow is Yellow, and
not Blue,] are useful in their Kind. though Mr. Lock does omit to show they are
so: And this Identical Yellow is Yellow, though it do not influence other
Particulars, as General Maxims do; (for which Reason, it does not absolutely
deserve the Name of a Principle;) yet, both It, (and such other Particular
Identicals,) is a kind of Principle to all that is, or can be, discoursed about
that Particular Color: For, if any part of that Discourse makes Yellow not to
be Yellow, or (which is all one) violates that Proposition, [Yellow is Yellow,]
it is concluded to be most evidently False; or, if it agrees with it, to be
True. He seems to mislike the Procedure by Praecognita and Praeconcessa;
whereas, his Acute Wit will find, upon Reflection, that it is impossible we can
make an Ordinary, much less any Speculative, Discourse, but the Discoursers
must agree in something that is either Foreknown, or (at least) Foregranted;
for, if the two Disputants disagree in all their Principles and Grounds, and
one of them still denies All the other affirms, it is impossible they should
Discourse together at all.

7. But, passing by all that is said, I allege farther, that (not to speak of
others) these two Maxims so The Absolute Necessity of First Principles Asserted.
much excepted against, [What it is] and ['Tis impossible the same Thing should
be and not be at once, are of such most Necessary and Universal Usefulness,
that, without them, we could neither judge, discourse, nor act. Indeed, these
Maxims lie retruse in the most Inmost Recesses of our Judging or Intellective
Power, and make not their Appearance in Formal Propositions, but only when we
have occasion to produce them; though they are still there all the while, and
guide all our Thoughts steadily, nay, all our Actions too. In the same manner
as when a Musician plays a careless Voluntary upon a Harpsichord, he guides
himself all along by the Rules of Music lodged in his Mind; though, they being
now familiar to him, he is not so Sensible of those Rules as he was when he
first learned them. To apprehend more clearly the Usefulness of these two
Principles, let us suppose a Man quite Divested of them, and to have neither of
them in his Judgment, and then reflect what he is good for. All our Judgments
being made by the Copula [is,] in case he have not this First Principle in his
Understanding, he might take [is] for [is not;] or else indifferently for one,
and the other too: which, besides the perverting his Judgment quite, would make
him utterly unfit for the Conversation of Mankind Again, it is impossible such a
Man should have any Truth at all in his Mind, which is the Natural Perfection
of Human Understanding; but, wanting a steady Ground to fix his Judgment, he
might think all things to be Chimerical, embrace every Fancy, and adhere to any
Contradiction.

8. To come to the Usefulness of other General Maxims, we may reflect how
Mankind do naturally guide their How other General Maxims do govern all our
Actions and Sayings.
Actions by them. A Country Butcher loses his Knife, and looks all about for
it; in which case it is usual for such Fellows to say, as the Motive of his
continuing to seek it, [I am sure it must be somewhere or other.] By which rude
Saying it is evident, that he guides himself all the while by this foreknown
General Maxim, [Every particular Body in the World must be in some place.] For,
had he not had the Knowledge of this Maxim beforehand, that is, did he think
it were possible it should be no where, or in no place, he would never have
taken such Pains to look for it. We may observe Hundreds of such Natural Maxims
as this in the Vulgar, guiding their Actions and Sayings; and perhaps, it would
not be unworthy Speculaters to observe their Behavior and Words which proceed
from Uncorrupted Nature, and retrieve the Genuin Principles and Maxims that
naturally produced them. To apply this: The same we may gather from our
Speculative Thoughts; and that the same passes in us naturally as does in the
Vulgar. Our First Principles lie habitually laid up in the Closet of our Minds,
and govern all our Thoughts as occasion presents; and, though we do not put them
into Formal Propositions, till the Circumstance invites; yet they influence all
we do, or say, or think; as was instanced lately in the unshaken and
unalterable Sense of the Copula [is,] which verifies all our Propositions.

9. In a Word, it were easy to show, that this unadvised Degrading of General
Maxims, making them in a manner The Discarding General Maxims destroys all
Science.
Useless for Knowledge, does destroy all Grounds; which either are such Maxims,
or, at least, have no force but by virtue of those Maxims, expressed or
implied; unless we will pretend those are Grounds in any Science that want
Proof there; which makes them Conclusions, and no Grounds. Whence, it does also
destroy all Science it self, which consists in Universal Knowledges, as
Experience does in particular ones; for such Universal Truths cannot be had, if
General Maxims be disallowed, as Logic demonstrates. This Error springs from
Men's taking wrong Measures in judging what Notions are Clear, what Confused.
This Ingenious Author thinks the need of such Maxims might be supplied by
having Clear and Distinct Ideas. Which, rightly understood, comes over to us;
for Art and Nature both inform us, that the Clearness of our Notions consists
in their being more General; and as they approach nearer to the Highest Genus,
they are still Clearer. Now, the Metaphysical Verity of a General Idea or
Notion, if put into a Proposition, is perfectly Identical, and a General Maxim.
Hence appears, that it is a most Fundamental Error in the Ideists, that they
rate the Clearness of their Ideas from the fresh, fair and lively Appearances
they make to the Fancy. Whereas only the Definition, by explicating the true
Essence of a Thing, shows us Distinctly the true Spiritual Notion of it. The
former of these is obvious and sensible. and (as I may say) lies and appears
uppermost; and, therefore, is Superficial, and a Material Representation made
in the Fancy. The Later is more Retruse, it requires more Reflection and Labor
to attain it, it is Intelligible not Sensible; but, once gained, it is Solid,
Durable, and (being indeed the very Nature of the Thing,) it is the Ground of
all our Discourses about it, and of those several Knowledges concerning it.
Hence the Followers of Fancy become liable to take Similitudes for Notions, and
Representations for Things; which makes their Productions very Plausible to
other Men's Fancies, (for as they were the Productions of Fancy, so they suit
best with Men of Fancy) but they fall short of instructing their Judgments. To
give an Instance of this Distinction of Notions from Phantasms: They think that
the Idea of a Quadrate (for Example) or Circle, is very Clear and Distinct; and
that the Idea of Quantity is very Obscure and Confused: Whereas, to the Notion
of the two former, there goes the Notion both of Quantity, of the Termination
of Quantity, (or Figure;) and, moreover, of such a Figure; all which being
Essentially involved in the Notion of a Quadrate or Circle, must needs make
their Notions less Intelligible and less Clear than is that of Quantity only:
However, the fair Pictures of the former, on Paper, or in the Fancy, enveigles
them to think otherwise. Let us but reflect how many Truths are deduced by
Geometricians out of the Notions of a Quadrate or a Circle, and what large
Treatises of Trigonometry are drawn out of the Notion or Nature of a Triangle;
and we shall discover how Compounded and Confused those Notions are in reality,
however we seem, while we mind only the Pictures of them, to have very clear
Conceptions of them, and to comprehend them distinctly and fully. Now, all
these Truths are involved confusedly in the Notion or Nature of these Figures:
For all Discourses concerning any Notion whatever, are nothing but running
Division (as we may say) upon the Nature of that Object as their Ground; and
all Descants upon it are merely that very Notion Unfolded and Explicated at
large, and considered on all sides, and thoroughly: Which, comprising them all
in its Bowels, is therefore not so Clear and Distinct as Fancy makes us imagine.
Whence is seen evidently, that Fancy, and the first and obvious Appearance, is
not to be the Judge or Test of the Clearness or Confusedness of our Notions;
but Reason, reflecting well on the Simplicity or Compoundedness of those
Notions themselves, and on the Reasons why they are so.

10. Lastly, it is objected, That such Maxims are Dangerous; because, if our
Notions be wrong, loose, or unsteady, That not General Maxims, but their Abuse,
breeds Danger to Science.
General Maxims will serve to confirm us in our Mistakes, and to prove
Contradictions. Now, though our Judgments may be such, yet I cannot conceive how
our Notions can be Wrong, Loose, or Unsteady. They are what they are; and being
the Things in our Understanding, their Existence is fixed there, and as
unalterable as our Soul it self, their Subject, is, Notions are the same as our
Meanings of the Words; and, though we may mistake what the Word signifies to
others, or to the Generality; yet, if I, mistaking, or not mistaking, have such
a Meaning of it in my Mind, (which only can mean or apprehend,) that Meaning is
truly in me: Nor, though I be rectified as to the Common Use of that Word, and
put another Name to it; yet my Meaning, whether properly or improperly
signified, is still indivisibly and unalterably the same. But, suppose this so;
why must General Maxims be held Dangerous and Faulty, when the Fault
Confessedly lies in other Things? Mr. Lock grants General Maxims to be True,
and Self-evident; and it is extravagantly odd, to think, that Propositions so
qualified, can be Guilty of leading Men into Error. If, then, he only means,
that the Mis-application or Abuse of them does great Harm, he magnifies General
Maxims, while he intended to disparage them: For, it is generally noted, that
those are the Best Things, that, Mis-us'd, do the Greatest Harm. By this
Argument, we must lay aside all Religion, as well as General Maxims; since, not
all the Things in the World, put together, have done so great Mischief, as
Mis-us'd Religion: Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum.


11. To show General Maxims, or self-evident Propositions, may demonstrate
Contradictory Positions, he instances His Instance that General Maxims are fit
to prove Contradictions, shows he quite mistakes the Notion of Body.
in Cartestus's making Body to be nothing but Extension; and in his own Tenet
making Body to be Extension and Solidity together: Whence, by this Maxim [what
is, is] the former may demonstrate there can be no Vacuum, the latter that
there may. And, I must, in behalf of Truth, take leave to tell them both, that
neither Extension alone, nor Extension and Solidity together, are any more the
Notion of Body, than a Horse-shoe is a Pancake. For, Body signifies a Thing,
and their Extension and Solidity are only Modes or Accidents of that Thing;
and, therefore, the Notions of them do differ toto genere; which is a greater
and wider mistake, than to say a Man is a Horse, or an Apple is an Oyster;
these being all comprehended under the same Common Genus. If, out of Aversion
to Metaphysics, and Disregard to true Logic, which teaches us to distinguish
our Notions exactly, Learned Men will not be brought to Consider what the Word
[Thing,] and [Body] which is such a Thing, mean, they must necessarily fall
into Fundamental Errors; and, so, stumble every step they take. The Notion of
[Thing] evidently relates to Being, one way or other: But, it does not formally
signify Actual Being, as Existence does; therefore it can only consist in
this, that is, a Power to be, or is Capable of Being actually. And this Thing
called Body, since we experience it is alterable and Changeable Substantially,
or into another Thing, must necessarily have a Power in it to be Altered, or
become another Thing; which Power we call [Matter;] our Common Speech and
Common Sense telling us, that when a New Thing is made, it is not Created or
made of Nothing, but of the Matter that pre-existed in the former Compound.
But, this Matter alone, since it is a mere Power to be another Thing, being, of
its own Notion, utterly Indeterminate, (which is the true Sense of Aristotle's
Description of it,) is not capable of Existing, or a Thing; for, nothing in
Common can exist, but what is determinately This: Therefore, this Matter, or
Power, needs another Compart, conceived to determine it, (which the Schools call
the Form;) by which it is made capable to be, or a Thing; and without which, it
cannot be such. It being evident then, that every single Mode or Accident does
something distinguish Bodies, therefore such a Complexion of them as so
distinguishes Matter, that it makes it differ from all other Bodies, it does
consequently determine it to be This, and no other; and therefore constitutes it
such a Thing, or constitutes it Capable to Exist; which is, to make it this
Thing, or an Individuum. Now, if we leave all Consideration of Matter out of
the Notion of Body, and make it consist of Modes, or Accidents only, as he
seems to tell us that himself and Cartesius do, we must put those Modes to have
no possible Subject, but to hover in the Air, none knows how; and, therefore,
we must needs discourse incoherently, and be too hard for our selves, by
raising, at every turn, puzzling Difficulties we cannot solve. All our Grounds
must fail us, when we do not distinguish between the Mode or Manner how a Thing
is, and the Thing it self. Nor do I think Cartesius holds Body to be Extension,
but Extended Matter. How Mr. Lock comes not to treat of Matter in his whole
Book, I know not; but I fear it is, because his Fancy cannot frame an Idea or
Similitude of it: By which it seems to me Evident, that very many of his Ideas
are mere Fancies, coined by his Imagination: For, it is evident he must have a
Notion of it, since he very well knows the meaning of those Words, [A Power to
be a Thing, or Matter;] which Meaning is the same with our Notion of it. As for
Vacuum, which he again mentions here, my Demonstration against it, is, in
short, this; waving many others mentioned above: All our Natural Notions are
taken from Body; and, amongst them, that of Space; therefore they are nothing
but Body inadequately considered; and either Body, or some Mode of Body:
Therefore, whatever our Fancy may suggest, it is impossible there should be
Space, where there is no Body; since the Mode, having no distinct Entity of its
own, cannot be where the Thing, which gives it Being, is not: Therefore, to put
Space where there is no Body, or a Vacuum, is a direct Contradiction. Each Part
of which Discourse has been made good in its proper place.

12. In his Second Instance of Man, he seems again, not to distinguish between
the Fancy and the Notion of a Ideism is the Genuin Parent of Enthusiasm in
Philosophy.
Man; which I have shown in my Method, Book 1. Less. 2.. 24. Next, he seems not
to reflect, that an Imperfect Conception of the Thing, is of the whole Thing
confusedly. Thirdly, it is evident, that Men do only err, or discourse wrong, by
imperfectly conceiving, through this Reason; because they are not so wise as to
consider that there may be more Modes wrapped up in the Thing, than we yet
distinctly discover: In which case, they may err by mis-applying their General
Maxims; for which they must blame themselves, and not the Maxim it self. But, I
absolutely deny that any Man can possibly have the true and distinct Notion of
Man, unless he conceives him to be Rational. As for what he tells us, he has
discoursed with very Rational Men, who have actually denied they are Men; I can
only say, I wonder how they escaped Bedlam; where, I dare say, there are many
Men, who are more Rational than they: And, my Opinion is, that those very
Rational Men were very high-flown Ideists: For, such Men, by deserting their
Natural Notions taken from the Things, and the Conduct of true Logic, and
poring perpetually on their own Interior; and being withal unable to see the
Difference between those Ideas they find there, or to distinguish betwixt
Fancies and Spiritual Conceptions; are (unless they be otherwise Masters of an
Excellent Genius) connaturally disposed by their Principles to be Fanatics in
Philosophy; and to entertain as wild Fancies, as the Deepest Enthusiasts.
Witness Cartesius his mad Fit of Enthusiasm, which lasted some Days, when he
was laying his Principles, (as is writ in his Life;) and those Self-strangers,
now spoken of, who actually denied they were Men: Whom, (to requite Mr. Lock
with a parallel Story) I cannot liken so well to any thing, as to a famous
Humourist, one John Band, who served my Lady Wootton, in Kent: This Fellow, in
the Heat of Summer, going out in a Cart, drawn by two Horses, fell asleep in
the Cart: The Horses not hearing any cry Gee, ho, to urge them forwards, took
their Opportunity to rest themselves, and stood still: A Companion of his
coming by, and seeing how matters stood, under-propp'd the Cart, took out the
Horses; and; having set them up, returned, and lay behind the Hedge, to observe
how John would behave himself when he missed his Horses: Who awaking, got up,
rubbed his Eyes, and, in the Dawning of his Reason, broke out, (to himself,) in
these Words, Either now I am John Band, or I am not John Band: If I am John
Band, I have even lost two Horses; But, if I am not John Band, I have found a
Cart. So that all John's Hopes were, that he was not himself; for then he had
been on the better hand. I much doubt, that both he, and Mr. Locke's Rational
Men, wanted the help of an Identical Proposition; which (though Mr. Lock holds,
they are not in the least Instructive) would have made them all so wise, as to
know that Every Thing is what it is.

13. But, to be serious; I cannot but admire that this Ingenious Author should,
in his 8th Chapter, so ridicule Identical Propositions not to be ridiculed.
Identical Propositions, or esteem them Trifling. He told us in his 2d Chapter,
that that Knowledge he calls Intuitive, is of Self-evident Propositions; and
Identical ones are such. He assures us, that in every Step Reason makes in
Demonstrative Knowledge, there is an Intuitive Knowledge of the Agreement or
Disagreement of our Ideas; Consonantly to which, I have demonstrated in my
Method, Book 3. Liss. 1.. 3. that all the Force of Consequence, which gives the
Nerves to all our Discourse, must be an Identical Proposition. Moreover, he
says, Chap. 4. that we know each Idea to be it self, and not another; and, that
no Abstract Idea can be the same with any other, but with it self; which are
perfectly Identical Speeches, and equivalent to these, The same is the same
with it self; or, Every Thing is what it is; nay, and General Maxims too,
against which he showed himself much offended in that Chapter. Nor, do I doubt,
but that he judges, his Knowledge by Ideas is refunded into those Identicals,
as its Ground; as will be shown shortly. Now, after all this, to rally
Identical Propositions after such a rate, is to me Unintelligible. But, I shall
be briefer here upon this Subject, having demonstrated in my Method, Book 2.
Less. 2, and 3. by many Arguments, which, I am very confident, are
Unanswerable, that all First Principles must be Identical Propositions: Whence,
either those Arguments must be shown Invalid, or it must be forcibly denied by
him that there are any First Principles at all; which all Mankind, unless they
be perfect Scepticks, do grant, and Common Sense forces us to acknowledge. For,
if there be no Supreme or First Principles, it is impossible there should be any
Inferior or Subordinate ones; and so, Mankind must talk ramblingly, and at
random, all their Lives, without any Principles or Grounds at all. But, waving
all the other aforesaid Proofs, I would beg of him to consider this one
Argument: We may speak of, or (which is the same) put into Propositions, all
other Considerations or Notions of the Thing, whether they be in the same Line,
or be the diverse Modes of it; we can say, without danger of being reproached,
that Socrates is a Man, an Animal, a Yard high, White, a Father, writing, etc.
and it is a hard Case if we may not be allowed to say something of the
Metaphysical Verity of the Thing, this being that on which all Truth is built;
and without which, all we could say would be False; and all the World, a Chaos
of Chimoera's. And, if we may say any thing of it, I defy all Mankind to show
me, that that Saying can be any other but an Identical Proposition. This being
so, I allege farther, that as all Truths are fundamentally built on the
Metaphysical Verity of Things; so all Formal Truths, or True Propositions, must
be grounded on such Propositions as express or signify that Metaphysical
Verity, or, say that a Thing is what it is; and, consequently, such
Propositions, and only such, can be First Principles. Now, if First
Principles, and that which grounds all the Force of Consequence, may be called
Trifling, I desire to be informed what can be called Solid, Serious and Useful.

14. I perceive, by Mr. Locke's managing his Discourse here, that his Dislike
of Identical Propositions springs The right Way how to use them, and that Mr.
Lock himself does and must rely upon them.
from his Mistake of our Manner of Using them. He seems to imagine that we would
place them in Capite Libri, (as it were,) and thence deduce Conclusions from
them; or else, that we consider them in their bare selves, without Relation to
any thing else: Whence he, with good Reason, affirms, they do not instruct us,
or teach us any thing, that there is no Real Knowledge got by them, etc. But
the Business is quite otherwise: They are the First, and most evident Truths,
fixed and rivetted by Rational Nature, in our Understanding; at the Bottom of
which they lie, perhaps Unseen, and and Unreflected on; yet so, that they give
the perfect Light to guide all our Thoughts and Discourses. Whence it comes,
that Speculaters do by Art, what the Sea Meth. to Science, B. a. L. 2. 18
* Vulgar do by Nature; and make them the Ultimate Ressort of all their
Persuasions, and endeavor to Reduce and Resolve all their other Knowledges
into them: This will appear evident to any Man who reflects, that, if those be
False, or we be not pre-imbu'd with them, we could have no Truth, nor any
Knowledge at all. They are such deep-laid Foundations, that all Science is
raised upon them, though they make no Formal Appearance in the Symmetry or Beauty
of that Structure: Nay, even those who rally them as Dry, and Useless, must be
forced, for their own Interest, to have recourse to them: For, unless Mr. Lock
does first know, that each Idea he has, is it self, and not another, which is
an Identical Proposition, he must confess he could have no Distinct Ideas; at
least, no Knowledge that they are Distinct; whence, the Fabric of his whole
Book would fall to the Ground. After which Kindness and Support from them, in
requital, to call them Trifling, is not so gentile a Return. Hence is seen,
that we make no other Use of them, than himself does, and must do, or neither
of us can possibly speak one Word of Sense; for, neither could he, without
them, (supposed and held, at least, in his Mind, if not expressed,) be certain
of any Idea; nor we, of any Notion we have; nor, consequently, could either of
us build any Discourse upon them. Mr. Lock acknowledges, Book 2. Chap. 32.
that the Metaphysical Truth of his Ideas do contain a Tacit Proposition: Which
being so, what Blame can we deserve for Speaking out, or Writing what is
tacitly in our Minds? The chief Reason why we put those Tacit Propositions into
Formal ones, is for the Scepticks sakes; who, having an utter Aversion against
Metaphysics, would not heed the Metaphysical Verity of Things, unless it were
produced, and forced upon them, by putting it into such an undeniable Form of
Speech as all Mankind uses, and must grant. Whence, as Mr. Lock confesses that
they are very useful to stop the Mouths of Wranglers; so, Experience teaches
us, they are of no less Use to convert or confute Scepticks: Nay, absolutely
Necessary for that End; because Scepticks will not admit any thing to be True,
but Identical Propositions only. For which reason, I have attempted, in my
Method, to give some Hints how to reduce all others to them. I once thought to
have written a particular Treatise on that Subject; but, I hope those short
Hints I gave there, may excite some other Speculaters to perfect what, having a
large Field of Matter to pass through, I did there but briefly touch upon. All
this while, I am well aware that Mr. Lock, Book 4. Chap. 8. mentions other
Self-evident Propositions, which are not Identical; but then, he acknowledges
withal, that unless those Ideas, which make the two Terms of those
Propositions, be fixed in their own Natures to be such, or to be themselves
only, and therefore not to be Another, none of those Propositions could be
evident at all. So that Nothing can be known to be True, or be Evident, but by
having recourse, finally, to Identical Propositions.

15. Another sort of Trifling Propositions, he says, is when a part of the
Complex Idea is Predicated of the Name of Neither Ideas nor Names can be
Predicate or Subject; but the Thing it self, as conceived by us, in whole or in
part.
the whole; that is, the Genus or Difference of the Species. I answer; What
have we to do with Ideas when we Predicate? For Predicating is the Saying
something of Another which we call the Subject: If then the Thing it self be
not Predicated, then (to Predicate being to Say) we do not talk or speak of It,
but perhaps of our own Fancies; especially since Mr. Lock has declared, B. 1.
Chap. 2. 8. that he takes Idea indifferently for what is meant by Phantasm or
by Notion. Secondly, What means [Predicated of the Name of the whole.] For, if
the Name of the Subject have not some Idea, or Notion, or some Thing for its
Signification, it is insignificant, and a mere useless Sound: and, if it have,
then the Notion of the Species or Genus is that which is Predicated, and not
the Name only. If Things, (of which only, as Philosophers, we ought to speak)
are turned into Ideas, Realities into Spiritual Resemblances, and those Empty
Resemblances into Emptier Names, Philosophy will be brought to a strange pass.
Thirdly, None ever intended to instruct Men by this Proposition [Homo est
Animal;] because every Man knows it already, who knows what the Word [Man]
means; without knowing which, it is impossible to know any thing by any Word
whatever; nor are such Propositions as that, which frequently occur in
Logicians, meant for any thing but merely for Examples of such and such
Predications: But yet, Nature tells us how Instructive it is on all occasions,
to know what sort or kind (whether General or Specifical) every thing is, and
how it differs from others of the same kind. Now, Mr. Lock, contrary to his
Equity in other occasions, will neither allow us to predicate the whole
Definition of the Thing defined (as was seen above in the Definition of
Extension) because it is the same Notion with that which is Defined; nor Part of
the Definition, because it is Part of the same; and yet Common Reason assures us
no Predication is True, unless the Subject and Predicate be, in part or wholly
the same; as the Sense of the Copula [est] tells us. I wish Mr. Lock would put
Mankind into a wiser Method; for they have, it seems, done nothing, but
perpetually trifled hitherto.

16. Upon the main, he would have nothing that is Essential predicated of Man,
or any other Species, (because Mr. L.'s new Instructive Way is utterly
Insignificant.
the Word signifies that already) but only what is Accidental to him; and he
thinks that then a Proposition is Instructive, when it tells us something not
contained in the Idea of Man. He instances in this; [In whatever Thing, Sense,
Motion, Reason, and Laughter are united, that Thing has actually a Notion of
God.] Now this he conceives, does tell us more than barely what the Word [Man]
means; and therefore has somewhat of Instruction in it. I much approve his
Design of bringing Disparate Notions to close and connect: But yet I must say,
that all he can say of Man, or any other thing, must either be taken from the
Intrinsecal Nature of the Thing it self, or it can never be Instructive, Solid,
or capable of Demonstration. V. g. It is Essential to Man to have Natural
Notions, and to connect those Notions orderly by his Reason, and by doing this
he may attain to the Knowledge there is a God. Now, all this is contained in
the Notion of Man; only it requires a deeper Inspection into that Nature, and a
more particular Reflection upon what the Word [Man] signifies. For (quite
contrary to his Sentiment) it is the Nature of the Thing, signified by its Name,
which only can Instruct us Solidly; and it instructs us by our Attention to it,
and our frequent and penetrative Reflection on it. Whence I cannot commend his
Instance, nor see how the Predicate [has the Notion of God] can ever be
connected with the Subject he puts, by virtue of any thing found in the Subject
it self as he exhibits it. Sense belongs to Man as he is an Animal, Motion as
he is a Living thing; from neither of which Considerations such a Connection of
the Terms are likely to follow. Reason is the most likely; but since Mr. Lock
holds, that Brutes too have some Reason, and yet can have no Notion of God, it
cannot be deduced out of the Common Word [Reason,] that Man has any such
Notion. Laughter there should seem, according to him, to be the most peculiar
to Mankind; for Brutes do not laugh at all; but this is less likely than the
others to be that precise Consideration, by virtue of which Man comes to have
the Notion of God. Again, in his Discourse against Innate Principles, he
declared his Opinion, that there were some Men who had actually no Notion of a
God at all; though, no doubt, they had Sense, Motion, Reason, and Laughter too.
So that if this Proposition be Instructive, it can (even according to himself)
instruct us in nothing but an Error. Lastly, What needs this Circumlocution?
If Sense, Motion, etc. huddled together, be signified by the Word [Man,] why
could it not as well be said, [Every Man has a Notion of God] without more ado?
Since by his Discourse to predicate what the Word [Man] signifies, is not
Instructive. Or, if they be not signified by the Word [Man,] how is the
Proposition True? Or what means it to say, he intends [Man] by those many
Words, and yet would not have it thought so? Or that no Intrinsecal Predicate
instructs, but only what is Extrinsecal to any Nature? Or, if this be meant for
an Instructive Definition, as it must, (for the Subject in that Proposition
agrees to nothing but to Man) why are the Parts of it so disparate, and so
many? Or rather if so many, why no more? If we may gain the Knowledge of more
Accidents in every Species by degrees, as it is granted we may; and that we
ought to define those Species, not by the old beaten way of Genus and
Difference, but by this new one, of cluttering together confusedly the
Multitudes of Accidents we find in them, we may come in time, by finding still
more and more, to have Definitions so large, that the whole side of a Leaf
cannot hold them, nor Man's Memory retain them; and then what do they serve for?

17. Indeed, when Words are taken in diverse Significations, if That the
Signification of Words is the Meaning of them; their Meaning is our Notion; and
our Notion is the Thing.
Men contentiously adhere to the different Senses themselves give them, it is,
as Mr. Lock says well, mere Trifling. But I cannot grant that all Predications
of Abstract Words are only Verbal and Trifling. He says, they amount to nothing
but Significations of Terms. And is not this enough? I wish he would consider
his own Words. By [Signification of Terms] he means, I suppose, the Sense or
Meaning of them: Now the Meanings of Words being the same with our Notions,
which as has been demonstrated, are the Things themselves, how can those
Abstract Terms be merely Verbal? Since they as much signify the Thing as any
other Terms whatever; only they signify it with a Restriction to such a
precise Respect or Considerability found in that whole Ens or Substance.

REFLECTION Twentieth, ON The 9th, 10th, 11th, and 12th CHAPTERS.
1. THis Excellent Author discourses very Solidly, when he says, that Universal
Propositions, of which we can have certain Knowledge, do not concern Existence.
Universals mnst relate to the Existence they have in the Mind.
I add, nor our Notions neither, of which those Propositions do consist, (and
much less Propositions that are Uncertain.) For, taking the Notion alone, or
according to the direct Signification of the Terms, objectively considered,
they abstract from (that is, are indifferent to) all kinds of Existence,
whether in the Mind or in Nature. But, when he says that such Propositions do
not concern Existence, he means (I suppose) Existence in Nature, or out of the
Mind; (or else not at all;) and the Copula [est] must necessarily signify some
kind of Existence, as well as Identifie the two Terms in every Proposition; or
otherwise it would be a Sound or no Word. But this Discourse is perhaps
needless, being, as I think, in great part granted here. All I intend by it, is
to clear the Notion of Existence in the Title, and that it means Existence out
of the Mind, by which Things or Individuums are in themselves, whether we think
of them or no. I grant too, that we have so certain a Knowledge of our own
Existence, that it can need no Proof; but I deny we have it by Intuition; and I
affirm we got it, and have it, by plain Sensation or Experience, in the same
manner as we know the Existence of other Bodies; as will be shown, when we come
to reflect on the 11th Chapter.

2. His Demonstration of a Deity, Chap. 10th, is very acute, nor does he here
affect Recourse to his Ideas, or To put any Knowledge in Brutes is against the
Nature of the Thing, and Implicatory.
build on them expressly, or (as he too often does in other places) take
Phantasms for Notions; which takes off the force of his Reasons. Particularly,
he argues so strongly that a Cogitative Being can never be made of meer-Matter,
that I do judge it Unanswerable: And, withal, that it necessarily concludes
that Brutes can have no Knowledge, without having something in them that is
Spiritual; which I am sure he will not say. I could wish Mr. L. had been steady
to this Distinction of those two Natures, of Spiritual and Corporeal, which
adequately divide Ens: Which, I think he was not, when he said B. 4. Chapter 3. 6.
that he sees no contradiction in it that God should, if he pleased, give to
certain Systems of Created Senseless Matter, put together as he thinks fit,
some degrees of Sense, Perception and Thought. For, if the Nature of mere
Matter, by being Commodiously put together, can bear the having Thoughtfulness;
it is but compounding it more artificially, and it may be as Cogitative as the
Wisest Man living; and so farewell to all Spirituality of our Soul, nay, to all
Spiritual Nature whatever: For, to what end should God create the Distinct
Nature of Spirits, if Matter wisely orderd could perform all their Operations?
If once we yield that Matter, conveniently contrived, can be capable of any
degree of Knowledge, it is but contriving it better and better, (and who can
stint Gods Omnipotency in this, more than in other things?) and it may be
capable of the highest Degree of Science; and, consequently, to create
Spiritual Nature at all, would be needless, and to no purpose. Besides, if Men
and Brutes differ only in the Degrees of Knowledge, they ought to be of the
same Species; since Magis et minus non variant speciem: For, otherwise, every
single Man would make a Distinct Species, which is a plain Contradiction.
Against this Position of the possibility of Matters being Cogitative, he argues
here very Vigorously 10. and shows clearly that Incogitative Matter, and
Motion, whatever changes it might produce of Figure and Bulk, could never
produce Thought. He will say that, though it could not do this of it self, yet
God could make it do it. But if God cannot contradict himself, or do Unwisely,
then, since his Creative Wisdom has Established each kind of Nature to be it
self and no other; then, to put in God a Power to confound those Natures again,
(which he does if he should confound the Primary and proper Operation of
Spirits, which is Thought, Knowledge or Reason by giving it to Bodies,) is to
put a Power in God to do Contradictions, that is, to do Impossibilities; for
whatever is against the Essence or Nature of any thing, makes that thing not to
be it self; which is against an Identical and self evident Proposition, and a
Direct Contradiction.

3. The Clear Distinction of Corporeal and Spiritual Natures, is of that vast
importance; that (though it may Mr. L. confound; Material and Spiritual Natures.
seem a little unseasonable) I cannot but take this occasion to reflect, once
more upon Mr. L's doctrine in this point, apprehending I may not meet with a
fitter opportunity hereafter. I have reason to think, that he does not exclude
Materiality out of the Idea of Spirit, or at least of the Soul, which all
Christian Philosophers and most Heathens too, hold to be of a Spiritual Nature.
On the other side he attributes Reason and Knowledge (in some degree at least)
to Brutes. Now, out of these two positions it follows demonstratively. 1. That
the Corporeal and Spiritual Natures are not clearly distinguished, which utterly
destroys all possibility of Truth in Philosophy, and seems to do no small
prejudice to Truths of a Higher Concern; which are left Inexplicable to Men of
Sense, if those inferior Truths, which relate to the Clear Distinction of
those two Natures, be violated and rendered Uncertain. For, Corporeal and
Spiritual Natures, comprizing, or dividing between themselves, the Objects of
all the Sciences a Philosopher can treat of, whether they be Physics, Ethics
or Metaphysics, all which must necessarily build their Discourses, and draw
their Conclusions from such Notions as are taken from, and do of right belong
to those two Distinct Natures; it follows that, if these two Natures be
confounded and jumbled together, and be not clearly Distinguished, it is
impossible any Clear Conclusion can be drawn from either of them, or any
Rational Discourse made concerning them. 2. That Mr. L's way of Philosophizing
by Ideas, which leads him into such strange Errors, or at least affords him no
certain Light to Distingush those Natures, is good for nothing at all. For, if
it cannot furnish him with means, to put a Clear Distinction between Natures so
widely Distant, and Different from one another; much less can it assist him to
show clearly what Modes, Accidents or Properties belong to one Nature, what to
the other; or to Distinguish those Natures, which are Infericur to those two
General ones; and therefore differ far less from one another than They did. It
remains then to show that Mr. L's Doctrine by way of Ideas, does not put a
Clear Distinction between the aforesaid Natures, but confounds them together.
He holds it not to be Certain that Immateriality, is not included in the Notion
of our Spiritual part the Soul; it may, therefore, be Material, or have Matter
in it, for any thing his Way of Ideas tells him; and therefore since Matter
cannot be crampt into an Indivisible, it may be Divisihle or Extended; and, so,
may be Divided or Shattered, that is (its Unity being thus lost, and,
consequently, its Entity,) it may cease to be, or be Corrupted. Again, if it
be Divisible, it must be to some degree, or either more or less, Divisible;
that is, Rare, or else Dense. If Rare, then (since Passivenes is Essential to
the Notion of Matter) it may by the operation of other Material Causes, which
never wants, be Condensed; and consequently, become Opacous or Visible; or, it
may by the same Causes become Rarer, and be turned into Fire. Also being
Divisible, it may have parts of which one must be without the other, that is,
it must be Impenetrable as to its own parts, and thence be able to protrude
another Material being, and be Solid too (in his Sense of that Word) which is
the same with Impenetrable. Moreover, since it must be Divisible, it must be
Quantitative or Extended, and this not Infinitely but Finitely; that is, it
must be Terminated; wherefore, Termination of Quantity, being the Notion of
Figure, it may have Figure too. In a Word, if it may possibly be Material,
there is no Property of Body, but may agree to the Soul; and therefore, the
Soul, though Spiritual, may be Corporeal; and so the Nature of Body and Spirit
may be one and the same. But what needs more than merely his ascribing
Materiality to it, at least, permitting it to belong to it? Our Notion of
[Matter] is taken from Body, and from nothing else, and therefore can be
nothing but Body, considered as (not what it actually is, but) as it is
Alterable, Changeable, or apt to be another Thing, that is, as it is
Corruptible; which, I am sure, Mr. L. will not say or think of our Soul.
Perhaps he may say, that he only means that it may have Matter annexed to its
Spirituality. But then he must grant, that since this Materiality did not, as
an Accident, accrue to the Soul afterward, she had it from her Nature; and
therefore it must be Intrinsecal to her, and help to constitute her peculiar
Nature; and, if this be so, then, when this Material kind of Compart is
dissolved or corrupted (for if Material, it may be Altered, wrought upon, and
Corrupted as other Material Compounds may) the Complex or Compound it self is
dissolved, and so no longer the same, but perished. Besides, what should the
Soul do with two Material Comparts; one, Organical; the other, Inorganical?
Especially, since there are as subtle Parts in this Visible Body of ours, with
which, as the Form of the Body, she is united, (viz. the Spirits) as any,
perhaps, Mr. Lock can conceive to be annexed to her.

4. To proceed, He does but think it possible, for any thing he knows, that the
Soul may have some Materiality; Mr. L's Principles confound Human and Brutal
Natures.
but he positively judges, that Brutes have Reason; nay, that it is as Evident
to him as that they have Sense. Now, if they have Reason, they must know how to
draw Consequences, this being Essential to the Notion of Reason, or rather the
same Thing in other Words. Again, If they can Reason, they can compare what is
meant by our Terms, and have the Sense of those Sayings we call Propositions in
their Knowing Power. And, since that Reason is not given them for nothing, but
for their Preservation, they can compare Agreeable and Disagreeable Objects,
and pursue, out of that Reason, that which is most Agreeable; that is, they can
Will, Choose, and Act freely, which are naturally consequent to their gathering
by their Reason what is better or worse for them, and thence Determining
themselves to it accordingly: I say, themselves; for, if they have Reason, then
Reason is part of Themselves, and not a Distinct Thing from them. Out of which
Two Things follow: One, That the Nature of Man and Brute are Confounded; since
all those Chief Operations Proper to Man, are Communicable to Brutes. Secondly,
That Mr. Lock will be at a loss to get an Idea of the Spirituality of his
Soul, or of other Spiritual Beings, by reflecting on the Operations of his
Mind; since the same may possibly be found in such Beings as are merely
Corporeal. Wherefore, to conclude this Discourse, all our Natural Notions of
Body and Spirit, and of all their Operations, must be jumbled together in a
kind of Indifferency to either; and therefore those two Natures must be
Confounded, if either the Soul, which is Spiritual, may have Materiality
Annexed to her; or Brutes, which are material Entities, may have Thought,
Knowledge, and Reason Annexed to them. And since Mr. Lock affirms very
rationally, that one of his Ideas is not Another, I cannot but think he becomes
the more obliged to show out of the Natures of those two Things, liquidly and
precisely, how those two Natures are distinguished; or else his way of Ideas
will be conceived to be merely Fantastic and Unphilosophical; being most
unlike the Ideas in the Divine Understanding, the Original Ground of all Truth,
which do not confound Natures, but establish them in a most perfect Distinction
to be what they are, and no other. I press not here how no Discourse at all in
Philosophy can be Conclusive, unless the Nature of Body and Spirit be perfectly
and clearly contradistinguish'd; nor repeat what I have shown, Reflex. 9.. 7.
that our Natural Notions teach us to distinguish perfectly between Body and
Spirit, which his Ideas do not, but confound them, and thence deprave our
Natural Knowledge of Things. I know he says, but proves not, that the having
General Ideas, puts a perfect Difference between Brutes and us; to which I have
spoken formerly. I add, that it is a thousand times easier to have General
Ideas, they being but Imperfect Perceptions of the Thing, than to have Reason;
as is easy to be demonstrated, and has been manifested above.

5. As for making something out of Nothing, or Creating; after we have proved
that Existence is Essential to God, To create is the Peculiar Effect of
Self-existence.
and not Accidental to him, which Mr. L. clearly demonstrates; it follows
thence, and out of the Commonest Notion of Causality, that it is not a matter
of Wonderment, or hard to believe that he should Create, but that if he pleases
to operate ad extra, this is his Peculiar Action; since nothing is more Evident
than that Every Thing acts as it is. Whence, if God's Essence, and his very
Nature be Existence or Actual Being, it is demonstrable that it is not only as
peculiar to him to cause Actual Being or Create, as it is for Fire to heat, or
Light to enlighten; but, moreover, that this is the only Effect that can
immediately or without the intervention of Second Causes, proceed from him.

6. I much fear that it may seem something to weaken the true Argument for the
Possibility of Creation, to The Thought cannot move the Body, and why.
bring the Instance of our Thought moving our Body; whence he concludes that
Gods Power to do a Thing is not to be denied because we cannot comprehend its
Operation. For, 1. Mr. Lock thinks he experiences this, viz. that the Soul
moves the Body; whereas we do not experience that God Created any thing. 2. As
Mr. Lock has shown very ingeniously, that only the Man is Free: So I affirm
it is the Man that, wrought upon himself, moves his Body, and not his Thought
only. And, that, as when we gaind our First Notions, the Man was acted upon,
both according to his Corporeal and Spiritual Part; so, every New Act he had
afterward, that proceeded from him as he was Man, is performed by the
Concurrence of both those Parts. Whence, in every Act of his Soul, he must be
re-excited by some Object that is out of the Soul, either striking on his
Senses; or else, by the repeated Strokes of the Material Phantasms, lodged
within, upon the Seat of Knowledge. These propose a-fresh the Motives, and
continue those Impressions all the while he deliberates, compares, discourses,
and determins; and, when the Man, according to that part called the Fancy, is
full (as it were) of those Agreeable Phantasms; and, consequently, the Soul
(hic est nunc) is full too of those Notions or Apprehensions of their
Agreeableness, the Whole Man acts for them, and moves to attain them. In which
Case, what is purely Material in those Actions, or belonging merely to
Corporeal Motion, is refunded into the Stupendous Contrivance of the Body,
whose Motions follow connaturally from the Phantasms, in the same way as it
does in Brutes; which is equally wonderful, we knowing no more than they, (that
is, not at all) how it is done: But, the Manner of the Action, as to its
Design, Direction, wise Ordering of it, and its Proceeding from Knowledge,
Freedom and Reason, (all which we know it does,) springs peculiarly from the
Soul, or from Man, according to his Spiritual Part. Now, the Fundamental Ground
of my Position is this, Man is not Two Things; nor (which is the same) made up
of Soul and Body, as two Actual Parts; but One Thing, of which, consequently,
those two are Potential Parts only. Wherefore, neither of those Parts is
Actually, but the Whole; and therefore, neither of them alone can Act, because
neither of them exists alone; * the Existence of the Thing being that in which
See Method to Science, Book 1. Less. 5.. 7.
its Virtue of Operating consists. But, in truth, his Argument proceeds as well
from this Topic, as it does from that of mere Thought moving the Body; for, we
can comprehend as little, how Man, though acting with his Phantasms and Thoughts
too, does move the Body, and all its Distinct Parts, so variously, as how the
Thought alone can do it. Nor, were there some Flaw in this Particular, does it
prejudice his main Demonstration of a Deity, they being Distinct Questions.
Add, that if we may conjecture from some Expressions of his in other places, he
may perhaps be of my Opinion in this Point, and, by the Word [Mind,] mean the
Man; though in many places he speaks very Ambiguously; or rather, seems too
plainly to maintain the contrary Position.

7. I take leave on this Occasion, to recommend it to Speculative Men, to
endeavor to draw all their Demonstrations The Notion or Nature of the Deity
being once settled to be Self-existence, all that can be said of it follows
Demonstratively.
from the Nature of the Thing, (this being the only solid way,) and not from
Foreign Topics. After we have proved a Deity, let us next demonstrate that God
is Self-existent; or, that his Essence, or Nature, is Existence; and then, all
that concerns the Deity, or his Immediate Operations, nay, even the Rational
Explication of the Trinity it self, will (if Right Logic and Reflection be not
wanting) follow more solidly, and more clearly, than the clearest Mathematical
Conclusions; if we rate Clearness and Evidence, (as we ought,) not from the
Figures on Paper, which make it easy to our Fancy; but from the greater
Simplicity and Clearness of the Notions, and their Terms, and of their
equally-evident Connection; which, coming nearest to First, and Self-evident
Principles, do most firmly establish the Judgment.

8. The 11th Chapter treats Of our Knowledge of the Existence of other Things;
by which words he means, other Things We can know there are Angels, though they
do not operate'on us.
than our selves. He seems to ground his Discourse on this Position, that no
particular Man can know the Existence of any other Being, but only when, by
Actually operating upon him, it makes it self perceived by him; which he calls
the Way of Sensation, or Experience. Now, if, by the Words, [any other Being,]
he means Bodies, nothing can be more Solid, or worthy a Philosopher. But, why
we may not gather by our Reason, the Existence of Spiritual Beings, or Angels,
(though they do not operate upon us actually,) from some Operation on other
Things in Nature that can only proceed from them, I cannot discern: Rather, I
hope I have demonstrated we can, in my Method, Book 3. Less. 6. Thesis 4.
Indeed, the Notions of Angelical Natures are not proper ones, as our Natural
Notions, which are imprinted by Sensation, are; which makes our Conceptions,
and consequently, the Words which we use when we discourse of them
Metaphorical. Nor matters it, that our Expressions concerning them are
oft-times Negative, or signify that they are not such Beings as Bodies are,
but Immaterial, Unextended, Indivisible, and, consequently, their Operations
Unsuccessive; in regard we intend all the while to signify by those Words, a
Positive Being, though our low Natural Conceptions cannot reach its particular
Nature, as in it self: And, if we intend this, then this is the meaning of
those Words, or our Notion of them; Meaning and Intention being all one. Yet,
these Predicates, though Negative, or Metaphorical, are, notwithstanding, truly
said of them; and, therefore, we can Argue and Discourse as consequently from
them, as we can from the most Positive or Proper Notions we have. Indeed, as
Mr. Lock says well,. 12. we cannot know they exist, by the Ideas we have of
them in our Minds; and the Reason is, because those Ideas, or Notions, taking
them as ^^stinct, are but Inadequate Conceptions of the Thing; and, considered
distinctly, are formally but a part of that Complexion of Accidents that
constitute the Individuum, which only is capable of Existing, or the Whole;
because Parts cannot exist out of the Whole: But he is much mistaken if he
thinks we can no more know they are Capable of Existing by the Notions we have
of them, than we can that Centaurs are: For, the Idea or Fancy of Centaurs
involves Inconsistent Notions in its very Nature, (or rather, No-Nature;) which
the Notion of a Subsistent Spirit, called an Angel, does not. Add, that
Knowing, Willing, and Operating, which we attribute to such Beings, are all
Positive Notions; and Consistent, or capable to meet in a Spiritual Thing.

9. Whereas Mr. Lock says we can only know the Existence of any Other Thing
when it operates upon us, and We know at first our own Existence, in the same
manner as we know the Existence of other Things; i. e. by Sensation, and not by
Intuition.
therefore we know it is actually by Sensation, I cannot see the least reason
why we should not know our own Being by Sensation too, as well as that of other
Bodies, without having recourse to Intuition; which, applied to that Case, it is
hard to understand; or, to know how it differs from the direct Knowledge had by
Sensation or Experience. We can hear, see, feel and smell some parts of our own
Body, as well as we can those of Others. Indeed, now, when we are ripe for more
express Knowledges, those Impressions made by one of our own Parts upon others,
do not cause in us the Notion of Existence, (though, perhaps, they may tacitly
repeat it,) because we know already, and beforehand, that we do exist: But,
put case we did not, would not these Impressions make us know by Sensation our
own Existence, as well as that of any other Body whatever? I doubt not but Mr.
Lock will grant they would. Since then the Embryo in the Womb lies in a
Roundish Posture, why may not one part of it, by touching another, or operating
upon it, cause in us, as soon as the Soul (which has a Capacity of Receiving
Notions) is in it, a Notion of our own Existence, by way of Sensation?
Especially, since Operation is nothing but the Sea Method to Science, Book 1.
Less. 8.. 7.
Existence of the Agent Body, pressed or imprinted (as it were) upon another,
by Motion. Certainly, it becomes us who deny Innate Ideas, to show how all our
First Notions do come into us by Impressions on the Senses; and, not to say
rawly, that some of them come by Intuition; which is the Way of Knowing Proper
to Angels, whose Knowledges are all Innate, and none of them Acquired, either
by Sense, or Discourse, for they have neither. This, I say, is certainly best
for the Interest of our Tenet; of which, Intuition gives but a slender Account.
I believe Mr. Lock proceeds upon this, that he finds he not only does, but
must as firmly assent to the Proposition Ego sum, as he does to the most
Evident Proposition whatever; nor can he at all doubt of it, nor can it need
Proof. But, my Judgment is, that this Introversion, and Studying our own
Interior, is a very Fallacious Guide, and will often lead us astray, if we
keep not a steady Eye, attentively bent to our Principles; which he seems here
to neglect. For, many Positions need no Proof, and force our Assent, and yet
their Certainty may depend on Different Causes.

10. The 12th Chapter treats of the Improvement of our Knowledge, which Mr.
Lock says, does not depend on Maxims. No Improvement of Science, without foam
General Principle.
But, First, he mistakes the Use of General Maxims: They are not made for the
Vulgar, or Beginners, to gather Knowledge by them; though it may be observed,
that Men of all sorts do naturally use them when they suit their purpose; nay,
sometimes make Proverbs of them. Nor was this Maxim, [a Whole is bigger than a
Part,] ever intended for Boys, or to teach them that their Hand is bigger than
their Little Finger, or such like; but, being premised to the ensuing Proofs,
they are occasionally made use of by Learned Men, in the Process of their
Discourse, to clinch the Truth of the Point, when it needs it, by their
Self-Evidence. In the same manner as my self have very frequently had recourse
to Metaphysical Principles, and made use of them, in my Preliminaries and
Reflections, as Occasion presented, to make my Discourses Evident; and, to rivet
the Truths I advance, in the Minds of my Readers; as any Attentive Peruser of
them may easily observe. He speaks against our Receiving Principles without
Examination, and of Principles that are not Certain; that is, against such
Sayings, as are no Principles; for, if they can either need, or admit of
Examination, or, if they be not Certain, none but mere Fops will let them pass
for Prinples. Yet, though Mr. Lock does thus oppose Maxims and Principles, it is,
notwithstanding, very evident, that himself must make use of some Maxims and
Principles all the while he disputes aganst their Usefulness; otherwise, he
cannot discourse at all; or, his Discourse can have no Force: In the same
manner as he that wrastles with another, must either fix his Foot on some Firm
Ground, or he will fall himself, instead of overthrowing his Adversary. Let us
then examine his Principles. He alleges, that the Knowledge of the Certainty of
Principles Mr. Locke's Principles examined.
depends only upon the Perception of the Agreement or Disagreement of our
Ideas. This, then, is one of his Principles; both because it runs through good
part of his 3d and 4th Books, as also because it is Equivalent to this
Universal, [All Certainty of Principles depends, etc.] Now, this is so far from
Self-evident, that it needs Examination enough; and is one of those I judge not
Certain; and, therefore, can be no Ground or Principle at all: Nor is it
possible it should, unless the Word [Idea] be cleared to mean Spiritual Notions
in our Mind, and not mere Resemblances, or Material Representations in our
Fancy; to clear which, (though the whole Treatise needs it,) no Provision is
made; but, on the contrary, those two vastly different things are rather
carelessly confounded; as is shown in my First Preliminary. Another Principle
seems to be this, [None ought, with a Blind and Implicit Faith, to Receive and
Swallow Principles.] This is of Universal Influence, and Self-Evident; and,
therefore, in all Points well qualified for a Principle. For, Principles were
not Principles, if they needed either Faith, or Deductions of Reason, to make
them go down, since they ought to be Evident by their own Light. But, what Good
can this do to any, but to such as have renounced Common Sense, even to
Ridiculousness? And, perhaps Mr. Lock had some such weak Writers in his Eye,
when he advanced this cautious Position, as a Warning to Learners.

11. Now, the General Maxims and Principles, on which the Learned Part of the
World has hitherto proceeded, Mr. Locke's main Principle; which is to ascertain
all other Principles, Inevident.
can only be overthrown (if they must needs be so) by other Principles, more
Evident than themselves are; or else it will be but a drawn Match; and so they
may hope still to stand (as the Lawyers phrase it) in their full Force, Effect,
and Virtue. We are to consider then, what Principle Mr. Lock has substituted
in their room, when they are discarded; for, it is a very ill Case to be left
without any Principles at all. It Is this, [All Knowledge of the Certainty of
Principles, and consequently, the Way to improve our Knowledge, is, to get, and
fix in our Minds, Clear, Distinct and Complete Ideas, as far as they are to be
had, and annex to them Proper and Constant Names.] Now, if the Ideas must be
Clear, the Terms must be very Simple, and consequently (as was shown above)
General ones; and this will force us back upon General Maxims, which it was
intended we should avoid, as good for little. To be Distinct, if we go to work
like Artists, we must distinguish those General and Common Notions; which will
bring us back into the old Road of those Ten Common Heads, called Predicaments;
and, consequently, of Genus, Species and Differences, which was lately
disliked; I suppose, because it was too much traveled in, and beaten; though, I
think, such a Common Path should not be left, because some may have here and
there laid a Block or Briar in the way. Lastly, Complete Ideas (as he grants)
are not to be had of the Species, much less of the Individuums. And, as for
Names; it is not we that are to annex them, but the Common Usage of the Vulgar,
or of the Generality of Learned Men, (in case they be Artificial ones;) for,
these are they who gave them their Constant and Proper Signification. Whence is
seen, that so many Difficulties are involved in this one Thesis, or Principle,
(besides what is said above, of the Word [Ideas,]) that we can build no Degree
of Certainty, nor Improvement of Knowledge upon it; especially, since Mr. Lock
himself (according to his usual Candor and Modesty) declares here, he does but
think it true. But, which is the hardest Case of all, to embrace this
Principle, we must be obliged to quit all our Self-evident Maxims, as of little
Use, upon which our selves, and all the Learned part of the World, have
proceeded hitherto.

12. It Is a great Truth, that it is a right Method of advancing Knowledge, to
Consider our Abstract Notions: But, if What Things hinder the Advancement of
Science.
these be not the Things, nor (as Mr. Locke's Complex Ideas are) so much as
like them, I see not but that, let us Consider them as much as we will, we
shall be never the nearer attaining any Real Knowledge by such a Consideration.
I add, that it is also as necessary to find out Middle Terms, that are Proper;
without which, no Science can be had of any New Conclusion; nor, consequently,
can we, without this, advance one Step in Exact Knowledge. It Is a certain Truth
also, that Morality is capable of Demonstration; though I do not remember that
any Author, but Mr. Lock, and my self, have been so bold, as openly to profess
it. The Current of Slight Speculaters having long endeavored to make it pass
for a kind of Maxim, that [there is no perfect Certainty to be had, but only in
Lines and Numbers:] Whereas, the Principles of Morality are as Evident, and the
Notions belonging to such Subjects as Clear, as those in Natural Philosophy,
perhaps Clearer; as this worthy Author has shown most manifestly. It Is also
True, that Knowledge may be bettered by Experience. But, if he means
Scientifical Knowledge, which is the Effect of Demonstration, I must deny it,
unless Common Principles of Nature do guide Experience, and give it Light of
the True and Proper Causes of what Experience informed our Senses; for, without
their Assistance, (as I have shown in the Preface to my my Method,)
Experimental Knowledge can never produce any one Scientifical Conclusion. I
add, that True Science would be a Thousand times more advanced, did Learned Men
bend their Endeavors to begin with the Primary Affections of Body, and thence
proceed gradually to Secondary, or more Compounded ones: For, this Method would
furnish Studious Men with good Store of Proper Middle Terms, to deduce their
Demonstrations. Lastly, It Is true, that we must beware of Hypotheses, and Wrong
Principles: But, where shall we find any Sect. of Philosophers, who, for want
of Exact Skill in Logic and Metaphysics, are not forced to build upon
Hypotheses, (and those generally False ones too;) but our Anti-Ideists, whom I
take to be true Followers of Aristotle, in his main Principles, and the only
true Understanders of his Doctrine. It being, indeed, scarce possible, that
those who are not well qualified with those two Sciences, should be capable to
Comprehend his True Sense.

13. Mr. Lock judges, that a Man may pore long enough on those Maxims used by
Euclid, without seeing one jot the more Euclid, and such others, not blameable
for laying Principles, or General Maxims.
of Mathematical Truths. Self-evident Truths need not be por'd upon at all; nor
were they ever meant for the attaining New Knowledges by poring on those
Propositions, singly considered: Yet, these Maxims must be pre-supposed to be
True, and admitted, or the Arguments would very often want their best Cement,
that gives them an evident and necessary Coherence. They are prefixed by Euclid
at first, both because they may often come in play afterward; as also, because
it would throw off the Tenor of the Discourse, to mention them still expressly
every time there needs Recourse to them: Whence it was judged fit by him, and
others like him, to premise them at first, and then refer to them. Let Men but
observe how, and in what Occasions, Euclid makes use of them, and it will then
be best seen what they are good for: But, if they are good for nothing at all,
I am sure it must be concluded, that both Euclid himself, and such Writers and
Users of Maxims, were, all of them, a Company of vain, idle Fops, to amuse
their Readers by proposing so solemnly such Ridiculous Trifles; and dubbing
those Insignificant Baubles with the Honorable Titles of Maxims and
Principles. To fix which Dis-repute upon him, and his Imitaters, will, I doubt,
much Scandalize every True Member of the Commonwealth of Learning.

REFLECTION 21th. ON The Fourteenth, Fifteenth, and Sixteenth CHAPTERS.
1. I Am sorry I must declare, that in Mr. Locke's 14th Chapter, which treats
[Of Judgment] there is scarce one Line that I can yield to. I discourse thus:
Judgment The Point stated.
does most evidently import the Fixure of our Understanding in its Assent to
the Truth or Falsehood of any Proposition. For to say, I judge a thing to be so;
is the same as to say, [I am fully and firmly persuaded it is so.] Now, this
Fixure of the Mind may arise from two Causes; Reason and Passion. Under the
Word [Reason,] taken at large, I comprehend all kind of Evident Knowledge
whatever, that can belong to a Rational Creature. To Passion belongs all
Precipitancy of Assent, from what Motive or Cause soever it springs. The Former
makes us adhere to what we judge, upon such Motives, as by their Evidence do
determine the Understanding to Assent, and fix it in that Assent; which
Motives, therefore, can be only such as are purely Intellectual; or such as, by
our Proceeding upon them, we see clearly the Thing must be so, or not so, as we
apprehend. The Later springs from the Will, corrupted and biased by some
Interest or Pleasure, which inveigles our Understanding to adhere to it as a
Truth, because the Will would have it so. Again, there are two sorts of Objects
Man, as having two Natures in him, may be employed about, viz. Outward Action
and Inward Assent. The former does (generally) concern the External
Conveniences or Necessities of our Temporal Life here; the Later, the Interior
and Natural Perfection of our Soul; which is the Adhering to Truth, and
rejecting of Error. In the Former of these we can have no Clear Evidence, or
very seldom; both because Outward Actions are employed about Particulars, of
which we can have no Science; as also, because those Particulars about which we
are to Act, are surrounded with almost Innumerable Circumstances which we
cannot Comprehend, and waylaid by the Undiscoverable Ambushes of Fortune; so
that we can seldom or never, with absolute Certainty, know whether they may, or
may not prove Successful. Notwithstanding which Dangers, when there is
Necessity or great Convenience to Act Outwardly, we may, without disparaging
our Reason, fall to acting upon a Probability; the Necessity obliging us to do
so, and the Impossibility of perfect Assurance acquitting us of Imprudence.
But, of Assenting, or of Judging Inwardly, that a Proposition is True or False,
there can be no Necessity, unless Evidence forces us to it; in regard God's
Goodness has furnished us with a Faculty of Suspending our Judgment in such
Cases, lest we run into Error; which is always prejudicial to our Nature; and,
if the Error does concern matters of high Moment, pernicious to our Souls
Eternal Welfare. This I take to be plain Reason, nor do I doubt but that each
Branch of this Discourse may be reduced to perfect Evidence. We come to examine
now what Mr. Lock delivers in this most important Point.

2. First, He Confounds Outward Action, of which there is Necessity, and can be
no Evidence of Success; with Mr. L. confounds Outward Action, to which we may
proceed upon a Probability, with Inward Assent, to which we may not.
Interior Judging and Assenting, of which there can be no Necessity, if there
can be no Evidence; and of which Evident Knowledge may oftentimes be had; as
also concerning whose Truth or Falsehood, till Evidence appear, we may safely
and honorably suspend our Judgment; nay, if, in such a case, we do not, we
hazard to do our selves an Injury when we need not. That he thus confounds
those two vastly Different, or rather Contrary Considerations, appears hence;
that, 1. he shows the Unreasonableness of not eating, and of not going about
our Business, till we have a Demonstration that the Meat will nourish us, and
the Business will succeed; which Instances evidently relate to Outward Action;
but in 3. he speaks in the same Tenor of taking the Proposition to be True or
False; which clearly relates to Inward Assent. Secondly, God's Wisdom has
indeed given us, generally, no more but Probability for our Outward Actions
doing us good, or succeeding; but to think our all-wise Maker has given us no
better Grounds to make us Assent; or rather, that he intended we should Assent
upon Probabilities, which are still liable to be False; and, if they be but
Probabilities, may all be False, is to think that God meant to expose our Souls
to innumerable Errors; nay, allows and designs we should embrace Errors. For,
if (as Mr. L. says) God has given as a Faculty to judge that to be True, which,
the Reasons for their Truth being but Probable, may not be True; then, since
God has most certainly intended we should make use of the Faculty he has given
us, it must follow that God has exposed us to Error, or designed we should
err; and that, (this Faculty, as he says, not being Knowledge) very frequently.
Which is hardly consistent with the Reverence we do both of us owe to our
Creator, who governs his Creatures according to the Nature he has given them;
which, is to avoid Error, and never (as will shortly be seen this does) to
admit a Contradiction.

3. What therefore I extremely admire, is, that Mr. Lock should say in express
Terms, that Judgment is that Faculty, A strange Character of our Judging
Faculty.
whereby the Mind takes any Proposition to be True or False, without perceiving
a Demonstrative Evidence in the Proofs; and that this Faculty is given Man by
God to enlighten him. For, First, Judgment does not enlighten us at all; as
appears evidently, because False Judgments are Errors; which are so far from
enlightening the Mind, that they manifestly darken it. All that Judgment does,
is to Fix the Mind in the Persuasion it has, whether that Persuasion springs
from Clear Reason or Dark Passion; and Mr. Lock seems to make good my Words,
while he contradistinguishes Judgment to Knowledge; which later, and only
which, is our Intellectual Light. Secondly, The Words [Taking Propositions to
be True or False] must mean Assenting to them as such; for every Judgment is
not only an Assent, but a full and firm Assent. Now, that no Probability can,
with Reason, cause Assent, (and certainly God, who gave us our Reason, has not
given us a Faculty to use it against our Reason) will be seen hereafter.
Thirdly, Which is yet worse, by contradistinguishing Judgment and Clear
Knowledge, he makes those Assents which spring out of Clear Knowledge to be no
Judgments at all; whereas These are the only Judgments that we can be sure
will do us good, and are according to our True Nature, Reason. He tells us
indeed, in the Close, that when we judge as things really are, they are Right
Judgments. But, how does this agree with his Contradistinguishing formerly
[Judgment,] according to its whole Latitude, or in its General Notion, from
Knowledge; unless we should say, that we only do right when we judge at
Hap-hazard, or judge Right by Chance. Qui quod aequum est statuit part
inaudita altera, Aequum licet statuerit, haud aequus est tamen: By which Rule,
we are ill Men, even though we Judge right; because we precipitate and hazard to
embrace Error when we need not. Besides, Things are so really to us as we know
them to be: And, if we do not know them to be such, we cannot with Reason say
or judge them to be such; and, if we do, we act against our true Nature; to do
which God has given us no Faculty. Fourthly, Amongst the Causes mentioned here
that make us judge, Necessity is reckoned as one, when Certain Knowledge is not
to be had: But, this can be no Cause at all to make us Judge. For, there can be
no possible Necessity, forcing us to judge, but Clear Evidence. This, indeed,
obliges us to Interior Assent, and compels us to judge that the Thing is so as
we see it to be. But, if no Evidence can be had, what Necessity is there at all
of Judging one way or other? Cannot we suspend our Judgment till Evidence
appears; or whether it does ever appear, or not? Why are we in such have to
hazard falling into Error? Or who bids us Judge at all till we see a good (or
Conclusive) Reason why? I am sure, whatever many Men may do out of Weakness,
neither God nor Nature ever imposed upon any such an absurd Duty. Lastly, What
means his making it then to be Judgment, when we have no Demonstrative
Evidence? May we not judge a Conclusion that is Demonstrated to be True,
because it is Demonstrated? Or that an Identical Proposition is True, because
it is Self-evident? Or, rather, ought we not to judge all such Propositions to
be True for this very Reason, because we know evidently they are so. So far
then is Certain Knowledge from being contradistinguish'd from Judgment, that
they are in some manner the same, as I have shown in my METHOD, B. 2. Less. 1.
3. where, I hope, I have set the Nature of Judgment in a Clear Light; as I have
that of Assent, Suspense, and Certainty, B. 3. 9.

4. I should be glad to think my self mistaken in Mr. Locke's Meaning, if his
Express Words, the Tenor of That God has provided due Motives of Enjoined
Assent to all Mankind, if they be not wanting to themselves.
his Discourse, and his next Chapter [Of Probability,] which runs in the same
Strain, would give me leave. Perhaps, he thinks that, since none can embrace
Christianity without judging it to be True, and few know it to be so, we should
exclude the Generality from the way to Salvation, if we do not allow such a
Faculty given us by God, as Judging without Knowing. I Answer, 1. Those Gifts
that come from Above, from the Father of Lights, are all Perfect, as being the
Endowments of his Infinitely-bountiful Hand; and, that Men act imperfectly and
foolishly, springs from the Limitedness of Creatures. Scarce a Faculty they
have but has its Weakness when we come to act, as well as our Reason. When then
any one is reduced to Christianity upon weak Motives, what is Good or Sincere in
that Action is refunded into God the Author of all Good; what is Defective (as
all Inconclusive Reasonings are) is to be refunded into the Imperfection of
Creatures. Indeed, it belongs to God to lay and establish such Motives to
embrace High and Concerning Truths, as are of their own Nature apt to convince,
not only People of all sorts, but even the most Speculative Wit living; but it
does not belong to him to provide, that every weak Man shall, untaught,
penetrate them thoroughly; nor every Careless Man make use of them. Rude and
Imperfect Motives are sufficient to move Rude and Imperfect Understandings. 2.
This notwithstanding, God has furnished even the Rudest, who cannot Speculate
at all, with a Power to understand such Motives, after some Fashion, called
Practical Evidence; which teaches them, by a common Converse with Natural
Things, and with Mankind, to know (dully at least) the Force of Witnessing
Authority attesting the Miracles that abetted Christianity, and the Books that
delivered it. But, what I chiefly insist upon is, that it teaches all Men, that
the Nature of its Precepts, and of its Morality, is most Agreeable to our
Reason; that it curbs Passion, which breeds such Turmoils in the World; and
that, (if settled in Men's Lives,) it would establish all the World in Peace
and Concord; especially, since they cannot but see what Inconveniences and ill
Consequences do ensue the Breach of the Commandments. And this gives an Entire
Satisfaction to every Man who is capable of Knowing Common Morality, (as, who
is not?) and assures them, that the Doctrine it self is True; since they
experience that Error puts all into Confusion and Disorder. But, this on the
By. In a Word, He must be a mean Speculater, who does not observe that God has
laid Motives, and Solid Knowable ones too, for every Man to embrace Christian
Faith, of what degree soever he be, if he be but so wise as to doubt, and
require a Reason: If those Motives be not applied to all, it is either the Fault
of those that do not care to be instructed; or of those who should inculcate
and explicate to them those Motives, and show how Solid and Clear they are. Let
them then bear the Blame; God's Providence is justified, and his Wisdom and
Goodness magnified, by his making ample Provision for such Negligent and
Unworthy Persons. See Method to Science, Book 3. Less. 8.. 18, 19.

5. Hence, I have little to say to his 15th Chapter, which treats of
Probability; See Method to Science, B. 3. L. 8.
having shown from the Ground To assent upon a Probability, is against the
Commonest Light of Reason.
of all Consequence, (the Connection of the Middle Term with the two Extremes,)
that, when the Medium is Proper or Immediate, it causes Demonstration, and
begets Science; when Common or Remote, it makes the Thing only Probable, and
begets Opinion; when Unconcerning, it causes Improbability; when clearly
Repugnant, it breeds Dissent. I am therefore only to reflect on those
Expressions of Mr. Lock that seem to say we may assent, or judge the Thing is
so upon Probable Reasons; or, as Mr. Lock expresses it, assent as firmly as
though the Thing were infallibly demonstrated, though it do but border near upon
Certainty. I have shown in my Method, Book 3. Less. 9.. 12. that no truly Wise
Man does Assent or Judge upon Motives, though very highly Probable; nor can do
so, though they be never so Probable and Likely, if he sees it but Likely, or
Probable: For, all Reasons or Motives that are but Probable, permit that the
Thing may not be so, or may not be; and to assent, or judge the Thing True, is
to say in our Mind, that the Thing is: Whence, to Assent the Thing is, upon a
Probability, is, equivalently, to hold, that, it is possible the Thing may be,
and may not be, at once: It may be, because it is; and, it may not be at the
same time, because the only Grounds for its Being so, are but Probable. Which,
therefore, being against a First, and Self-evident Principle, is the greatest
Depravation that a Humane Understanding can be liable to, and (if put in clear
Terms) absolutely Impossible; both because Contradictions being repugnant to
the Nature of Ens, or Thing, are Unintelligible; as also, because it would make
our Mind, which is Essentially Intellectual, to be not Intellectual, that is,
Chimerical. For, it is impossible it should be Intellectual, if it denies First
Principles.

6. This Ground laid, it is obvious to discern what is to be said to his 16th
Chapter, [Of the Degrees of Assent.] There cannot be, in proper Speech, any
Degrees of Assent.
For, 1. I must deny that any Assent at all that the Thing is so, can be built
upon the Sandy Foundation of Probability, without a most prodigious Perversion
of Humane Understanding. 2. Hence I reflect upon the very Subject or Title of
this Chapter; and I object against it, that it is an Absolute Impossibility
there should be, in proper Speech, any Degrees of Assent. To Assent to any
Truth, (as was lately shown,) is to say interiourly, the Thing [is;] and to
Dissent, is to say the Thing [is not.] These two Notions then are evidently the
Objects of those two Acts, which give those Acts to be what they are, or (as
the Schools express it) do specify them. Wherefore, each of those two Acts
consists in an Indivisible, as their Objects do; and, consequently, there can
be no more any Degrees of Assent, than there can be any Middle between is, and
is not; which is neither the one nor the other; or, in part the one, in part
the other; whereas, being both of them Indivisible, neither of them can have
any Parts at all. The Degrees then which can possibly be put in this case, and
which I would be willing to think Mr. Lock meant, are the Degrees of Bending
or Inclining, more or less, toward Assent or Dissent; that is, Greater or
Lesser Opinions of the Things Being, or not Being. Assent then, and Dissent, or
is and is not, in the Judging Power, are the two fixed Butts and Bounds of that
large Field, in which Innumerable Swarms of Opinions, Probabilities,
Likelihoods, Doubts, Deemings, and Uncertainties reside; driven perpetually up
and down, in a Wild-Goose Chase, by those Unsteady Guides, Probabilities; now
nearer, now farther off from those Immovable Barriers. But, it is to be noted,
that the Degrees of Probability and Likelihood may sometimes be so very great,
that they may seem, even to the wisest Men, while they regard them heedlesly,
to counterfeit Assent, till they come to take a narrower and stricter Re-view
of the Grounds on which they are built; as I have shown in my Method, Book 3.
Less. 9.. 2. Mr. Lock enumerates here many Probable Topics, grounding
Opinion; and I have done the same, in the place now quoted,. 10. All which do
agree in this, that they are Common or Remote Mediums: Whence they are, in true
Reason, Inconclusive; and therefore, utterly unable to cause Assent in a Being
that is Rational; there wanting in them that Visible and Certain Connection, in
which all the Force of Consequence consists, and which Mr. Lock puts to be
only known by Intuition. There may, indeed, be Degrees of Assent taken from
the Subject's side, by which the Understanding Assents more or less firmly;
according as the Medium is more or less Evident. Whence, Metaphysical Mediums,
which approach nearest to Self-Evidence, cause a firmer Assent, than those
which are taken from Inferior Notions, which depend on the other for their
Certainty: And, that Medium taken from the Divine Authority, does rationally
beget the Firmest Assent of all: Yet, still, the Object of the Assent or
Dissent is [is,] or [is not.] But this cannot be Mr. Locke's meaning here;
because the least of these Assents is built upon Clear Evidence; which is
impossible to be found, where the Medium is but Probable.

7. I am very apprehensive that this Discourse, and others such like will seem
very Uncouth, and be very Displeasing Probable Assent is Nonsense, or
Impertinent.
to those short-sighted Speculaters, who, either out of Disadvantagious
Education, or out of Diffidence that there can be any Certain Method to
Science, are Sceptically inclined: Especially to those of our Modern Schoolmen;
who, not being accustomed to demonstrate themselves, think it a Disgrace to
them, and Incredible to boot, that any else should do it. One of whom, a Worthy
Friend of mine, of an acute Understanding, and very Ingenious, but not yet
weaned from insignificant School-Terms, nor aware of their Trifling way of
Distinguishing; uponmy discoursing with him about this point, did imagine it
might all be answered, and over thrown by an easy Distinction of Assent, into
Absolute and Probable. Alleging that Absolute Assent had indeed [is] for its
Object, and so consisted in an Indivisible; but that Probable Assent did not
so; by which means the imputation of holding a Contradiction is avoided. Thus
he replied: Wherefore, it were not amiss for his sake, and others of the same
pitch, to lay open the frivolousness of this insignificant Distinction; that,
by reflecting on this, they may correct their carriage in all other like
occasions. First then, he seems to join the Epithet of [Probable] to the Act of
Assenting; which is perfect Nonsense. For, since every Accident or Mode has its
Metaphysical Verity, by which it is what it is, as well as any Substance; it is
equally against the First Principle [Every Thing is what it is] to apply that
Distinction to any Accident (of which Assent is one,) as it would be to apply
it to any Substance. Put case then we were discoursing concerning the Nature of
a Stone, or of any other Substance or Body; and were disputing whether its
nature were such or such; and he should go about to elude the whole force of
this Discourse, by Distinguishing [Stone] into a Probable Stone, and an
Absolute Stone, would it not be highly ridiculous: For the same Reason it would
be equally Ridiculous to apply [Probable] to the Act of Assenting; since that
Act is as absolutely it self, as a Stone is a Stone, or any other Body is what
it is. But, that I may not be too severe, let us imagine he meant to apply
[Probable,] to the Object of the Act or some Proposition, as standing under
Motives only Probable; whence, it is equivalent to this Proposition, [This
Tenet is Probable:] Then, in case the Proof of that Tenet were only a Probable
Medium, that Proposition is a plain Truth, for what is inferred by a Probable
Medium, is beyond all question, Probable; and therefore the Assent to that
Proposition, ought to be called Absolute, and not Probable, which quite spoils
the Distinction by making the two branches of it to be one and the same. 3.
Hence, this Contradistinguishing Probable and Absolute, is faulty in another
regard, because the two parts of it are not (some way) Opposite; as they ought
to be; because the Defendent in the Schools uses to say, that according to one
of them, he grants the Proposition, and according to the other denies it. Now,
Absolute and Probable, are not at all proper Opposites: [Absolute] signifies
Consummate or Perfect in its kind, and relates to the Minds perfectly yiedling
or assenting that the Thing is True; whereas, [Probable] must relate to the
Motives, or the common Medium under which the Proposition stands, or else (as
was lately shown) it is mere Nonsense, and Ridiculous. The Proper Opposite to
Probable, is Improbable; and, what has Improbable to do with Absolute? Lastly,
granting he speaks of the Object or Thesis proposed to our Assent, it will
appear evidently that my Assertion will stand good, and that the Formal Object
of Assent is what is expressed by the Copula [is,] or the Connection of the two
Terms, in which Truth (which only is to be assented to) consists. For example;
When we say that [A Thesis proved only by a Common Medium, is Probable;] the
Truth, even of this Proposition, is only expressed by the Copula [is,] and
consists in an Indivisible; so that you no sooner step out of [is Probable,]
but you must run into its Contradictory, [is not Probable.]

8. This Instance will give us occasion to note the Vanity and Folly of
Innumerable Distinctions, which pass current What kinds of Distinctions are
Disallowable in Disputation.
amongst Disputants; in which, if examined strictly, sometimes the two parts of
them are not Opposite, but only oddly Disparate; sometimes Coincident;
sometimes they are applied to such Terms as are incapable to admit them,
without palpable Nonsense; very often when all is done, they are Impertinent:
And, frequently, whereas the Distinction should divide the Notion of the Genus,
and include it, one of the Members will perfectly contradict the whole
Generical Notion, and pretend to pass for one sort of it, when it is point
blank Opposite to it, and to every part of it: For example, I remember an
Eminent School Divine, when (honest Nature putting a scruple into me, when I
was young) I asked him how a Man could say he had done such a thing when he had
not done it; he answered very Soberly, that he had done it intentionaliter, though
not realiter: Now, to do it (as he called it) Intentionaliter, is only to have
an Intention to do it, which signifies not to have done it. So that [Doing] is,
by virtue of a Distinction, divided into Doing and not Doing; and not Doing is
made one sort of Doing. And I do assure my Friend his Probable Assent is not a
jot wiser; but has more faults in it than had the other, It Is not enough then,
nor at all Satisfactory, to give an Answer fork'd with a Distinction; but care
must be had that the Distinction be Pertinent, and well qualified, as is hinted
above. See other Distinctions of the same leaven with the former, laid open,
Method to Science. B. 3. Less. 9. 19. 20.

9. I heartily join with Mr. Lock in his Discourse about preserving Mutual
Charity, and Forbearance. Though Charity to Sincere and Weak Misunderstanders is
a Christian Duty.
the Demonstrations of Learned Men do much Good, yet I am sure the want of
Charity does more Harm. It Is in the highest manner Preternatural that Rational
Souls should be forced, or dealt with any other way than by Reason; unless they
come to wrong Common Morality, or the Peace of the Common wealth in which they
live; both which are so evidently against the Law of Nature, that their Reason
must needs see and acknowledge it, unless most wickedly blinded with Passion
and Vice. Alas! what Silly Reasons do good Weak People take for Certain, and
are convinced by them as perfectly as we are by the Clearest Demonstration!
And, (which more obliges us to pity them) if we propose to them strong Reasons,
they are too weighty for their weak Strength to wield; and their own ridiculous
ones do suit better with their Size and Pitch of Wit.

10. I am clearly of Mr. L's Judgment, concerning the Degrees of Probability in
several matters; as also that in Tradition built on mere Hearsay, has little or
no Force.
Traditional Truths, each Remove weakens the force of the Proof, if it descends
merely (as he expresses it) by the way of the Hearsay of a Hearsay. The bare
Narative must either be supported by a Consonant, Frequent, Open and Obligatory
Practice, and be strengthened by the Acknowledged High Concern of Perpetuating
the Matter of Fact attested, or it may in time dwindle away into a feeble
Tittle-tattle. And, I very much esteem his Remark, as both very Acute, and very
Solid, that no Probability in Historical Relation can arise higher than its
First Original; unless that First Original were afterward abetted and
corroborated by other Motives. His Allowance of the Validity of the Testimony
for Miracles, is Wise, and Pious; and his making Divine Revelation to be the
highest Certainty, is well becoming a Christian Philosopher: For, all our
Knowledge whatever is taken from Things, made and established by God, as the
First Cause; and, therefore, if it be Certain that God's Revelation or
Testimony stands engaged for any Point, the Truth of that Point is proved by a
Nobler, Stronger and Higher Medium than can be drawn from Physics, or even
Metaphysics; that is, from the Sovereign Cause of all those Objects, whence
those respective Mediums are taken; and, by whom only they they have any Truth
at all in them; no, not so much as their Metaphysical Verity it self.

11. It would not be impertinent on this Occasion, to present Mr. Lock with a
short Story. A very A more Firm Assent is due to Points certainly known to be
Revealed, than to Scientifical Conclusions.
Judicious Cantabrigian desired to know of me, whether we ought not to assent
to a Point of Christian Faith, supposing it was evidently Revealed, more firmly
than to any Scientifical Conclusion? I answered, that we ought. He asked, Why?
Alleging, that, since there could not be any greater Certainty that it was
revealed than Demonstration, the Assent to the Conclusion could not, in true
Reason, be more Firm than that which a Demonstration produces, or than the
Conclusion of any Science: For, let the Syllogism be this, [Whatever God said,
is True: But, God said there will be a Resurrection of our Bodies; Therefore,
there will be such a Resurrection:] None can pretend (said he) any greater
Certainty than that of Science, for the Certainty of the Authority that gave us
the Minor; therefore, since Conclusio sequitur deteriorem partem, the Assent to
the Conclusion can be, in true Reason, no greater than that of Science. I
replied, that that Saying of the Logicians was meant of the Particularity or
Negativeness found in the Premises, and not of the Force of the Medium. I
alleged, that the Major had the greater Influence upon the Conclusion, (whence
that Proposition so called, had its Appellation,) than the Minor; which was
only an Applier of the Force of the Major to some Particular, or some other
Notion, in order to conclude concerning it; and therefore, the Certainty of the
Conclusion was chiefly to be rated from the Force of the Major: Whence, those
Enthymems, which have the Major for their Antecedent, are more Natural than
those which have the Minor. I insisted, that the Divine Authority being
alleged for the only Medium or Motive for all Revealed Points whatever, our
Assent to the Verity of all such Points, was only to be refunded into It; and,
that it lost not its Force by its being applied by a weaker Medium to some
Particular, provided that Supreme Authority's standing engaged for that
Particular, were closely Applied to our Mind; which is done by absolute
Certainty and Evidence. To illustrate which, I brought this Instance. Let there
be two Agents, whereof the one is Calidum ut octo, the other Calidum ut duo,
and both of them applied to the same Patient equally; it will not follow from
this Equal Application, that they will have an Equal Effect; but the Heat
produced by the one, will be more Intense than that which was caused by the
other. So, supposing two Syllogisms, the Minors of which are both known by
Science; but of the Majors, one is known only by Science, the other by an
infinitely higher Evidence, viz. by the Essential Veracity of the Divine
Authority; it will not follow, from the Equal Application of it, by the
respective Minors, to this or that Particular, Subsum'd under them, that the
Assent to the two Conclusions, which is the Effect they are to produce in our
Minds, will be Equal; but they will operate according to their Several Forces,
provided the Force of both be but Closely applied to our Minds, so to make it
work its Full Effect; which is done by seeing both the Minors to be Absolutely
Certain and Evident. I have not Time to dilate on this high Point as it
deserves, but leave it to the Sober Reflection of all Judicious Lovers of Truth,
who seriously desire that Christian Principles may approve themselves to be, in
all respects, perfectly Rational. And it is a Duty we all owe to our selves, and
to the World, to show that Christian Faith does not pervert or impair, but
perfect and exalt our Reason.

REFLECTION 22th. ON The 17th, 18th, 19th, and Last CHAPTERS.
1. THis Learned Author states Reason very right in all its Parts; but, I
believe, he mistakes the right End, Intention and Use of Syllogisms; and that,
How Syllogisms came to be invented at first.
while he opposes them, he takes his Measures from the Modern School-way of
Syllogistick Arguing, and the little Fruit it has yielded. Such Forms of
Reasoning were, certainly, never intended for the Vulgar, as by his Discourse
he seems to apprehend; nor for Men of good Mother-Wits, to attain Ordinary
Knowledge, by casting their Thoughts in those Exact Molds. For, Mankind could
use their Reason, and improve in it too; nay, could draw their Consequences
(generally) very well, before Syllogistick Reasoning came in fashion; though they
could not so well make it out to themselves or others, why the Consequence must
follow, nor refund it into its Causes, and so set it above Contest, by reducing
it to Evidence. Their own Natural Genius taught them to discourse right, very
often unreflectingly; as it does also the Vulgar in Things within their Ken. In
process of Time, Reflecters upon Nature, finding (as it were) by Experience,
that some Discourses were evidently Consequent, some not, they began to cast
about and find out by what Virtue some Discourses came to be so evidently
Conclusive above others. And, to this end (Art, if truly such, being nothing
but a deep Inspection into Nature) they set themselves to anatomize and dissect
a Rational Discourse, that so they might discover the hidden Nerves and
Ligaments that gave Force and Connection to the whole. They found that such a
Discourse did consist of three main Parts, called Propositions; and each of
these again, of three lesser parts, called by them Subject, Copula, and
Predicate; all which had Distinct Natures and Offices in the Discourse. They
discovered that the Connection of the two Terms in the Conclusion, in which
consists the Truth of it, depended on their Connection with a Third or Middle
Term in the Premises; and that, if they be not connected with it or Immediate,
but Remote from it, as all Common Mediums are, which beget Probabilities;
nothing is concluded, and so the Conclusion may, (for any thing we know) be
False. They observed hence, that there could be but Three Terms in such a
Discourse; and that, were they more, it caused a Blunder and Inconsequence.
Hence they took Care those three Terms should be so placed, as would render the
Connection of the other Two with the Medium most Clear at First Sight. This
done, they treated of each of those Greater and Lesser Parts, that is, of
Propositions and Notions singly and apart; adding such Rules as they saw
convenient for each. From these Observations, laid orderly together, sprung the
Art of Logic, and all the Rudiments belonging to it. All which have their
Force from Nature; nor ought any thing be esteemed Art, but what has honest
downright Nature for its Ground: And, I hope, that in every Tittle of my whole
Method, I have not one Argument in those many Trains of Consequences I have
drawn there throughout it, that is not taken from the Nature of the Thing in
hand. Now, things standing thus, who can think Logic, or Syllogism (the main
End of it,) are to be slighted as of little or no use? Can any Man think that
Art and Reflection do add no Advantage to Untaught Nature? Or that our Rude,
Natural, and Common Reason may not be Cultivated and Improved, as well as our
Natural Voice, Walking and Handling, may be bettered, by being taught to Sing,
Dance, or Play on the Lute Artificially.

2. I am very apt to think, that at first the Inventers of Logic and
Syllogisms did never intend to use them perpetually The True Use and Abuse of
them.
themselves, nor to instruct others in any Science by using constantly that
Method. Since neither Aristotle, nor any other Author I ever read, Ancient or
Modern, ever went about to deliver a Scheme of Doctrine in a Syllogistick way:
But that, after they had by Study and Reflection, found out in what their
Evidence lay, they made use of them as Exemplars or Tests, by which they might
try whether their Loose and Dishevelled Discourses had an Evident and Necessary
Connection of Terms at the bottom; or else, in some Signal Occasions, to confute
and convince an Acute or Obstinate Adversary; especially, if the Auditory and
Judges of the Dispute were Men of Learning. For which Reason that way is still
continued in Learned Assemblies: Such as the Schools often are, and always
should be. But, when at length that way grew too common, and that Sophisters
and Bunglers would needs constantly use It, and It only, in their extempore
Disputes; which could be managed right, and as they ought, by none but those
who were exact Masters of Logic; it came at length to degenerate into insipid
Artless Wrangle and Talking at random. For, the Multitude of illunderstood and
barbarous School-terms increased, frivolous Distinctions (as I lately
instanced) grew rife; Principles were either neglected, or else supplied by
their Masters (...); the Natures of Things, and the Ways dictated by Nature,
were left off; and hence it came, that no Progress was made in Science; nor any
Point decisively concluded.

3. In diverse parts of this Discourse I doubt not but Mr. Lock agrees with me:
What I disagree with him in is: Objections against Syllogistick Arguing cleared.
1. I deny that in Learned and Philosophical Discourses, (for which Syllogisms
were intended) the Mind can perceive the Connection of the Proofs where it
really is, as easily, nay perhaps better, without them. Certainly, the seeing
the middle Term placed in the middle, as it ought, will make a Reflecting Man
see better the Connection of the Terms; whence, besides its own aptness to
connect, it comes, even by virtue of its place, to be seen to be Immediate to
each of the Extremes; and, so, more apt to connect them. Again, In a Syllogism
there is no Necessary Word left out, nor one Unnecessary Word put in; whereas
in Loose Discourses this last is always wanting: And, can we think it adds no
degree of Clearness to the Discourse to keep it from being pestered with many
Unnecessary Words, in many of which there will not want Ambiguity? Nor is this
all, for in Loose Discourses, the fine Language and Plausible Tricks of
Rhetoric do too often dazzle the Eye of the Mind; and make that seem excellent
Reason, which, brought the Test of a Syllogism, will be seen to be plain
Foolery and Ridiculous Nonsense. Lastly, Good Logicians, who are skilled in the
Solid Reasons why the Conclusion follows, do, while they discourse
Syllogistically, guide their Thoughts all along by steady and (generally)
Self-evident Rules; and see a priori, and this, by the Highest Causes, why, and
by what means the Conclusion must follow; which conduces in a high measure to
Demonstration and Science: Whereas, those that have only the Assistance of
their Uncultivated Natural Reason, do both want this knowing Satisfaction to
themselves, and are utterly Unable to give it to others. I grant then, that the
Untaught Vulgar in Common Conversation and obvious Affairs can need no
Syllogisms; and that the Gentlewoman he speaks of, may have Wit enough to avoid
catching Cold, though neither her self, nor any for her, do put the Reason of it
into a Syllogism; and so does a Milk-maid, without the help of Mathematics,
know certainly that the Diameter of her Pail is Shorter than the Circumference
of it; nay, both of them would be blunder'd, and know those Truths worse, were
the true Reasons for them put into the uncouth Garb of a Syllogism; for Art is
not their Talent: But to think that Learned Men and Disputants gain little or
no Advantage by them above the Vulgar, is to maintain, that Art, though never so
Solidly Grounded, is good for nothing.

4. Secondly, To say that Syllogism helps little in Demonstration, is, I am
sure, against Reason and Experience both. He Syllogisms are useful for
Demonstration.
might as well have said in one Word, they are good for nothing at all. For it
cannot be thought they are good to know Principles, they being Self-evident;
and, it is manifest they cannot help us in Probabilities; for a Syllogism that
does not conclude is not worth a Straw; and no Medium that is merely Probable
(it being a Remote one) can be connected with the Extremes, nor consequently
can it conclude. It Is left then, that if they help little in Demonstration,
they do not help us much in any thing. We need then very strong Arguments to
make us yield to such a Paradox. Mr. Lock confesses Syllogism is sometimes
good to discover Fallacies: I take leave to say they are always good for that
End: And does this help us little in Demonstration? All Argumentations are
either Conclusive or Inconclusive; Conclusive ones have a middle Term
immediately connected with the Extremes; Inconclusive ones either are aimed to
deceive us, by bringing a Bad Medium, or by using a Bad Form; and those are the
worst sort of Fallacies, or of such Syllogisms as lead us into Error; most of
those Fallacies noted in common Logick-books, being but Trifles. If then the
Syllogistick way discovers Fallacies, it cannot be denied but it exceedingly
helps Conclusive Argumentation, or Demonstration. He grants too, that it sets
the absent Proposition (and, so, the whole Argument) before the View in a Clear
Light. I infer; therefore without it, we should not have had so Clear a
Knowledge of the Proof, nor consequently of the Conclusion; and is this
nothing? But he thinks this good is over balanced by this, that it engages the
Mind in the perplexity of Obscure, Equivocal and Fallacious Terms. Let us blame
then those Logicians, who multiply Terms and needless Crotchets, (which I have
endeavored in my Method, to lop off as Superfluous) and those Authors who do
not define those Terms they use; and not Syllogism nor Artificial Logic, which
tells them they ought to do it. I know no more, properly and peculiarly
belonging to Syllogism, but a Middle Term rightly placed; as is usually done in
the First Figure, and according to the First Four Moods. Nor do I see any thing
in these that in my Method is not reduced to Clear Evidence. It Is confessed too
that it is adapted to the attaining Victory in Disputes. Now, if this be so,
then the Champion of Truth, by means of Syllogism, will make Truth Victorious;
and then, how it can be denied (as Mr. Lock does) that it confirms Truth in
fair Enquiries, is to me Unintelligible; unless by Fair Enquiries he means
Loose Discourses, which are not Syllogistical, nor reducible to that Form;
which I think is an Improper and Lukewarm expression; For, a Philosopher ought
to esteem no Discourse Fair, which is not Clear and Conclusive.

5. Indeed Mr. Lock says very well, that Syllogism is of no use at all in
Probabilities. And there is very good Syllogisms are of no use in Probable
Discourses.
Reason why. For Syllogism shows an Infallibly-Certain way of Concluding;
whence nothing can bear that Test but what does Conclude; Whereas Probabilities
being grounded on Common Mediums, do not conclude at all; and therefore it
would do Probability a Great Disservice to bring it to the Touchstone of all
True or Conclusive Reasoning, a Syllogistick Form. This would quickly lay open
the Incoherence of the Terms, and consequently, show those Men to be less
Rational who do Assent, or say interiourly, The Terms do cohere, or the Thing
is True, upon a Probable Argument, in which they do not Cohere. It Is then by
Sagacious Prudence, and not by Syllogisms, that the Degrees of Probability are
to be weighed and tried. He grants also that Syllogism serves to fence: And so
it does, though not in Mr. Lock's sense of that word. For, as an expert Fencer
easily Wounds, and overthrows an Enemy, who is not Skilful in that Art: So a
Man who is Skilful in Syllogism, which is the Art of Concluding evidently, will
quickly confound and overthrow an Adversary of Truth. But why he should think
it does not serve to increase Knowledge, is a strange Riddle; the whole Design
of Artificial, or Syllogistick, Reasoning being to Deduce Conclusions not yet
known, from Premises which are either perfectly Foreknown, or at least better
known.

6. Mr. Lock has then good reason to say, that Other Helps should be sought:
But, if Syllogism be discarded, where Other Mistakes about Syllogism Cleared.
any other Help can be found to make the force and Clearness of the Consequence
better appear, or upon more evident and more Certain Grounds, not the Wit of
Mankind can Imagine: And I defy any Man to bring me any Reason, that is a good
one, or Conclusive, but I will show him that it is equivalently a Syllogism;
and I will undertake to reduce it to that Form; and manifest that it has all
its Strength and Evidence from the same Principles which give a Syllogism to be
clearly Conclusive. I know not what Authors Mr. Lock may have met with, who
say we cannot Reason about particulars, or, that No Syllogistick Reasoning can
be right and conclusive, but what has at least one General Proposition in it: I
am sure I have shown the contrary in my Method. B. 3. L. 2. 21. Indeed I show
22. and 24. that such Syllogisms are not Instrumental to Science, as are those
which have one or more, Universal Premises: For, all Science is of Inadequate
or Abstracted Notions, which are Universal ones, and not Particulars; for who
can pretend to have Science of the whole Complexion of Accidents, which
constitute any Particulars? And, to let my Reader farther see, that the
Knowledge of Particular Conclusions cannot reach Science, I desire him to
reflect, that if a Physician knew only that this Particular Individual Herb is
good for such a Disease, and not that all of that Sort or Kind is so, he could
not pretend to have Science of the Nature of Herbs; or, if a Mathematician knew
only that this Individual Triangle, which he is describing in Paper, has three
Angles equal to two Right ones, but knew not that any other, or all, had so,
none would much praise him for his Science in Mathematics. The so much
neglected and abused Aristotle, who had too much, and too well-grounded Sense
to be rightly understood by those who did not much regard Grounds, nor the
Highest Causes of Things, told us that Singularia non perficiunt Intellectum;
the Knowledge of Singulars does not perfect the Understanding. Since then
Science is a Perfection of our Soul, it must be employed about the
understanding Universals: Plain Reason abetting his saying, as I have shown
Ibid. 22.

7. I cannot let this Chapter pass, without reflecting particularly on Mr. L's
saying, that Inferences or Consequences Inferences and Consequences of Words,
abstracting from their Sense, is strangely against all Reason, and Preposterous.
in Words, are a great part of Reason, though the Agreement, or Disagreement of
Ideas be the Principal. Now, it is evident by those expressions that he speaks
of Words Abstractedly or Contradistinctly, from the Ideas signified by them;
that is, from their Sense; taking Words in which sense they are no more but
mere Sounds. Whence I see not but Black-smiths striking orderly and regularly
upon their Anvil, may make as good Consequences, as those he speaks of, and
puts them to be a great part of our Reason. I have observed that this Acute
Author fancies Unintelligible Mysteries in the Annexing Words to his Ideas;
Nay, (as appears here) in Words taken without Ideas, or the Sense of them; that
is in Senseless Sounds or Characters. Whereas my weak Speculation, though I bend
my sight never so strongly, cannot discern any Annexion other than this, that
Men have agreed that such Words, shall signify such and such Things or Notions;
all other Annexion being Unaccountable. Nor, can I see how in such sayings as
this, Mr. Lock does (as Philosophers ought) guide himself by the Natures of
the Things in hand, viz. Words, and Reason. For Words, abstracted from his
Ideas. which he puts to be signified by them, are mere Articulate Sounds, and
out of the Mind; whereas Reason and all its Acts* are completed in the Mind,
and Sense. How then the Consequence of Words (thus understood) should be a
great part of Reason which is Sense; or what Reason, which is an Internal and
Spiritual Power, has to do with those External and Material Sounds or Motions
of the Air, more than to know their Signification, and to take care they be not
Ambiguous, quite surpasses my Understanding. The Complexion of Ideas, he speaks
of, which the Words are to signify, is confessedly made first by the
Understanding; and, the Memory can retain our Notions as well, or better than
it can Sounds; and though such Sounds, through the use of the Words are apt to
re-excite the Memory, yet all this amounts to no more but their Aptness, through
use, to signify our Notions, let them be what they will: Which is plain Sense
and easily Understood; Whereas the Consequence of Sounds, Abstracted from our
Notions, is very Amusing, and utterly Unintelligible.

8. The 18th Chapter [Of Faith and Reason, and their distinct Provinces] is
admirably Clear, and in great part very What is due to Reason, what to Divine
Revelation.
solid. I grant no new Simple Ideas, that are proper ones, can he Conveyed by
Traditional Revelation. The Author of Nature gave us our Natural Notions; and
the Author of Grace, (who is the same Person,) brought no unheard of Objects of
our Senses to increase the Stock, already sufficient for all our Knowledge;
yet, if the Points thus conveyed are Spiritual ones, as most points of the
Revealed Faith are, there will be conveyed new Metaphorical Notions, translated
from our Natural ones which are Proper. I grant too, that Revelation cannot be
admitted against clear Evidence of Reason. I wish, that instead of the word
[Revelation] he had rather said [Pretence of Revelation] for, otherwise, some
Readers may hap to take his words in a Dis-edifying sense; as if it were a
possible Case, that Revelation it self may be supposed to be opposite to Clear
Evidence of Reason; and (which is worse,) in case they hap to contract, must
truckle and submit to it. My Judgment in the Point is this, that supposing the
Revelation is grounded on the Means laid by God to assure us he has Revealed
such and such Points, (which therefore cannot but be Certain to us, or Evident,
at least to those who are Guides to others) the Case implied here is
impossible; because it is impossible that God, who gave us our Nature, should
(as Mr. L. well expresses it) will us to admit any thing for true, in a direct
Contradiction to the Clear Evidence of our Understanding. I add, not to admit
it as True, if the Motives be but Probable, or (which is the same) if the Thing
may be False. What I am here to note, is that, Two Cautions are necessary in
this occasion. The one, that since God does nothing The First Caution to be
observed, in order to this Point.
needlessly, therefore the Points Revealed by God are such as Humane Reason
could not other ways attain to; whence they being such as those Mr. Lock holds
to be above Reason, hence they must often look very oddly to those Low
Conceptions which the Course of Nature affords us: Whereas the Motives laid by
God for Mankind, to embrace Christian Faith, do, for that very regard, lie
level to our Natural Reason. Wherefore, in our Enquiry what we are to embrace,
what not; we ought not to begin our quest, by scanning the Points proposed to
us as Revealed; but, by examining whether the Motives to judge they are
Revealed, be Certain or no. Otherwise, we shall Neglect to employ our Reason,
in such Things as are suitable to her Capacity, and in which she can have
Evidence; and task it to Consider what is perhaps above her reach, and of which,
consequently, she can have no Evidence; which way of Proceeding is clearly
Irrational. How many are there in the world who are reputed for Learned men,
and yet have no Principles which are not taken from Fancy? Let then such short
Speculaters loose, to judge of the Verity of Points (perhaps) Incomprehensible
to our Natural Reason, they will be apt to fancy twenty Contradictions in the
Trinity, the Incarnation, a Virgins Conceiving, the Resurrection, and in many
other main Points of Christian Faith: And, were it allowable for any to begin
his Search after Truth on this preposterous manner, the Persons must be highly
Qualified to decide what is a Contradiction, what not, ere their Sentiments can
be thought to have any kind of weight. They must be excellent Logicians to know
the force of a Consequence, and how many things go to make a Contradiction.
They must be acute Metaphysicians to know all the many several Respects
belonging to Things; without which it will be hard to determine certainly what
Notions are in all respects Contradictory, which not: And, if they be not thus
Qualified, their Skill is Incompetent for such a Performance. Again, if the
Point do concern the Nature of Body, they must be able to Comprehend the Nature
of that Subject. And, in a word, unless they can demonstrate their own Opposite
Tenet, plain Terms give it that they can never show the other side to be a
Contradiction: For, since both sides of a Contradiction cannot be True, they
must demonstrate their Tenet to be True, or they cannot demonstrate the other
to be False and Contradictory; for it is one labor to do both.

9. The other necessary Caution is, that men do not take the Bad Explications
of some weak Divines for the The second Caution to be used in this Point.
Point of Faith it self. For, such men, as Mr. L. well notes, being very
forward to stop the mouths of all Opponents by crying out such a Position is of
Faith; and, withal, having a high Opinion of their own Sentiments, and
Miscalled Authority; are apt to fancy that all is of Faith which belongs to
their own Explication of it, or seems to them Consequent from it, or Connected
with it; which is no better, in Effect, than to obtrude their own Skill in
drawing Consequences upon Men for Divine Revelation. Now, if the Explicater be
not truly Learned and Candid, then in stead of showing the Point of Faith,
Conformable to Nature, as a Solid Divine ought; he may hap to represent every
Point of Faith so untowardly, that it may have Twenty Contradictions in it.
It Is therefore the Duty of every Ingenuous Man, to distinguish such
Explications from the Point it self; and not to pronounce too hastily of it,
till it appears it cannot possibly bear any other Rational Explication, and
such a one as is Agreeable and not Contradictory to the true Principles of
Reason and Nature. Which I the rather Note, because I have observed that scarce
any one point of Faith that is Controverted has escaped this Misfortune; nay
more, that Metaphorical Expressions have often (I may say, generally) been
mistaken for Literal ones: In a word, let but the Grounds for GOD's Revealing
Christian Faith be held and shown Absolutely Certain (and the Motives laid by
GOD to that end, cannot but be such) and the Divine Authority, thus Evidently
Engaged, and closely Applied to our Mind, ought to subdue our Understanding to
assent, notwithstanding our seeming-Rational Dissatisfactions. I say, Seeming;
For, to put the Grounds and Motives we have to know God revealed it to be thus
Certain, and yet that there is Clear Evidence against the Point revealed, is to
put a perfect Contradiction, or Impossibility. Which makes me something
apprehensive that those Authors, who put such a Case (however their meaning may
be good and pious, and they see not the Consequence of it) do deem that the
Grounds we Christians have for GOD's Revealing our Faith, are not altogether
Certain, but Probable only; which leaves all our Faith in a Possibility of
being False for any thing any man living knows; that is, of being perhaps not
True.

10. Hence I think it is but a very slight deference to Divine Revelation to
affirm, that in Matters where Reason Reason is not to be relied on in things
beyond its Sphere.
cannot judge, or but probably, Revelation is to be hearkened to: But that in
Matters where Reason can afford certain Knowledge, Reason is to be hearkened
to. For, though it were so that Reason can do this, yet Experience tells us that
Reason does not actually, (and this very often) what it can do, or all that
lies within the Compass of that power; but that we may often presume we have
certain Knowledge when we have none. Especially since of the two it is far more
likely our Reason may discourse wrong of the Points that are Revealed, than of
the Motives which God has laid for Mankind to know they are so; the later
being within its Sphere, the other oft-times not.

11. The 19th Chapter treats of Wrong Assent, or Error. This Learned Author
seems here not to speak constantly The Notion of [is True,] must be
distinguished from the Notion of [may be true, or may not be true.]
of the same Point. To Assent to any Proposition, is to say interiourly, [It is
True;] or, that the Thing is so as the Proposition exhibits it. Now, these
Propositions may be of two Sorts: The one is expressed thus, [The Thing is so,
or is True:] The other thus, [The Thing is Probable.] Hitherto, and in some
places here, he speaks of the Former, or of Assenting to the Truth of the
Thing; or, of taking the Probable Proposition to be True: In other places here,
he seems to speak of the Latter; as, when,. 6. he complains that Probable
Doctrines are not always received with an Assent proportionable to the Reasons
which are to be had for their Probability: Which clearly makes the Object of
Assent to be the Probability of the Thing, or as it stands under such Motives
as make it to a higher Degree Probable; or, (which is perfectly Equivalent,)
that Propositions to such a Degree Probable, are to be assented to, as to such
a Degree Probable. Now, this is an Evident Proposition; and the Assent to it,
most Rational. For, since we call that Probable that stands under Probable
Motives, it is as perfect a Truth, and as firmly to be assented to, as it is to
assent, that what is Probable, is Probable; or, what is Probable to such a
Degree, is Probable to such a Degree: Both which Propositions being evident,
nay, the Terms of it as closely connected as they are in this Proposition,
[What is, is,] we not only may, but are forced to assent to them, as being
both of them Self-evident. But, I much fear this is not Mr. Locke's meaning;
but, that he means, we must assent to a Thing as True, or that the Thing is,
upon a Proof which, of its own peculiar Nature, and as it is distinguished from
Evidence, is so far from Concluding it is, that it permits and allows it may
not be, or be False. In which case, to assent, is both against Clearest Reason,
and even (as was shown above) against a First Principle of our Understanding.

12. What confirms me in this Apprehension, is, his making way to his ensuing
Discourse with these Words; Therefore, that no Assent ought to be built on
Probable Mediums, is Demonstrable.
[If Assent be grounded on Likelihood, and if the Proper Object and Motive of
our Assent be Probability, etc.] Now, both those Hypothetical Ifs I must
Categorically declare against; and positively affirm and maintain, that Likely
Motives can only, in true Reason, make us assent the Thing is Likely; and that
Motives but Probable cannot, without highly wronging our Reason, cause us to
assent the Thing is more than Probable: Lastly, That [may be, or may not be,]
cannot be a good Argument that the Thing is. I affirm farther, that this
Position of mine is clearly Demonstrable: For, all Motives or Proofs affecting
the Conclusion, and our Assent to it, according to their Different Nature and
Force; therefore, as Evident Motives make the Thing Evident, so Likely Motives
can only prove the Thing to be Likely; and Probable Motives can only prove
the Thing to be Probable; and that, the Proof being the Cause of the
Conclusion, and those Proofs being Proper, and adjusted to those respective
Effects, it is as perfect a Demonstration, drawn from the Proper Cause to its
Proper Effect, that they can make the Conclusion no more than Probable; and,
consequently, our Assent to it (if Rational) no more than that it is only
Probable; as it is that an Agent which is Hot but to such a Degree, can only
cause Heat to such a Degree; and this is as Evident, as that no Cause can act
beyond its Power to act, or can do what it cannot do; which is an Identical
Proposition, and Self-evident.

13. It Is in vain then to start this Question, How Men come to give their
Assent contrary to Probability, till this All Error comes by Assenting upon
Probability.
Question be first satisfied, Why Men should assent at all upon mere
Probability? But, this being supposed without any Proof; and, it being allowed
by me, that Men may assent contrary to Probability all the Ways he assigns, I
am not to pursue that Point any farther, because it is quite besides my Aim;
which is, to concern my self only with what promotes true Science; with which,
Probability, as being both Uncertain, and Inevident, has nothing at all to do,
but to Injure it, (if it meets with Rash Concluders,) by Ill-grounded Assents.
But, casting my Eye on the Title of this Chapter, which is, [Of Wrong Assent,
or Error,] I observe, that he has not so much as touched upon one main Cause
of Error, which has an unhappy Influence even upon some Wise and Good Men, and
often proves Prejudicial to their best Concerns; I mean, the Assenting absolutely
upon very high Probabilities; or, (as Mr. Lock expresses it,) as firmly, as if
they were infallibly demonstrated. We are, indeed, more often deceived by
Assenting on slight Probabilities; but, we are far more grossly deceived, when a
very High, and very Likely Probability fails us: Whence, in such occasions, Men
use to say, [Who could ever have thought or imagined it?] or, [I was never so
abominably deceived in my Life.] I will explain my self by one Signal Instance,
showing how dangerous it is to yield up our Reason, by Assenting Absolutely
upon very Great Likelihoods, and even the Highest Probabilities. Which
Discourse may, I hope, edify some, and thence convince others, that such an
Assent is Irrational.

14. A Man who is at this Instant in perfect Health, is apt to assent
absolutely, that he shall not die suddenly of The Tenet, that we ought to
Assent upon Probability, is highly prejudicial to Piety, and to best Christian
Morality.
an Apoplexy before Morning; that a Tile shall not fall from a House, and kill
him when he walks the Streets; that his House shall not fall on his Head, and
crush him; that a Drunken or Quarrelsom Ruffian shall not, without Provocation,
run him through; that a Bit of Meat, a Crum, or a Bone, shall not choke him; or
any such sudden Disaster befall him that Day; and it is very highly Probable
they will not. Now, the greatest Concern we can have in this World, is, to die
well prepared for the other. Put case then, a Man of a Loose Life, (such Men
being most apt to presume, and lull themselves in a blind Security,) assents
firmly and absolutely, upon such a high Probability that he shall not be taken
off suddenly, but shall have Time to die Penitent, haps to be surpised by some
such unlucky Accident, without having any Leisure to repent; the case of his
Soul is very desperate. Now, it is evident, that that this Eternal Loss of
Happiness lights to such Men through their acting contrary to their Reason; and
their Assenting, and Relying firmly upon the Frail Assurance of a Probability:
For, had they used their Reason right, it would have naturally suggested to
them these Thoughts: I can see no Bottom nor Foundation for Assenting so fully
that I shall not die very shortly, or suddenly. How many Men, who thought
themselves as secure as I do now, have, notwithstanding, been taken away in an
Instant! Every Man living is liable to these, and a Thousand other
Unforeknowable Mischances: Nor have I any kind of Privilege above others; nor
know I any reason why those Sinister Chances that happened to other Men, may
not as well be my Lot. This plain and obvious Discourse, joined with the
Infinite Concern of the Thing, might have conduced to make those carelessly
secure Men rectify their Wanderings, and endeavor to keep a good Conscience,
lest they should be suddenly Arrested by Death, with their Debts uncancell'd:
Which good Thoughts and Motives they had wanted, had they assented upon a high
Probability that they should not die suddenly, as firmly as though the Thing were
infallibly demonstrated. This Infallible and Irrational Security, I say, would,
in all likelihood, have made such weak Souls run on in Sin, defer the
Amendments of their Lives, and put it off with a dangerous presuming on
Deathbed Repentance. Hence I infer two Things; one, that our Position, that we
ought not to assent upon a high Probability, but to retain some Degree of
Suspense, is a Great and very Important Truth, since it has so great an
Influence (not to speak of our many other Concerns) upon the best and most
Important Part of Christian Morality. Error does not use to be so favorable
to Goodness and Piety, no more than Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion;
whereas Truth reduced to Practice, is ever the Genuin Parent of Virtue. The
other, that to Judge or Assent without Knowledge, springs from our Weakness, or
else from Passion; and that Judgment taken in this Sense, is not (as Mr. Lock
affirms) the Gift of God.

15. He proceeds to the Reasons why Men take wrong measures of Probability, and
so come to assent wrong or Err. To apply our selves to the Right Method to find
out Truth and Science is the only Antidote against Error.
But, it appears evidently from what is said, or rather indeed, it is evident
out of the very Terms, that all Error or Wrong Assent, does only Spring from
Assenting at all upon Probable Motives. For, did they Assent only upon
Evidence, it is Impossible they should ever err; since Evidence for an Error
is in it self impossible. Or, did they suspend their Assent, or not Assent when
the Thing is but Probable, it is again impossible they should Err; for, it is
impossible they should Err, or Assent wrong, when they do not Assent at all.
Whence follows, that (excepting Invincible Ignorance, which concerns not our
Point in hand) all Wrong Assent, or Error, springs from our Assenting upon
Probability. The Reasons he assigns, why Men take wrong Measures of
Probabilities, serve better to show why Men do not assent upon Evidence; viz.
Doubtful and False Principles, Received Hypotheses, Predominant Passions, and
Authority; by which last, I suppose, he means, such Authority as may deceive
us. All these are so many Remora's to the Advancement of Science, and Motes in
our Intellectual Eye, hindering it from seeing Evident Truth. Yet, none of them,
but has some kind of Probability, (as the World goes;) or, at least, will
furnish Men with probable Arguments: For, a very slight Thing serves to make a
Thing Probable. So that the Upshot is, that the Chief, and most Effectual Way
for Men to avoid Wrong Assents, or Errors, is to instruct them in the Way how
to conclude evidently; which is the sole End and Aim of my Method to Science;
and, particularly, of that part of it which treats of the Self-evident
Conclusiveness of Syllogisms, in which no Man can possibly be deceived. For,
this shows, that the Inference or Consequence of the Conclusion, when the
Medium is Proper, is as Certain as Self-Evidence can make it; and, that Common
Mediums, (such as all Probable ones are,) can never Conclude; and, therefore,
such Conclusions cannot be assented to, or held True, without wronging our
Reason. Whence follows, that the Way to avoid Wrong Assent, is, to exclude
Probability from having any Title at all to our Assent; it being highly and
manifestly Irrational for any to judge, a Proposition not at all Demonstrated
or shown to be True, should be assented to as firmly as if it were infallibly
demonstrated: For, this is directly to judge a Thing to be such as it is not;
which is a manifest Error, or Untruth. Nor, matters it what most People do out
of Weakness: Man's true Nature, which is Rational, is to be rated according to
the Conformity we ought to conceive it had from the Idea of it in the Divine
Understanding, its true Essence; where none can doubt but it was Perfect, till
it came to be slubber'd and sullied by the tampering of Second Causes, and
their Never-uniform Circumstances. The Natural Perfection, then, of a Rational
Creature being to arrive certainly, or without missing, at Knowledge and Truth,
which cannot be had without Evidence; hence, it is his true Nature to be guided
in his Way to acquire those Interior Perfections of his Mind, only by
Evidence; without which, he is liable to fall, every Step he takes, into the
Precipice of Error. Nay, it is so clear a Truth, that Man's true Nature is
only to be guided in his Interior Assents by Evidence; that, even in our
Outward Actions, which do not directly concern the perfecting our Soul, and in
which we can have no Evidence of their Success, or of the Good they will
certainly do us; yet, still we must (unless we will incurr the Note of Folly)
have Evidence that it is better to act, or better to venture; otherwise, we
shall clearly act with some Precipitancy, and against our true Nature, Reason.

16. Besides, it is extreme hard to take Right Measures of Probability. Every
Measure is a Certain Standard; No possible Way, or Certain Standard, to take
the Just Measures of Probabilities.
whereas, Probabilities are not capable of any; but, like desultory
Ignes-fatui, whiffle now to this side, now to that; doubling, and re-doubling;
so that none can take their just Dimension, or Proportion. They vary every Day,
ofttimes every Hour; and, what is more Probable, this Minute, may, by some new
Circumstance lately come to our Knowledge, become less Probable; the next,
perhaps, Improbable. Even the Highest Probabilities are not exempt from this
Frailty, and Fickleness. I may think my House will certainly stand; nor do I
see any Reason to make the least Doubt of it: A prudent Neighbor, whom I take
to be more Judicious than my self in such Things, spies a Flaw, or Crack, near
the Foundation, which he thinks weakens it; which makes it now Improbable it
will stand, and Probable it will fall. Hereupon, I send for an expert
Master Builder, who has ten times the Skill of the other; and he assures me,
that late Formidable Crack is nothing at all to the Firmness of the Foundation,
and therefore it will certainly stand: Which said, the Motive shifts Faces
again, and it becomes very Probable it will not fall. Amongst Schoolmen, some
hold, that the Opinion of Three Doctors makes a Point Probable; some think, the
Opinion of Two is sufficient; some say, One, who has maturely weighed the
Point, will serve; and, in the mean time, perhaps it is scarce Probable, at
most but Probable, that any of these say True. But then, these Later say, that
it is certain that what Seven Learned Men agree in, is Probable: Let then these
Seven Learned Men agree that what some One very Learned Man, whom they
nominate, says, makes the Thing Probable; that One Man has the Virtue of all
the Seven centered in him; and, therefore, that one single Learned Man's
Opinion makes it Probable enough in all Conscience. Where then shall we fix the
Bounds, or whence take any Certain Measures of Greater and Lesser
Probabilities? Whoever peruses, and considers well the several Sorts of
Probable Motives, enumerated in my Method, B. 3. L. 2.. 10. and by Mr. Lock
here, in his 15th and 16th Chapters, will see, (though we have not reckoned up
half of them,) by reflecting on their Variety, and their Crossness to one
another, (abating the several Degrees of each,) how insuperable a Task it is to
settle any fixed Limits by which we can be constantly assured, which sort of
Probability is Greater, or Lesser. It Is a Thousand times easier to establish
absolutely certain Rules of Demonstration, were Men but as zealous to pursue
Truth, as they love to talk at random; either because they think that Noblest
Quest not worth their Pains; or, perhaps, because Palliated Scepticks inveigle
them into a Conceit, that Science is unattainable. To obviate which Calumny,
has, these Fifty Years, been the Butt of my Endeavors.

17. As for Authority, this one Maxim, pursued home, secures us from being
deceived by relying on it; viz. [No The Certain Rule, not to be misled by
Authority.
Authority deserves Assent, farther than Reason gives it to deserve.] So that
all the Certainty of Authority is to be refunded into Intrinsecal Arguments,
taken from the Nature of Mankind, the Attesters; and the Nature (I mean, the
Notoreity and Concern) of the Things attested; and, thence ascertaining the
Attesters Knowledge, and Veracity: Which, if they can be demonstrated, or put
beyond Probability, (for, till then, none who are able to raise Doubts, and see
the Medium is Inconclusive, can be bound in Reason to assent upon any
Testimony,) even the Wisest Men may rationally Assent to what they attest;
otherwise, not; though weaker Arguments (as I hinted above) may suffice for the
Vulgar, and for our Outward Actions.

18. To close my Reflections on this Chapter, I am apt to think that this
Learned Author is here drawn aside from Mr. Lock seems to take someThings for
only Probable, which (or the Authority for them) are Demonstrable.
using his Excellent Reason to his best Advantage, by apprehending some Things
to be only Probable, which (or the Certainty of the Authority for them) are
perfectly Demonstrable; as, in particular, that of the Existence of Julius
Caesar. The same I judge of these, viz. That Alexander the Great conquered
Asia; that there are such Cities as Rome, or Paris; that the same Chances
cannot light often upon a Hundred Dice; that I shall not think over again, in
order, the same Thoughts next Year, as I did this; and a Thousand such like.
Which, perhaps, many will take to be but highly Probable; whereas I, upon good
Reason, cannot but judge they are all of them Demonstrable. But I am weary, and
hasten to an End.

19. The last Chapter bears for its Title, [Of the Division of Sciences.] The
two First General Branches of this Division The Members of Mr. Locke's Division
of Sciences are partly Co-incident, partly not belonging to Science at all.
are, in my opinion, Co-incident; as will be seen hereafter. However, the
Learned World is much obliged to the Author, for putting Ethics to be capable
of Demonstration, and a true Science. But, as to his Third Branch, which he
calls (...), or the Doctrine of Signs, I must confess, I do not well know what
to make of it: For, to make the Doctrine of Words to be a Science, or part of
Philosophy, is to make Philosophy Wordish. He defined Philosophy, in his
Preface, to be The Knowledge of Things; and here he seems to make the Knowledge
of Words a part of Science, or Philosophy, taken distinctly from the Knowledge
of Things; which is his First Branch. All Science is Connected Sense, and both
Sense and Science are in our Minds. The Common Agreement of Men gives Words to
be Signs; Common Usage shows this Agreement; Grammar helps them with Congruity;
Critic gathers from Authors, or Derivations, the Genuine Signification of such
Words as are not so much worn by Common Use, but mostly used by the Learned:
For, when they are thus Common, Critic is Useless. Logic, which is to direct
our Reason, and define our Notions, so to keep our Thoughts or Discourses
steady, takes care they be not Ambiguous; or, if they be, gives Rules to detect
their Double Sense, lest the Illunderstood Signs lead us astray from the Point.
But, all begins and ends in this, that we be sure our Words do signify our
Notions, rightly, and sincerely. Sometimes we have Simple Notions; and then we
use such Words as signify them: Sometimes we join many Simpler Notions in a
Complex one; and then we make use of such a Word as signifies that Complex
Idea, or Notion: Sometimes we connect diverse Notions affirmatively, and frame
Judgments, or Mental Propositions; and then, Verbal Propositions signify that
Verbum Mentis, or Interior Saying. We may fancy that Words do ty together many
Simple Ideas in a Complex one; (for, there is nothing which Men of Wit, by much
bending their Thoughts, cannot fancy;) but it is We who ty our Notions together
in our Mind; nor can mere Articulate Sounds any more Connect Simple Ideas, than
they can connect or identifie our Notions which are the Terms of a Proposition:
nor can they do this, any more than they can frame a Judgment; that is, Judge,
or Know. We may fancy too, that they record our Thoughts, which otherwise would
be lost: It Is true, that after we have agreed such Words should signify such
Things in our Mind, they have an order to one another, and do ordinarily come
together into our Thoughts; and so the Word infers the Thing; but so does the
Thing infer the Word too, to which we, by our Agreement of its Signification,
do relate it; and, of the two, the Word is sooner lost out of the Memory, and
more needs a Recorder, than the Notion does; especially, when our Memory is of
Connected Sense. How often do we remember very well the Sense of an Author we
have read, and yet cannot at all call to mind his Words! My self, when I was
young, had Words, and great Variety of them, at my Tongue's End; my Expression
was Copious, and Florid, and now I am old and past my Autumn, my style is dry;
and the Flowers and Leaves fall off, when the Fruit is ripe; and though I still
retain and increase my stock of Thoughts, I have lost that Multiplicity and
Choice of Words I had formerly. But, I must complain that it is a great Injury
to that Excellent and most Useful Science, [Logick] which treats of the
Operations of our Understanding, and of the way how to manage them, to make it
nothing but the Doctrine of Signs, or Words; and to pretend it has its Name
thence. As if (...) did not signify Ratio, and Uerbum mentis, as properly as it
does Vox; and (...) far more often [Rationalis,] than it does Sermon utens.
But, above all, I am sure, (...) is never found to signify the Art or Doctrine
of Words, but the Art of Discoursing or Reasoning.

20. I cannot but think that the Subordination of Sciences, is as Useful and
Necessary to be known, as their Division or The Connatural way how Sciences are
to be Divided, and Subordinated.
Distinction, in Philosophy; they being the Exact Knowledge of Things, taking
this last word in its largest sense, as it Comprehends Rem and Modum rei. Also
every Notion being the Thing inadequately conceived, and having a kind of
Distinct Nature peculiar to it self in our Minds; and all Sciences (they being
Distinct and not Confused Knowledges,) having, consequently, for their Object,
the Thing as thus Distinctly or Inadequately considered, (by which Objects they
are Specified and Distinguished;) it follows, that there may be as many Sciences
as we have such Distinct Notions of the Thing; and that each of them is got by
looking more penetratively into those Distinct Natures in our Mind, or Distinct
Notions: Science being in reality nothing but Descants (as it were) on those
Notions, and grounded entirely on their Metaphysical Verity. Whence follows
likewise that the Subordination of Sciences is grounded on this, that those
Notions (their Objects) are Subordinate; or that one of them is more Universal
or General, others more Particular. To instance; The Highest Science in the
Line of that General Notion we call Substance, is that which treats of the
Supreme Genus, or of Ens as Ens, and of what belongs to it as such; and this we
call Metaphysics or Trans-natural Knowledge. The imediate Notion under Ens is
Corpus; and this is the Object of Natural Philosophy, or Physics. Next under
That is Vivens; which (as its Object) Constitutes the Science or Knowledge of
Living Things, and what belongs to them as such. Under that is Animal, which is
the Object of the Science that treats of Sensitive Things, as they are
Sensitive, and of what appertains to them, as they are such. The Lowest of our
Notions in that Line, which are in any degree Common or General, is that of
Homo; which treats of Humane Nature, of its Operations proper to Man, as Man;
and Chiefly of his Primary Operation Reasoning; and then, the Science which
shows how to order those Operations right that belong to his Understanding, is
Logic; as that Science which shows how to order those Operations right that
belong to his Will, is called Ethics. Lower than this, Science proceeds not;
Individuals, by reason of the Complexion of Innumerable Accidents that
Constitutes them, not being knowable to us, as such, so as to give us Exact
Knowledge of their Singularities.

Corollary I. From what is said it appears; that Mr. Locke's two First Branches
fall into one. For his First Some very Useful Corollaries concerning that
Subject.
Branch being [The Knowledge of Things as they are in their own proper Beings,
their Constitutions, Properties and Operations] and his second, viz. Ethics,
having for its Object the Operations of Man's Will; and Logic, the Operations
of his Understanding, which proceed from him as Man, (all Outward Actions that
proceed not from his Interior Knowledge and Will, being merely Animal;) it
follows that Ethics, which is his Second Branch, is coincident with his First.
For Man is a Thing, and has a Proper Being of his own, and his Understanding
and Will are his Properties; and their Operations are his Operations.

Corollary II. Each of the Subordinant Sciences deduces Conclusions about its
Proper Object: Which, though Conclusions there, are the Principles to the
immediately Inferior or Subordinate Science: so that none can know exactly
what Homo is, who is such an Animal, if he be Ignorant what Animal is; Nor what
Animal, which is such a Living Body, is, if he knows not what Living Body is:
Nor what Living Body, which is such a Body, is, if he knows not what Body is;
Nor, what Body, which is such an Ens, is, if he knows not what Ens or Thing is.

Corollaay III. Hence is seen evidently, how Necessary, and according to Nature
it is, that those Notions which are most Universal, should be most knowable or
Clear; in regard the Inferior ones cannot be known but by them; and that being
most Clear, they must (as was often shown above) be also most Simple.

Corollary, IV. Hence is seen also how all Sciences conversant about our
Gradual Notions in the Line of Substance (and the same holds in all the other
Lines) come to be connaturally Subordinate to those which have a Superior
Notion for their Object; and how Perfect Knowledge or Skill in the Inferior
Science, is Unattainable without Knowledge or Skill in the Superior.

Corollary V. Hence is demonstrated, that Metaphysics is absolutely the
Highest Science; and that, without Knowledge or Skill in it, none can perfectly
understand the Inferior Sciences, so as to resolve them into their First, and
most Evident Principles.

Corollary VI. And, since the Greater Clearness of that Notion, which is the
Object of any Science, gives a greater Clearness and Evidence to the Science it
self; and the Greater Clearness of any Notion arises from its being more
Simple; and the more General they are, the more Simple they are; and the Notion
of Ens is Evidently more General than all the rest: It follows demonstratively
that the Science of Metaphysics, which treats of Ens as Ens, is the most Clear
of any others; and, in the Highest Degree, Evident; and that they who think
otherwise do guide themselves by Fancy, to which such very Abstract Notions are
Unsuitable.

Corollary VII. And, since Evidence determins our Understanding to Assent, and
therefore Certainty which is the Determination of our Judging Power, follows
Evidence as its Proper Cause; it follows, that, as no Inferior Science can be
Evident without Knowledge in Metaphysics, so neither can our Knowledge of any
of them be perfectly, (or in the Highest Degree,) Certain, but by virtue of It,
or of such Maxims, or First Principles, as belong to It.

Corollary, VIII. The same Discourse that is made here of Objects found in the
Line of Ens, and their proper Sciences; may be made and have Equal force in the
Objects belonging to all the Lines of Accidents, and the Sciences Proper to
them.

Corollary last. Hence the Doctrine of Words is no part of Philosophy, taking
them as aparted from our Notions; because it has neither for its Object, Rem
nor Modum rei; nor any thing found in Nature, or Belonging to it; since Words
are merely Signs, appointed by our Voluntary Designation, to assist us in
Communicating our Conceptions to others, which can be no part of the Knowledge
of Things or true Philosophy; Words being neither Simple nor Complex, Adequate
or Inadequate Notions, nor in any Manner taken from the Things themselves.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
Preliminary First.
1. INtroduction. 2. The Using the word [Idea] in disparate Senses obstructs
the way to Science. 3. Philosophical Words generally used, not to be laid aside
without great Necessity; much less changed for Others less proper. 4. Mr. L.'s
Acception of the word [Idea] very Ambiguous. 5. The Ambiguity of it not cleared
by him. 7. The putting Brutes to have Knowledge associates them with Mankind.
8. The First Consideration pre-requir'd, ere we ought to think that Brutes
know. 9. The Second Consideration pre-requir'd. 10. That our selves both asleep
and awake, do, without Knowledge, perform as strange Operations as Brutes do.
11. The Resemblance of Reason in some Actions of Brutes, no Argument of their
Knowledge. 12. Brutes have Phantasms, but no Notions or Meanings. 13. Ideas, if
not Spiritual Notions, Inexplicable. 14. Experience that we have Ideas gives no
Distinct Account what they are. Nor the saying, they are Resemblances. 15. To
have Ideas of our own Ideas inexplicable. 16. No Operation, External or
Internal, begins from the Soul alone. 17. Mr. L. not only, nor directly opposed
by this Discourse. 18. To ground all Knowledge on Ideas not distinguished from
Phantasms, makes Science Impossible.
Preliminary Second.
1. THat the Elements or Materials of our Knowledge are properly to be called
NOTIONS. 2. The word Notion and Cognition are taken here objectively. 3. What
Notions are. 4. Fancy is to have no hand in discoursing about Spiritual
Conceptions. 5. The Question about Notions stated. 6. A Notion is the Thing it
self in our Understanding. Proof 1. Because Knowing is an Immanent Act.
7. Proof 2. Because the Thing known must be in our Knowing Power. 8. Proof 3.
Because a Resemblance is not the Object of our Knowledge, nor sufficient to
cause it. 9. Otherwise Ideas only could be said to be Known. 10. Proof 4.
Because otherwise all Philosophy would be destroyed. 11. Proof 5. Because
Similitudes cannot possibly give us the First Knowledge of Things. 12. As was
proved formerly. 13. Proof 6. Because ere we can know the Idea resembles the
Thing right, both of them must be in the Mind, to be there compared. 14. Proof
7. Because both the Correlates must be in the Understanding. Proof 8. Because
the Prototype must be first known.
15. Proof 9. Because the Notions are what is meant by Words. 16. Proof 10.
Because, when the Thing it self is intended to be made known, the Thing it self
is the First Meaning, or what is first meant by the words. 17. Proof 11. Because
the Ideas cannot be foreknown to our Agreement what the Words are to signify,
but the Things only. Hence the Question, whether the Things or our Notions, are
immediately signified by Words, is frivolous.
18. Proof 12. From the Verification of Propositions. 19. Proof 13. Because
what is perfectly Like is the Same. 20. Proof 14. This last Reason maintained by
the Instance of the Notion of Existence. 21. Proof 15. The same Reason abetted
by the Natural Sayings of Mankind. 22. The Difference in the Manner of Existing
prejudices not the Identity of the Notion and the Thing. 23. The Eminency of
the Spiritual Nature of the Soul gives her a Power to be all Things
Intellectually. 24. Shown that Things may have two Different Manners of
Existing. 25. No Solid Philosophy can be built on Ideas. 26. What Knowledge is.
Preliminary Third.
1. AN Objection against the Possibility of the Whole Thing being in our Mind.
2. Some Notes premised to clear this Objection. 3. Our Knowledge is such as our
Notions are. 4. We can have such a Notion of a Thing (or Essence) as
distinguishes it from all other Things. 5. Confused Notions suffice for a
Remote Ground of Science. 6. Only Distinct or Abstracted Notions are the
Immediate Ground of Distinct Knowledge, or Science. 7. Science thus grounded,
is truly called the Knowledge of the Thing. 8. Abstracted Ideas, though Exclusive
of one another, do Include or connotate the Thing. 9. This Point farther
explicated and enforced. 10. Arg. 1. Proved, because Abstracted Notions, if
Essential, do evidently include the Thing. 11. Arg. 2. Proved, because all
Modes do the same. 12. Arg. 3. As having no Being of their own. 13. This makes,
or shows Philosophy to be the Knowledge of Things. 14. Hence Aristotle
expresses the Modes or Accidents by Concrete Words. This Point elucidated by
Abstract and Concrete Words.
15. Hence Space without Body, or Vacuum, is a Contradiction.
Preliminary Fourth.
1. The State of the Question. 2. Aristotle neglects to show particularly how
Knowledge is made. 3. Later Philosophers were at a great Puzzle about it. 4.
How the Schools explicated this Point. 5. How the Ideists behaved themselves as
to this Point. 6. How far the Author engages to clear this Difficulty. 7. The
First Cause carries on the Course of Second Causes by Immediate Dispositions.
8. And, therefore, he affists Nature, if disposed, when it cannot reach. 9.
Therefore, if the Matter can be disposed for a Rational Soul, God will give it.
10. There can be such a Disposition in Matter. 11. Therefore, some Material
Part, by which immediately the Soul has Notions from the Objects. 12. Therefore
Effluviums are sent from Bodies to that Part. 13. Therefore Man is truly One
Thing, which is Corporeo-Spiritual. 14. Therefore some Chief Part in him which
is primarily Corporeo-Spiritual, or has both those Natures in it. 15. Which is
affected according to both those Natures, because of their Identification in
that part. 16. The peculiar Temper of that Part consists in Indifferency. 17.
That Part very tender and Sensible, yet not Tenacious. 18. That Part the most
Noble of all Material Nature. 19. Perhaps it is Reflexive of Light, or Lucid.
20. The Effluviums have in them the Nature of the Bodies whence they are sent.
21. They affect that Part, as Things Distinct from the Man. 22. Why they
Imprint Abstract Notions. 23. The peculiar Nature of our Soul renders those
Notions perfectly Distinct, and Indivisible. 24. Whence Complex Notions come.
25. The Soul cannot, alone, produce any new Act in her self; 26. But by the
Phantasms exciting her anew. 27. How Reminiscence is made. 28. Memory and
Reminiscence Inexplicable, unless Phantasms remain in the Brain. The Manner how
Reminiscence is made in Brutes.
29. How Reflection is connaturally made. 30. Direct Notions are Common to all
Mankind, and their Words Proper; Reflex ones, Improper; and their Words
Metaphorical. 31. Whence we come to have Negative Notions. 32. But those
Negative Notions do not abstract from the Subject. 33. How we come to have a
Notion of [Nothing.] 34. Hence great Care to be had, lest we take Non-Entities,
or Nothings, for Things. 35. Logical Notions are Real ones. 36. The Test to try
Artificial Notions. Hence all Philosophy is Real Knowledge.
37. How our Soul comes to have Fantastic Notions, or (as we call them)
Fancies. How to avoid being deluded by them.
38. How we may discourse evidently of those Natures of which we have no Proper
Notions. 39. We can have no Proper Notion of God 's Essence. 40. The Author
speaks not here of Comparing Notions, or of Judgments. 41. The Author's Apology
for this Discourse; and, what can be the only Way to go about to confute it.
Preliminary Fifth.
1. THE Design of the Author here. 2. The Meaning of the Word [Existence.] 3.
The Extreme Danger of Misconceiving it. 4. The Meaning of [Ens,] or [Thing.] 5.
The Meaning of [Entity,] or [Essence.] 6. The Meaning of [Matter] and [Form;]
or, of [Power] and [Act.] 7. What is meant literally by the common Saying, that
Matter and Form compound Body. 8. The Literal Meaning of Substantial or
Essential Forms. The Reason why some Moderns oppose Substantial or Essential
Forms. The Meaning of Metaphysical Composition and Divisibility.
9. What is the Principle of Individuation. 10. The Meaning of the Word
[Substance.] The Word Improper.
11. That the Word [Supporting,] and [Inhering,] taken Metaphorically, may be
allowed; and ought not to be Ridiculed. 12. The Meaning of [Suppositum,] or
[Hypostasis.] 13. The Meaning of [Suppositality.] 14. The Meaning of the Word
[Individuum.] 15. The Meaning of [Substantia Prima,] and [Substantia Secunda.]
16. The Word [Accidents] is Improper. 17. The Word [Modes] more Proper. 18. The
Word [Quantity] is very Proper. 19. The Word [Extension] very Improper. 20. The
Meaning of Divisibility, Impenetrability, Space, and Measurability. 21. A short
Explication, what Quantity, Quality, and Relation are. 22. What Transcendents
are. 23. The Five Sorts of Transcendents. 24. Great Care to be had, that
Transcendent Words be not held Univocal. 25. What great Errors spring thence,
shown in the Univocal Acception of the Transcendent Word [Compounded.] 26. The
Cartesians Unadvised in going ultra Crepidam.
Reflection First.
1. THE Excellent Wit, and Unbiased Ingenuity of the Author of the Essay
acknowledged. 2. It Is probable he has taken a Prejudice against Metaphysics.
3. The Incomparable Excellency of the Science of Metaphysics, shown from the
Objects it treats of. 4. And from the Manner, by which it handles them. 5. The
Knowledge of these High Objects Attainable by Natural Reason. 6. Mr. Locke's
Tenet of no Innate Ideas, Solidly Grounded, and Unanswerable.
Reflection Second.
1. IN what the Author agrees, and disagrees, with Mr. Lock. 2. We may have
Notions, without perceiving we have them. 3. We may think, without being
Conscious that we think. 4. It Is impossible to be Conscious, or know we know,
without a new Act of Reflection. 5. It Is impossible to be Conscious of, or know,
our present Reflex Act, but by a new Reflex one. Hence, we can never come to
know our Last Reflection.
6. It Is utterly denied that Consciousness causes Individuation. The
Unreasonableness of the Opinion, that Men do always think.

Reflection Third.
1. NO Notion Simple, but that of [Existence.] The Order of our Notions is to
be taken from Nature.
2. The word [Solidity] arbitrarily and abusively taken by Mr. Lock. 3. His
Solidity not at all Essential to Body. 4. Space without Body, or Vacuum, is a
mere Groundless Fancy. 5. The Contrary to that Tenet demonstrated. 6. Therefore
it is impossible there should be any True Experiment to prove a Vacuum.
Reflection Fourth.
1. MR. Locke's First Chapter commendable. 2. Privative Notions connotate the
Subject. 3. Mere Motions made upon the Senses, Insufficient to give us
Knowledge of the Objects. 4. Sensible Qualities are the same in the Objects, as
in the Mind. 5. The Pretense of God's Voluntary Annexing Improper Causes to
Effects, is Unphilosophical. 6. The Power in the Object to cause Sensation and
Knowledge, is improperly such.
Reflection Fifth.
1. IDeas or Notions are not Actual Perceptions, but the Object perceived, and
durably remaining. It destroys the Nature of Memory, to make it consist in the
Reviving Ideas. The Mind cannot revive Perceptions.
2. Ideas in the Fancy may fade; but Notions are never blotted out of the Soul.
Reflection Sixth.
1. IF Brutes can know, they may have General Notions, and Abstract and Compare
too. 2. The Distinguishing our Notions guides our Reason and Judgment right. 3.
All Complex Ideas or Notions must consist of Simpler ones, united in the Thing.
4. Otherwise, they are Groundless Fancies. 5. The Manner how all Complex Ideas
or Notions are made, elaborately explained. 6. How the Doctrine of Cartesius,
Mr. Lock, and J. S. differ, as to this Point.
Reflection Seventh.
1. EXtension, not well Explicated. Immensity, worse.
2. Place, well Explicated. 3. Body and Extension, not the same Notion. 4.
Space cannot be without Extension. 5. Extension and Space differ only
Formally, or in some nice respect. 6. The Common Explication of Extension
defended. 7. Ens adequately divided into Body and Spirit. 8. Vacuum must either
be Res, or Modus Rei; otherwise, we can have no Notion of it. 9. The
Extravagant Arguments for Vacuum refuted. 10. We can set Bounds to Space,
Time, and to all Durations but God's. 11. Annihilation implies a Contradiction;
and is not an Act of Omnipotency, but of Impotency. 12. The Cartesians can
hardly avoid Vacuum. 13. The having an Idea of Vacuum, distinct from that of
Plenum, no Argument to prove it.
Reflection Eighth.
1. THE plain Sense of the Vulgar gives us the true Notion of Time. 2. Duration
is not Succession, but rather Opposite to it. 3. It Is a strange Paradox to say,
the Notion of Succession or Duration is to be taken from the Train of Ideas in
our Mind. 4. Our not perceiving Duration when we Sleep, no Argument for it. 5.
This Tenet is against Experience. 6. And, against the Nature of Things, and of
Resemblances too. 7. One Motion, if Known and Regular, may, and must be a
Measure to another. 8. There is no Show of Reason, that the Equality of the
Periods of Duration can possibly be taken from the Train of our Ideas. 9. This
odd Tenet not positively asserted by Mr. Lock.
Reflection Ninth.
1. IMaginary Time before the World, a mere Illusion of Fancy. 2. They who
advance Tenets against Nature, must alter the Meaning of those Words that
express our Natural Notions. 3. God's Immensity not Commensurate to an
Infinitely Expanded Space. 4. We can have no Notion of a Vacuum, but a Fancy
only. 5. Scripture-Texts the worst sort of Arguments for Philosophers, unless
they be most Plain, and Literally meant. 6. Only Self-Existence, and what
flows from that Notion, is peculiar to God. 7. Our Natural Notions assure us,
that it is mere Fancy to explicate God's Attributes by respect to Corporeal
Natures.
Reflection Tenth.
1. ENdless Addition of Numbers can never give us the Notion of Infinity. 2.
How we come to have that Notion. 3. And with what Ease. 4. The Notion of
[Infinite] is most perfectly Positive. 5. Duration easily conceivable without
Succession.
Reflection Eleventh.
1. THoughts are not to be called Sensations. 2. Thinking is the Action, and
not the Essence of the Soul. 3. Mr. Locke's Position, that Things are Good or
Evil only in reference to Pleasure or Pain, is True and Solid.
Reflection Twelfth.
1. THE due Commendation of Mr. Locke's Doctrine, in this Chapter of Power. 2.
That some Spiritual Agent is the First Mover of Bodies. The Will cannot move
our Bodies.
3. The Understanding and Will not Distinct Powers. 4. Man's Freedom, or
Self-Determination, deduced from Principles. 5. The Difference between Men and
Brutes, in their Determination to Action. 6. Man naturally pursues what is
according to Reason, or Virtuous. Therefore his Nature has been perverted since
his Creation.
7. Therefore Supernatural Motives are added, to strengthen Man's Weakened
Nature, or Reason. 8. Supernatural Motives being the Stronger, would always
prevail, were they duly applied to a Subject disposed. 9. Why the
Understanding and Will must be the same Power Substantially. 10. How to
Conquer in our Spiritual Warfare. 11. It Is evident that Man Determins himself
to Action: 12. Yet, as Pre-determin'd by God. 13. Determination to Virtuous
Action does perfect, and not destroy Freedom. 14. Good, if evidently appearing
such, does certainly Determine the Will. 15. How Wrong Judgments come. 16. Sin
generally springs from True, but Disproportionate Judgments. 17. Of Uneasiness;
and Mr. Locke's Discourse concerning it. 18. Good is the only Determiner of
the Will; and not Uneasiness. 19. Proved from our Natural Defire of Happiness.
20. The Appearance of Good is of Greatest Weight; but, in a manner, disregarded
by Mr. Lock. 21. Putting this Appearance, his Reasons do not conclude. 22.
Proved, because Ease is not the Perfection of a Soul. 23. The Truth of this
Point stated. 24. Mr. Lock omits here the Idea of Power to be a Thing, though
Nature suggests and forces it.
Reflection Thirteenth.
1. OUR Mixture of our Notions is Regular; Mr. Locke's, Irregular, and
Disorderly. 2. Without knowing what Substance or Thing is, we cannot pretend to
Philosophy. 3. All our Notions, and, amongst them, that of Substance, or Res,
is taken from the Thing. 4. We cannot be Ignorant of the Notion of Substance,
or Thing. 5. We know the more Inferior Notions of Things less perfectly. And,
Individual Essence, the least of all.
6. To gain a Distinct Notion of Substance, or Thing, we must consider it
abstractedly from its Modes, singly Considered. 7. The Literal Truth, how
Substance and its Accidents, or the Thing and its Modes, are exactly known. 8.
It Is impossible not to know Extension, it being in a manner, Self-evident. 9.
The Cohesion of Extended Parts is above Physical Proofs, and can only be known
by Metaphysics. 10. Whence, it is in vain to seek for Natural Efficient Causes
for those Effects that depend on Formal Causes. 11. We may have Clear Knowledge
of Spiritual Natures by Reflection. 12. The Reason why, and the Manner how.
Reflection Fourteenth.
1. THE Mind alone does not collect Notions, or compare them. 2. Verbal
Relations come not from Defect in our Language, but for want of a Real Ground.
3. What Causality is, and what Grounds the Relations of Cause and Effect. 4.
The Knowing the Principle of Individuation must antecede the Knowledge of
Identity and Diversity. 5. What gives the Ground to specify all Notions. 6.
What gives the Ground to our Notions of the Individuum. 7. How Individual Men
are constituted. 8. Existence cannot possibly be the Principle of
Individuation. 9. The Outward Circumstances of Time and Place cannot conduce to
constitute the Individual Essence. 10. An Individual Man is formally an
Individual Thing of that Kind, and an Individual Person too. 11. The Essence of
Things not to be taken from the Judgment of the Vulgar, nor from Extravagant
Suppositions. 12. Consciousness cannot constitute Personal Identity. 13. That
Consciousness is Inseparable from every Individual Man. 14. Yet Angels, who are
pure Acts, are Constituted in part, by the Act of Knowing themselves. 15. No
Soul is Indifferent to any Matter. The Notion of the Individuum is Essential.
The Substance is the same, though some Quantity of the Matter does come and go.

Reflection Fifteenth.
1. THat is only True Virtue, which is according to Right Reason. 2. How we
come to have Confused Ideas, or Notions. 3. The Whole Thing, as it needs not,
so it cannot be known clearly. 4. The Metaphysical Reason why this Complexion
of Accidents, which constitutes Individuums, should be almost infinitely
Various. 5. We can Sufficiently know Things without Comprehending fully this
Complexion. 6. No Formal Truth or Falsehood in Ideas or Notions.
Reflection Sixteenth.
1. WHence Proper and Metaphorical Notions and Words have their Origin. 2. The
General Rules to know the Right Sense of Words. 3. Words of Art most liable to
be mistaken. 4. The Way how to avoid being mistahen in Words of Art. 5. Even in
Terms of Art, the Thing is chiefly signified. 6. Metaphysical Words not
Unintelligible, but most Clear. 7. This Third Book concerning Words seems
Unnecessary. 8. Whence J. S. is not much concerned to reflect on it. 9. Nature
teaches us to define by a Genus, and a Difference. 10. Those who oppose this
Method, must be forced to use it. 11. The Mind does not frame Universal Notions
designedly; but is forced to it by Nature. 12. Nominal Essences Groundless and
Catachrestical. 13. Aristotle's Definition of Motion defended. 14. Aristotle's
Definition of Light most Proper. 15. The Cartesian Definition of Motion Faulty.
16. Individuums under the same Species differ Essentially. 17. Whence we must
take our Measures of Simple and Compound Notions. 18. The same Rule holds in
Accidents as well as in Substance. 19. The Idea or Notion can never be in Fault
when we Name Things wrong. 20. Confused Notions may have more Distinct ones
annexed to their Subject. 21. Coofused Notions do not exclude but include those
Distinct ones which are yet Undiscovered. 22. We must not judge which Notions
are Simple, which Compounded, from Clear or Obscure Appearances they make to
our Fancy, but from the Rule given above, 18, 19. 23. Shown hence, because
those Men conceit that Metaphysical Notions are Obscure, whereas they are
evidently the Clearest. 24. Not the Design of avoiding Different Significations
of Words, but Plain Nature forces us to put Real Essences. 25. Words are not
Ambiguous for want of Settled Standards in Nature. 26. The Thing signified is
not to be blamed for the Abuse of Words; but their Ambiguity, ill Contexture
or Misapplication. 27. Imperfect Knowers agree in the Thing and not in the Name
only. 28. The Knowing Things by Abstract Notions promotes and not hinders
Science. 29. By Mr. Locke's Principles, there is no way to remedy the Abuses of
Words. 30. Mr. Locke's Sentiment, after all, Ambiguous.
Reflection Seventeenth.
1. OF the Second Operation of our Understanding. 2. Mr. Locke's Definition of
Knowledge in many respects Faulty. 3. Knowledge cannot consist in the Connection
or Disagreement of Ideas. 4. The True Definition of Knowledge. 5. Our
Definition of Knowledge farther maintained. 6. Hence, there is but one sort of
Connection, in which Knowledge consists; viz. that of Co-existence. 7. The
Degrees of our Knowledge assigned by Mr. Lock, very Solid. 8. Every Step we
take in Demonstrative Knowledge, or every Consequence, must be grounded on
Self-Evidence. 9. The great Usefulness of this last Position. 10. Skepticism
and Dogmatism are, both of them, highly Prejudicial to Science. 11. We have
Sensitive Knowledge of other Notions besides Existence. 12. Only Principles
and Demonstration, and not Experiments, can give us any Intelligible
Explication of Natural Qualities. 13. Short Hints of the true Aristotelian
Grounds. 14. How all Secondary Qualities come to be made. 15. The Course of
Nature is fundamentally built on on the Admission of Rarity and Density. 16.
That by these Grounds, the Nature of Secondary Qualities is Demonstrable. 17.
The True Reason why some Men think them Inexplicable. 18. The Possibility of
Demonstrating them shown by the Instance of Color.
Reflection Eighteenth.
1. THE State of the Question. 2. How we know the Things by Means of Ideas,
Inexplicable. 3. The Ideists must be forced to grant, that the Thing known is
in the Mind. 4. The Necessity of the Things being in our Mind, farther
enforced. 5. Mathematical and Moral Knowledges are grounded on the Thing in the
Mind. 6. All Essential Predicates, and Accidental ones too, are truly the
Thing, and the whole Thing implied confusedly. 7. That our Complex Notions are
Regular, and Well-grounded; Mr. Locke's not so. 8. In what manner we compound
such Notions. 9. All Pleas fail the Ideists, unless they perfectly distinguish
Phantasms from Notions. 10. Odd Miscarriages of Nature ought not to shock
Natural Principles. The Cartesians are concluded against by J. S. as well as
other Ideists, or rather more.
11. All Truth consists in Joining or Separating Partial Conceptions of the
Things; and not in Joining or Separating Ideas. 12. The Distinction of Truth
into Mental and Verbal, Extravagant; and the Parts of it Co-incident.
Reflection Nineteenth.
1. UNiversal Propositions in the Mind are easily Knowahle, Antecedently to
Words. 2. It Is not necessary to know the precise Bounds and Extent of the
Species. 3. Unnecessary Knowledge not to be Coveted, nor the Want of it
Complained of. 4. The Nature and Use of General Maxims mistaken by Mr. Lock.
5. The Terms of General Maxims Clearer than those of Particular Propositions.
6. Such General Maxims are never used to deduce Conclusions from them, but to
reduce Inferior Truths to them. 7. The Absolute Necessity of First Principles
Asserted. 8. How other General Maxims do govern all our Actions and Sayings. 9.
The Discarding General Maxims destroys all Science. This Error springs from
Men's taking Wrong Measures, in judging what Notions are Clear, and what
Confused.
10. That not General Maxims, but their Abuse, breeds Danger to Science. 11.
His Instance, that General Maxims are fit to prove Contradictions, shows he
quite mistakes the Notion of Body. 12. Ideism is the Genuin Parent of
Enthusiasm in Philosophy. 13. Identical Propositions not to be ridiculed. 14.
The Right Way how to use them; and that Mr. Lock himself does, and must rely
upon them. 15. Neither Ideas nor Names can be Predicate, or Subject; but the
Thing it self, as conceived by us, in whole, or in part. 16. Mr. Locke's new
Instructive Way is utterly Insignificant. 17. That the Signification of Words
is the Meaning of them; their Meaning is our Notion; and our Notion is the
Thing.
Reflection Twensieth.
1. UNiversals must relate to the Existence they have in the Mind. 2. To put
any Knowledge in Brutes, is against the Nature of Things, and Implicatory. 3.
Mr. Lock confounds Material and Spiritual Natures. 4. Mr. Locke's Principles
confound Humane and Brutal Natures. 5. To Create, is the Peculiar Effect of
Self-Existence. 6. The Thought cannot move the Body; and why. 7. The Notion or
Nature of the Deity being once settled to be Self-Existence, all that can be
said of it follows Demonstratively. 8. We can know there are Angels, tho they
do not operate (...) us. 9. We know at first our own Existence, in the same
manner as we know the Existence of other Things; i. e. by Sensation, and not by
Intuition. 10. No Improvement of Science, without some General Principles. Mr.
Locke's Principles examined.
11. Mr. Locke's Main Principle; which is to ascertain all other Principles,
Inevident. 12. What Things hinder the Advancement of Science. 13. Euclid, and
such others, not blameable for laying Principles, or General Maxims.
Reflection Twenty First.
1. THE Point stated. 2. Mr. Lock confounds Outward Action, to which we may
proceed upon a Probability; with Inward Assent, to which we may not. 3. A
strange Character of our Judging Faculty. 4. That God has provided due Motives
of Enjoined Assent to all Mankind, if they be not wanting to themselves. 5. To
Assent upon a Probability, is against the Commonest Light of Reason. 6. There
cannot be, in Proper Speech, any Degrees of Assent. 7. Probable Assent is
Nonsense, or Impertinent. 8. What Kinds of Distinctions are disallowable in
Disputation. 9: Charity to Sincere and Weak Mis-understanders is a Christian
Duty. 10. Tradition built on mere Hearsay, has little or no Force. 11. A more
Firm Assent is due to Points certainly known to be revealed, than to
Scientifical Conclusions.
Reflection Twenty Second.
1. HOW Syllogisms came to be invented at first. 2. The True Use and Abuse of
them. 3. Objections against Syllogistick Arguing cleared. 4. Syllogisms are
useful for Demonstration. 5. Syllogisms are of no Use in Probable Discourses.
6. Other Mistakes about Syllogisms Cleared. 7. Inferences and Consequences of
Words abstracting from their Sense, is strangely against all Reason, and
Preposterous. 8. What is due to Reason, what to Divine Revelation. The First
Caution to be observed, in order to this Point.
9. The Second Caution to be used in this Point. 10. Reason not to be relied on
in Things beyond its Sphere. 11. The Notion of [is True,] must be distinguished
from the Notion of [may be True, or may not be True.] 12. Therefore, that no
Assent ought to be built upon Probable Mediums, is Demonstrable. 13. All Error
comes by Assenting upon Probabilities. 14. The Tenet that we ought to Assent
upon Probability, is highly Prejudicial to Piety, and to best Christian
Morality. 15. To apply our selves to the Right Method to find out Truth and
Science, is the only Antidote against Error. 16. No Possible Way, or Certain
Standard, to take the Just Measure of Probabilities. 17. The Certain Rule not
to be misled by Authority. 18. Mr. Lock seems to take some Things for only
Probable, which (or the Authority for them) are Demonstrable. 19. The Members
of Mr. Locke's Division of Sciences, are, partly Co-incident, partly not
belonging to Science at all. 20. The Connatural Way how Sciences are to be
Divided, and Subordinate. Some very Useful Corollaries concerning that Subject.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 6. line 11. which last. l. 19. Notion, which. p. 13. l. ult. poor weak.
p. 17. l. 19. so far. p. 28. l. 3. to be. p. 88. l. 28. extra Causas. p. 99. l.
ult. Words do. p. 100. l. 1. Definition. p. 115. l. 11. it treats. p. 170. l.
2, 3. at least. p. 179. l. 16. insuperably. p. 181. l. 8. GOD at. p. 191. l.
25. no otherwise. p. 202. l. 14. found in. p. 212. l. penult. to be so. p. 247.
l. 30. as is fetched. p. 253. l. 16. the referring it. p. 266. l 2.
Supposition. p 272. l. 15. given them. p. 340. l. 22. may walk. p. 348. l. 33.
it is hard. p. 393. l. 13. l. 5. or other. p. 432. l. 3. brought to. p. 434. l.
23. Enquiries. p. 439. contrast. p. 451. l. 12, 13. Probable the next; perhaps
improbable.


