FAITH VINDICATED FROM Possibility of Falsehood: OR, The Immovable Firmness and
Certainty of the Motives to Christian Faith, Asserted, Against that Tenet,
which, denying Infallibility of Authority, subverts Its Foundation, and renders
It Uncertain.

Desistes adversus alios dicere; caeterum ita pro Veritate loqueris, ut ea quae
dicuntur argui refellique non possint. Dionys. Areopag. Epist. 6. LOVAIN, A. D.
MDCLXVII.

Introduction.
THough nothing be more natural than that all, who deny the Certainty of the
Rule of Faith, should deny also the Certainty of Faith it self, since the
Certainty of this later depends on the Certainty of the former; and, it is
impossible the Conclusion should be held Certain, unless the Premises be held
so too, yet, the conceit which the Generality of those who call themselv's
Faithful or Christian, have of their Faith, and, consequently, the nature of
that kind of Assent, is such, that nothing can sound more horridly and
blasphemously to their ears, than bluntly and without disguise to say, That all
their Faith may possibly be a Ly for any thing any man living absolutely knows.
For, a certain goodness of Rational Nature, has fixed this apprehension in them,
that, since the World is made for the Salvation of Mankind, it is unsuitable to
the Wisdom and Goodness of Providence, which has furnished us with means of
Certainty for our inferior concerns, that the Principles on which Eternity
depends, should fall short of that Certainty, and, consequently, of strength
and efficacy to move and carry us on to a steady pursuit of that greatest, and,
in comparison, only Interest. Notwithstanding, so unresistible is the force of
this evident truth, that, whoever has deserted the Catholic Church, and her
Rule of Faith, Tradition, can have no absolute Certainty of Faith; that is,
indeed no true Faith (for that truly is Faith which the Generality of those who
use the Word mean by it) that the more intelligent amongst them, conscious of
the manifest weakness of their Grounds, are necessitated, in their
Controversies, when they should defend their Faith, in plain terms to disgrace
and betray it; choosing rather heartily to confess it to be all a possible
Falsehood, than to undertake that impossible performance to maintain that it is
an Absolute Truth.

I cannot resemble this Natural Conceit of the perfect Certainty of Faith,
inbred as it were in the Generality of those who have had even a glimmering of
Christianity, to any thing so well as to the apprehension, the former World had
of a Godhead. For, as natural Instinct forced those, who had not light to know
the True God, to affix the Notion of a Deity to some false one, as some eminent
Hero, the Sun, Thunder, Fire; nay, there was nothing so ridiculous but they
would make a God of it, rather than forgo the tenet of a Sovereign Power so
deeply rooted in them by Nature; so, our modern Misbelievers, rather than they
will relinquish their Opinion, that Faith and the means to know the way to
Heaven is absolutely-Certain, springing naturally from the conceit they have
that God has a Providence for the Salvation of Mankind, choose to misplace the
notion of the Certain means to know God's will, or Rule of Faith, in the most
unlikely things imaginable; as, in a ridiculous whimsy of Fancy little better
than a Dream, nay sometimes in a dream it self, or in the motion of some
hypocondriacal vapor, as do the Fanatics; others, in other things seemingly
wiser; as, in their opinions of some men they esteem Good and Learned; in
merely their being educated thus by Parents who confess they have relinquished
what themselves had been educated to; in Interpretations of words by
Grammatical skill which were writ long ago, and in dogmatical points, where
every word is capable of equivocalness; nay (which is indeed as mad as the most
extatick of them all) to affirm that such words are so plain to every Reader
that none can miss the right sense of them: All which, though plainly confuted
by this Principle which Nature teaches the rudest, that, That can never be a
way which many follow to their power and yet the greater part are misled,
joined to their plain Experience that many followers of these ways exceedingly
differ; yet, so prevalent is the force of the other Truth, that they will wink
at this later to embrace that; insomuch that none of those (I except Seekers,
by what name soever they are called, as not being pretenders to Faith) but,
were they asked whether they be not as Certain of their Faith as that they
live, would readily and heartily answer affirmatively; I mean those of every
sort who follow merely the Guidance of uncorrupted nature in this affair.

Notwithstanding, as in the Pa began World There were found many Witty men, who,
out of Unacquaintance with the True Godhead and the Unworthyness of the False
Gods then in vogue, or out of a conceit of many misgovernments in the world,
speculated themselves out of their natural notions and went about to deny
absolutely there was any God at all; so it happens that, amongst those who have
deserted the Catholic Church, there are found diverse men of speculative and
searching brains; who, out of Unacquaintance with, or at least their slightly
penetrating the nature of the Catholic Rule of Faith, the Living Voice and
Practice of the Church, or TRADITION, and, withal, seeing the Vanity and
manifest Inability of their own pretended Rules to ascertain them absolutely
their Faith is True, joined with the experienced Disagreement in Faith amongst
diverse Pretenders to it, would speculate themselves out of their Natural
Christianity, and deny any Absolute Certainty at all of Faith, or the way to
Salvation; contenting themselves with a Probability in the Grounds it is built
on, miscalled by them Moral Certainty; confessedly consistent with a
Possibility of Falsehood. Which kind of Grounds permits* that perhaps all may
chance to be shown to morrow a mere Illusion and a bold Lie; and all the
Christian World hitherto to have been possibly led by the nose by a False
Imposture; nay, to have held that Imposture Most Sacred, and preferred the
adhering to it before all the Goods, Life or Nature could bestow.

How near this wicked Tenet approaches to Atheism appears hence, that it is next
to the Denial of a Godhead, to deny that in proper speech we know Him, or the
Way to Him; Yet this is the very Position of those who put a Possibility of
Falsehood in Faith; since none can truly be said to know that to be true; which
he sees and acknowledges may not be true at the same time. This Seed of
Infidelity sown when the Rule of Faith was renounced, first dared to appear
publicly above Ground in the writings of Mr. Chillingworth and the L.
Falkland; and, though, had it been proposed barefac't, in another occasion, it
could have hoped for no welcome Reception even amongst the Generality of the
Protestants themselves, who were made believe ever since their Breaking from
the Church, their Faith had the Word of God for its Basis, which they honestly
understood to have the same Certainty as if God himself had spoke it; yet,
being dressed up by their plausible Rhetoric, and, advanced in a circumstance
when they were confuting the Papists, the middle sort of Protestant Readers at
unawares let it pass as meritorious to their party; and the wiser sort embraced
it both as a real Truth, and also as making best for the Interest of their
Cause when they would oppugn us; what disservice soever it did tot he Common
Cause of Religionor Christianity. For, they were not at all sollicitous (so
strangely did faction transport them) so they could in their conceit overthrow
the Infallibility of the Catholic Church, though they reduced all Faith into
Incertainty, and all the Grounds on which it is built, into a tottering
Contingency.

It seemed to threaten a Mischief considerable enough to Christianity, that
such a pernicious Tenet should be publicly owned in Controversy, to taint the
wiser sort of Readers with Atheism, in which it has been too successful; but,
it grew intolerable when it durst take the boldness to appear in Sermons
pronounced in very Honorable Assemblies, and afterward published in Print;
where, under the Title of [The Wisdom of being Religious] and a great many
seeming shows, and, I heartily think, very real Intentions of impugning
Atheism, by an ill-principled, and (in that circumstance) imprudent and
unnecessary confession in equivalent Terms of the possible falsehood of Faith,
nay even as to the chiefest and most Fundamental point, the Tenet of a Deity.
Religion receives a deep wound, and Atheism an especial Advantage: as may
perhaps more particularly be shown hereafter. I envy not that Sermon, and some
other Productions of Mr. Tillotson their Author, their due commendations,
though he be my Adversary; I acknowledge that in his clear Method, or
disposition of his matter, and the cleanness of his style, which fit him for an
Excellency in Preaching, he has few Equals; and that, had he good Principles,
he would deliver them as intelligibly as any man I know; only I could wish he
had right Principles to Ground his discourse, without which he can never make a
Controvertist, but must needs undermine the solid Foundation of Christianity,
if he undertake to meddle with the Grounds of it, even while he goes about to
defend it.

What I am on this occasion chiefly to reflect on, is my own obligation; which
is, the boldness of owning and publishing the Incertainty of Christian Faith,
being come to the height, to assert it is Absolute Firmness and Certainty in the
best manner God shall enable me: and his Providence seems to require it of me
at present; In regard it is expected I should reply to Mr. Tillotson 's
pretended Answer to Sure Footing; whose first Principle in that Reply seems to
be this, that, what he deems the Rule of Christian Faith, and, consequently,
that Faith it self is possible to be False; for, by virtue of this Position,
which he defends p. 118, and in diverse other places implies and builds on, he
more oppugns my discourse than by any other Thesis whatever. The contrary to
which if I evince, then the Protestants own confession, that they have no
Absolutely-Certain Ground or Rule of Faith, confutes them without more ado, and
concludes them to have relinquished its only right, because its only truly
certain Rule, TRADITION.

Yet, were it not my chief design to establish the Absolute Truth of Christian
Faith in it self, by all the Arguments I can imagine, and not merely to confute
Protestant Controvertists, I needed not take the pains thus to multiply
Demonstrations, or even alledg so much as one. For, since, whatever they
pretend seemingly to Antiquity or Authority of Fathers by their voluminous
quotations, yet they will finally and heartily stand to nothing in contests
about Faith, as Conclusive, but their own Interpretations of Scripture; Which
being so weak a Ground that every days Experience shows it is Failings; an
ordinary Probability is abundantly enough to overthrow their Discourses, whose
very Principle is not only Improbable, but evidently a False one; Whence, the
meanest Catholic writer cannot fail to have the advantage over their Best in a
Prudential man's Esteem; because he cannot possibly miss of a Medium more
probable than is their main Ground. I declare then that my Chief End in this
Treatise is to settle Christian Faith, or to demonstrate that it must be truly
or Absolutely Certain; and that my applying it now and then to my Opposers, is
only a Secundary Intention, and merely Occasional.

Ere I fall close to my Proofs, that Faith cannot possibly be False, to avoid
Equivocation in the words, I declare that by the word [Faith] I am not
sollicitous whether be meant our Act of Faith or the Points of Faith, that is,
the Object of that Act; but judge that distinction wholly Impertinent in this
present discourse; and, the reason is, because I cannot affirm a Point True or
False, but as it stands under Motives able to make me judge, assent or believe
it is such or such; which Motives, if they be such as are able to convince that
the Point cannot but be so, then my Judgment or Assent tothose Points,
thusconcluded, that is my Act of Faith cannot but be True; because it depends
entirely on Grounds Impossible to be False, viz. those Motives; But, if those
Motives are not of such a nature as is absolutely Conclusive the thing is, then
both the Thing, Object, Point, or Proposition of Faith, as being only Knowable
by virtue of them, may be otherwise, and also my Act of Faith or Belief of
those Points may be a wrong or erroneous Judgment; that is, both of them may be
False. To ask then if Faith can possibly be False, is to ask whether the
Motives laid by God's Providence for Mankind or his Church to embrace Christian
Faith, must be such as of their own nature cannot fail to conclude those points
True; and, to affirm that Faith is not possible to be False, is equivalently to
assert that those Motives or the Rule of Faith, must be thus absolutely
Conclusive, Firm, and Immovable.

Hence is seen, that I concern not my self in this discourse with how perfectly
or imperfectly diverse persons penetrate those motives; or how they satisfy or
dissatisfy some particular Persons; since, I only speak of the Nature of those
Motives in themselves, and as laid in Second Causes by Gods Providence to light
Mankind in their way to Faith: to which the dimness of eyesight, neglect to
look at all, or looking the wrong way, even in many particular men, is
Extrinsecal and Contingent.

Lastly, to avoid Mistake and Confusion, I declare, that there being two sorts
of Questions, one concerning the Existence of a thing, called An est, viz.
whether there be any Certainly-Conclusive Rule of Faith, or no; and the other
about what is the Certain or truely-Conclusive Rule of Faith, called Quid est;
I am not now discoursing about the later (that was the work of SURE FOOTING)
but the former only. Indeed, in my first discourse there I endeavored to
evince this Truth from par. 1. to par 17. by diverse Arguments; but, because
Mr. T. waves the speaking to those Premises as they tend to infer my
Conclusion, and only discourses a little (Mistakingly) against the Conclusions
themselves, therefore, being resolved to write a Treatise to establish
Christian Faith, I thought fit to apply it to his proceedure there; that so I
may both more forcibly invite him to that necessary though neglected Duty, and,
withal that by settling the Existence and Nature of Faith and it is Rule first,
I may clear the way methodically to discover what, and only what, can be the
right Rule of Faith. And, possibly in my next Treatise if Mr. T. and Mr. St.
think fit to continue on this discourse forwards by answering this, they may,
by denying that in true speech the Points of Faith are Truths, or Faith is
True, oblige me to begin yet higher, and make use of such Mediums as are more
direct and immediately fit to confute Atheism.

The understanding Reader will easily pardon the Speculativeness of this
Treatise in great part of it: if he reflects that discourses built on
Intrinsecal Mediums and managed in the way of Severe Reason, do naturally, nay
must necessarily, bear up to the First Principles; yet, by the Harmony and
Connection of Truths with one another, there will be found also very many Proofs
fairly Intelligible by the middle sort of Prudential men; especially in those
Arguments which are drawn from Practice; and, if I flatter not my self, some
Proofs, and those Convincing ones too, suitable to every Capacity. This comfort
my Readers may expect to reap by this Procedure that it must forcibly shorten
Disputes, and bring Controversies after a while to a period, unless our
Adversaries be still obstinately bent to play the Drolls instead of soberly and
pertinently disputing. For, hardly can Error hide her deformity, when she is
exposed naked to the view of Rational nature in the noon-day-light of
FIRST-PRINCIPLES.

Faith Vindicated FROM Possibility of Falsehood.
First Eviction.
1. I Lay for the Basis of my present Discourse these two Propositions.

1. Christians are obliged to hold firmly, profess, and stand to it, even with
Postulata.
the loss of their Lives, that Points of Faith are TRUTHS.

2. None can be thus obliged to hold, profess, and maintain that to be TRUTH
which they know not to be so.

The later of these is as certain, as that God, the Imposer of this Obligation,
is Good: For how unworthy his Infinite Goodness were it, to will that rational
Nature or Mankind should act irrationally by holding firmly what it has no firm
Grounds to hold; that is, what it knows not to be so? Or to sacrifice its very
Being to testify the truth of those Points, concerning which, if it work
according to right reason, the nature God has given it, and deviate not from
that by a weak credulity, it can never be perfectly satisfied that they are
indeed Truths; which it can never be, if, notwithstanding all it knows, they
yet may possibly be Falsehoods. No man in true morality ought to say what he
knows not, much less so asseverantly, as to seal it with his blood.

As for the former Proposition, which I account most fundamental to the ensuing
Discourse, I am to declare that by Holding, etc. a thing to be a Truth, I
understand the holding that the thing absolutely, in reality, or indeed, is so
as I judge. Whence to this Holding a Thing to be Truth, it is not enough that a
man hold it is so to the best of his judgment; but it is required moreover, that
he hold he is not deceived in making such a judgment; and this, because he
holds his Thought conformable to the Thing. For, this settles Verity or Truth
on its proper and firm Foundation, the thing; and not on the unstable motions
of his Judgment, as does the other. My first and chief Postulatum thus
understood, I esteem to be self-evident to all that converse with Christianity
taken in its largest sense, as I declared in my Introduction; setting aside
that sort of Speculaters; I mean those of our modern Adversaries, against whom
I dispute at present; and of whom the Question is now agitated, whether they
are indeed to be held right Christians or no. And I conceive that he who should
deny it, must be bound to put the contradictory Position; and to affirm, that
Christians are not bound firmly to hold, profess, and maintain with the loss of
their lives the TRUTH of their Faith, but its Likelihood only.

He that affirms this, if he would be held a Christian, is to be confuted by
the contrary sentiment of the generality of Christians, from whom he dissents
in so Fundamental a Point as is the rightly understanding the nature of Faith,
which they profess, and which it so highly imports them to know; that is,
indeed, in rightly understanding the meaning of the word Faith. If he be no
Christian, yet hold the Godhead, it is to be demonstrated partly from the proper
effects of Faith, and the nature of the great difficulties, both intellectual
and moral, which it is ordained to master: partly out of the nature of God and
his Attributes, obliging him to lay means proportioned to an intended end; or
to establish every thing according to the Concern that depends on it, which
Concern in our case is the highest imaginable, to wit, the Salvation of
Mankind, the End of creating those very Entities on which the Certitude of
Science is built. Or, lastly, if he be an Atheist, the Deity and it is
Attributes are first to be demonstrated: as also what is Man's summum bonum,
and the immediate Disposition to it; and then the nature and Certitude of
Faith, and consequently of it is Rule are to be demonstrated.

Supposing then my later Postulatum to be evident to all that know there is a
wise and good Governor of the world, and who understand the common Principles
of Morality; and my former Postulatum to be clear and undeniable matter of Fact
to those who converse with Christianity; and therefore to have unavoidable
force upon all that would be held Professors thereof, I shall be bold to
proceed upon them.

And, first, Logic, whose proper office it is to look into the nature and
actions of our Soul as Rational; and as it were, to anatomize her Thoughts,
takes up the discourse, and proceeds thus.

2. Truths are found in Propositions; The Thesis demonstrated from the nature
of Evidence.
a Proposition consists of two Notions called Subject, and Predicate, and a
third, whose office it is to connect them; whence to know a thing to be Truth or
true, is to see the Conn^xion between the two Notions spoken of, or to see that
the third truly connects them. Now there are but two ways imaginable
(abstracting from Experience) how this may be seen: Either by seeing
immediately that those two Notions are the same with one another out of the
very Notions themselves; or else by seeing that they are each of them the same
with a Third; whence follows, that, unless that Third Notion can fail to be the
same with it self, those two Notions which are the same with it, cannot
possible fail to be the same with one another. The former is called
Self-Evidence; this later, Evidence by deduction: Both are built immediately
upon this grand Verity, that, The same is the same with it self; wherefore,
unless it be seen: that the Truth of that most Self-Evident Axiom is engaged in
their Patronage, they cannot be even known to be True; and, if it be seen that
it is thus engaged, they must needs be known impossible to be false; since it is
most manifestly impossible, that First Principles should be false, or that the
same should not be the same with it self. Wherefore, either Points of Faith
need not be known to be Truths, or else they must (by Reflecte^s at least) be
known impossible to he false.

3. The same is evinc't from the nature From the nature of the Subject in
Faith-Propositions.
of the Subject in those Propositions which affirm the Truth of any point of
Faith: For, if we look narrowly, we shall find that the Subject in those is,
either formally, or in effect, a Proposition it self; as when we say, This
Proposition [Christ is really in the Sacrament] is true; [That God is one and
three] is true, etc. Where the Subjects are manifestly these; Christ is really
in the Sacrament; God is one and three, or, a Trinity is. A Proposition then
being a Speech apt to express Truth or Falsehood, nay necessarily determined to
do the one, (excepting those which speak of a future Contingent) it follows,
that who ever is bound in reason to affirm that the Proposition expressing the
point of Faith is True, is bound likewise to affirm it is impossible to be
false, if taken in the same sense he means it; that is, indeed, if taken for
the same Proposition, since it is impossible Truth should be Falsehood. Either
then Christ's followers are not obliged to affirm the Points they profess are
true, which thwarts the Sentiments of the Christian part of mankind; or else,
they must necessarily be obliged, withal, to affirm them impossible to be
false.

4. The same is concluded from the From the nature of the Copula
nature of the Copula, [is] whose office being to connect or identifie the
notions of the Subject and Predicate, that is, to express that what is meant by
those two notions is to be found in the same Thing, or that they have one
common stock of Being, its proper signification is Being or Existence; not
absolutely, as if it meant that either of the Terms exists in Things; but
comparatively or conditionally as it were, that that Being which belongs to one
of the Terms, is the same Being with that which belongs to the other; or that
by the same Being whereby one of the Terms is, the other is also. Now then,
this kind of Expression or Signification being such as has no latitude between
it and its utmost Opposite or Contradictory, [is not] it being the most
uncompounded notion that is, and not capable to be mingled with any alloy or
participation of its Opposite, as it happens in Contraries: it follows that who
holds the Truth of the Proposition, or, which is all one, the Identification of
the two Terms expressed by the Copula [is] must hold it absolutely, and the
Opposite to be impossible to be false; nothing being more impossible than that
is and is not should both be true at once; or that the same thing should be the
same and not the same in the same respect, that is, should be true, and not be
true: And hence it is, that though distinctions use to fall upon the
Equivocalness of the two Terms, yet no man that knows what Logic meant, ever
distinguished the mere Copula, its simplest notion not admitting any possible
division.

5. Our Argument from the Copula From the nature of the Predicat^ in most of
those Propositions,
is particularly strengthened from the nature of the Predicate in the
Propositions we speak of; I mean in such Speeches as affirm such and such
Points of Faith to be True. For True means Existent, in Propositions which
express only the An est of a thing, as most Points of Faith do; which speak
abstractedly, and tell notwherein the nature of the Subject it speaks of
consists, or the Quid est. So that most of the Propositions Christians are
bound to profess, are fully expressed thus; A Trinity is Existent, a Christ
God-and-man is Existent, etc. and the like may be said of those Points which
belong to a Thing or Action past; as, Creation was, Christ's Crucifying was,
etc. For, Existent is the Predicate in these too, only affixt to another
difference of time; and it is equally impossible such Subjects should neither
have been nor not have been, or have been and have not been at once, as it is
that a thing should neither be nor not be at present, or both be and not be at
present. Regarding then steadfastly the nature of our Predicate, [Existent;] we
shall find that it expresses the utmost Actuality of a Thing; and, as taken in
the posture it bears in those Propositions, that Actuality exercised; that is,
the utmost Actuality in its most actual state; that is, as absolutely excluding
all manner or least degree of Potentiality, and confequently all Possibility of
being otherwise; which is radically destroyed when all Potentiality is taken
away. This Discourse holding, which in right to Truth I shall not fear to
affirm (unconcerned in the drollery of any Opposer) to be more than
Mathematically demonstrative, (as shall be shown more particularly hereafter)
it follows inevitably, that who so is bound to profess a Trinity, Incarnation,
etc. is or was Existent, is also bound to profess that it is impossible they
should be not-Existent; or which is all one, that it is impossible these points
of Faith should be false.

6. The same appears out of the nature From the nature of Distinction, as
applied to the Predicate.
of distinction or division applied to our Predicate Existent, as found in
these Propositions: For, could that Predicate bear a pertinent distinction,
expressing this and the other respect, or thus and thus, it might possibly be
according to one of those respects, or thus considered, and not be according to
another, that is, another way considered: But this evasion is here impossible;
for, either those distinguishing Notions must be more Potential or antecedent
to the Notion of Existent, and then they neither reach Existent, nor supervene
to it as its Determinations or Actuations, which Differences ought to do; nor
can any Notion be more Actual or Determinative in the line of Substance or
Being, than Existent is; and, so, fit to distinguish it in that line; nor,
lastly, can any determination in the line of Accidents serve the turn; for,
these suppose Existence already put, and so the whole Truth of the Proposition
entire and complete antecedently to them: It Is impossible therefore that what
is thus affirmed to be True, should in any regard be affirmed possible to be
false; the impossibility of distinguishing the Predicate pertinently, excluding
here all possibility of diverse respects. From the impossibility of
distinguishing the subjects of Faith-propositions.


7. The same is demonstrated from the impossibility of distinguishing the
Subjects of those Faith-Propositions; for those Subjects being Propositions
themselves, (as was shown 3.) and accepted for Truths, as is supposed, they are
incapable of Distinction, as shall be particularly shown hereafter, (Evict. 3.
5.) Besides those Subjects being Points of Faith, and, so, standing in the
Abstract, that is, not descending to subsuming respects, even in that regard
too they are freed from all pertinent distinguishableness.

8. The same is demonstrated from the nature of Truth, which consists in From
the nature of Truth, consisting in an Indivisible.
an Indivisible: Whence there is nothing of Truth had, how great soever the
conceived approaches toward it be, till all may-not-bees, or Potentiality to
be otherwise, be utterly excluded by the Actuality of Is or Existence: which
put or discovered, the Light of Truth breaks forth, and the dim twilights of
may-not-bees vanish and disappear.

9. The same is demonstrated out of From the nature of Connection
the nature of Connection found in the aforesaid Propositions. For, it is evident
their Truth consists in the connection of those Notions which make the Subject
and Predicate. Whoever therefore sees not the Connection between those Notions
in the Principle of Faith, sees not the truth of any of those Propositions;
that is, those Propositions are not to such a man True. Wherefore, Connection
excluding formally Inconnexion, so that it is clearly impossible they should be
found together in the selfsame Subjects, and the falsehood of such Propositions
consisting in the Unconnectedness of their Terms, it follows that he who is
obliged to profess those Faith-Propositions True, must see the Connection
between their Terms, and consequently that they cannot possibly be inconnected
or false. Again, since all approaches or vicinity to Connection, by how near
degrees soever they are made, are not Connection, it follows that all Connection
consists in an Indivisible, and can admit no Latitude for a Possibility to be
otherwise, to be grounded on. Lastly, all Connection being necessarily
Immediate, or seen by virtue of Immediateness, and to see Immediate Connection
being the Producer of Certain Knowledge, or of Assurance the Thing cannot but be
so; it follows, that to see the Truth of such Propositions, or, which is all
one, the Immediate Connection of their Terms, is to see they cannot but be so,
or that they are absolutely void of all Possibility of Falsehood.

. 10. By this time we are brought From the nature of Opinion.
orderly to look into the nature of Opinion. Which word I take not here in a
large sense for any kind of Assent, however produced; but for an Assent or
Adhesion to a Tenet without sufficient Grounds to evince the Thing is so as the
Opiner judges; as it is taken in that Proverb, Turpe est opinari. Now, it is
most evident, that there would be sufficient Grounds to convince, in case, the
Term or Point were seen to be deduc't by immediate steps, or a Train of
immediate Connexions to that very Conclusion. It Is manifest then, that it is
therefore Opinion, and blameworthy, because its Grounds, as they are laid in
the understanding of the Assenter, want or fall short of this immediate
Connection; So that Opinion is a judgment upon remote or unimmediate
Considerations. By which means it comes to pass, that the most necessary verity
of that Grand Principle, [The same is the same with it self] upon which all
Certainty both of first Principles and of Deduction is built, and whose perfect
Self-Evidence and Interessedness in whatever belongs to right discourse, seem
to make the very Light of Reason consist originally in It, is not engaged in
the Opiners discourse; whence, wanting Immediateness, it becomes unconnected,
incoherent, weak, and slack, or rather indeed null. No wonder then if all
Opinion, how near soever it approaches seemingly to Immediate Connection, and
how strongly soever it be supported by an experienced seldomness of such
Effects, or the conceived unaptness and fewness of Causes fit to produce them,
yet it admits Possibility of being otherwise; in regard it fails in its very
Root and Basis, by not relying on the main Principle and Foundation of all
steadiness in humane Discourse, and which is of so necessary a Truth, that it is
impossible to falter or give way, to uphold and exempt it from a liableness to
disconnexion of those Notions which it pretended, and ought to Identify; that
is, from a liableness to Error.

11. From this declaration of the nature of Opinion, it is rendered manifest
out of what Fountainhead all Rational Assents flow; namely, from seeing the
Immediate Connection of one Term with another; or, which is all one, that this
Principle [The same is the same with it self] stands engaged for their verity:
Also, that the Light of Reason consists fundamentally in this; and formally in
deriving the perfect Visibleness of this to make other Propositions also
visible to the Eye of our Understanding. Likewise, that Assents not springing
from this Light of Reason, must be, as such, Irrational; and arise necessarily
from the Will, taken as not following the Light of Understanding, but as
prompted and put forward by some passion, viz. some irrational desire or
inclination the thing should be so, which pressed and precipitated the
understanding into Assent before due motives forced it. As likewise, that since
none can be bound constantly to profess what he cannot steadily see to be true,
a Christian who is thus bound to profess his Faith True, must see that the
First Principle now spoken of, which gives all Steadiness to our Intellectual
Sight, is interessed in the patronage of the Proposition he assents to: Whence,
true Faith, by reason of its Immovable Grounds, can bear an asserting the
absolute Impossibility of its being False; whereas, who ever affirms Faith may
possibly be false, makes it built upon remote mediums, that is, such as are
either not immediate; or (which is all one) not seen to be immediate to the two
Terms of the Proposition assented to; and so, they become destitute of the
Invincible strength of that first Principle which establishes all deduc't
Truths, and legitimates all Assents to them. Whence follows inevitably, that he
turns all Faith into Opinion; makes Faith absurd, preternatural and irrational;
importing that it is a thing which men must assent to or say interiorly it is so,
and yet see no solid Grounds why it must be so; profess stoutly it is true, and
that they are sure of it; and yet, if they will speak truly, profess with all,
that it may be false, and that the whole world may be mistaken in it; and
lastly, he leaves all Christ's Doctrine Indefensible, and utterly unmaintainable
to have, absolutely speaking, either any solidity or steadiness in its Grounds,
or one true word in it self.

Second Eviction.
. 1. FRom this not-seeing the Connection of the two Terms in The Origin and
Natures of Suspense and Assent.
the Conclusion by a Medium immediately connected to them both, but by distant
Glances only, which have not the power to make one see Intellectually the
Thing is, or Assent; joined with this that, notwithstanding, it is not seen
those Terms are Opposite or Inconnectible; the Soul becomes hereupon, as it
were, environed with a kind of Intellectual Darkness, and sees not which way to
step forwards, without danger of harming hor Cognoscitive or Truth-affecting
Nature by Error. Whence, she remains in a kind of Neutral Condition, which we
call Suspense. But, it is to be well noted, that this Suspensive Condition of
the Soul, not being a state of Actuality or Determination, (much less of utmost
Actuality, as is the seeing, by virtue of that main Principle before-nam'd,
that a thing is) but of Indetermination, Potentiality, and Confusedness; its
Nature admits consequently infinite degrees, according as the Appearances which
incline her toward Assent or Dissent are greater or less. Moreover, as in the
passing from Indetermination to Determination (for example) in a motion to a
Terminus of Rest, there are diverse approaches of that Motions Quantity so very
near the Terminus or End, that their distance is undiscernable to a vulgar eye,
and needs exact skill to distinguish them: So it happens here, that there must
necessarily be found diverse Inclinations or Approaches toward Assent, which
have so small a degree of Suspense in them, that they are hard to be
distinguished from absolute Assents, but by a learned Reflecter; and the way he
takes to distinguish them must be to observe whether the Understanding, acting
reflectingly, that is, looking into the Nature of its own Act, finds there that
it absolutely yields it self over to judge the thing is existent or true, or
whether it only judges it very probable or Truthlikely. For, any Assent to the
greatest Likelihood of a thing is as far from being an Assent to the things
Existence, as the Notion of Existent or True is from the Notion of very likely
to be true. And if the Assent to the former be not actually an Assent to the
later, yet tend toward it, as it does; then it is Potential in respect of it,
and so includes some degree of Suspense; which defect only can in our present
case, hinder the other from being actually it, according to our former
Discourse. Assent, then, to the mere Likelihood of a thing, is, or at least
implies, Suspense of its Existence

2. Another thing which inclines men to confound the Assent to the Likelihood
of a thing, with the Assent to its Existence or Truth, is Habituation or
Custom. For, men being used to proceed naturally to outward Action upon a very
high Probability, without more ado or examination, they are hence apt to
apprehend that a Conceit, which had so little and so undiscernable a proportion
of Suspense in it, was a perfect Assent: and that, because the Soul quite
yielded to the Motive as to Exterior Action, therefore it yielded likewise as
to Interior Assent. Whereas, by reflecting on the Nature of this Act in the
Soul, and by retriving its Grounds, we come to discover that, however the Soul
runs promptly and rationally to Outward Action upon such a Motive, when she is
concerned to act, even after deliberation; yet, not so to Interior Assent, if
she acts rationally; but, upon reflection, finding in her self nothing to fix in
her the Existence of the thing, or elevate it beyond the possibility of
not-being or being False, she hangs back from assenting the thing is, and is
constrained to say interiorly, or acknowledge in her own breast, she may
possibly be mistaken, and the thing possibly be not-Existent, for ought she
sees; which restrains her from truly assenting that the thing is.

3. An Instance will render our Discourse clearer. It Is proposed then (for
example) to our Judging Power, whether America be or no? And we will suppose (to
avoid a disputed case) the Evidence of Authority has convinced the
Understanding it once was, by the Impossibility the several Attesters should
either be deceived in a plain Object of Eyesight, or have a common Motive able
to make them conspire to belly their Eyes. But, the Question is, whether it be
now or no. And, the uncouthness and unlikelihood that so vaste a place should
be destroyed, joined with the Customariness of acting upon a very great
probability, makes him who is to act in order to it, (for example, send a ship
thither) proceed to his intended outward action fearlesly, and esteem him mad
who desists upon a conceit of so unlikely a failure. For, since all Action is
in particulars, and Particulars are the very Sphere of Contingency, it follows,
that we must not act at all, if we expected Demonstrations of the several
Objects and Adjuncts of our outward Action: Whence he deserves justly to be
accounted frantic who should desist from Action where there is so high a
Probability; for this extravagant cautiousness were in effect to take away the
Motives to any Exterior Action in the world, and consequently all such Action
it self. But now, let two Speculaters or Scholars meet together, who consider
not the Practicableness, but merely the Truth of things; and aim not to better
their Purse by Merchandising or outward Endeavors, but their Understandings by
rightly-made Judgments or Assents, that is, by Knowledges: and we shall see
their working on the Point turns upon other hinges. In the other, there was
Necessity of acting, without which the world could not subsist: but, here is no
necessity of Assenting, which we suppose only aimed at, at present; nor can
there be any, unless that Principle or Cause of all Assent [The same is the
same with it self] comes to exercise its over-powering Virtue upon the Soul.
There, it was enough that prudential considerations discovered a betterness to
act exteriourly, all things weighed; to which needed not a severity of
Principles forcing the Truth of the thing: but here, those Principles, which
are the Maxims of Metaphysics or Supreme Wisdom, are the only things to be
consulted; and the prudential weighing of Particulars avails little or nothing
toward the secure establishment of the Truth aimed at. There, some harm was
likely to ensue, if they acted not exteriourly, and went not about their work:
but, here, no harm at all could come by not acting interiourly; I mean, by
not-Assenting, but Suspending till the beams of Truth, by the Fountain-light of
that First Principle, cleared their Understandings: rather on the contrary, a
great harm was certain to ensue upon assenting in that case, that is, an Injury
to Reason, their true Nature; by concluding, without seeing a middle Term
connecting the two Extremes, on which every act of right Reason is built. These
Scholars then, or Pursuers of Truth, consult with Speculative, not Practical
Principles, to guide their Assents by. They are certain that such an Effect (as
is the destruction of America) cannot be without a Cause; and Experience tells
them such Causes seldom or never happen: Yet, knowing that all material things
have Contingency annexed to their Natures, and not discovering any evident
Principle in Nature hindering the vast Oceans on either side America to
overswell the Continent, and so destroy it; they are forced to confess
interiourly America may, for any thing they know, possibly not be; whence they
are forced to suspend, as to its Existence, and only Assent to it is extreme
Likelihood of existing.

4. The use I make of this discourse The Point evinc't from the natures of
Suspense and Assent
at present is this: that, though Likelyhoods have a great latitude; yet
Assent, (being the terminus of those Inclinations toward it, which gradually
exceed one another) consists in an Indivisible, as does the notion of is, on
which (either seen, or deemed to be seen) it is built, and to which it goes
parallel. That, all Acts falling short of Assent to the Existence of a thing
advance no farther than great Assents to it is Likelihood, and fall under the
head of suspensive Acts; as to that things Existence, as the Soul will discover
upon reflection: and that, when we mistake one for the other, it is for not
distinguishing well the great resemblance between assenting as to outward
Action, and as to the speculative Truth; as also between assenting to the
extreme Likelihood of a thing, and assenting to its Existence. That, whenever
we see the Possibility of a things being False or not-Existent (which in our
case is all one) we cannot have an Assent to it is Existence, but to the
likelihood of it only, and suspend as to its Existence or actual being: and
that, therefore, they who acknowledge that, notwithstanding all the Means used
and all the Grounds it has, Faith may possibly be false to us, cannot be held
to assent to the Existence or Truth of those points; but to suspend concerning
their truth, and to assent only to their likelihood to be true, Which, whether
it be a sufficient disposition to denominate such persons Christians, will
easily and best be determined by the vulgar of Christianity, who possess the
genuin and natural meaning of the word Faith, untainted with the frantic
conceits sprung from such speculations as are taken out of Fancy; not, as they
ought, from the nature of the Thing.

5. The same Argument may be From the nature of Holding.
made from the nature of firmly Holding, as was from Assent; and the self-same
discourse, mutatis mutandis: since it is most Evident, none can firmly hold a
thing to be true, which he sees and acknowledges, that is, holds may be False;
however he may hold it Very likely to be True.

6. The same is evinced from the From the nature of Knowing.
notion of knowing: which word I take here abstractedly, unconcerned what kind
of knowledge it be; provided it be True and proper knowledge, and not abusively
so called. For, since nothing can be known to be but what is, nor known to be
such but what is such: again since Christians, if they have either Honesty or
Wit in them, must, some way or other, know points of Faith to be true, whose
truth they esteem themselves bound to profess and stand to even with the loss
of their lives; it follows, those points must be what they are known to be,
that is True; and consequently (unless knowledge can be Ignorance) impossible
not to be or to be False.

7. What has been said of Assent and Holding and Knowing may also be
discoursed From the nature of Certainty, in many regards.
from the notion of Certainty: for this has the same nature with the former, as
it is a determination of the Understanding; I mean, Intellectual determination
is the common Genus to them all: and they differ only in this, that Knowledge
and Certainty are proper Effects of Evidence, whether sprung from the thing or
from the Attester, nor can they be where there is wanting the Intellectual
Light issuing from that First Principle of all Evidence so often spoken of;
whereas H^lding or Assenting can proceed from the Blindness of Passion, or from
Ignorance, as well as from the clear Sight of the Understanding. Now that the
Nature of Certainty consists in an Intellectual Determination thus originiz'd,
and consequently, when put, excludes all possibility of being otherwise (which
is the point I aim to evince) appears, partly from the Etymology, and most
evidently from the Use of the Word. For, Certus signifies Determinate. As then,
when the matter spoken of restrains that word to Volition, it signifies an
Absolute Determination of Will or Resolution; as, certus ^undi: so, when we are
speaking of the Ground of Intellectual Certainty, and say the thing is Certain,
we intend to express full as much as when we say, the thing is; which speaks
Ultimate Determination and Actuality in the Object, considered in it self: and,
in like Manner, when the same word is intended to signify Formal Certainty in
Us, or that Disposition of the Understanding whereby it is said to be Certain,
it must necessarily signify (unless, contrary to the nature of Words it is most
formal Notion be less rigorous then those which are less formal) a Determinate
state of the Understanding, or an Intellectual Determination. Whence, as a
thing is then Certain or Determinate when it is; so the Understanding is then
Determined according to it is Nature, or Certain, when the Thing is seen to be
as it is, which immediate Effect of the other is impossible, but by virtue of
the first Principle of Evidence making that clear discovery; and, This engaged,
all Intellectual Potentiality, or Possibility of not being seen to be, is
totally and formally, that is, most absolutely excluded. The true and genuine
Notion, then, of Certainty imports an absolute impossibility that that judgment
which so fixes and determines the Understanding should be an Error, or False:
Since nothing can be seen to be, but what really is.

8. Again, since Determination in any kind, is the Terminus of all
Indetermination in the same kind, and so, beyond it: it follows, that Certainty
or Intellectual Determination, is placed beyond all possible degrees of
Indetermination of the mind, or Uncertainty. Certainty, therefore, is not
attained till all possible degrees of Uncertainty, and, consequently,
Possibility of Falsehood to us, or Error, be transcended and overcome. Faith,
then, must be denied to be Certain, if it be put Possible to be False.

9. And, as my former Discourse has endeavored to display the Nature of
Certainty from its Genus and Difference, which compound it is Definition; so the
same will be still more satisfactorily evinc't from observing the Language of
Mankind, when they use the word Certain. For, that being most evidently the
signification of a word which the intelligent Users of that word intend to
express by it: if by diverse sayings of theirs we can manifest that they meant
to signify such a Conception by that Word, that will infallibly be the true
meaning of it, and that Conception will have in it the true Nature of
Certainty. Let us observe then attentively what is at the bottom of their
hearts, when they use these and the like familiar Discourses, which naturally
break from them. How frequent is it, when any one asks another, Is such a thing
true? and the other replies, I verily think it is; he returns upon him with
this pressing demand; I, but are you certain of it? may not you be mistaken?
Which clearly intimates that that Disposition called Certainty, is beyond all
Inclinations, Motions, or indeterminate Tendencies of the Understanding, making
it verily think it is true, which speaks the next remove, as it were, from a
certain Assent; and, consequently, that it is an absolute determination and
fixure of the Soul that it is true: As also, that Certainty elevates the Soul
beyond hazard of mistake. Again, many times, when one is smartly questioned, if
he be Certain of a thing? not daring, upon better reflection, pretend to
Certainty, he replies warily (in a moderate word which diminishes and falls
short of the other) that he is Morally certain of it; which evidences that the
Notion of Certainty is in point of fixing or determining the Understanding,
beyond that counterfeit Certainty, called Moral Certainty: Wherefore, since all
Moral Certainty (as they call it) how great soever, though it be penetrated
perfectly according as it is in its own Nature, is seen to consist with a
Possibility to be otherwise; True Certainty, which exceeds it, must needs
include an Impossibility to be otherwise. Faith, then, is not, in true speech,
Certain, unless it be Impossible to be False.

10. Again, let an Overweener, after his mistake becomes Visible, be challenged
with it; we find that, in common speech, we use these or the like words, You
said, or thought, You were Certain of it, but You see You are mistaken, Is it
not Evident that the word Certain excludes a possibility of being otherwise?
since his being Certain of it formerly is denied purely upon this score,
because he was mistaken: which shows that the true notion of Certain is
inconsistent with mistake; that is, that Certainty implies Unmistakableness or,
which is all one, Inerrability hic and nunc in the present affair. Whereas, had
the notion of Certainty admitted a Possibility not to be as he judged, he had
not been so mistaken in judging that Certain which by actually happening not to
be was shown afterward Possible not to be. To think to evade, by alleging
that it was not meant his mistake consisted in judging that Certain or
Impossible not to be, which was Possible not to be, but in judging that would
be, which afterward hap'd not to be, is merely Childishness and Folly amongst
Men, who hold that things are carried on by the course of Cause and Effect; and
that things therefore happen because a Cause puts them, or not happen because
no Cause puts them. To judge, then, a thing would not be is the same, amongst
Intelligent Men, as to judge there would be no Cause to make it be; and, if
there would be none such, it is most evident it could not be, or was Impossible
to be in this order of the world. Such answers are fit for men who are led more
by Sounds than Sense; and who think a different word will gain them an Escape,
though that word signifies the same thing as the former.

11. The same will appear from the Absurdity, which palpably discovers it self
in any Expression that modifies the true Notion of Certain with a Contingency:
as if one should say, it is Certain per adventure, or it is fallibly Certain: The
Nonsense of which shows that the true Notion of Certainty implies an
Oppositness to all Contingency, or an Impossibility to be otherwise. You Will ask,
what then must be said of the Phrase, [Moral Certainty] where Certainty seems
to admit an allay of Contingency? I answer, it is evident even hence and from
all my former Discourse, that the word Certainty is there used Catachrestically
or abusively, for some great Likelihood, and its Epithet means such a degree of
it as is found generally in humane exterior actions which depend on Free Will,
and are contingent as being Particulars; and speaks not proper Certainty, as
it is meant to signify that perfect Intellectual Determination, whose
Principles and Causes being high Truths, are unalterable. Whence, Moral
Certainty, how high soever it be exalted and triumph in an empty name, is in
reality Uncertainty; and the highest degree of Moral Certainty is the lowest
degree of Uncertainty, truly so called; that is, of that which expresses an
Intellectual Indetermination.

12. Thus much from the use of the word; which, when it falls naturally and
unaffectedly from the tongue of the Speakers, is a proper Effect of the Notion
or meaning in their Souls, that is, of the Signification of that word; whence
it is an apt Medium to demonstrate that Notion, its proper Cause, a posteriori.

13. From this Discourse follows, first, that, since, speaking of the present,
(and the same, in proportion, holds of other differences of time) it is the same
to say, The thing is certain, as to say the thing is; and to say the thing is
speaks Indivisibility; the Notion of Certainty too consists in an Indivisible.
By which is not meant that one Certainty may not be greater than another, both
from a greater Perfection in the Subject, and a greater certifying Power in the
Object: but, that Certainty, in the way of being generated in the Soul, is
either there all at once or not at all; in the same sort as there is no middle
between is and is not, (or half-beings of them) which are the formal Expressers
of Certainty. Whence, again, appears that what we abusively call Moral
Certainty, is indeed none at all; because it reaches not that Indivisible or
Determinative Point in which True Certainty consists.

14. Secondly, since true Certainty From the Impossibility that what may be
false can have any Principles.
is caused in us by seeing the thing is; and this cannot be seen but by virtue
of Principles; (especially that chief one, A thing is the same with it self)
which Principles being Truths, cannot possibly be False: it follows both that
what is Certain cannot possibly be False, and that what can possibly be False
subsists upon no Principles. Whence, all Moral Certainty, as they call it, as
also all high Probabilities, which confessedly may possibly be false, are
convinced to subsist upon no Principles: and they, who acknowledge they have but
Moral Certainty and high Probabilities for their Faith or Opinion, confess they
have no Principles, which in true Language deserve that name, to ground them;
but, at best, certain likely Topical Mediums that often prove true, or hold for
the most part: which may serve for a talking kind of Discourse, or Exterior
Action; but are flat things and useless when Truth is to be concluded.

15. Thirdly, it follows that true From the Identity of Certainty with
Infallibility.
Certainty of any thing is the self-same with Infallibility or Inerrability, as
to the same thing. For, Certainty is not had, till it be seen, that that First
Principle, [A thing is the same with it self] is engaged for the identification
of the two Notions which make up the Proposition we are Certain of; that is,
for the Truth of that Proposition: Wherefore, since we can have Infallible
Assurance of the Truth of that First Principle; as also of this, that nothing
can be seen to be, unless it be; we can frame an Inerrable Judgment that, when
we see that First Principle engaged for the Identity of those two Notions, it is
engaged for it, and so they identify'd; that is, we must know Infallibly that
that Proposition is true. This I say in case it be a True Certainty, and not an
only deemed or mistaken one: yet even then there is a deemed Infallibility, and
the person that mistakingly judges himself certain of a thing, judges withal
that he cannot be mistaken, hic and nunc, in that particular, which manifests
that the Notion of Certainty is the same with that of Infallibility, however it
may be misapplied. Again, since the natural use of words gives it not to be
nonsense to say, [I am Infallibly Certain of such a thing] it is plain that the
Notion of Infallibly is not disparate from the Notion of Certain, or
incompetent to it: it must then be either Tautological, or else be a different
yet appliable Notion, and so apt to difference or distinguish it; but it cannot
be this later, for then the Notion of Certain ought in all Reason and Logic
admit with equal sense the opposite difference [Fallibly] which we experience it
does not; nothing being more absurd and foolish than to say, [I am fallibly
certain of a thing] It Is clear then that infallibly is not fit to difference
the Notion of Certain, or not a different Notion from it; but the same sense
reiterated in another word for aggravations sake, as when we say, I saw it with
mine own eyes; or such like; that is, if we consider it calmly, we shall find
that that malignant word Infallibility which so bewonders our Opposers, amounts
to no more but true Certainty, and has the self-same Notion with it.

16. Fourthly, it appears that, seeing From the contrary opinion's unavoidably
subjecting Faith to Chance and Contingency.
what may be otherwise, how unlikely soever, needs but a lucky chance to be so;
they who say Faith may possibly be False, instead of establishing it, subject
it to Chance and Contingency; and confess it has no Grounds so to secure it but
a greater Wit than has been formerly, may possibly show it to be False; that
is, may subvert all the Grounds it now stands on. So that these men are
convinced not to settle Faith upon any firm Grounds, or on the Nature of the
thing: but to hang it on Humane Wit, that is, on the Wit of the present
Christians maintaining its Plausibility; and, possibly, on the fortunate want
of an acuter Wit than any now extant; who, when he shall arise, may perhaps
outwit them, and show all their Faith to be a ridiculous foolery.

17. Lastly, speaking of Truths, it is From the Incompossibility of Truth with
Falsehood.
perfect Nonsense to say they can possibly be False; since it is a direct
contradiction Truth should be Falsehood; as is evident in Predications of past
or future things, viz. in these, Christ has died, the Resurrection will be: the
former of which, if once True, has been, and so cannot have not been, the
Circumstance of Time being gone in which only it could not have been; and the
later, if once put to be true, that is, to stand under certain or unimpedible
Causes, is Impossible to be False, or not to succeed. So that it is the greatest
madness and folly in the world to put either of these possible to be False. if
they be once rightly judged Truths: and indeed I fear rather that they who judge
the later possible not to be, subject them to impedible Causes; and so make
them, or at least their Grounds as to our knowledge, Future Contingents, which
have neither determinate Truth nor Falsehood. Speaking then of those
Propositions or Points of Faith which predicate de praesenti, it will be found
by the Considerer, that they are all in a matter which is unalterable, and
above Contingency; and, in case this were not, their very Determination to the
present frees them from being other than they are for the present: Every thing
while it is being necessarily what it is. There is no shadow, therefore, of
Ground, for a man, who affirms Points of Faith to be Truths, to affirm withal
they may possibly be False. All I can imagine in their behalf, to excuse them
from speaking palpable Contradictions, is this; that perhaps they may mean our
Discourse, while in via to find out these Truths, was impedible, and so there
was then a possibility they might not become seen to be True, that is, might be
no Truths to us. But, the Question returns, Whether, in the end of our weighing
their Motives, we discover them to be Truths or no? If not, why do we so
asseverantly affirm they are? and why are we bound by Religion to profess them
to be so? or, if we come to discover they are Truths, how are we so stupid as
not to discover withal, that they cannot possibly be Falsehoods?

18. My last Argument from Logic From the nature of Disputation, and the
Impossibility otherwise to evince the Truth of faith.
shall be this, that there is no way left to prove Faith, or persuade it to
another that acts according to perfect Reason, in case it, that is, its Grounds
as to our knowledge, can possibly be False. And, that this is so, is not so much
evident from any particular Consideration in Logic, as from the whole Nature
of Artificial Discourse, or Disputation. For, in case the Premises be but
Morally Certain, (as they call it) or possible to be false, that is, if the two
Terms be not seen to be connected, these Propositions may, nay ought to be
denied by the Respondent; whose Office and Right it is to grant nothing but
what is Evident, lest he ensnare himself; but to put the Arguer to prove them.
What then must the Opponent or Arguer do? Must he bring a Syllogism consisting
of Premises only morally Certain or possible to be false, to make the other
good? What will it avail? since these Premises are also deniable for the same
reason, and so in infinitum; that is, nothing at all can possibly be concluded
finally, till Grounds impossible to be false be produced; which put, the
Conclusion may be such also. Wherefore, unless Faith have Grounds impossible to
be False, (and, consequently, able to show It such also) none can Rationem
reddere Fidei, give a true Reason of their Faith; but such an one at best as,
in due right of Dispute, is ^^deniable at pleasure: Whence Faith is rendered
both unmaintainable or indefensible in it self, and unperswadable to others
that guide themselves by perfect Reason. For, however all who discourse of
Religion, when they would convert any to Faith, use not to pin their Motives to
Syllogistical Form: Yet, since no Reason in the case of convincing the
Understanding, is allowable, but what will bear the test of true Logic; and
this assures us there is no concluding any thing at all, without relying finally
on Premises or Grounds impossible to be False: it follows that, how finely and
quaintly soever these men talk, unless they produce such Grounds, they can
conclude nothing at all; and all their importunate Persuasions, which are not
reducible to these Grounds, (nay, are made use of by Persons who declare
against having any such Grounds for Faith) signify just as much as if they
should say, I beseech you, Sir, be so good natured as to believe me; though to
tell you true, I acknowledge sincerely neither can I bring, nor can there
possibly be brought any Ground able to make good what I say, or any undeniable
Premises to force my Conclusion.

Third Eviction.
1. THus far Logic: Let Us see next The main Thesis demonstrated from the want
of Potentiality in the Subject.
what Nature and Metaphysics say to the Point, in which Quest yet we must not
leave Logick's Assistance. And, first, these Sciences assure us, that as all
Capacity of different Beings springs from First Matter, so all Capacity of
contrary Determinations arises from what we call Potentiality or Indifferency
in the Subject. Now the Subject in our present case is not so much our mere
Faculty of Understanding, as the Points of Faith it self in our Soul, or the
judging Power of our Soul considered precisely as affected with these Points;
for, it is these, or our judging Power taken merely as conversant about These,
that is, our Judgments, which our Opponents must affirm True, yet Possible to
be False. Since therefore both the Points themselves and our Judgments consist
formally in Affirmation and Negation, that is, in is and is not, which are
indivisible, and constituted such by a Formality the most formal and actual
that can be, (as has been shown) they can have, as such, no Indifferency or
Potentiality in them to the contrary, neither Natural nor Metaphysical; nor,
consequently, Possibility of Falsehood.

2. The Position of our Adversaries From the, otherwise, necessity of putting a
consistency of Truth with Falsehood.
is still rendered more absurd by this Consideration, that even in Nature where
there is the greatest Potentiality that is, viz. First Matter, the Subject is
not yet capable of opposite Qualities at once, but successively; at least in the
same part: Whereas, their Position is not that Faith which is now True is
possible to be False afterward upon the Alteration of some Contingent Matter;
but, that it is Possible now to be False, or possible to be now False, for any
thing any man knows; that is, the understanding may have possibly Truth and
Falsehood in it at once, and as to the same Part or Point.

3. But it is still far more irrational, From the, otherwise, necessity of
putting Contradictories to be true.
in regard these seeming Contraries, (True) and (False,) applied to the
Propositions we speak of, have in them the perfect nature of Contradictories;
it being necessary that in those which speak de praesenti, one should be
expressed by [is existent] the other by [is not existent] as it is in those which
speak preteritly and futurely, that one should be expressed by (has been) or
(shall be,) the other by (has not been) or (shall not be:) To think then they
can at once be True and False, is to judge that Contradictories may be verified
of the same, or that both sides of the Contradiction may be true.

4. Again, Truth being a Conformity From the, otherwise, necessity of putting
it possible the mind should be at once conformable and disconformable to the
thing.
of the mind to the Thing, and Falsehood a Disconformity; to say, a Proposition
is True, and yet possible to be False, is to say, that the mind, considered as
judgingly conversant about that Proposition, may be at once Conformable and
Disconformable to the same thing. Too wild a Position to be introduced into a
rational nature, by any thing but such a wilful and blind passion, as must
first actually corrupt, and, in fine, tend to destroy the very nature it self.

5. And, to void this Thesis from all From the Impossibility of different
Respects here so to avoid a Contradiction.
possible evasion, here can be no different Respects according to which these
Affirmations and Negations may be made, so to avoid Contradiction; but all such
Respects are excluded, both out of the nature of the Predicate in most of those
Propositions, as has been shown (Evict. 1. 5.) as also out of the nature of
the Points of Faith; which, standing in the abstract, descend nor to, nor
meddle with subsuming Respects, but have their Notions completed in the common
words which express them. And, lastly, because Truths and Falsehoods are not
capable of Distinctions and Respects: For, however a Proposition taken into
Consideration and scanning whether it be true or no, may admit Respects and
Distinctions, and so be affirmed to be in this regard True, in that False; yet,
what is once accepted to be True, cannot in any Respect afterward be affirmed
possible to be not True, or False. For example, this Proposition [An Ethiopian
is white] is distinguished by Respects to several parts, and in regard to his
Teeth it is true; to his skin, it is false: But after those Respects have
distinguished the Ambiguity of it, and so, by dividing it into two
Propositions, settled one to be True, the other to be False, there can be no
further use of Respects or Distinctions, which are to antecede to Truth and
Falsehood by clearing the doubtfulness of Propositions, and can have no place
after the Truth is once acknowledged, or supervene to it. He then that once
acknowledges Points of Faith to be Truths, can have no Assistance from recourse
to this and the other Respect, to evade a Contradiction when he affirms they
may be False.

6. Again, it is particularly opposite From the nature of the Soul.
to the nature of a Soul to have such an Act in her as to judge a thing True yet
possible to be False at the same time. For, our Soul as to her Judging Power is
essentially a Capacity of Truth; whence the First Principles which ground all
Truths are so connatural to her, that she cannot but embrace them and judge them
true. Nothing therefore being more opposite to Truth than a Contradiction, it
follows that nothing is more impossible to be received or subjected in the Soul
according to her Judging Power than a Contradiction; that is, no implicatory or
contradictory Act can settle there. Now, to judge a Proposition or Point to be
true, is to judge the thing to exist just as it affirms; and, to judge it
Possible to be False, is to judge it Possible not to exist as it affirms; and
this, not in order to different times but the same; that is, to judge a
Proposition or Point true yet possible to be false, is the same, as to judge the
thing actually is, and yet perhaps is not at the same time; and this, as
appears by our former Discourse, not to be avoided in our case by difference or
diversity of Respects. Wherefore, since such an Act is not possible to be in
the Judging Power of the Soul, it is most manifest, that he who holds one side
of the Contradiction, cannot possibly hold the other; that is, he who holds
Faith may be False, cannot hold that it is True; and that, if it be held and
professed to be True, it ought also to be held and professed Impossible to be false.

7. Moreover, the Soul, antecedently, From the necessity of putting the Soul at
once determined and indetermin'd in order to the same Point.
to its being informed by the Object, was indifferent and undetermined to judge
it True or False, that is, to be or not to be; but, when it came afterward
through consideration of the Thing or Object to judge it True, it became
determined; and how, but by a Notion the most determinative of any other, viz.
that of being or is: wherefore, since to put in her at the same time a Judgment
of its possibility to be False, puts her to be indetermin'd, and this in order
to the same, This Position puts the Soul to be at once determinate and
indeterminate as to the same; which states are as vastly distant as actual
Being and not-actual Being can remove them. Nay, this monstrous Thesis makes
the Soul Indeterminate to either side, that is to Truth as well as to Falsehood,
even after it had supposed her determined to Truth; For, to judge a Point
possible to be False, puts the Judgment Potential or Indetermin'd as to the
Falsehood of it; and False signifying not-true, possible to be False must
signify possible to be not True, and so include Potentiality or
Indetermination to Truth also: in regard, were it actually True, it could not
be Possible to be not True, or not it self. The Soul must then be Indeterminate
to either, that is, neither judge it true nor false, even after she was supposed
to judge it true, in case she can then judge it possible to be false: and,
consequently, this Position of Faith's possibility to be false, cannot, without
highest contrad^ction, stand with a hearty conceit that Faith is True. To think
to escape the force of this Argument by alleging the respect to different
Motives, or, that the Understanding was not perfectly but partly determined, is
in our case frivolous. For I ask, was it determined enough by any Intellectual
or Rational Motives to judge the thing is? if not, what made it judge so when
those Motives could not? Is it not evident it must be some weakness or some
blind motive in the Will, not Light of Understanding? But, if it were
determined enough to judge the thing is or is true, it is also enough for my
Argument and Purpose.

8. Especially the force of this Argument From the Formal Natures of Truth and
Falsehood.
will be better penetrated when it shall be well considered in what Truth and
Falsehood formally consist; and that, taken rightly, they are certain Affections
or Dispositions of our Understanding. For, that is not to be called True by me
which is not True to me; not is any thing True to me, but when it is seen by me
to be so in the Object; and to be thus seen by me, is the Object to inform and
actuate my Understanding Power as it is Judicative; whence that Power, as it is
thus actuated, gains a Conformity to the thing it self, in which consists the
precise nature of Truth. However then Truth come from the Object which is the
ground or cause of it, yet it is formally no where but in the Understanding or
Judgment; as appears evidently from this, that Truth is found in Propositions:
now Propositions are not in the thing formally, (though, when true, they are
derived hence) but in the mind only, and significatively in words. Truth then
is that whereby I am true or veracious when I say interiourly, the Thing is, or
is thus and thus; wherefore the Truth of any Point is not had till this
Actuation or Determination of my Power by the Object, which as it is Formal
Cause makes this Conformity to it, be put: And, this put, to think that at the
same time or at once the mind can be unactuated, undetermined, potential or
disconformable to it, is too gross a conceit to enter into the head of any man
endued with the common Light of Reason. Whoever then affirm's Faith or those
Propositions which express Faith possible to be false, he is convinced by the
clearest Light of Reason (in case the desperation of maintaining the Truth of
Faith, for want of grounds, drives him not to say any thing, but that he speaks
heartily what he thinks) not to judge or say from his heart, His Faith is indeed
True, having never experienced in his Soul, for want of Principles to put it
there, that the Object or Ground of his Faith has wrought in it that
Conformity to the thing, in which Truth consists; and, consequently, that, when
he professes Points of Faith to be Truths, he either by a fortunate piece of
folly understands not what he says, or collogues and dissembles with God and
the world for honor or some other Interest.

9. It Is hence farther demonstrated that the Position we impugn destroys From
the notion of Metaphysical Unity
the Notion of Metaphysical Unity, consisting in an Indivision or Indistinction
of any Notion, Nature or Thing in it self, and a Division or Distinction of it
from all other: For, according to this Tenet, Truth or the Conformity of our
Understanding to the Object, put by our joint supposition that the Proposition
of Faith is true, may possibly be Disconformity or Falsehood, and this
Determinate State, Indeterminate; which makes the mind as having in it One
Notion, that is indeed that One Notion, capable to admit into its bowels
Another, not only disparate, but Opposite, that is, One possible to be not One,
but Another.

10. The same is demonstrated concerning From the notion of Metaphysical Verity.
Metaphysical Verity. For this Position makes the self-same mental Proposition
or Disposition of the Understanding we call Truth, possible to be Falsehood;
that is, Possible not to be the same with it self, which subverts all
Metaphysical Verity; that is, the Foundation or ground of all Formal Verity or
Truth in the World.

11. The same injury demonstratively From the notion of Metaphysical Bonity or
Goodness.
accrues to Metaphysical Bonity or Goodness. For, it makes that Conformity of
the mind to the thing which is Truth, and so the Good or Perfection of the
Understanding, to be at once possible to be Falsehood, that is, possible to be
not good but harmful and destructive to it.

12. I make no question but my Adversaries will think to elude the force of
these three last Demonstrations, and perhaps of some others by alleging that
they deny absolutely Truth can possibly be Falsehood, and that they mean only
that though the Points of Faith appear now upon considerable Motives to be
True, yet those Motives secure it not from being absolutely False; but not so
that they can really be both. And I grant this would be a good Answer, in case
they did not affirm Points of Faith to be really True, (upon which Supposition
taken from the common Language and Sentiments of all that profess Christianity,
even theirs too as Christians I proceed) but only professed they were Likely to
be True; for then it would be so far from following that Truth could be
Falsehood, or that the same Points could be both true and not true at once,
that, in that case, it would follow they ought to affirm they were neither True
nor False; since likely to be True and True indeed are no more the same, than a
Statue which is like a man is the same with a man. But, if all Christians be
bound to profess, and themselves actually do so, that their Faith is indeed
True, then let us see how they will avoid the consequences of my former
discourse, when they assert it withal Possible to be False. For it is that
very individual judgment they make concerning a Point of Faith, or an Act of
Faith, which they must affirm to be True or a Truth, that is conformable to the
thing; and it is of the self-same Judgment, though called by them a Truth, of
which they affirm that it is possible to be False, or disconformable to the
Object: And, this is not so meant as if it should become so afterward, either
by some Alteration of that Judgment into another, or of the thing to which it
is Conformable; but that even that very self-same Judgment, while they speak
and hold it after their Fashion True, may even then possibly be False; from
which it is evident, that for want of solid Grounds to settle Poin^s of Faith in
their Soul as Truths, they hold them indeed only Likelihoods, whose Nature it is
to be Possible to be F^lse; and yet, forced by the natural sense and language
of Christianity, which it is dishonorable to them too palpably to contradict,
they become obliged to profess them Truths, whose firm Grounds make them
Impossible to be False; though at the same time they affix to them the proper
badg of Likelihoods, Possibility of Falsehood. Whence by confounding the purest
and solidest nature of Truth's Gold, with other Notions of so base an alloy
that it cannot admit any mixture with them, all Principles which are to support
the true Natures or Beings of things, are by consequence attacqu't; and, could
their Position stand, would quite be overthrown.

Fourth Eviction.
1. THe very first Principle of all Truth cannot escape the pernicious From the
contrary Thesis being destructive to the First Principle in all Metaphysics.
Attempts of this Erroneous Tenet. It Is this Quicquid est, dum est, impossible
est non esse, or, The same thing cannot both be and not be at once. For in
Faith-Propositions, especially those in which Existent is the Predicate, [as
the Trinity is, etc.] it is the same to say the Proposition is True, as to say
the Subject is Existent; and the same to say it may be False, as to say it is
Possible to be not Existent, or that it may not be; and our Adversaries relate
not this to a several circumstance of time in which they may be conceived to
agree to the Subject successively, for their sense is that this Proposition [a
Trinity is, etc.] may (for any thing they know) even now possibly be False
while they pronounce it true. Since then to affirm a thing Existent, and yet
Possible to be not Existent at the same time, is to say directly, that it may
be and may not be at once, it is most manifest that either they must not say a
Trinity is Existent, or else it is not possible not to be Existent at the same
time; that is, if indeed that Point of Faith be True, they must withal affirm
it Impossible to be False; as also that they who affirm both, profess to hold
direct Contradictories. So that while these men go about to violate the
Sanctuary of Faith, whose solid Nature is so built that it is intrinsecally
repugnant to Falsity, they by consequence subvert the Groundwork and
Bottom-Principles of all Truth. So wisely did that best Master of Mankind
settle his Doctrine, that we cannot call into question that which makes us
Christians, without renouncing all that makes us Men.

2. I foresee my Adversaries will still From the Impossibility of a sufficient
Motive to judge a thing True, with a Motive to judge it possible to be False.
object that I mistake them and impose upon them to relate their Discourse to
the real Being of the thing as it stands in the thing it self, whereas they
intend it only to mean the thing as standing under Notion, or considered
according to diverse Motives they either have or may have to persuade or
dissuade them as to the Verity of it; and in plain terms that they mean only
this; that Faith is not so conveniently proposed to them but that the grounds
of it for any thing appears evidently are possible to be False. I answer, that
I also speak of the thing as standing under Notion, else how could I put it in
Propositions, and discourse from the nature and contradictoriness of those
Propositions as I do all along? But yet, lest my Notions should be aerie and
empty, I am careful to take them from the nature of the thing, and to rate the
Truth of my Propositions from the Conformity they have to the Object as in it
self; and the force of my Motives from the relation they have to First
Principles; and then I am sure to discourse and speak solidly. The same I
expect from them: Whence I ask them, whether they assent to this Proposition,
[A Trinity is Existent] that is, judge it really and indeed True, or not? If
not, I argue not against them at present, but leave them to be confuted by the
natural Sentiments, and punsh'd by the abhorrence of all that profess
themselves Christians, even their own party; of whom I have so good an Opinion
that they will heartily abominate that man who shall make any difficulty to
profess and maintain that there is indeed a Trinity, or that his Faith is True.
But, in case they do assent indeed to this Proposition, [A Trinity is] or judge
it True, then I contend farther that they must be forced likewise to affirm it
to be so in the thing in it self as they predicate; that is, there is found in
the same Thing or Being what corresponds to the Notion of Trinity and the
Notion of Existent; which put, and that they thus judge it to pass in the Thing,
I affirm that, out of the formal Opposition between Existent and not-Existent,
and their Incompossibility in the same subject, which they cannot but know, it
follows necessarily that they must judge it Impossible it should be
not-Existent, or that that Proposition should be false at the same time they
judge it true and the thing existent; nor ever afterward, unless the thing
whence it is Truth is taken be Alterable. I will endeavor to explain my self a
little clearer if I can. As real existence so ultimately determines and
actuates the Thing in which it is, that it excludes, while there, all
possibility of real Nonexistence: so Intellectual or Judged Existence expressed
by the word [is] so ultimately determines and actuates the Soul as to its
Judging Power, that it excludes, whiles there, all Possibility of judged
Nonexistence; in such sort, that (the Soul being by Nature framed a Capacity
of Truth) it is no less Impossible it can judge a thing may be and may not be at
once, than it is that a thing should at once be and not be in reality. Again, I
affirm that, it is equally impossible the Motive, which (in case she acts
rationally) convinces the Soul the Thing is, should consist with a Possibility
of it is not Being, as it is that the Soul can at once judge it to be and not to
be, or that the thing can both be and not be really; since this Motive was the
Cause of the other Judgment, and an Effect of the Thing's Being so in reality;
and depends on the same Incompossibility of Being and not-Being, or on the
simplicity of the Notion is; and, lastly, on a Maxim as evident as what is
most; namely, that the same is the same with it self. Whence I make account
whoever has sufficient Grounds to affirm a Point of Faith is, or is true, that
is, is more than Likely to be True, has withal true Grounds to affirm it
Impossible to be False; and that, who confesses it Possible to be False,
disclaims any true Grounds of judging or professing it is, or is True; and so
judges it in his heart to be but a high Probability or a good Likelihood at
most, which is enough for plausible Talkers, but falls far short of making a
man a true Christian.

3. And, hence, we may with horror and pity reflect upon the perniciousness
of Heresy, in corrupting the Understanding, that eye whose defect fills (as our
Savior discourses it) the whole Body with darkness; by subverting
fundamentally all those Principles in which the Common Light of all Knowledge
consists; and perverting (as much as the Goodness of Nature established by our
Creator will suffer it) that very Faculty which makes us Men in what is most
Intrinsecal and Essential to it, the knowledge of the first Principles, that is,
despoiling it quite of all Intellectual Perfection due to it is nature: But to
return to our Arguments.

4. Can any discourse be taken higher than from first Principles? Yes, in some
sort there can; that is, from the First Cause or Being, or, a Patre Luminum,
the Father of lights, from whom all created Natures, whence those Principles
are borrowed, and the very nature of our Understanding it self, where they are
found, derive their Origin. This First Being Metaphysics demonstrate to be
Self Existent, that is, Infinite and Unlimited in Existence, and consequently in
all perfections; amongst which, since to be a Self-determination to act
according to right Reason is one, God has or rather is that too. It being then
according to right Reason to do what is seen clearly to be best, all things
considered; God, seeing what is absolutely Best, must therefore be
Self-determin'd to do still what is Best. This put, looking into the notions of
Good and Best, we find them to be both relative, and that what is good to none
is is not good at all: Applying which to God's Perfection every way Infinite and
no way farther perfectible, it is seen manifestly that when he is said to
operate exteriourly in this world what is Best, it cannot mean what is Good or
Best to Himself, or any thing which is His own Good, or Perfection, but, what
is good or best to his Creatures. And hence we settle this most comfortable,
most evident and most enlightening Conclusion, that God does what is best for his
Creatures. And, it being evidently Best for them to be guided or governed
according to the true natures which he has given them, it follows also that God
governs his Creatures connaturally, or sutably to their right natures.

5 Hence it follows that, if we can once demonstrate that to Act thus or thus
is most Connatural to such a Species or Nature, we can demonstrate from the
Highest, First, Best and most Immutable Cause, that, however Contingency finds
place in diverse particulars, yet that kind, as it is subjected to Gods guidance,
is governed most agreeably to its true and right nature, which his Creative
Wisdom and Goodness had at first given it.

6 Particularly, it is consequent that it cannot be God should command or expect
from his Creatures what is opposite to the true Nature he had given them. For,
since their being what they are, or their Metaphysical Verity is fixed by the
Idea's in his own divine Understanding, from which in their Creation they
unerringly flowed, hence, as to put them at first was to act conformably to
himself or his own Wisdom, so, to violate them, is to work Disconformably and
unlike to himself; which it cannot be thought God should do through Inclination
or Choice, and as little be made to do it through force.

7. Again, since we can no otherwise discourse of God but by such Notions as we
gather here from Creatures; which, however improper, yet all grant to be truly
pronounced of him if they signify Perfection; Hence, if we can demonstratively
evince that such an Action is truly agreeable to Wisdom, Goodness, Mercy, etc.
and such others disagreeable, we can know Demonstratively that those are worthy
to proceed from him, These Impossible to have so infinitely perfect an Author.

8. What use may be made of this From the nature of the First Cause, or the
Deity.
Principle of Supreme Wisdom [God does what is best for his Creatures] will be
seen hereafter. The use we make of it at present, is to add a new degree of
establishment to our former Discourses by applying it to them. I argue then
thus: Since it is agreeable to rational Nature, or rather since it is the very
Nature it self, not to hold any thing but upon the tenure of Immediate
Connection, or seeing that the first Principle of all rational discourse, [The
same is the same with it self] is engaged for the Truth both of the Premises
and Consequence; since Assents not thus abetted are but Opinions, and, as such,
deprave Humane Nature; since nothing but true Certainty can fix the
Understanding in a steadness of Judgment; since it is connatural to Rational
Nature to proceed upon Principles, which is not to be had where there is
Possibility of Falsehood; since this Possibility renders Faith unmaintainable;
and so, contrary to rational nature, makes Christians hold and profess what
they cannot make good; since the putting Points of Faith to be Truths, yet
possible to be False, puts the Soul in violent and Incompossible States, as of
Indetermination and Determination, Conformity and Disconformity to the Object;
nay subjects her to the judging Contradictions True, which is most repugnant to
her Nature; since it subverts all the Principles of our Understanding, both
Logically and Metaphysically considered, that is radically and fundamentally
destroys all possible Rationality; since it destroys the Nature of Faith it
self, and by consequence the stability of all the Natures in the world; since,
I say, these things are so, as has been particularly proved in my precedent
Discourses, it follows that it is the greatest Impossibility that God, who does
the best for his Creatures, can govern or manage his Darling-Creature, Mankind,
on this preternatural fashion: But, it is Certain that the way to arrive at
Faith is particularly laid by Gods Providence, and so is an especial part of
his Government of Mankind; it is known also and acknowledged that he has
commanded us to profess the Truth of our Faith in due occasions; Therefore,
it is Impossible the Means, Grounds or Rule of Faith, and, consequently, Faith
it self, should be capable to be False; Seeing this last Position, joined to
the other immediately foregoing, induces all the Absurdities mentioned in my
former Discourse, and pins them upon the Deity as on their first Cause. So
horrible and Diabolical a Tenet is this of the Possible Falsehood of Faith, that
it calumniates Heaven it self; nor can any thing but an Invincible Ignorance in
the Maintainers of it, excuse them from highest Blasphemy, and from making the
unenvious Fountain of all Goodness like our own narrow and crooked Selves.

Fifth Eviction.
1. LEt us hear next what the Science of Divinity both Speculative and Moral
will award concerning the Point in Question.

2. The Wisdom of the Eternal Father From the nature of the proper Agent in
instructing Mankind.
having been pleased to take our Nature upon him, and, amongst his other
Offices he performed toward Mankind, that of a Master being manifestly one; we
cannot doubt but that he both would and could, that is, did accomplish what
belonged to that Office. Again, true D^vinity assigning one main, if not the
chiefest, Reason why the Second Person was made Man, to be this, that, it being
requisite God should come and converse with us visibly, to cause in us Knowledge
of his heavenly Doctrine, or be our Master, and Knowledge or Wisdom being
appropriated to the Second Person, it was therefore most fit that Person should
be Incarnate; it follows that the Office of a Master in our Savior Christ
springs peculiarly out of the nature of his Divine Personality, and not of his
Humanity precisely, as does his Suffering and Dying for us, etc. Wherefore the
Proper Agent of Instructing and Teaching Mankind being, as such, Infinitely
Perfect, it is evidently consequent Christ performed the Office of a Master, or
wrought the effects proper to a Teacher as such, with all imaginable Perfection.

3. It being then the proper Office or Effect of a Master or Teacher to make
his Scholars know his Doctrine is True, we cannot think but that this Divine or
Infinitely-perfect Master made them absolutely or perfectly know the Truth of
his Doctrine.

4. And, because the end of this Teaching was not terminated in those few
himself conversed with, nor in the Christians of the First Age, but was
principally intended for the Body of Mankind, which was future in respect of
them; it follows that this Enlightening and Instructing now spoken of, was to be
equally extended to the following World of Christians: they being all Sectators
or Followers of his Doctrine; that is, his Scholars, and He their Master. Unless
then he had taken order that succeeding Ages also should have perfect Assurance
or know his Doctrine was absolutely True, he would have set up a School and
laid no means to preserve the far greater part, and in a manner the whole Body
of his Scholars (or Christians) from Ignorance and Error.

5. All Christians then both the Primitive and their Successors had and will
have means to Know absolutely Christian Doctrine is True. This means we call
the Rule of Faith: Both the Rule of Faith then must be known to be veracious,
and Faith which is built on it to be absolutely True, and by consequence to be
absolutely Impossible to be False.

6. Besides Man being an Intellectual From the nature of the Persons instructed.
Creature, it is evident the true Perfection of his Nature consists in Knowing;
and this, whether we consider him as a Speculater, or as an Acter. For if the
thing may Possibly be False for any thing he knows, then he is most evidently
Ignorant whether it be False or no; that is, whether it be True or no; which
speaks Imperfection in his Nature as it is a Capacity of Knowledge; And, if he be
to Act about it, it is evidently a less Perfection and worse for mankind to go
to work unassuredly than assuredly; Faith then being Gods Ordinance, and God
doing what is best for Mankind, it follows Faith is perfectly secure to him;
that is, he must know it to be such; and, consequently, it is not subject to the
Contingency of being False.

7. But, leaving Man, the Subject of From Faith's being a Virtue.
Faith, and reflecting upon Faith it self in us, the first thing that offers it
self to our Consideration is, that it is Habit is a Virtue, and consequently
Rational. Also that it is Act is an Assent upon Authority; since then it is
demonstrated formerly that there can be in reason no Assent without Certain
Grounds, and that what is Certain is Impossible to be False, it follows that
the Grounds of Faith, and, consequently Faith it self is not possible to be
False.

8. Next, Faith is an Intellectual From Faith's being an Intellectu. al Virtue.
Virtue, that is, apt to perfect man's understanding as such; that is, it is to
him a Knowledge, and so informs his mind with Truths. The Nature of Faith then
forces that Points of Faith must be Truths, and, so, as is manifoldly
demonstrated, Faith it self is not possible to be False.

9. Again, this Intellectual Virtue From Faith's being a Supernatural Virtue.
called Faith is also a Supernatural one; and, therefore, as such, proceeds
from an Agent infinitely more perfect than any can be found in Nature;
therefore the immediate effect aimed at by Faith, that is, the informing the
Understanding, would be performed with infinite advantage as far as concerns
that Supernatural Agent's or God's part; and, if it be not so exquisitely
performed, it must spring from some Incapacity in the Subject. There being then
in this Effect of informing the Understanding two Considerations, viz.
Evidence, which is had either by Experience of our Senses, (of which Spiritual
Natures, the chief Objects of Faith are incapable) or by intrinsecal Mediums,
that is Demonstration of those Spiritual things; of which, taking the
Generality of mankind, the Subject of Faith, very few are capable; And that
other of Certainty, attainable both by those Intrinsecal and also Extrinsecal
Mediums, or Authority; which Authority, by means of the Practicableness of it is
Nature, all are to a great degree able to understand; it follows that, here
being no violence or unsuitableness to Humane Nature considered in it is
Generality, the ^upernatural Agent or Cause of Faith will effect here a greater
Certainty than mere natural Impressions could produce; that is, (all
Extrinsecal Arguments being finally resolved into Intrinsecal ones) the Best
and Chief Nature in the world will be made use of, and most strongly supported
to make up the greatest Authority that is possible, and so to establish this
Certainty of Faith and it is Principles beyond that of any Humane Sciences. But
diverse pieces of Humane Science, nay the least particle of true Science is
acknowledged impossible to be False; Faith therefore a fortiori must be such
also.

10. This Supernaturality of Faith, (by From the firmness Supernatural Faith
ought to h^v^ ^bove Natural.
which word we mean Divine Faith) convinces that it ought to exceed all other
Faiths according to the Notion of Faith in common; that is, it ought to partake
whatever Perfection truly belongs to Faith or Belief, as such, in an especial
manner; and far above what is found in Humane Faiths; in a word, it ought to
have as much in it as can elevate it under the Notion of Faith, without
wronging that Notion or Nature: Faith then in common, as distinguished from
Science and Opinion, being an Assent upon Authority, and Firmness being
evidently a Perfection in an Assent, Divine Faith ought to have a far greater
degree of firmness in it than any Humane Faith whatsoever; Wherefore, since
Humane Faith can rise to that Degree of Stability, that Mankind would think him
mad, that is, a Renouncer of evident Reason, who can think seriously it can be
an Error or possible to be False, (for example, the Belief of this present Age
concerning the Existence of France or K. James) Divine Faith being
Supernatural, ought to be more firmly grounded; and consequently more highly
Impossible to be False.

11. Again, we find that the more Another Proof from the same head.
we are ascertain' that a Convictive Authority is engaged for the Truth of any
thing, the more strongly that Authority is applied to our Understanding; and
consequently, more forcibly works its effects there, or subducs it to Assent;
whence this Certitude is so far from being against the nature of Belief, that
it is most manifest it strengthens and perfects it under that Notion. Divine
Faith then being Supernatural, has a peculiar right to have such an Application
of the Divine Authority to the understanding, as may be truly Certain or
Impossible to be False; since by such an Application it is most evident that not
less but more Belief is given to the said Authority, and the understanding
becomes more humbled and subjected to it; that is, by such an Application, how
scientifically evident soever it be, the Act of Faith is never the nearer being
an Act of Science, but is perfecter under the very Notion of an Act of Faith;
being still a steadier, heartier, and firmer Assent for the Authority's sake,
which is thus strongly and closely applied, and a greater Reliance on it.

12. Moreover, Faith being to work through Charity, and to guide our actions
From the requisiteness* that Christian Action should proceed from the Acters in
the perfectest manner.
as we are Christians; and rational actions being so much more perfect by how
much more knowingly they proceed from the Agent; unless Faith were truly
Certain, that is, Impossible to be false, Christian action would fall short of
the Perfection found in most ordinary Humane Actions of an inferior and (in
comparison) trifling concern; and a Christian would go to work with less
assuredness and steadiness than a Carpenter and Cobbler; and this, not out of
the Impediments of Original Sin, (which is Contingent and Extrinsecal to Faith
or Religion) but merely out of a defect of Certainty in the Intrinsecals of
Faith it self and it is Grounds; which beyond all evasion, affixes the
Imperfection upon Christianity it self.

13. I may add, that Arts and Sciences, That otherwise Christian Religion would
be more defective in point of Principles than any other Art or Science.
even the most slight and inconsiderable ones, and which are most liable to
Contingency in their Effects or the Actions springing from them, have yet all
of them Certainty in their Principles. Religion then being the Art of carrying
or guiding Souls to Bliss, and the Points of Faith its Principles, in virtue of
which it is to perform this Effect; and the Ground of Faith the main and supreme
Principle, whose Firmness is to establish the rest, and, so, render them
efficacious: unless Faith it self and its Grounds were truly Certain, the
Principles of all Religion would be exceedingly more defective and
inefficacious than those of any petty Mechanical Trade, and indeed no
Principles.

Sixth Eviction.
1. THe foregoing Considerations are more enforced by this, that From Faith's
being the Knowledge of our last End, and of the way to it.
Faith is the Light which discovers to us our Last End and the Way to it; that
is, which is to guide us in that to which all our other Concerns are
subservient, and all our Actions directed. Unless therefore this Knowledge or
Light of Faith be steady and firm, all our whole Life, as Christians, would be
feeble, tottering and uneven: as wanting Certainty of the First Practical
Principles which are to ground our Christian Behavior; nay, Certainty of the
End we should aim at, without which the whole Course of our Life must needs be
staggering and inconstant, and it self but a blind groping in the dark.

2. Moreover, since all Mankind, From the Certainty the Heathens had of the
Principles of their imperfect Morality.
even the Heathens themselves, had perfect Evidence and Certainty of the
Practical Principles of Natural Morality, which grounded their Moral (seeming)
Virtues, as is confessed; which Virtues yet, for want of the Light of Faith
teaching them to know their true last End, and so perform the Acts of those
Virtues for it is sake, or order them to Heaven, fell short of elevating them
toward it and bringing them thither: It follows that, had there not been
provision made that Points of Faith, the Principles of Christian Morality,
should be as Certain as were the other, things would have been perversely
ordered; that is, greater care would have been taken to create those imperfect
Dispositions of the Soul, which alone were not able to secure one man from the
State of Eternal Misery, than for those Sublime Perfections, called Christian
Virtues, which are the direct steps for man to arrive at Eternal Bliss, and the
Immediate means to attain the End he was created for, the Sight of God.

3. Especially, since this Last End From man's last End being only attainable by
Intellectual means.
and Chief Good of Mankind is not attainable by External Actions or Local
Motions; but Intellectually, or by Interior Acts of the Soul; by which he is
promoted forwards even to the very assecution of it; that is, by force of
Knowledge or Truth exciting him to act, and guiding him in those actions: It Is
manifest, the Points of Faith must be Truths, and so, as has been manifoldly
proved above, Impissible to be false.

4. Again, Virtues spring connaturally From Virtue's being the connatural
Effect of Truth, and Vice of Falsehood.
from Truths, and Vice from Falsehoods: If Faith then be Possibly False, the
Practices springing thence are Possibly no Virtues but Vices; and, so, they,
and consequently, Faith, whence they proceed, possibly would not dispose, but
indispose us toward our last End; which destroys perfectly the Notion of
Faith and Virtues too. Faith, therefore, would be no Faith, were it possible to
be False.

5. You Will object, a Reason merely Probable or Morally-Certain is sufficient to
make Us act for a Temporal Good; much more, then, for an Eternal and Infinite
one; since the greater Goodness is in the Object, the less is the hazard; and
consequently the more the Reasonableness to act for it. I answer, though, if
all other things corresponded, the Objection would be Valid, and the reason
given for it, speaking abstractedly, be really Conclusive: Yet, in our present
case, there are so many things which make it Unparallel that no Shadow of
Consequence can be made from the one to the other. First, for the reason lately
given; Viz. because our Last End being in it self Spiritual and most Perfect,
is not attainable but by Means of Best Spiritual Perfections or Virtues; and
the more knowingly these proceed from Us the better they are; according to that
saying, None is cordially and solidly good, who knows not why he ought to be
good: whence they cannot be Best in their kind, nor, consequently, Means fit
to attain that End, Unless they proceed at least, from True Knowledge; which
cannot be had by a mere Probability, how high soever it be. Whereas, Material
and Temporary Goods depend not on a constant course of Causes or Dispositions
toward them knowable by us: but very frequently, if not equally on a
Chanceable or Contingent cast of Things; whence we use to say, Fools have the
best Fortune. Hence, the intending and directing part in such Actions depends
on the Knowledge of some particulars; but the Attainment is carried on by
Material Means: nay, very frequently, there is no knowledge at all requisite in
any respect. For Example, He that, by the death of a hundred Relations in a
Plaguetime should alone survive and so inherit their Estates, would be really
rich, whither any interior Act of his mind in the least contributed to it or
not; that is, though he never desired, aimed at, or even thought of it. But, if
a Man in time of persecution and Martyrdom should say within himself, I cannot
believe there is a God or a Next World; Yet I Will venture to dye rather then deny
them; in hopes that, if perhaps there be such a thing or state, he will give me
a far greater reward: such a Man I dare affirm to be no nearer gaining Heaven
by this Act no better principled, than if he had never had any such Act at all;
in regard he wanted that First necessary disposition which St. Paul and
Connaturality require; Accedentem ad Deum oportet credere quia Deus est. Heb.
11. v. 6.

6. Again, Faith is intended for a From the otherwise Inability of Faith, to
resist and overcome Temptations.
Spiritual Armor to rebeat all the assaults and temptations of our three
Ghostly Enemies, Original Corruption in us, the Vanity of the World about us,
and the Cruelty of the Devil and Wicked men over us. Hence the Advice of the
Apostle, cui resistite fortes in Fide; hence his recommending to us above all
things to take Scutum Fidei; hence the Contempt of all Worldly Honors,
Pleasures, and Riches in Gods choice Saints, and their suffering Persecution
gladly for Conscience sake; hence, lastly, their embracing and even courting
Torments and Death it self with such Alacrity and Constancy. But, alas, how
unactive had their Charity and Zeal been: how dull their desire to forego all
present Goods, even life too among the rest; if this wicked Doctrine had been
in their hearts, that perhaps all was a lie, which they professed, suff'red, and
died for! And, how coldly and timorously would they have looked Death in the
face, having perfect Certainty on one side that they were about to lose all the
known Goods they possessed, for others unknown and uncertain? Well may a Natural
sincerity preserve diverse persons who are out of the Church morally honest and
innocent: but we must not hope for any eminent Sanctity or Heroic Act of
Virtue from any Professors of such a Faith, if they follow their Teachers,
maintaining there are no stronger Motives for the Truth of Christianity, to
comfort and establish the Souls of the Faithful. And it is to be feared that,
though their highlyconceited Probability or Moral Certainty (as they call it)
be enough to Exclude Actual Doubt, while Men are in a state of Security and all
things go well with them; Yet it will scarce be able to preserve them from
doubting Actually, when they are upon the point of foregoing all the Goods they
at present enjoy, and are so highly concerned to be Certain of the Existence of
those Future ones they hope for in lieu of them.

7. Moreover, we are perfectly Certain From the, otherwise,
by manifest Experience, of the Existence of Temporal Goods, viz. Honors,
Uncertainty of the Existence of Spiritual Goods, or the Attainableness of them
in the next life.
Pleasures, Riches, etc. or, that such things are in the world; whereas, unless
Faith be truly Certain, that is, Impossible to be false, the Generality of
Mankind cannot be perfectly assured even of the Existence of Heaven, or those
Future Goods for which they are to relinquish all present ones. Wherefore, the
Existence of the thing being the first and main Basis of all Humane Action, and
the Ground of all the other Motives: it is clear there is a manifest difference
between acting for Heaven and for Temporal Goods, even in this respect,
whatever Parallel may be pretended in some other Considerations. Besides, all
acting even for Temporal Goods were unjustifyable, unless those Goods be held
Attainable; and de facto we are perfectly certain that Honors, Pleasures,
Riches, etc. not only exist, but are of such a nature also as they may be
attained to, due means used; since we experience multitudes of men have and do
daily arrive at them. But, even, though Heaven be held to be, yet it cannot be
held to be attainable, unless the Proposals of Faith be Certain; since neither
have those who are to come to Faith seen nor experienced any man get Heaven,
nor discoursed with any whom they know to have come thence and seen it. So that
I fear, were the Objection, concerning the Sufficiency of Probable Motives to
make us act for Inferior or Humane Goods, distinctly cleared, it would be
found not to mean that Probability of those Humane Good's Existence or
Attainableness suffices; for example, that there are Riches in common, or that
they may be gotten one way or other, both which are presupposed to the Action
as certainly known: but it seems to mean only this, that men ought to proceed
to Action though there be but Moral Certainty or great Likelihood that those
Goods are actually to be attained in this or that circumstance of Time or
Place, or by such or such means, as, by sending Ships to the Indies, inventing
Waterworks, Husbandry, Soldiery, and the like: which assertion held within
its bounds will break no squares; seeing even in the actual attainment of
Heaven by me or by this particular way or means, when those means depend on
material Circumstances, there is found the same room for failure and
contingency, notwithstanding the Certainty of Heavens Existence and
Attainableness in common, secured to us perfectly by Faith. For, though Virtue
practiced is an Infallible Way to bring Souls to Bliss; yet no man has
Certainty that any Extrinsecal State he puts himself into, or material means he
uses, will make him truly virtuous, or finally get him the end he aims at: but
must content himself with Likelihoods, or the seeming-betterness of his putting
himself in that State or Circumstance, or his using this or that means; in the
same manner as it happens when he acts for Temporary Goods; and, for the
success, leave it humbly in the hands of Divine Providence, or miserentis Dei,
acknowledging with David, that in manibus tuis Domine sorts meae, and working
out his Salvation with fear and trembling.

8. Besides, to act Externally is in From the, otherwise, preternaturali^y in
producing a due love of Heaven
the power of the Will; but, to act Internally, at least as is requisite for
each Effect, is not so. For, however the Will may set the Understanding to
consider the Motive; yet it must be the Truth of the Object's Goodness, or the
clearness of the Proposal of it, which only can oblige connaturally the
Understanding to conceit it as it ought, and consequently the Will to love it
accordingly: in which conceiting and heartily loving not only the Intending
and Commanding part of the Action is placed in our case, as it happens in our
acting for material Goods; but also the Executive and Assecutive Parts of it.
Not the same sleightness of Motive; therefore, or Moral Certainty, will here
serve the turn; but true Certainty or Impossibility of Falsehood is required:
this being the best and properest to beget a hearty, lively, steady, and
all-overpowering Affection for Heaven; and such as may (as it ought) make
Christians practically repute all other things as Dung in comparison of That.

9. But, the main consideration From the Incredibleness of the Mysteries nor
superable by any Motive possible to be False.
which forces the Certainty of Faith and the Motives which are to beget it,
(that is, of the Rule of Faith) above those which ground our Action of pursuing
Temporary Goods, is the unconceivable Mysteriousness of the Points of Faith:
Truths exalted above the ordinary Course of Nature as far as Heaven is above
the Earth: Many of them looking so odd and uncouth to our course Humane Reason
unrefin'd by Faith, that, as they seemed of old to the Greeks Foolishness, so
still they are acknowledgedly most unsuitable to the grossness of Fancy, by
which the Generality of the world, especially those who are yet unelevated by
Christian Principles, are led; and confessedly above Reason; insomuch as it
costs the best Wits of Christianity no small pains to maintain them not to be
Contradictory or Impossible to be True. Putting, then, the Motives of Faith,
and consequently Faith it self, Possible to be False; the only seeming
Certainty (I might say, the confessed want of Certainty) of the Motives to
believe would be so counterballanc'd by the Incredibleness and seeming
Contradict^riness of the Thing or Object, or rather indeed overballanc'd in the
Conceit of all those who are yet to embrace Faith; that there would be no
overplus of weight left to incline them to hold those Points True rather than
False: much less to make them absolutely hold they are Certain Truths. And, he
that should assert the contrary, I wonder how he would go about to prove it, or
by what Standard he would measure whether is the greater of the two
counterpos'd Unlikelihoods, viz. that the possibly false Motive of Faith should
hap to be actually such, or that the seeming-Impossibility in the Objects
should chance to be a real one. For, it is not enough to say here that we are in
reason to expect the Divine Nature should be exceedingly exalted above its
Creatures, and incomprehensible; and therefore we are not to measure his
Perfections by the ordinary Rules found in Creatures, but think it reasonable
he should infinitely exceed them: For, however this has weight in Points of
Faith which concern the Divine Nature and its Perfections as in it self, yet
here it will not serve the turn, in regard Faith teaches us many other Points
seemingly repugnant to the Divine Nature it self, and most strangely debasing
and vilifying it; as, that God, infinitely happy in himself, should be exposed
to injurious Bufferings, Scourgings, and an ignominious Death, for a Creatures
sake that, in comparison of him, is a mere Nothing; and that Omniscience and
Omnipotence could not invent and practice some easier and more honorable way to
work the End they intended; and, lastly, that it should beseem Infinite
Goodness that a Person superlatively innocent should be so severely punished, to
do an undue favor to those who were enormously wicked, This consideration,
then, necessitates plainly the Impossibility of Faith's being false; for else
'twould be irrational to believe it. And lastly, it shows the case of Christian
Interior Acts utterly unparallel to that of Acting Exteriourly for sensible
and material Goods; which one may apprehend to be attainable; and also
comprehend the Way to attain them, without puzz'ling his Understanding with any
unconceivable mysteriousness in the business to check his Assent.

E're I leave this Point, I must desire the Reader to reflect well on the
condition those persons are in who are yet to embrace Faith. They have no Light
but their pure Natural Reason, and to this are proposed for Objects to the one
side the Motives to Faith, or the Authority (in our case) that God has spoke
it; on the other the strangeness of the Mysteries. Let then those persons
understandings no better elevated, go about to scan the profound Mysteries of
Faith, it is clear, and I think confessed by all, they must needs seem to them
Impossible to be True; which therefore nothing but a Motive of its own nature
seemingly Impossible to be false, can conquer so as to make them conceit them
really True. But this Motive or this Rule of Faith is confessed by our
Adversaries Possible to be false; nor (it being a fit and proportioned Object
for Humane Reason) is there any thing to make it seem better than it is, or
Impossible to be false; it is then against all reason to believe, were Faith and
its Grounds Possible to be false; the Motives of Dissent being in that case
evidently greater than are the Motives of Assent.

10. Again, since it is incomparably From the otherwise greater plausibility of
Objections against Faith.
more easy to throw down than to build, or less difficult for the
Understanding to comprehend an Objection, than it is to lay orderly in the Soul
a severely-connected frame of Discourse forcing the Truth of a Point;
particularly, when those Points are utterly unsuitable to Fancy, and even
exalted above Reason; and so lie open to very plausible and easily penetrable
Objections, on which disadvantage or disproportion to weak Judgments, (that is,
indeed, a high excellency on the Object's side) Atheists ground their drollery
against the Mysteries of our Faith: It follows, that were not the chief motives
to Faith, or Rule of Faith practically self-evident, and, so, Impossible to be
False; there would be, considering the rudeness and unelevatedness of the
Generality of those who are to come to Christian Faith, and the unsuitableness
of the Mysteries to their fancyled Understandings, greater Temptations and more
plausible, (that is, to them stronger) motives laid to make them dissent to
those Mysteries, than to make them assent. The motives to Faith, then, must be
Practically self-evident, and, so, Faith it self must be Impossible to be False.

Seventh Eviction.
1. PErhaps the Language and Practice of Christianity, expressing most
manifestly their sentiments, may give to some a more natural and penetrable
satisfaction, that it is Impossible Faith should be false; than all the
Speculative and Scientifical Proofs hitherto deduced.

2. For their Language, then, I only From Faith's being a Knowledge of God, and
of his Will
hint to the memory of my prudential Readers, (for, to transcribe them were
endless) all those Expressions so frequent in Scriptures, Fathers, Councils,
and the mouths of the Faithful to these very days, viz. That Faith is the
Knowledge of God, his Will, and of revealed Truths. Nor will I streighten the
signification of the word Knowledge, to mean Scientifical Knowledge, ('it is
neither my Tenet nor Interest;) but will leave it at large for any that are
concerned, to explicate how this Knowledge is bred: provided they leave the true
Nature of Knowledge, and do not abusively call that Knowledge, which in reality
is (when looked into) no Knowledge. Hence I argue; Since it is impossible any one
should know what is not to be known; and what is not, is not to be known; it
follows, that the Object of Faith is, and so, (here being no contingency in the
Matter) Impossible not to be; and consequently Faith, or the Belief of it,
impossible to be False.

3. Nor am I afraid of those canting Distinctions without sense, that it is
Morally a Knowledge, or that they know it to be True, morally speaking. For, if
it be expended what is meant by these words [Morally a Knowledge;] it will
quickly appear, that, as True Knowledge can only be an Effect of the Thing's
Being: so this Counterfeit Knowledge, called Moral, falling short of the other,
can only be the Product of the Thing's Likelihood to be, and so can only have
for its Object the Thing's Likelihood: which, whether it be enough to specify
and terminate an Act of Christian Faith, I appeal to the constant Expressions
of all who are generally called and reputed Christians; and challenge my
Adversaries to produce one Expression of theirs, which sounds thus dwindlingly
and feebly, as if it meant only some high likelihood, or their apprehension of
it as no more but such. Observe but the Life and Energie of their words in such
occasions: as that of Job: Scio quod Redemptor meus vivit; and that of S. Paul:
Scio cui credidi, and certus sum etc. and we shall find their Understandings so
perfectly possessed of the Object's Existence, and not deeming only its
Likelihood; that they seem rather to want words to express their Absolute
Certainty of it. Oftentimes indeed they deny Faith to be Evidence or Science,
and affirm it to be Obscure: but what is this to the purpose? while all Relyance
on Authority is obscure; and Certain Knowledge can be had by means of Authority,
as appears in diverse Instances of Humane Faith.

4. Particularly, waving the former, we will reflect on some places more
expressly assertive of our Position; as, that of the Prince of the Apostles,
Acts 2. 36. Certissime sciat ergo omnis Domus Israel, etc. Where, about to
bring them to Faith, he expressed it to be A most certain Knowledge, and this
Attainable by the whole House of Israel, which must mean the Generality at
least.

5. I add, (omitting many others) two of his Fellow-Apostle Paul. The first,
Col. 1. 23. Si tamen permanetis in Fide fundati, and stabiles et immobiles a
spe Evangelii: Now, how any one can be founded or grounded in Faith, if Faith
be Possible to be False, that is (Eviction. 2. 14.) have no Foundation,
Principles or Grounds it self; how any one can be Stable and Immovable in a
Persuasion, which very Persuasion and its Grounds may not only be moved but
overthrown and subverted (as must inevitably follow, if it be possible to be
False.) I expect to be informed by Mr. Tilletson and Mr. Stillingfleet. Do
these words sound only an Exclusion of Actual Doubt, or Suspicion of it at
present, which Protestant Writers make sufficient to an Act of Faith? or rather
does it not mean that which of its own nature is such as can admit no Possible
Cause of Doubt at any time for the future? Let them dispense a while with
pursuing their affected Gaynesses in the Outsides of words, and take the pains
to look into their Meanings; and then, if they can make out that Groundedness,
Stability and Immobility can consist with Possibility of falsehood, I shall
promise them my utmost endeavor to hold Contradictions with them; for, in that
case, those would be the only Truths.

6. The second shall be that most emphatical one of the same Apostle. Licet nos
aut Angelus de coelo annuntiaverit vobis praeter id quod accepistis, Anathema
sit. Though we or an Angel from heaven should preach to you otherwise than you
have received, let him be Accursed. Which were a very rude and unreasonable
carriage (especially for us Christians now adays) were Faith Possible to be
False, and so, short of the credit due to so Incomparable Authorities: For
since it is known that many things which have seemed, (that I may use Mr. T's
words) morally impossible to be False, have proved to be actually and indeed
False, and it is granted that it is always possible to be so: but it was never
heard that an Apostle of Jesus Christ, or an Angel from heaven could, or at
least did at any time preach False: it is most manifest that nothing which was
Possible to be false, can with any reason sustain it self against the force of
their Authority; and that Faith, which ought to do so, must be Impossible to be
False.

7. From the Language and Sense of the Saints and Christians of former From
Faith's being placed beyond Contingencie.
times, let us come nearer home, and see how unsuitable it is to the Notions and
Expressions of present Christianity, to say, Faith is possible to be False.
Now, the Possibility of Faith's Falsehood, is built on the Contingency of the
Motives which are to ground it: for, were there no Contingency in them, but
that their Causes were so laid, that 'twere impossible they should not be
Conclusive, they could not possibly fail of being able to conclude; and so
Faith would of its own nature be Impossible to be False. Considering, then, the
Nature of Contingency, whether Speculatively in it self, or Practically in
Instances wherein it is found, we may observe that it implies a certain kind of
Proportion between the frequency of Effects on the one side, and the Seldomness
on the other: which we usually express by Ten to one, a Thousand to one etc. If
then Faith be Possible to be False, its Nature will bear, nay oblige us to
express the probable degree of its Likelihood in such kind of Language; and
that we assert it to be likely in such a proportion, but not-likely in a
higher: for example, it would be perhaps wise and agreeable to the Nature of
the Thing, as thus proposed, to say, v. g. It Is a hundred to one there is a
Trinity, a Heaven or a Hell; but it is not a Thousand to one that there are any
such things. Or, if any contend I have assigned too-small an over-proportion to
Faiths Likelihood; yet at least he must grant that, in a greater, it would
inevitably follow, that such language ought, in True speaking, be used, when we
are to express the degree of Faith's Firmness. Wherefore, it being
experientially manifest, that nothing sounds more ugly to a Christian ear, than
to say, that it is so many to one Faith is True, but not so many more: it is
evident that the Nature of Faith is placed beyond all Proportions of its
failing to its standing, and all degrees of Contingency; that is, it is
Impossible to be False.

6. Moreover, to say, It Is a thousand From the manner in which Christians
express themselves when they profess their Faith
to one Faith is True, or there is a Trinity, is not to say, It Is True, or
There is a Trinity; Christians, therefore, ought in due candor, then when they
are to profess their Faith, express only how much over-proportion, in a Moral
Estimation, its Likelihood bears to its Unlikelihood; and not to stand telling
a Lie, when they are to make Profession of their Faith; saying, It Is True, when
it is only to such a degree Likely to be True; that is, Lying, when they should
be doing a chief duty of Religion. And, which is worst of all, as being not
only most unwise and imprudent, but most diabolically wicked and impudent, to
stand stiff in the Profession of that Ly, though they hazard the loss of their
Estates, and even Lives too, by the bargain. Yet, this imputation of such a
most foolish and most damnably-dishonest Obstinacy is Unavoidably to be affixt
upon Christians, if they thus profess their Faith True, in case it be Possible
to be false; that is, in case it be only a thousand to one (for example) that
it is True. If it be said, they saw not perhaps this possibility of Falsehood,
and so acted virtuously in that Absolute Profession of its Truth, because of
their good meaning; the Answer is ready: First, that Mr. Tillotson, Mr.
Stillingfleet, and such who maintain, and, so, if they write what they think,
see Faith Possible to be False, are bound not to profess Faith to be True, and
to forewarn others not to make such a Lying Profession: Next, that if God have
commanded us to make such a Profession, as all Christians grant he has; then,
not only their Meaning, but the Act it self is good and laudable. Which,
joined to these men's Principles, and their Natural Consequences laid open in
our former Discourse, signifies that Dishonesty is Honesty, and a most foolish
and wicked Obstinacy a high Virtue, as being commanded by God: Nay, that God is
the Author of Sin, commanding them to tell a Ly in Professing their Faith True.
Positions most abominable, as well as contradictory; but it is most fit the
Nature of all Goodness should go to wrack, when the Nature of Truth is once
violated.

7. Again, if Contingency have place in Faiths Basis, there must be some stint
of From this, that otherwise it were lawful to lay a wager Christian Faith is a
Ly.
this Contingency, according to the moral estimation of things: be it then, for
Example, a thousand to one, or what other proportion you please, for it alters
not the present case: If then it be but a thousand to one Faith is True, then
it is One to a thousand it is not-true, that is, it will bear a Wager that Faith
is a Ly; and a Christian, according to these Principles may, without injury to
his Faith or its Grounds, and with a great deal of Honesty, lay a wager that
his Faith is actually False. Nay, if he get any one to cope with him at
excessive odds; he is bound in Reason and Prudence to undertake him, and lay a
wager all Christian Faith is a Ly. Which sounding highest Impiety in the ears
of all reputed Christians, of what Sect soever, that govern themselves by the
Natural conceit they have of Faith; it is plain that the Nature of Faith is
placed beyond all Contingency of failing, that is, all Possibility of Falsehood.
If it be objected, such a Wager could never be tried, and so, it could never in
Prudence come to be laid: I reply, my Discourse is unconcerned how able or
unable man's Understanding is to decide it, and only contends that the Nature
of the thing, that is, of Faith no better settled, would bear or justify it;
which is unavoidably consequent.

8. Particularly, it is strange that From the Carriage of the Martyrs, if
supposed Honest and Prudent.
none of the Christian Martyrs, who from time to time have died for their
Faith, should when their life lay at stake, endeavor to mitigate the fury of
their Persecutors with such like language. I beseech you, (Great Nero; or
Dioclesian!) understand us Christians right: we deny not absolutely the
possibility of your opposite Tenets being true, nor assert our own Faith so far
as to say it may not possibly be False. What we profess is only this, that it
seems to us so highly probable, or Morally-Certain, that we have no Actual
Doubt of it at present; though we cannot absolut^ly say but we may come to
discover it to be false hereafter, and your opposite Tenets true, and so
renounce Christianity and join with you: Indeed we dare venture a thousand to
one (or perhaps something more) that our Faith is true; yet for all that we
shall not stick to lay one to a thousand it is false. These had been moderate
and mollifying Expressions, and questionless might have saved the lives of very
many: which why they should not have used, they being (according to our
Adversaries Principles) true, and honest to profess them, and highly prudent to
do it, their lives being concerned; nay, Conscientious too, (for there is none
but holds it highly sinful to conceal any Truth which may save another man's
life) no other reason can be given but this, that the Possibility of Faiths
falsehood had never entered into their hearts; but they held Gods promises of a
better life full as Certain, as was their present possession of this, or
present determination of losing it for Christ's Name. All their Expressions
sounded the Certainty of the Truth they professed, and their most comfortable
Hopes grounded upon that Certainty. Nor did any of the circumstant Faithful
ever judge them too lavish of their blood, for standing so stiff upon their
avowing the rigorous Truth of their Faith, and the Falsehood of its
Contradictory; but always esteemed their Action no less Wise and Honest, than
it was Undaunted. What kind of Profession of his Faith a Protestant, thus
principled, would make, in case of imminent Martyrdom, I know not; but I should
esteem my self the foolishest Knave living to tell aly to hang my self, by
professing my Faith true, which I could never heartily judge it to be, whilst I
held it Possible to be False; and so, at best, only Likely to be True.

9 Note here, that I have conceded very much in yiedling a thousand to one of
the Likelihood of Christian Faith in the Protestant Grounds without Traditions
Certainty, which they deny: rather, taking in the Incredibleness of the
Mysteries, it would be (in that Hypothesis) above five to one, speaking
modestly, that all Faith is False. For, since it is Evident the Certainty of
Books cannot be had at all without the Certainty of Tradition; and Protestants
deny the Certainty of Tradition, and bring multitudes of exceptions against it
(as may be seen in Mr. Tillotson's Answer, or rather Abuse of Sure Footing)
there is some degree of Incredibleness in the right Conveyance of Christ's
Doctrine hitherto: to which difficulty add the Incredibleness of the Mysteryes
themselves, exceedingly enhauncing the other; it is manifest there would be a
high disadvantage on Faith's side. Nay, granting a pretty high Probability
(which is perhaps as much, as they care for) yet, the not-onely Improbability,
but seeming-Impossibility of the Mysteries of Faith, if taken, not as standing
under Authority, but as Objects of our Humane Reason (as in this
counter-ballancing case they ought to be) would quite overpoise the Probable
motive, and incline the Soul strongly toward Dissent, unless Interest, Custom,
or some other Affection come in to the Assistance of the weaker Motive,
Printing it in a bigger Letter, and diminishing the difficulty in the Object by
not letting it be considered or penetrated, that is, by hindering the working of
Right Reason. Now, in this case, if this Discourse holds, a Protestant may with
a safe Conscience lay odds, and wager two to one at least, his Faith is all a
F^lshood: A strange Impiety, but yet the natural Consequence of that impious
Tenet [Faith is possible to be False] as this is the genuine Sequel of denying
the right Rule of Faith.

10. The same is deduced from the very notion of a Martyr and the proper
signification of that word, which is to be a witness; and this, as appears by
his Circumstances, of all witnesses the most Solemn and serious, and the
perfectest under that Notion that can be imagined; as engaging not only his
word, but his Life and dearest Blood for what he testifies. Now all witnessing
or Attestation being most evidently of what the Witnesser knows to be True, and
nothing sounding more unnaturally, or being more disagreeable to the nature of
that kind of Action than to have a Likelihood for its object, or to witness
what he knows not, (as will appear by the constant practice of it in all other
occasions) it follows that a Martyr or Witness of the Truth of Christ's Faith,
must know it to be True, that is, he must know it to be more than likely to be
True; and, consequently, (nothing being more Impossible than that one can know
what is not) Impossible not to be True, or to be False.

11. No less unnaturally would it From the Blasphemousnes of the Equivalencies
to this Proposition Faith is Possible to be False.
sound should we gather together, and make use of all the Equivalent Speeches
to this Proposition, [Faith is Possible to be False] such as are, There is no
Certain way to Heaven. No man knows there is a Heaven, a Hell, a Jesus Christ,
a Trinity, etc. No man sees any reason securing Faith from being a lie. The
Ground of all our Hope is unstable and may be overthrown. Absolutely speaking
it may be there is no such thing as that which Christians are to profess, and
ought to dye for. It may be Points of Faith are so many lies, and false as so
many old-Wives Tales. The Light of Faith may be Spiritual Darkness and Error.
What we hold to come from God, the Author of all Truth, may perhaps come from
the Devil, the Author of all Lies. All our Supernatural Truths may be
Diabolical Falsehoods. Faith has no Principles. The Points of Faith are not
Truths, but Likelihoods only. These and innumerable such others, are all
Equivalent Periphrases to this Proposition [Faith is Possible to be False] as
in this Treatise has been manifested; but, how horrid and blasphemous, needs no
proof but thebare rehearsing of them.

. 12. From the Language and Practice From the Practice of Learned Christians
in captivating their understandings to Faith.
of the Generality of the Faithful professing Faith, we come next to the
Practice of the Wits of Christianity; not proceeding as Speculaters and
Scholars (a most trifling impertinent Topic when we are speaking of Faith, yet
most frequently used by our Adversaries, especially Mr. Stillingfleet, and Mr.
Pool, who are obstinately bent to practice that wilful mistake) but as
Christians or Faithful: and this, not only acting or speaking in Abstraction
from Humane Knowledge, but as in direct Opposition to it, and (as it were) in
defiance and despite of it. Now, with these intelligent Persons it is very
solemn, after, by penetrating the Grounds of Faith, they have come to embrace
Faith itself, immediately to discard and renounce all Tenets opposite to the
said Faith, how Certain soever they held them formerly: Nay, to stand with a
mind prepared to disassent to anypiece of Humane Learning, how Scientifical
soever it looked, which they saw evidently to thwart any of those Believed
Truths. Making account it was their duty captivare Intellectum in obsequium
Fidei, to captivate their Understandings to the Obedience of Faith, or, to
yield them totally up, by an absolute and perfect Assent to the Truth of those
Mysteries; and not to heed or credit any objections or Proposals of Humane
Reason to the contrary, when once the stable and immovable Grounds or Motives
of Divine Belief, that is, the Rule of Faith, had subdued their Judgments to
that invincible Assent; but to rest well assured that all reasons were
fallacious, and all Positions False which went against those Sacred and
Established Truths. This was ever their unanimous and constant Profession;
particularly the Fathers are full of Expressions of that kind: An Evident
Argument that, as Christians, they ever held Faith and it is Grounds Impossible
to be False; for, otherwise, they had bin obliged, by Honesty and their love of
Truth, not to have so readily rejected their formerly-conceited Truths, nor to
have stopped their ears so obstinately to new Reasons against Faith; but, as
long as Faith was possible to be False, they ought in due candor to have still
weighed the Opposite Thesis and the Objections perpetually alleged, against the
strength of Faith and it is Rule, and considered which was more likely to be
true; and not have still concluded so partially on Faiths side, and obstinately
resolved to hear nothing against it; bearing themselves as if all must needs be
True which Faith's Rule teaches us, that is, indeed, as if Faith could not
possibly be false.

. 13. Whence follows, that all who From the Duty incumbent on the maintainers
of the impugn'd Tenet to remain Seekers all their lives.
hold Faith is possible to be false ought, in Conscience and their natural duty
or love to Truth, remain Seekers all their Lives: For, however they may hope at
present that what they adhere to is true, yet, since they hold it is possible to
be false for any thing they know, they ought, the affair and its concern being
so weighty, to be still examining it is Grounds, and casting about to see
whether this Possibility of Falsehood, which they already see, be not indeed
Actually such, though as yet they see it not; or at least, whether some other
Profession may not, after long consideration, appear less possible to be False,
and another still less than that; that so they may go as near Truth as they
can: weighing discreetly and impartially what Deism, Paganism, Turcism, and
such others, wisely represented without their Poetical Fancyes, and Fooleries,
can say for themselves. Or, lastly, if they come to such a Skepticism in
Religion (which I doubt is the true case) as to judge such a quest lost labor;
because, when all is done, the sullen Dame [Truth] will never the sooner
discover her face, nothing being to be found but what will still appear
Possible to be False: the Practical Conclusion naturally following hence will
be this, to fix there where it lights most advantageous to their temporal
Interest; in the same manner as men addict themselves to this or that Trade;
cry it up and maintain it stoutly to be Truth, because it is Creditable to the
Profession, though they judge all the while it may be a falsehood; and, because
they see their Faith can have no Certain or Firm Grounds, undertake to make it
good that Faith it self needs have none, by the best assistances plausible
Rhetoric, seemingly-probable reasons, weak or mis-us'd Testimonies and
voluntary Cavils and Mistakes can lend them. And, in a word, since they are not
in circumstances to settle any thing, to laugh heartily at those who go about
it, and to endeavor very politickly to pull down every thing; which any
Intelligent Reader will manifestly see by this establishing Treatise, compared
to their performances, to have been the Effects of my Adversaries labors.

14. The Unnaturalness of this Tenet From the inefficaciousness it brings to
Christian Preaching and Exhortation.
will perhaps be brought nearer home, and so be better penetrated even by our
Opposers themselves, if we reflect how wickedly it would sound from the mouth
of Preachers; if, after a Sermon, exhorting and pressing the Faithful to the
Love of Heaven, or particularly, to stand steadfast in their Faith, they should
in the close, to prevent in their Auditors the misunderstanding some
overstraining Expressions, add an ingenuous caution, That they should not, for
all that, adhere to Faith as if it could not be False, nor work for Heaven as
if there were any absolute Certainty of the being of any such a Thing. Is it
not manifest, this (in our case) honestdealing Profession would enervate the
force of all the Motives they had proposed and pressed? And, if so, is it not as
evident, that all the efficacy of Christian Preaching springs naturally from
the Impossibility that Faith should be False? For, it is not only the
Unseasonableness of this Profession, but the Impiousness of it, which would so
scandalize the Hearers; and either avert them from the Preacher, or make them
cold in Virtue. It Is clear, then, that all the forceable Application of
Christian Motives to the hearts of the Generality of the Faithful, is grounded
on the Impossibility of Faith's Falsehood: and that, therefore, he who holds the
opposite Tenet, and would be honest, should either leave off Preaching, for
which this Tenet makes him unfit; or else use much caution while he preaches,
least, by implying the perfect Certainty of Faith, while he practices
Assentation to That, he becomes Injurious to Truth, and consequently to It too,
if it be True.

. 15. But, to conclude; it has bin From the Churches constant Practice of
Obliging to Belief.
no less the Practice of the Governors of the Church, or Ecclesia docens, to
oblige the Faithful to believe what they recommended to them as the Doctrine
of Christ and his Apostles, (Nay Mr. whitby, in his late Treatise [(...)] page
53, 54. asserts the same of the Church of England, as to their Creed or
Fundamentals) Which, had Faith been held by the Governors and the Governed
Possible to be False, had signified just thus much, as if the Governors should
say, You shall believe it, though we know it may be false; or, You shall
believe us telling you the Apostles taught it, though both we and the Authority
we trusted for it may be deceived, for any thing we know: And as if the persons
governed should answer, We will believe you, though we know you may be in the
wrong, and the Point it self false; which is in effect the same as if they
should profess they are resolved to believe them, let it prove what it will,
right or wrong, True or False. So strange a Tyranny in the Imposers or
Commanders, and Slavery in the Believers or Obeyers, as is impossible in either
to consist with Humane Nature, had not both of them (the Obeyers at least) been
verily persuaded those Commanders had such Motives to propose as should have
been able to oblige Assent; without which all Command of an Interior Act of
the Soul is Nonsense and Folly. Oh, but (will a witty Atheist say) Humane
Policy might have made the Governors conceal the Cheat, by which means the
ignorant governed were frighted into a belief of any thing! Very likely,
indeed, that amongst so many millions, and of those, many Saints by our
Adversaries own Confession, all should persist and be true Conspirators in so
unnatural a Confederacy: or that, in so free an admission of all sorts of
prudent people to any kind of knowledge, as is practiced in Christendom,
insomuch that there are found many thousands of the Governed equal in Parts and
Learning to diverse of the chief Governors, and superior to very many of them,
all should so camely permit themselves and the world to be abused in a Point no
less important than their very Manhood. It Is then above Policy and Force, and
only atchievable by the Natural strength of the Motives, to oblige such
Multitudes, and so qualified, to Christian Faith: and these Motives must have
been Impossible to be False; none else being able to subdue the Understandings
of such a great portion of Mankind to hold their Proposals true, or justify
all the Church Governors in all Ages from a most unjust and most unnatural
Tyranny.

Diverse Principal Objections Answered.
TO mistake every passage voluntarily is so in fashion, and so continually
pursued, as the best method to answer Discourses which proceed by the way of
Principles, that, perhaps, it were not imprudent to forestall such Blinds, and
prevent such mis-representers from raising their light and aerie dust, by
acting our selves, if we can, the part of an Opponent after a solider manner
than we are to expect from those prevaricating Discoursers: besides, nothing
more clears a Point than to manifest that such Objections which aim at the Root
of it, quite lose their force while levelled against it. I recommended this
foregoing Discourse, when I had finished it, to the perusal of diverse of the
most judicious and impartial Friends I could pick out; courting their severest
candor to acquaint me with its defects. Their most pertinent and most
fundamental Exceptions, I present the Reader with; which I have strengthened as
well as I could, and added diverse of mine own; protesting, that, did I know my
self, or knew where to learn of others, more forcible and efficacious ones, I
should not have declined the proposing them; nor have feared to oppose the
Invincibleness of the Truth I here defend against the strongest Assaults of the
most Ingenious, most rational, and most acute Discoursers.

Objection I.
The word Truth is both in the Postulata, and all over this Treatise taken in
too Metaphysical a Rigor: in which sense it may, perhaps, be denied that Faith
is True, or that the Generality of Christians do so esteem it.

Answer. I take that word in the plain natural, and proper sense, in which all
mankind takes it, for what in reality and indeed is so; which I affirm to be
sufficient for my purpose, or to ground all those Arguments which I bring
thence to evince the Impossibility of Faith's Falsehood. But, I fear the
Objecter confounds the First operation of our understanding with the Second,
that is, our simple Apprehension or Meaning of the word Truth or True with the
Propositions or Judgments made concerning it. For, not only weak people judge
many things True which stand under no Certain Grounds; but even solid men, when
the Concern of the Point is slight, and no circumstance awakes them into a
heedfulness, and, as it were, engages their Honesty to speak rigorous Truth;
oftentimes carelessly and unconcernedly admit Things for Truths which are far
short of having Grounds elevating them to an Impossibility of Falsehood; and,
indeed, are far from being judged Truths even by themselves while they seem to
admit them for such; nay more, though they sometimes use them as Truths, when
the weight is not much whether they be so or no; as when in a Rhetorical
Discourse, (or even in a solid one for Illustration sake) we make use of the
Story of the Phoenix, or such like; or when in ordinary conversation we relate
many passages abetted by no certain Authority, but taken upon the account of
rumor, perhaps invented by witty humor; the Truth of which it were in those
circumstances Imprudent and Impertinent to discountenance, but to let them go
with a kind of Transeat, or a valiant quantum valere possunt; Yet, in both
cases, what the solid man out of unconcernedness passes, and what the vulgar
man out of weakness judges as a Truth, both the one passes the other judges to
be in reality and indeed so: whence both of them have the genuine simple
Apprehension or meaning of the word [Truth] and the same all other men have,
however the one misapplies it, the other permits it to be misapplied in
Propositions.

Nor will any distinction of Truths morally speaking, probably Truths, etc.
serve the turn; for Truth (as was said) speaks the Conformity of the Judging
Power to the Thing; that is, a Real disposition of the mind: which therefore
either is or is not, in the same manner as the Wall is either white or not
white; not admitting for it is difference probably or not-probably, any more
than Being does: But, as it is impossible but the Wall if it be not white, must
necessarily be not-white, or have some other disposition in it which is
not-whiteness; so it is impossible but the mind, if not Conformable to the
Thing or True, must be Un-conformable or not-True; (meaning not-True
negatively, not privatively so as to signify False) and, consequently in stead
of that Conformity, it must have some other Disposition in it; whatever that
Disposition be.

Objection II.
In some places of this foregoing Treatise Objective Truth is confounded with
that disposition of the understanding or Conformity of it to the Thing called
Formal Truth or, Truth in us.

Answer. The clearing this requires the making an exacter discovery into the
nature of Truth. To do which we will begin our explication with noting that our
understanding has two Operations (omitting the third, Discourse as not
pertinent to our present purpose) viz. Simple Apprehension and Judgment. The
result or Effect of the first is called a Notion; Concerning which Philosophers
discourse thus: that, when I apprehend what is meant by the word Man, or have
that Notion in me, Man's nature is both in the Thing, and in my Conception; for
it is impossiole (my Conception being an imminent Act) I should conceive what is
not in my Conception, or that my Act of conceiving should be intrinsecally
determined to be this, but by what is intrinsecal or in it. What is meant then
by the word [Man] has two states: one in the thing as existent out of me; the
other in the thing as existent in me: as the self-same figure is in the Seal
and the Wax. Yet, neither of these different States enters into the Notion I
have of Man, but merely what is common to the Thing, under either State, which
is what answers to the definition; for, both Man, taken as in himself, is a
rational Creature; and also what I conceive, or mean by the word [Man] is
rational Creature; though the words [rational Creature] express neither the
being in my Mind nor out of it, but abstract from either. By this means my
Mind concieving Man gains an Unity of form with the Thing out of it, or a
Conformity to it: which Disposition wants nothing to be called Truth, but that
it is incapable of grounding Affirmation or Negation; the bare meaning of the
word [Man] neither implying [is] nor [is not] Whence Truth and Falsehood are
usual said to be incompetent to the first Operation of our Understanding,

We will make way to the Second Operation of our Understanding by another
Instance of the first. Imagine then there is proposed to my Eye a Round Pillar;
which it affects, and by it my Brain, and, so, my Understanding; it cannot fail
to beget there a simple Apprehension, and consequently a Notion of what is
directly imprinted; which is, that Thing with as many of its qualifications as
were apt to be conveyed in by means of that sense, confusedly blended together;
as also (by my Experience that it affects or is affecting me) of it is
Existence. Moreover, as Occasion, or indeed Nature guides me, I may have
distinct or abstracted notions of Pillar, Roundness and Existence, nay more of
Pillar and Roundness as exercising or actually having the same existence; or,
which is all one, of what is meant by this Proposition, [the Pillar is round]
that is, of what corresponds to those three distinct notions, put now in a
frame of a Proposition, and, so immediately apt to express Truth or Falsehood;
and yet not proceed to behave my self affirmingly or denyingly, or judge any
thing concerning them, but merely to conceive what is meant by those words.

Way being thus orderly made toward the Second Operation of the Understanding
by disposing the separate notions in a fitting posture by the First; nature
seems to require It should supervene; and, so, the Understanding sets it self
to judge whether those Extreme or distant notions, exhibited by the First in the
posture of Connection, be indeed connected or no; the standard or measure of
which is to be taken from the Thing. Now in self-evident Propositions and First
Principles the Understanding guides it self by that imbred or nature-taught
Principium Intellectus; [The same is the same with it is self] In deduc't
Propositions; by the same Principle fundamentally, or originally, and
immediately by this, [Those notions which are the same with a Third, are the
same with one another,] But, in our present Instance, Experience alone suffices
to inform the understanding, supposing the obvious knowledge of what Pillar and
Roundness are, and that a Pillar is a Thing, whereas Roundness without Pillar
is none, but only an Affection or determination of a Thing; both known by
plain Nature, whatever some Schoolmen speculate. For, these put, mere Experience
teaches us that that thing which is called Pillar, is the same thing which is
called Round, or, which is all one, that in this Proposition, [The Pillar is
round] the two extreme notions are indeed, (that is, with a Conformity to the
Thing) identifi'd, or that that Proposition is True.

But to return home to our purpose: It Is clear that Pillar and Roundness
Existing by the same existence or in the same Thing, are found in the thing
after it is manner, and in my Judgment (or Soul as apt to judge) after it is, that
is judgingly: But Truth has nothing to do with either of these manners of
Being (as was discourst formerly in the parallel case of Notions) but purely
and adequately consists in the Unity or Community of Form which my Judgment has
with the Thing; by having which in her, the Soul gains a Conformity to it. In
this Common Form considered as in the Thing, consists it is Metaphysical Verity,
or it is Being what it is; and this Verity, considered as apt to stamp or
imprint it self on my Judging Power, is called Objective Truth; as received in
me, and fashioning or conforming my said Power to the Thing as in it self, and
so making my Judgment True; it is called Formal Truth.

This declared, I deny that I any where confound Objective Truth with Formal,
or what is in the Thing, with what is in me as in me; for, that were to identifie
those two most vastly and most evidently different States: A Supineness too
gross for any attentive Discourser to fall into I conceive then what the
Objecter would allege is, that I confound those Truths spoken of with Truth to
us, or quoad nos, as the Schools speak. For, though what is Truth to us must
needs be Truth in it self, and in us, in regard we cannot know that to be which
is not; yet what is Truth in it self, or Truth in us, is not therefore Truth to
us, in regard one may upon probable, nay improbable, or even False Grounds,
light upon a right judgment; in which case his mind as judging, is conformable
to the thing or True: yet, still, that thing is not true to him, in regard he
has no reason able to conclude it such, or to make him see it to be true.
Truth then to us, is the same with our Sight of it; that is, with Certainty or
Determination of our Understanding by force of Intellectual Motives; and, this
indeed I often seem to confound with Truth in the two former Acceptions; but I
therefore seem to do it because I am loath to transcribe and apply so often my
Postulata, and suppose my Judicious Reader bears them in mind. Which if he
pleases to understand as subjoined to those Discourses, it will follow that
what is so in the thing it self, or perhaps in us, if it be so severely
obligatory to be thus constantly professed and held so, and consequently (by my
later Postulatum) necessary to be known to be so, all my mistaken proofs will
be brought to conclude it True to us, that is, Certain.

You will say, why is it not enough for God to provide that our Acts of Faith
be indeed True in us, since, so, they would perfect our Understandings by
conforming them to the thing; and guide us right; but they must also be True to
us, or be known to be True. I answer, for two Reasons. One, because God's
Government of Mankind would by this means be preternatural, obliging him to
hold, profess, and dye for professing the Truth of those Points which he knows
not to be such. The other Reason is, because every Act of Faith as exercised
would perpetually involve an Error, in case the Motives to those Assents were
not conclusive of the Truth of those Points: For, however one may light by
hap-hazard, or through weakness on a Truth from an Inclusive Motive, yet, since
it is impossible a rational Creature should assent but upon some Motive, good or
bad; hence, every Assent practically implies ['Tis true for this reason]
Wherefore, if the Reason grounding such Assents be unapt to conclude the Truth
of the thing, that Judgment necessarily involves a Falsehood or Error; however
it be, otherwise, conformable to the thing abstractedly considered. Truths then
being bastard, illegitimate and monstrous, both the Intellectualness and
Supernaturalness of that Virtue called Faith, make it scorn to own such
defective Pr^ductions.

Objection III.
The Meanings of Words are indeed to be taken from the Vulgar, but the Truth of
Propositions is to be taken only from the Judgments of Learned Men: though
then that be indeed the meaning of the word [Faith] which the Generality of
Christians mean by it, yet the Truth of this Proposition [Faith is possible to
be False] must be judged of by the Sentiments of the most Learned Divines; the
Generality (at least the Best) of which, and Catholics amongst the rest, grant
the Grounds of Faith as to our Knowledge, and consequently Faith it self, to be
Possible to be False.

Answer. That Maxim is to be understood of those Propositions which require
some Speculation to infer them; in which case also even the Unlearned are not
bound to Assent upon the Authority of Learned men, taken precisely as men of
Skill, because generally it is Practically-self-evident to them, that such
Speculative men differ often times in their Sentiments, and they are unfurnisht
of due means to discern which is in the right: yet, if they are to act in such
affairs, they are bound in Prudence to proceed upon the Judgments of that part
which is generally reputed most and ablest; and then their proceedure is
laudable, because they do the best secundum ultimum potentiae, or that lies in
the power. Whence Learned men who have ability to judge of the Reasons those
Speculaters give, behave themselves imprudently and blameably if they even
proceed to outward action, merely upon their Judgments without examining the
Reasons they allege, in case they have leisure and opportunity to do so. But
now the Maxim holds not all for those Propositions in which it is either
self-evident, or evident to common and uncultivated Reason that the Predicate
is to be connected with the Subject: as it is, for example, in this, [Man is a
rational Creature] or this, which is palpably consequent from the former, [Man
is capable of gaining Knowledg] for in such as these the natural Sentiments of
the Vulgar are full as Certain as those of Speculaters; perhaps Certainer. And
with the same Evidence the Predicate [Possible to be False] must necessarily be
seen to be connected with [Faith] by all those who esteem themselves obliged by
Gods Command to profess and dye for the Truth of those Points they believe.
Besides, they hold that Faith makes them know God and his Will, that their
Assent of Faith is to be Immovable, or adhered to all their lives; that is,
such as cannot be overthrown or shown False by any Reasons brought against it;
both which equivalently imply Impossibility of Falsehood.

Again, it is denied that Catholic Divines, even as Speculaters, hold Faith
Possible to be False; since they all, to a man, (whatever they hold besides)
hold the Catholic Church Infallible; and that we ought to receive our Faith
from her Living Voice and Practice: Now the Tenet of Infallibility in the
Proposer necessarily draws after it the Tenet of Impossibility of Falsehood in
what is proposed, that is, in Faith, But, because it may be said this is their
Sentiment as Catholics, not as Schoolmen, let the Angel of the Schools speak
for the Schools themselves; his Expressions are common, and so reach all.
Scientia (says he, Sum. Theol. 2a 2e q. 1a a. 50 ad 4m.) cum opinione simul
esse non potest simpliciter de eodem; quia de ratione scientiae est, quod id
quod scitur ex ^stimetur Impossible esse aliter se habere; de ratione autem
opinionis est quod id quod est opinatum existimetur possibile aliter se habere:
sed id quod fide ten^tur, propter fidei certitudinem, existimatur etiam
Impossible aliter se habere. And again in the same Question, ao. 4o. ad 2o. Ea
quae subsunt Fidei dupliciter considerari possunt: uno modo in speciali, and
sic non possunt esse simul visa and credita; alio modo in generali, scilicet
sub communi ratione credibilis; et sic sunt VISA ab eo qui credit; non enim
crederet nisi VIDERET ea esse credenda, vel propter EVIDENTIAM* signorum, vel
propter aliquid hujusmodi. It were easy for me to avail my self by these
Testimonies to confirm the main of my Doctrine; but, what method will permit
me, and leads me to at present, is only this, to show that this Great Father of
the Church, and Doctor of all Schools, declares the common Sentiment, drawn
out of the conceit of Faith's Certainty, to be this, that it is Impossible that
Points of Faith should be otherwise, or false; and that we must, e're we
believe, have Evidence of the Grounds of our Belief, which amounts to the same.
All then that can be objected from some of our Divines is this, that they
explicate their Tenet so, as by consequence Faith is left possible to be false;
but, what is this to the purpose; since it is one thing to hold a Tenet, and
another thing to make it out. In the former they all agree, in the later (as is
the Genius of Humane Understandings where our heavenly Teacher has not settled
them) they disagree with one another, sometimes with themselves. Nor, can it
bear any Objection, nor breed scandal, that the Ground of Faith should be more
particularly and distinctly explicated now than formerly; for, since
Controversy is a Skill, why should it be admired, nay, why should it not be
expected that it should receive Improvement, that is, better explain its proper
object the Rule of Faith, than formerly* since we experience a progress in all
other Arts and Sciences which are frequent in use, as this has been of late
days:

Objection IV.
A great part of the First Eviction, in case it proceed concerning Truth in us,
as it ought, supposes the vulgar Skilful in Logic, and to frame their Thoughts
and Assents in the same manner as Artificial Discoursers do.

Answer. It supposes no Skill or Art in the vulgar or Generality of Christians,
but only declares artificially what naturally passes in rational Souls when
they Assent upon Evidence. And this it ought to do; For the Art of Logic
frames not it is Rules or Observations at random, but takes them from the Thing
or it is Object (as all other Skills do) that is, from what is found in rational
Souls as rational, or apt to discourse: by observing the motions of which when
it behaves it self rationally, the Logicians set down Rules how to demean our
Thoughts steadily and constantly according to right Reason: So that the manner
of working in Artificial discoursers in this only differs from that of Natural
ones, that the one acts directly the other reflectingly. For example, a vulgar
Soul when it assents interiourly a thing is, or affirms, has truly in it what a
Logician call's a Proposition; and that Proposition has truly in it what
corresponds to the notions of Subject, Copula, and Predicate; though he
reflects not on it, as does a Logician. In the same manner when he gathers the
Knowledge of some new Thing, he has truly in that discourse of his what
corresponds to Major, Minor and Conclusion, nay he has practically in him what
necessitates the Consequence or that Maxim [The same is the same with it self]
of whose Truth, it being a Principle of our Understanding, he cannot possibly
be ignorant. Though all this while he reflects not how or by virtue of what he
acquires this Knowledge.

And hence Light is afforded us to understand in common how the vulgar come to
have Practical Self-Evidence of diverse Truths: For, the Maxims which even
scientifical men have of the Objects of several Sciences, being taken from the
Things or the Objects of those Sciences; and (those Maxims being Common or
General ones) from the obvious or common Knowledge of those things, which the
vulgar who convers with them cannot choose but have; Again, nature imbuing them
with the Knowledge of that Principle on which the force of all Consequences is
Grounded, as also with the knowledge of all those we call Principia Intellectus,
or Principles of our Understanding, hence their rational nature is led directly
by a natural course to see evidently and assent to diverse Conclusions, without
any Reflection or Speculation; which rude but unerring draught of Knowledge is
called by me in Sure Footing and elsewhere Practical Self-evidence, because it is
a natural Result of Practice or ordinary converse with those things; An
Instance would at once clear this, and, if rightly chosen, be serviceable to
the Readers of Sure Footing. An unlearned person that cannot read a word
believes fully there was such a man as K. James; and that we may not mistake
the Question, we will put him to be one that has a handsome degree of
conversation in the world. We find him assent to the Affirmative heartily; But
the point is how he is led into that Assent, and whether rationally? To ask him
a reason why, is bootless; for this puts him to behave himself like a Reflecter
on his own Thoughts, which he is not: whence we shall find him, upon such a
question, at a puzzle to give the particular reason; though, as taught by
Experience, he will stand stiffly to it in common that he has a reason for it,
and a good one too. To help him out then, the way is to suggest the true reason
to him, for then he will easily acknowledge it, finding it experimentally in
himself; which done, deny the Goodness of it, and you shall find, he will, as
taught by nature stand to it, and deliver himself in some rude saying or other
in behalf of it. For example, tell him he believes there was a K. James because
those who pretended to live then have told us so; but what if they were
mistaken? His answer would in likelihood be to this purpose; what a God's name
were they blind in those days, that they could not see who was King then?
Which expresses naturally his conceit of their Inerrableness in such a point,
in case they had eyes, which nature taught him men generally have. Insist
farther; Perhaps they were not mistaken, but had a mind to cozen all England
that came after them. Nature will lead him to this or some such kind of Reply;
To what purpose should they all make fools of every body? Which words, though
rudely expressed, yet couch in themselves the full reason given in Sure Footing,
as far as it is built on Nature. For, first, it implies that man's nature with
which he has a fair acquaintance in common is to do a thing for a purpose, end
or reason. Next, his Interrogatory way is in his rude style, equivalent to a
Negative, and so it signifies there could be no reason for it; and, lastly, his
standing to his former Tenet implies virtually a Conclusion from the reason
given, that the thing could not be done; which involves necessarily a knowledge
of that First Principle on which all force of consequence is grounded; and also
of that Principle, no Effect can be without a due Cause; both perfectly
supposed and held by him, though not expressed in his rude Enthymeme.

From this discourse is collected what this Practical Self-evidence is; and,
that it is distinguished from Experience in this, that Experience is only found
of what uses to make the Minor in this virtual discourse, but Practical
Self-evidence is of Conclusions deduc't (as it were) from a common maxim
naturally known, as the Major; and a Minor (for the most part) experientially,
or else Practically known; which, joined with the Self-evident Principle in
which the force of Consequence consists, make up that virtual discourse. Again,
it differs from Science, in that a man of Science reflectingly sees a Medium
identifying the two Extremes, and is aware of the virtue of those Causes which
beget Evidence; whereas the other is rather Passive from Natural Impressions
than Active by any Self-industry in these Knowledges, and rather feels the
force of those Causes in his own Adhesion, than sees it. Secondly, It Is
collected that this Practical Self-evidence is notwithstanding, True Knowledge;
though, perhaps, it be the sleightest kind of it; in which it is differenc't
from Opinion built on probabilities. For, seeing such Assenters have both by
Experience or by Common Conversation true Knowledge of the natures of diverse
things in common, which make the Minor, as also by Nature of all the Principles
of our Understanding, which countervail the major, and force the Consequence;
it comes to pass that this Practical Self-evidence is entirely and adequately
grounded on true Knowledges both as to Premises and Consequence; and
cossequently it is it self a True Knowledge likewise. Which consideration will
help to explain my later Postulatum, and show by what means it is possible all
Christians may know their Faith to be True, or the same the Apostles taught, by
the Churches Testimony, because they know the Inerrableness and Veracity of
vast and grave multitudes in open matters of Fact which are practiceable daily.
And lastly, it is collected that what is Practically Self-evident to the
Unlearned, is Demonstrable to the Learned: in regard These are capable of
seeing by what virtue the causes of this Self-evidence bred that Knowledge,
which the other's incultivated Reason would give no account of.

Objection V.
That first Principle [Every thing while it is, is necessarily what it is]
seems to be often times misapplied, particularly Evict. 2. 11. and 13. to Truth
at present; whence the Arguer would conclude that it is Impossible that a thing
should be also at present False. Which is true, if it be meant of Objective
Truth; but then it seems to miss the Question. But, the consequence holds not,
in case the Discourse be of Formal Truth; that is, of Truth in us, or of Truth
to us, that is, of Certainty; for none pretends that his Judgment can at the
same time be Conformable and Disconformable to the thing, which speaks those
inrintsecall Dispositions, called Truth and Falsehood in us; or that himself can
be Cetrain or Uncertain of it at once, which expresses Truth and Falsehood to
us; this being put those Motives which only he had at present in his
Understanding, able to prove the Point true and false both or at once: whereas,
what is pretended by the Objecter is only this, that, though upon present
Motives he now judges it True and Certain, yet, afterward, upon other Motives
he may come to see it False.

Answer. I mean in those places Truth to us, or Certainty: But, the Objection
proceeds as if there were but one man in the world, or as if True, False,
Certain and Uncertain could be relative to one person only. First, then, my
Position is that, whoever puts a thing True to himself, yet possible to be
False to another, puts no less a capacity of the thing's being at once thus
True and False though in several Subjects, than as if it were in one Subject
only. Next, he supposes each of those different Judgers to have possibly just
Grounds for so judging, since he puts in one Motives sufficient to evince the
Truth of the thing, in the other, possible ones to conclude it is Falsehood. For
our Question is not, to what degree weak Souls can miscarry in assenting, but
what degree of strength is found in the Motives to Faith; which, the Objecter,
as a Christian, that is, as a Holder that Points of Faith are Truths, must
affirm to be sufficient to conclude it True; and yet, as himself contends,
leaves it still Possible to be False; that is, proveable by other Grounds to be
so; for, else, the word False, cannot mean False to us, or in the Subject, as
is pretended; that is, he must make it possible to be justly or in right
reason, held by one True, by the other False. Now it is the Impossibility of
such opposite Grounds I constantly maintain; or that the Grounds of Faith are
Impossible to be False. Thirdly, hence I go farther and urge, that, if those
different Motives can oblige justly one man to hold Faith True, the other to
hold it False, then, putting them in the same man, it ought to oblige him to
hold both sides of the Contradiction: and this enforces my proofs of this
nature in my Third Eviction. I know it will be readily answe'rd, that this will
not follow; because, the Motives being disparate, the more probable one would,
when in the same subject, overpower the other, and so hinder the opposite
Assent. But I desire it may be considered that Intellectual Motives or Reasons
have their power to bind the Understanding to Assent, not from their relation
to other extrinsecall Proofs corresponding or discorresponding with them, but
from the Truth of the Premises on which they intrinsecally depend, and the
Goodness of the Consequence; and, finally, by virtue of their being built on
first or self-evident Principles. If then the Motives one man has at present be
sufficient of their own nature to oblige him, acting according to right reason,
to judge Faith True; who ever has humane Reason ought to assent upon them: and,
if Faith be still possible to be False, that is, False to us; that is, be
possible to be shown False, or possible that others may have just ground to
hold it so, put those Grounds also in the same man, and, since they must be
convictive of humane understanding, they ought to have their formal Effect
where they are; that is, convince it of Faith's Falsehood too; which however
absurd, yet it is the genuine and necessary sequel of this Source of
Absurdities, viz. That Faith and its Rule may possibly be False. How the force
of this Discourse is avoidable but by alleging that no man acting according to
right reason has just grounds to hold his Faith True to us, or can ever have
just Grounds to hold it False to us, (which is to deny the Possibility of
Faith's Falsehood to us, the Opposers own position) I profess my self utterly
unable to discern. Now, he that holds these Positions is a perfect Sceptick or
a Pyrrhonian as to matters of Religion; since he puts an absolute desperateness
of knowing the Truth on either side, in that matter or subject.

Objection VI.
When it is said that Faith and its Rule may be False, the Arguer misunderstands
it to mean that we assert it may actually and indeed be shown so, whereas it is
only meant by those words, that it is Possible to be False for any thing we
know; or, for any thing the Grounds of Faith as to our knowledge, evince or
force to the contrary.

Answer. I know not what Possibility to any thing means, if it be not a
relation to its being actually and indeed: nor a Possibility of being False to
us, but a Possibility of being actually and indeed such; that is, of being
actually shown so to us. And all this must be forcibly admitted by him who puts
no proper or necessary Causes in the Thing, nor consequently Conclusive Motives
in men's Understandings why this Faith now professed should necessarily be the
same Christ and his Apostles taught. It Is indeed a different thing to say, it
may be so, and to say, I do not know but it may be so. But, he who maintains
that Faith may possibly be False, if he be honest, knows what he maintains to
be True; otherwise, certainly he were very wicked who would thus disgrace or
diminish Faith, if he did not know his Position to be a Truth; whence follows
that such a man must not only say, I know not but it may be False; but he
must, if he will speak out what he thinks, be obliged to say, I know it may be
False; however he be loath to declare Categorically and sincerely his Tenet in
so odious a Point, or hazard his credit with the Generality of Christians,
whose Sentiment he contradicts so expressly.

Objection VII.
It Is enough that Faith be as Certain as that the Sun will rise to morrow, that
America will not be drowned, as that there was a Henry the Eighth, etc. which
are only Morally Certain, and enough for humane action, since they exclude
Actual Doubt, or leave no suspicion of doubt behind them; which as Mr. Stilling
fleet tells us, App. p. 76. is the highest actual Certainty which the mind of
any reasonable man can desire. In the same manner as it is Certainty enough for
me to use my house that I am morally certain it will not fall on my head,
though I have no Absolute Security but it may. And this kind of Certainty seems
more suitable to Mankind, being more easily penetrable by the Generality than
the other rigorous and over-straining Certainty; which seems more fit and
proper for the higher sort of Speculaters, than for a world of men, which
comprehends capacities of all degrees and sorts, and the greatest part of them,
perhaps, of little Learning.

Answer. The Objecter must prove that all those Instances are
only-Morally-Certain or Possible to be False, e're he allege them for such:
That of Henry the Eighth, which does indeed oblige the understanding to belief,
I affirm to be Practically Self evident and demonstrable, and so Impossible to
be False. As for the rest, they are utterly unfit to parallel Faith's
Certitude, being all of material things, whose very Essence is to be mutable;
whereas Points of Faith, being Truths, and in matters not subject to
Contingency, are essentially incapable of being otherwise than they are, that
is, still Truths: So that far easier is it that all material nature should
undergo all the Changes imaginable, than that any such Truth can not be it
self, or the Principles on which 'cis built in us desist to be True or
Conclusive. In particular, I would ask^ whether it be enough for Faith to be as
Certain to us Christians, as it was to those immediately before the Flood, that
the whole world should not be drowned, which exceeds the case of America's
possible destruction; or, as it was to those after the Flood, that the Sun
should never stand still or go back; or, lastly, as it is that a house, of
whose Firmness none had actual doubt, should fall? If so, then the Standing of
the Sun in Ioshuah's time, and it is Retrogradation in Ezekiah's, show the
unparallelness of these Instances. You Will say these were both miraculous. But,
this alters not the case; first, because it was never heard, nor can it be held
by any sober man, that even Miracle can make such Truths, Falsehoods; or those
Motives, which are of their own nature able to conclude the Truth of any such
Points, Inconclusive or Invalid. Next, because, if the Motives to Faith, and so
Faith it self are Possible to be false for any thing we know, it is Impossible
to give a satisfactory Answer to a Deist, demanding how, in case they should
prove indeed False, we can be assured Gods Goodness to Mankind will not step in
even miraculously to discover the vanity of so universal an Illusion, and the
Abuse of Falsehoods so absurdly imposing upon the world, as to obtain the
highest repute of Sacred and Divine Truths.

Concerning the last Instance of the Moral Certainty of a houses standing,
which has been objected to me by learned Protestants, as sufficient to make me
act as steadily and heartily as if I had a Demonstration that it would not
possibly fall, besides the General Answer that Points of Faith are Truths,
which renders the case unparallel; I reply, that the two houses, the one in
Holborn, the other in Kings Street, which of late years, and a third in Cock
Lane, which of late days fell, when none had the least actual doubt or
suspicion of doubt of it, else surely they would never have staid in them,
inform us sufficiently to what a changeable, tottering and ruinous condition
Christian Faith would be reduced by these Principles and Parallels: No fewer
than three Houses fell in the compass of a short time, and none had the least
suspicion of doubt beforehand of such an Event; therefore, may an Atheist say,
Down falls Christian Faith too, whose Foundation was (by this Doctrine) but
Parallel for strength to the other; or, if it fall not in so long time, it has
only something better luck, not better grounds than had the three Houses.

As for the objected Unsuitableness of such a Certainty as I require, it is
replied, that nothing is more natural for the Generality of Mankind, than to be
led by Authority; nothing more penetrable by those of all sorts than the
Infallibleness and Veracity of exceedingly vast and grave Authorities relating
matter of Fact, as we experience in their belief that there was a Q. Elizabeth
and such like; to comprehend and assent immovably to which costs them not the
least over straining, as the Obiecter imagins. Which being so, I make account
that God both in his power and wisdom could, and in his Goodness would render
the Authority of his Church, the Ground and Pillar of Truth, as evident to all
her Children, both as to its Inerrableness and Veracity as the other; nay
incomparably more, it being in every regard so requisite.

Objection VI.
If the Motives to Faith must be Impossible to be False to us, they would
necessarily conclude the Truth of Faith; wherefore they would, of themselves,
oblige the Understanding to assent, and so there would need no precedent pious
affection of the Will; which yet both Councils, Fathers, and Catholic Divines
with one consent require. Nay, more, were not such a pious affection put, Acts
of Faith would not be Free.

Answer. If Experience teaches us that even assent to Humane Sciences, though
Evident from Intrinsecal reasons, Comprehensible by our Understanding, and
purely Speculative, is not to be acquired without an affection to see Truth; as
is evident from the carriage of mere Scepticks, who having entertained a
conceit of it is hopelesness, come thence to want Love or Affection for it, and
so never come to see it, how Conclusive soever the reasons be. Much more by far
must some good affection be prerequisit to assent to Divine and Supernatural
Truths, which are Obscure in themselves, as depending upon Authority;
Incomprehensible to our natural reason; and Practical, that is
obligingly-Efficacious to break out into Christian Action or Love of Heaven
above all sublunary things, as True Faith must be. The First obstacle of the
three mentioned has this difficulty, that the beams of Truth, which come
directly from the things themselves are generally apt to strike our
Understanding more naturally, penetrate it more deeply, and to stick in it more
immovably, than those which are reflected to us from the Knowledge of another,
such as are Points of Faith; besides the new difficulty of seeing the Veracity
of the Attester, which, how evident soever it be, yet it puts the Understanding
to double pains; whereas, Evidence had from the Thing is but a single labor,
and so less confounding and distracting the thought.

The Second Obstacle, Incomprehensibleness is apt to stupify the Understanding
and retard Assent; nay even to deter it from considering them as Truths; The
Atheistical temper of the world (which could not subsist were Metaphysics duly
advanced) sufficiently informs us how difficult it is for men to apply and fix
their thoughts upon those considerabilities in things and those natures which
are abstracted from matter; the reason whereof is, because it being natural
that our Fancy be in act while our Understanding is so, and there being not
Proper Phantasms, (the only agreeable ones to material men, who are not strong
enough to guide their Judgments purely by Principles and Connexions of Terms)
which suit to such abstracted Conceptions, but Metaphorical ones only, which
the Understanding must in rigor deny to be right ones, even while by necessity
it is forced to make use of them; Hence the life of a Christian, as such, being
to serve God in Spirit and Truth, and, so, the Objects and Principles of his
new Life for the most part and principally Spiritual ones, it comes to pass
that for this very regard alone, there will need a great love of Truth and
Spiritual Goods to make the Understanding appliable to them, or even admit a
consideration of them. I was told by a worthy Friend of mine that discoursing
with an acute man, but a great hater of Metaphysics, and mentioning a Spirit,
he in a disgust broke out into these words [Let us talk of what we know.] By
which expression it is manifest that he mistook the Question An est, for Quid
est; But what makes for my purpose is, that the unknowableness of the Essence
or nature of a Spirit to us in this State, obstructed even his desire to
consider whether there were any such thing or no; and consequently that there
needs a contrary desire or affection to know Spiritual things, to make us
willing even to entertain a thought of their being, much more to conceit it.
But incomparably more needful is such an Affection, when to the Spirituality of
those points there shall be added an Incomprehensibleness, nay, if only those
points be considered, an Incredibleness; when no Parallel can be found in
Nature, nor scarce any similitude weakly to shadow out the thing and it is
possibility; nay, when some of those points directly thwart the course of
natural Causes, whence all our other Knowledges have their Stability. Then, I
say, if ever there is requisite an Affection for the Nobleness and Excellency of
those high Spiritual Objects, to make us willing to hearken to any Authority
proposing them, how evident soever the Motives be for the Credibleness of that
Authority.

The third Obstacle follows, taken from the End for which Faith is essentially
ordained, that is, from what it essentially is, viz. a mover of the Will to
Virtue and Goodness, or a Practical Principle. Now, nothing is more evident
than this Truth, that by-affections and contrary inclinations are apt to hinder
the understanding from assenting, or even attending heartily and calmly to
these Reasons, (how clear soever they be) which make against any beloved
Interest; whence, there needs a contrary affection to these other, to remove
the mists those passions had raised, and purge the Eye of the Mind, that so it
may become capable of discerning what it could not before, though in it self
most visible. How much more, (not only requisite but even) necessary must some
pious affection be to permit the mind freely to embrace the doctrine of
Christian Faith, containing Principles which enjoin a disregard and
posthabition of all that is sweet to Flesh and Blood, nay even of Livelihood
and Life it self.

It Is most manifest then that a Plous Affection pre-requisit to Faith,
derogates nothing from it is Certainty, but is perfectly consistent with the
Evidence of those Motives which are to generate it; and that the Governors and
Officers of the Church, though proposing the most convincing reasons in the
world for the Authority conveying down Faith to us, can prevail nothing, unless
the Great Governor of the world and Giver of every good gift, by his peculiar
Power, plant antecedently in their hearts this good disposition, and prepare
terram bonam, that their endeavors may take effect, and the Sowers Seed take
root; no more than Paul, though miraculous, could convert all that saw his
Miracles or heard his Preaching, but only such whose hearts God opened as he
did Lydia's. It appears also by the same discourse how the Acts of Faith are
free, that is, as depending on this pious disposition of the Will, which sets
the Understanding on work to consider the Motives, and so produce them. The
whole Humane Action is free, because the Will orders it; though she do not
produce it all, or though freedom be not formally in the Body: so the Act of
Faith is free, because it is ordered by the Will which is free; though no
freedom be found in the Understanding, which is incapable of such a
qualification, but pure necessity of assenting when the Motives are seen to be
Conclusive.

No need then is there upon any account of a pious disposition of the Will to
piece out the defect of the Reasons why we believe, and to oblige the
Understanding to assent beyond the Motive; that is, assent, to a degree, beyond
what it had reason to do. An Impossibility in Humane Nature rightly and
connaturally governed, and (I much fear) no small disgrace to Christian Faith;
considering the obstinate bent of the Church's Adversaries to confound the
Speculative Thoughts of Divines, explaining Faith and its Grounds less
carefully, with their Sentiments issuing naturally from them as Christians, nay
with the Doctrine of the Catholic Church it self. What can revincingly be
replied to an Atheist, objecting on this occasion that Christians make the
Evidence of Faith's grounds stand need to be pecc'd out by Obscurity; our
Knowledge of them by Ignorance, and the Rationality of them by Will without
Reason, that is, Willfulness. Wherefore I carnestly obtest and beseech, even
per viscera Christi, all who shall read this Treatise, and yet have
Speculatively held and maintained this Opinion I here impugn, (for practically,
and as Christians, they hold the contrary Conclusion) seriously to weigh the
Point once more, and not to obstruct the Resolving Christian Faith into
immovable Principles, or absolutely Certain Grounds, by an Opinion only
sprung from the conceited difficulty in making out those Grounds to be
Impossible to be False; which yet themselves to a man profess and hold, as they
are Christians. I humbly beg leave to propose to them these few Considerations:
First, It Is Certain Faith is no less Faith, or an Assent upon Authority, though
that Authority be demonstrated to be Infallible: but on the contrary, that it is
both firmer and more rational even for that very regard. Secondly, It Is Certain
that the Generality of Christians hold their Faith to be True, or Impossible to
be False, (that is, it is True to us) and withal perfectly Rational, and
consequently that its Grounds or Principles are so able to ascertain it that
they place it beyond Possibility of Falsehood. Thirdly, It Is no less evident
that, an inclination or motion of the Will, being of such a nature that it can
have neither Truth nor Falsehood in it, can be no Rational Principle or Ground
of our Assents or Acts of Faith; that is, apt to ascertain them, or indeed apt
to establish the Truth of any Tenet. Fourthly, That it is most evident from my
foregoing Discourse, that an antecedent pious disposition of the Will is still
requisite to Faith, notwithstanding the perfect Conclusiveness of the Grounds
on which it is built; and, that all Acts of Faith depend on this quoad
exercitium at least, (as the Schools speak) which in the Judgment of many
Divines is sufficient. Fifthly, That it is the common Opinion of the solidest
Divines, that Faith consists with Evidence in the Attester. Sixthly, That Faith
or a firm and immovable Assent upon Authority, is not thoroughly rational, and
by consequence partly faulty, if the Motives be not alone able to convince an
Understanding rightly disposed, without the Will's Assistance; for, what can be
said for that degree of Assent which is beyond the Motive or Reason? Is it not
evident from the very Terms that it is Irrational or without any Reason? But,
the worst is, that, whereas all good Christians hold their Faith Impossible to
be False, or judge their Acts of Faith Immovable Assents, these Authors as
Speculaters put all the Reasons for Faith to leave it still Possible to be
False, and make this pious Affection the only thing which elevates it to
Impossibility of Falsehood, which is vastly higher in point of Certainty; as if
a rational Creature, not deviating totally from its nature, but acting
according to right Reason, ought therefore to hold a Point Impossible to be
False, because it self has an Affection, or (as we say) a great mind it should
be so. Seventhly, This Assertion renders the Impossibility of Faith's Falsehood,
not only unmaintainable, (as has been now shown) but also unperswadable to
others; for, how shall I be able to give account to others that my Affection
which works this Persuasion in me is rational, and not apt to mislead me, when
as the very Position obliges me to profess the contrary, and to grant that this
Affection pushes forward my Understanding to assent beyond the reason it has,
that is, as to this degree in my Assent, (which is no small one since it raises
it from judging Faith possible to be false, to judge it Impossible to be such)
without reason? Or, will not this Speculative Tenet seem to force this
Inference, that the Grounds of Faith, as to its most intrinsecal consideration,
viz. the Impossibility of its Falsehood, is made by this Doctrine full as dark a
hole as it is to allege the private Spirit? Nor can the Reverence due to the
Divine Authority suffice for such an Effect; both, because it is Impossible God
should will that Mankind for his sake should act irrationally; as also, because
there is no poison in the world so pestilent as an Error abetted by the most
Sacred Patronage of God's Authority, as the Histories of the Fanatics in all
ages, and our homebred experience testifies. Whence, that very Reverence to
the Divine Authority obliges us to be so sure it is engaged for a Truth e're we
admit it for such, that we may securely though with an humble truth say with
Richardus de Sancto Victore, Domine, si error est quod credimus, a te decepti
sumus; so that there is indeed no greater injury and abuse to the Divine Name
imaginable, than to hazard the making it patronize Falsehoods: against this
deceit our Savior has fore-arm'd us, by his fore-warning us with a Nolite
credere, when any one pretends, Lo here is Christ, or there is Christ.

Lastly, it is visible to any indifferent understanding, that those Divines who
defend this influence of the pious Affection upon the settling of Faith's
Certainty, though in other Points very rational and acute, yet when they come
to this, they are at an utter loss, and can make nothing cohere. Philippus de
Sancta Trinitate contradicts himself twice or thrice in one leaf while he
attempts to defend it. But, I instance in one for all, that is, Father
Vincentius Baronius, a Doctor of Toulouse, and of the Holy Order of S.
Dominick; a Person of as much Eminency, Gravity and Learning as any of late
days. This Great Writer in his Manuductio ad Moralem Theologiam, p. 130, 131.
falls upon Caramuel in these words, Distinguit Caramuel duplicem honestatis
Certitudinem seu veritatem; formalem unam vocat, alteram objectivam; istam
negat cuilibet opinioni probabili, ill am concedit, etc. -- Sed hoc nobis
ignorantiae prodiglum est aut temeritatis, dari veritatem aut falsitatem,
certitudinemque cui nulla Objectiva correspondeat; Hoc ne deo quidem concessum
est, ut Scientiam habeat rei non scibilis, i. e. veritatem formalem rei quae
objectiva careat. Yet the same Author, p. 271 is forced, by the defense of
this ill grounded Tenet which he had espoused, into the same paralogysm which
he had so gravely, severely and learnedly reprehended in another. Where putting
the Objection very home, he asks, Si praevium illud ad Fidem Iudicium sit intra
probabilitatis fines, qua ratione poterit men's assurgere in assensum illo seu
opinione firmiorem? ergo fidei Certitudo nutlat si ab illo Iudicio, quod
prudenter probabile dixi, pendeat, nec aliunde repetatur: This done
acknowledging that tota Controversia and fidei summa is contained (as indeed it
is) in this argument, he addresses himself to answer it. First slightly by an
example, that this precedent Judgment is to Faith as Accidental Alteration to
the Substantial Form, and so being only a disposition to it may be less noble
or Certain than Faith is it self; whereas, if our Assent of faith ought to be
thoroughly rational, this previous Judgment being that on which this Assent is
built, as to us or as to our knowledge, must at least be Firm and Immovable it
self, since the Assent of Faith built on it ought to be such, and consequently
beyond Probability; whence the example is most unsuitable; signifying that as
Nature disposes matter by imperfect degrees toward a perfect and ultimate
Effect, so infirm Principles may rationally beget a firm Assent. After this, he
alleges that the Certainty of Faith is to be fetched from God the Author of
it, who infuses Light and gives most efficacious strength to believe. But the
question is whether God ordinarily and abstracting from Miracle infuses Light
into rational Creatures, but by means of motives or reasons; and whether it
requires such strength, or rather be not an unwise Credulousness, that is a
great weakness, to believe beyond what we have reason to do, and so unworthy
God the giver of every good and perfect gift. Lastly, he affirms that the
Certainty of Faith is to be fetched from the pious Affection of the will, qui
mentem rebus credendis indubitato and immoto assensu alligat quasi nodo
indissolubili; Which, as it were by an indissoluble Knot, ties the mind to the
things to be believed with an undoubted and unmoved Assent. But, the question
is how this knot is indissoluble, in case the probable reason prove false,
unless the Soul be wilfully blind; or why a resolvedness in the will can
rationally establish a true Intellectual Certainty. What I chiefly conclude
from these answers of his is, that he perpetually waves Certainty had from the
Object, and so unavoidably is forced to put a formal Certainty in as, to which
no Objective Certainty corresponds; which his excellent wit in another
circumstance saw to be prodigiously faulty, and a Certainty (that is a
perfection) not competent even to God himself. So Impossible it is that Errors
prejudicing the Rule of Faith should not either by Opposition to First
Principles be discovered to be Falsehoods, or, by self-contradictions in their
maintainers, confess it themselves.

Objection VII.
It Is manifest that diverse weak people assent upon very Inconclusive, nay
silly, or less than probable Motives; whom yet no sober man will deny have
saving Faith; the true nature of Faith then requires not necessarily motives
Impossible to be False, or that Faith be True to us, but may be without any
such qualification.

Answer. When we say Faith is Impossible to be False, we take the word [Faith]
in its proper and primary signification; now, that being the proper
signification of a word that is most usual, and that most usual which is found
in the Generality of the users of it, the proper signification (that is the
true nature) of Faith is that which is found in the generality of Christians;
which being evidently an Assent to be adhered to all one's life, to be died in,
and died for, and the Object, or Form of that Assent being Truths; and, so, it
self True; it is most manifestly, in each of those regards, implied that it must
be Impossible to be False to us, or to the Generality of Christians; that is,
it must have Grounds able to show it, nay actually showing it so to them,
whatever Contingency may happen in a few particulars for want of applying to
them the right Rule of Faith. Besides, Faith must be a Knowledge of Divine
things, a virtuous Act, and, so, rat^onal; and a most efficacious Cause of
working for Heaven: Also, its Grounds must be apt to establish the most
Speculative Faithful, to convert or confound the most acute Wits denying or
opposing it, etc. all which and much more is proved in the First discourse of
Sure Footing by arguments as yet not attempted to be invalidated by any;
however something has been offered against those Conclusions: Which Attributes
it cannot possibly justify, nor yet perform those Offices, without being True
to us, or having Grounds Impossible to be False. The word [Faith] then, applied
to those weak persons now spoken of, signifies not the same as when it is found
in the Generality of Assenters; but, merely, a simple credulity of any thing
told them by a person that looks seriously when he speaks it, and is conceited
by the Believer to be wiser, or to have heard more than himself. Which kind of
Assent, if it be seconded by favorable circumstances laid by God's Providence,
especially by such means as are found in the Discipline of the Church, so as it
begets a love of Heaven above all things, may suffice to save those weak and
well meaning Catholics. But, how incompetent an Assent no better grounded were
for the establishment or propagation of Christianity; that is, how insufficient
for the Body of the Faithful or the Church; how unfit for the Ends, and unable
to produce the Effects true Faith (or the Faith found in the Generality of the
Faithful) ought to do, needs no declaration to manifest it; since no person of
ordinary capacity can without difficulty refrain from smiling at the ridiculous
levity of such kind of Assenters.

INFERENCES From the foregoing Discourses concluding all Controversy.
1. IT rests, then, evinced and demonstratively concluded, with as great
Firmness, as First Principles made use of for Premises, and Immediate
Consequences from those Principles can establish it, that, that most firm or
Unchangeable Assent called Christian Faith, laying an obligation on its
Prof^ssors to assert it with the greatest Seriousness, Constancy and Pledges
imaginable, to be TRUE, and its Object, Points of Faith, to be TRUTHS, is not*
possible to be False to us, that is, to be an Erroneous Judgment, or a Mistake
of our Understanding,

2. It Is with the same Certainty concluded, that the Ground of Faith as to our
Knowledge, and, so, the Rule of Faith, must be likewise Impossible to be False.
For, since nothing can or ought in true Reason be stronger than the Ground it
stands on, if This be not Impossible to be False, it can be no Rule of Faith;
because it would weaken Faith it self, which is built on it, into a Possibility
of Falsehood, inconsistent with its nature.

3. It follows with the same Clearness, that, if the Rule of Faith, or the
Immediate Means to convey the Knowledge of Christ's Doctrine to us, be any Living
Authority, that Authority must be Infallible, as to that Effect. For, if
Fallible, Faith which is built on it would still be Possible to be False. As,
Likewise, that, if it be any Book, both the Letter of that Book must be known
to be Imposs^ble to have been corrupted, as to what concerns Faith built on it;
and withal, the Sense known to be Impossible to be ^istaken. For, in case
either of these (all the Causes being put to preserve them such as we have
said) be truly judged or found to be Possible, Faith, which is to depend on
them, will still be left possible to be False.

4. It follows immediately, that those pretended Faithful, who have not
Grounds of Faith thus qualified, have no true Faith; that is, no Act of Belief,
but what, notwithstanding all that they know, or can know of it, may possibly
be False: nor, consequently, are they to be accounted truly Faithful, as not
having true Faith (that is, in our case, an Assent built either on Infallible
Living Authority, or on unmistakeable Letter and Sense of a Book, 3.) but
Opinion only.

5. It follows with like Evidence, that, a Controvertist being one who is to
assert Faith, not by looking into the Mysteries of Faith and explaining them,
(this being the Office of a School-Divine) but into the Motives to it or Rule
of Faith, if he goes not about to bring Proofs which he judges and is ready to
maintain, nay, which are of their own nature apt to show Faith and its Rule
Impossible to be False, he does not the duty he ows to Faith, nor behaves
himself like a Controvertist; but he betrays Faith by his Ineffectual and
Probable managery of it, making it seem a slight Opinion or lightly grounded
Credulity. Especially, if he professes that all Proofs which can be produced in
this matter, are Possible to be False: For, then, it is a plain and open
Confession all his Endeavors are to no purpose; because he is to show Faith,
the Subject of his Discourse, to be what in reality it is; that is, Impossible
to be false. Nay, since Faith must be thus Certain, he manifestly destroys
Faith, when he should defend and establish it, by professing all its Proofs or
Grounds possible to be false.

6. It follows immediately, that unless some other Medium can be found, or way
taken, in that Skill or Science called Controversy, which is able to show
Faith Impossible to be false, than what is laid down in Sure-footing, which
partly by our Adversaries confession of the Inability of theirs to reach
Infallible Certainty, partly out of the nature of the Thing (as is seen
Sure-footing, Corol. 16 and 40.) is evidently impossible; nor was it ever yet
attempted by any other Means, except by looking into the nature of Tradition:
It follows, I say, that as it is Certain that Faith and its Grounds are
Impossible to be false, that is, false to us, or may be shown thus Impossible
to be False: So it is by consequence Certain, likewise, that the main Doctrine
there delivered will stand, whatever particular miscarriages may have happened
in the managing it; which are to be judged of by the strength of my Reasons
there given, and the force of my Adversaries Objections.

7. It Is necessarily consequent from the foregoing Paragraphs, that, if I have
discoursed right in this small Treatise of mine, and have proved that Faith,
and, consequently its Grounds, must be Impossible to be False; then Mr.
Tillotson's Confession p. 118. (to which M. Stillingfleet's Doctrine is
consonant) that [It is Possible to be otherwise (that is, to be False) that any
Book is so ancient as it pretends to be, or that it was written by him whose
name it bears, or that this is the sense of such and such passages in it] is a
clear Conviction that neither is the Book-Rule he maintains the True Rule of
Faith, ( 3.) nor have he and his Friends True Faith, ( 4.) and, consequently,
there being no other Rule owned (taking away Private Spirit) but Tradition,
that Tradition is the onely-true-Rule of Faith, ( 6.) and, so, the main of
Sure-Footing stands yet firm; and, lastly, it is evinced, that his own Book
which opposes it, opposes the onety-true, (because the
onely-impossible-to-be-False) Ground of Faith: that is, he is convinced in that
Supposition, to go about to undermine all Christian Faith: Whence the Title of
his Probable-natur'd Book is manifested to be an improper Rule of Faith.
Nickname, and the Book it self to merit no Reply.

8. This last point is hence farther confirmed because Mr T. (and Mr. St.) can
claim no admittance into a dispute whether this or the other be the True Rule
of Faith, till they approve themselves to be Christians and show they hold
there is such a thing as Faith, or that it can bear the having any Rule at all;
since an Assent to a point seen and acknowledged Possible to to be False, can
never rise to be more than an Opinion; nor can the Motive of assenting to what
may possibly be False, in true speech be called The Rule of Faith; both,
because there is in that case no Faith, (Infer. 1.) and, so, it cannot be a
Rule to what is not; as also, because what we see Possible to be False, cannot
with any propriety be called a Rule to the Understanding directing it to Truth,
in regard, for any thing it sees, it is a crooked path and a False Light leading
it into Error. What therefore they are to do, in the circumstances they have
brought themselves into, is, to show that they destroy not the Truth of Faith,
that is, the Nature of Faith it self, and the Nature of the Way to that Truth
or the Rule of Faith, by putting them both possible to be False. I saw they
did; and therefore was obliged to begin my discourse higher, and to Settle the
Existence of Faith by removing the possib^l^ty of it is Falsehood; that, so, it
might be shown able to bear the having a Rule; which, while it was in the
tottering and uncertain condition to which Mr. T. and Mr. St. had reduced it,
that is, in a Possibility of being all a Ly, and indeed is an Actuality of
being as to us not-Truth, but at most a great Likelihood, it was utterly
incapable of. Since therefore in the right method of discoursing An est ought
to antecede Quid ests they have lost their right to be discours't with about
the Quid est of the Rule of Faith, or what is that Rule, till they can justify
themselves not to have destroyed the very An est or Existence of Rule and Faith
both, with which Mr. T. is now challenged from his own words, and Mr. St. from
his abetting him and espousing his Patronage. Both Nature, therefore, and Art
excuse me from replying to Mr T. and Mr. St. where the just Laws of severe and
rigorous Reason exactly observed; and, so, it is only a voluntary Courtesy not
an obligatory duty to afford them or any other Writers thus Principled any
Answer at all, or to admit them to a dispute about this Point, What is the Rule
of Faith.

Lastly, hence is inferred that a Conclusive Method or short way of ending all
Controversies between the Catho lik Church and all her relinquishers, is
settled by this Doctrine. For, if right Faith must be Impossible to be False to
us, or to the Generality of Christians, that is, if the Motives to embrace
Christianity, must be thus firm; then it is Evident that that Party whose
Writers renounce the having any such Motives, in case those writers speak the
sense of that Party, is not rightly Christian or truly Faithful, Infer. 4
but a distinct Sect from the body of right Christians: or, it being most
unjust that the discourses of private Speculaters should be pinned upon the
whole party, if they write things deniable by that party; in case any such
Party should think fit to disclaim such Writers as private discoursers and
their Tenet of Christian Faith's not being Absolutely Certain, which they are
at liberty to do, and set some other writers to maintain the opposite Thesis, it
will quickly be seen whether they are able to bring Infallible Grounds of
Faith, I mean any Authority conveying Christ's Faith down to us infallibly
(which they must bring Infer. 2.
if they will prove Faith Impossible to be False) distinct from what the
Catholic Church holds to, and which themselves renounced when they forsook her
Communion. But that there are, any such Grounds as these, that is Grounds
Inerrably bringing down the Knowledge of Christ's Faith to us, that is a, Rule of
Faith Impossible to be False to us, I could never yet discern by the carriage,
writings or Discourse of any Party that dissented from the Catholic Church, to
be their Tenet: If, then, it be a most Certain Truth, that Faith must be
Impossible to be false, as, I hope, I have abundantly concluded; it is, also,
most Certain, that those who deny they have such a Faith, do, by that very
denial, confess they have no True Faith, nor are truly Faithful, nor of the
True Catholic Church.

Postscript.
THus, Reader, thou see I still endeavor heartily to put Controversy home as
far as my discourse can carry it; and that I have resumed here all the
scattered ends of voluminous disputes into one point. By which means the
sincere Protestant, and all others out of the Church, may see at a short view
what they are to do. If they look into their own breasts, as they are
Professors of Christianity, they will find it writ there in Capitals, That
CHRISTIAN FAITH CANNOT BE AN ILLUSION' OR FALSEHOOD; Also, that Faith is to be
held by them True, and that they ought to suffer all Persecutions and Death it
self for the professing it to be such: This found, and duly reflected on, the
next thing to be done is, that they press their Learned men, by whom they are
led, to show them by such Grounds as their separation from the Catholic Church
permits them to hold, that is, by their Grounds, that Christian Faith is
Impossible to be False; If they can; (as hitherto they have told us they
cannot) then their Adherents may in reason hope well of their own condition
till they see those attempts evidently shown invalid. But, if they profess
still they cannot; and that Faith needs no such Certainty; then, not only the
natural dictamen of Christianity in their own breasts ought to make them
distrust the Principles of their Party, found to be so destructive to Christian
Faith, but also I shall hope there are some Proofs in this foregoing Treatise
which they will judge require an Answer.

I expect my Answerer will sow together many thin Rhetorical fig leaves to
cover the Deformity of that abominable Thesis, that Faith may be False; which
to propose undisguiz'd were too openly shameful: But, I hope thou will be able
to discern their sense through their Rhetoric, and heedfully to mark with a
steadfast Eye, that, in how quaint and elegant phrases soever they cloak their
Tenet, yet the genuin, downright and natural sense of the position they go
about to defend, will still be this, [The mysteries of Christian Faith may all
be so many Lies, for any thing any man living absolutely knows, and the whole
Body of Christian Doctrine a Bundle of Falsehoods.

I expect also many plausible Instances and pretended Parallels of the
sufficiency of inferior degrees of Certitude for such and such particular
ends. But, what thou art to consider, is, whether those Ends be Parallel or
equal to that highest End and Concern of Christian Faith.

These things I expect; but I expect not that so much as one Principle, that
will be found to deserve that name, will ever be thought prudent to be produced
to justify a Tenet every way so Irrational, and unprincipled; or rather
destroying the Certainty, and consequently the Essence and Nature, of the Best
Body of Principles that either Nature, or the Author of Nature and Grace
himself ever instilled into Mankind.

Lastly, I beseech thee to obtain for me if thou can, that, if any think fit
to reply to this Treatise, they would be persuaded to set aside all WITTY
PREVARICATION and ELEGANT DROLLERY, (the two chief, and in a manner only,
Sticklers in the pretended Answer to Sure-Footing) and, beginning with First
Principles, to draw thence Immediate Consequences, as I have constantly
endeavored in this Discourse. By their attempting or neglecting to do this,
and only by that Test, it will be seen whether my Evictions stand or fall;
whereas from flashy wit so little is gained, that even what is solid suffers
disgrace by such a managery. And, I here very penitently beg pardon of my
Readers that I have sometimes heretofore spent my precious time and
lessfruitful labor which might have been better employed, in pursuing that way
of Folly. For such my more deliberate Thoughts now discover it, however the
reputed profoundness, but, indeed, real shallowness of my Adversaries, made it
at that season seem most convenient.

FINIS.
Corrections of the Press.
PAge 6. line 5. built upon. p. 14. l. 13. the Ten et. p. 25. l. 10. Acts. as
p. 33. l 5. not be, is. p. 43. l. 9 is deniable p. 89. l 25. Objects on: p.
112. l. ult. (...). p. 121. l. 2. it is neither Affirmation nor. l. 9 usually.
p. 126. l. 26. Such Truths. p. 128. l. 9. their power. l. 18. at all. p. 130.
l. 25. of the Schools. p. 134. l. 26. find. p. 139. l. 18. being to. l. 21.
both at. p. 149. Objection VIII. p. 161. l. 13. parologysm. l: 21: nut at. p.
164 l. 1. Objection IX. l. 5. to have. p. 171. l. 22. onelytrue.


